January 3: After a White House meeting of top aides from several agencies, NASA issued a statement saying that its researchers had used human subjects in the 1960s and 1970s in investigations of the possible effects of exposure to radiation. It pledged to investigate fully whether the subjects were properly informed. Some Energy Department tests were first disclosed in 1986 in a report to Congress by the General Accounting Office. (NY Times, Jan 4/94)	* In a written statement, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said the Department of Energy had told his office that NASA was "involved in the sponsorship or co-sponsorship of some human experiments to determine the effects of radiation" during the 1960s and 1970s. Goldin did not say what experiments had taken place. He promised a full public accounting. "There is no place in this agency for human medical experimentation conducted in secrecy or without full respect for human dignity of each and every participant," the statement said.	Goldin named Donald Robbins, Deputy Director of Space and Life Sciences at Johnson Space Center in Houston, to lead a team to search NASA records involving radiation tests on humans. Goldin said Robbins will "cooperate fully" with the Energy Department and independent review groups investigating the tests, including Congress. (Fla Today, Jan 4/94, Jan 6/94)	* An editorial in a major space journal urged that the European Space Agency (ESA) not abandon its Columbus space station module program, despite a redesign of the Freedom station in favor of a U.S./Russian station core. This threat, due to funding crises in Germany and Italy, would jeopardize one of ESA's own justifications for existence. While ESA's near-term strategy is to maintain Columbus and increase ESA's participation in the station, its long-term strategy is for an advanced crew transfer spacecraft for station operations--a major European technological development. The U.S., Russia, Japan and Europe all need this new vehicle. Launched by Ariane-5, it should be ready around 2005-2007, after Columbus in 2001. Further, European managers rightly stressed that the station program should make better use of Ariane 5 for resupply as well as launches, but costs now 30 percent over budget must be reduced. (AvWk, Jan 3/94)	* The same journal also urged increased research funding to yield breakthroughs in human factors engineering to reduce future errors in civil aviation. With a fleet expected to double by 2010, according to a Boeing official, at the current rate of hull losses human error could cause a major accident every 10 days by 2006. The man-machine interface must be optimized between automation and man-in-the-loop. Several diverse key factors from effects of long-range flights and information technology to national cultural differences and air traffic control must be addressed. With government funding a critical factor, a 1990 FAA/NASA/DoD master plan remains a good guide. (AvWk, Jan 3/94)January 5: The astronauts who made a nearly flawless repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope said they owed much of their success to the extraordinary training that went into the high-profile mission. The seven-member crew was picked earlier and trained longer--nearly two years--than any previous Shuttle crew, including 400 hours rehearsing in deep water tanks. However, at their first post-flight news conference they cautioned that future Shuttle missions would not get the same kind of support from the space agency's money managers. The mission commander, Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, said that clearly the NASA budget was not a limitless amount of money.	NASA officials said that since its release December 10, Hubble had been undergoing focusing and engineering tests conducted by remote control from the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. (B Sun Jan 5/94)	* NASA officials said that Kennedy Space Center (KSC) had not been home to any secret radiation tests on humans, and no workers were unknowingly exposed to any harmful materials. "We do not do anything like that here," KSC spokeswoman Lisa Malone said. Life science research underway at the space center mostly involves growing plants and food in an environmentally controlled chamber at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station as well as some muscle fatigue research in long-term bedrest studies to simulate weightlessness. The Johnson Space Center in Houston and the Ames Research Center near San Francisco are the facilities where most medical research on humans is conducted.	Agency spokesman Michael Braukus noted that the agency was still organizing its efforts to find out exactly how NASA was involved in the nuclear research. NASA's use of radioactive materials has centered on developing rocket engines powered by nuclear reactions and using a nuclear reaction to generate electricity in space. Former astronauts Alan Bean and Gene Cernan said they had never served as human guinea pigs. (Fla Today, Jan 5/94)	* Two American scientists, Clark Chapman and David Morrison, wrote in Nature magazine that society might want to decide whether to pay for a sky survey to track comets and asteroids that could crash into the Earth with catastrophic results, so that governments could use nuclear arms to smash or divert them. NASA proposed a Spaceguard Survey to map all asteroids large enough to cause global catastrophe. It would cost $50 million to set up and $10 million in annual operating costs. (Reuters, Jan 5/94)	* NASA continued tests of the Research External Vision Display (REVD), a new optical system allowing pilots to see a runway during nose-high landings without computer-generated views. The REVD, basically an upside-down periscope, is a system of lenses and mirrors that reflects the view of the runway under the aircraft nose to the pilot. NASA started the first of up to 20 tests on the device on an F-104 aircraft at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, California. The REVD approach differs from that used in the European Concorde and Russian Tu-144 supersonic transports, which drop the entire nose of the aircraft in front of the windshield. It could be used on a future U.S. supersonic airliner. (NASA Release, 94-2)	* NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced receipt of a report investigating the loss of the Mars Observer mission.Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., and Chairman of the independent investigative board studying the Mars Observer failure, delivered the report to the NASA administrator. Dr. Coffey "candidly pointed out management and technical concerns that must be addressed." (NASA Release 94-1, 2/9)	* NASA awarded a four-year, $39.8-million contract to the California Institute of Technology (CIT) for the design and development phase of the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE) science payload. The science payload on the ACE spacecraft consists of nine instruments: a Solar Isotope Spectrometer: a Cosmic Ray Isotope Spectrometer; a Solar Wind Ionic Mass Spectrometer; a Solar Wind Ionic Composition Spectrometer; an Ultra Low Energy Isotope Spectrometer; a Solar Energetic Particle Ionic Charge Analyzer; a Magnetometer; an Energetic Electron, Proton and Alpha-particle Monitor; and a Solar Wind Electron, Proton and Alpha-particle Monitor. (NASA Release C94-a)	* The Mars Observer spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. NASA officials reported the probable cause of communication loss as a rupture in the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine--MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have put the craft in a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. Goldin asked Dr. Wes Huntress, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Space Science, to conduct a thorough review of the findings and recommendations and to report back in the near future on corrective actions to be taken by NASA. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)January 6: NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a number of management appointments and organization structural changes at NASA Headquarters and various field centers. The changes will affect NASA science, technology, research facilities and major programs, as well as the agency's Advisory Committee structure.	New Center Directors: Dr. Ken Munechika, Executive Director of the Office of Space Industry of the State of Hawaii, was appointed Director of the Ames Research Center at Mountain View, California. Kennett J. Szalai was appointed the new director of the Dryden Flight Research Facility, which was to become a separate entity from Ames. Project reporting lines would directly link the centers and the NASA Headquarters offices that Dryden supports, thus reflecting the commitment by NASA to reduce layers of management.	Dr. Carolyn Huntoon, Director of Space and Life Sciences at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, since 1987, and formerly the Center's Associate Director, was appointed Director of the Center. G.P. Bridwell was appointed Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. Donald J. Campbell was appointed Director of the Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio.	Key appointments at NASA Headquarters: Michael I. Mott was appointed Associate Deputy Administrator (Technical), reporting to the Administrator on analyses of the early stages of programs and reviews of major issues. Thomas (Jack) J. Lee was appointed Special Assistant for Access to Space, to lead NASA efforts to define a technology program to retain U.S. leadership in space. Dr. Charles F. Kennel was appointed Associate Administrator for Mission to Planet Earth. Dr. Mark Abbott was named Chief Scientist of the Office of Mission to Planet Earth. Lawrence J. Ross, former Director of the Lewis Research Center, was appointed Director of the Wind Tunnel Program Office, reporting to the Office of the Administrator.	Because of major expansions in the Space Station Program, Administrator Goldin made several key appointments there: Wilbur C. Trafton, was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station. Randy Brinkley was assigned as the Space Station Program Manager, for management of all United Stated-Russian activities in Phase I and Phase II, to ensure implementation of the International Space Station. He was mission director for the recent Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission (STS-61). Captain William Shepherd, USN, was to continue as manager for all technical activities related to the International Space Station, reporting to Brinkley, and thus concentrating on the design, development, and assembly of the Space Station. Daniel C. Tam was assigned as Deputy Program Manager for Business in the Space Station Program Office at the Johnson Space Center, handling all business management operations.	The NASA Advisory Council also acquired new leadership: Dr. Bradford W. Parkinson, was appointed head of the Council. Anne L. Accola was appointed Staff Director of the Council. (NASA Release 94-3; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Jan 8/94; Bakersfield Californian, Jan 7/94; Antelope Valley Daily News, Jan 8/94; [Houston] Citizen, Jan 19/94; National Journal, Jan 15/94)	* Systems Integration Group, TRW's Fairfax, Virginia-based subsidiary, was awarded a NASA contract for $173 million to manage a network of computerized ground stations receiving data from government satellites that observe the earth's environment and climate changes. (W Post, Jan 6/94)	* Dr. R. Malcolm Brown, Jr., a University of Texas botanist and expert on bacterial cellulose, has created a new substance by fermenting sugar using a particular bacteria strain, which he maintains can replace normal cellulose and be used in numerous applications, including producing edible spacesuits. NASA, along with the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the state of Texas, financed his research. (WSJ, Jan 6/94)January 7: Intermetrics, Inc., of McLean, VA, was awarded an $81 million, 10-year contract as part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. It provide Independent Verification & Validation (IV&V) of the Earth-Observing system (EOS) Data and Information System (EOSDIS), for the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland. EOS was projected to generate about 1 trillion bytes of new data per day, offering access to data on the Earth's ecosystem, permitting scientists to distinguish natural from human-made changes. (NASA Release C94-b)January 8: Russian Space Mission Control spokesman Alexander Volchenkov announced that the Soyuz TU-18 rocket had lifted off Saturday for rendezvous with the orbiting MIR Space Station. Aboard were three cosmonauts, one of whom may attempt a new record for living in space. The craft was scheduled to dock with Mir for a crew change, after 200 days in space for the current crew.January 10: The crew for the STS-66 mission aboard Atlantis in the Fall of 1994 was selected. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Donald R. McMonagle was to command the mission, called ATLAS-03. This third Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) would continue Spacelab studies of solar energy effects on the Earth's climate and environment. USAF Major Curtis L. Brown, Jr, was named pilot; Scott E. Parazynski, M.D., Joseph R. Tanner, and ESA astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy, mission specialists; and Ellen Ochoa, PhD., Payload Commander. Tasks included the CRISTA-SPAS Cryogenic Infrared Spectrometer Telescope for Atmosphere on the Shuttle Pallet Satellite, jointly with Germany. (NASA Release 94-4; Def Daily, Jan 12/94)	* The crew for the STS-67 mission aboard Columbia for late 1994 was announced. Stephen S. Oswald was to command the Astro-2 astronomy mission to study the far ultraviolet (UV) spectra of faint astronomical objects and polarization of UV light from hot stars and galaxies. USAF Major William G. Gregory was named pilot, Navy Lieutenant Commander Wendy B. Lawrence mission specialist, Ronald A. Parise and Samuel T. Durrance payload specialists, Tamara E. Jernigan Payload Commander, and John M. Grunsfeld mission specialist.	* A flight plan change seven months before the Mars Observer launch may have caused the craft's failure. Its propellant tanks were pressurized not five days after launch but eleven months into the flight as it reached Mars, thereby apparently causing a catastrophic rupture in a fuel line that spun the craft out of control. Pressuration, needed to fire the braking rockets to put the craft into orbit around Mars, involves opening previously closed valves and releasing high-pressure helium to squeeze the hydrazine fuel and nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer from separate tanks to mix and ignite. Minute amounts of condensed oxidizer possibly reached the hydrazine fuel, ignited, and ruptured the pipes, which released propellant into space and caused the uncontrolled spin. Peter G. Wilhelm, Director of the Naval Center for Space Technology, a panel member who focused on the propulsion system, said that the team debated the change extensively, and JPL project manager Glenn E. Cunningham stated that the team considered and rejected an option to change valves as too costly and slow, and a procedure that might have meant missing the 1992 launch window, thus requiring a two-year launch delay. (W Post, Jan 10/94)	Three unmanned supply craft were scheduled to visit Mir during this mission. A U.S.-Russian agreement signed in December worth $400 million to Russia over the next four years called for up to 10 U.S. Shuttle flights to Mir. (AP, Jan 8/94; UPI, Jan 8/94; Reuters, Jan 8/94)	* Martin Marietta Corporation announced it would not claim a $21.3 million on-orbit performance fee and would return $17 million already received because of the failure of the Mars Observer craft. The total cost of the craft and its instrument cargo was $1 billion. Referring to the presumed explosion caused by a change in the flight plan with an eleven-month delay in pressurizing a system, discussed in the four-volume report but omitted in news media interviews, Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory and leader of the panel investigating the failure, said that "had J.P.L. been more closely involved with Martin Marietta in the development of the spacecraft, it is conceivable this issue would have been identified earlier." (NY Times, Jan 11/94; W Post, Jan 11/94)	* Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., and Chairman of the independent investigative board studying the Mars Observer failure, delivered the report on the Mars mission to NASA. The spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. Despite lack of any communication with the craft, the board found that the probable cause of the loss of communication was a rupture of the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine - MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have caused the craft to enter a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. The board discussed a number of other concerns of a procedural nature. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)January 11: NASA reported that tests of corrections made to the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) were proceeding well and that the first new pictures were expected within days. David Leckrone, Hubble project senior scientist and NASA public information officer Mike Finneran at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, expressed great satisfaction with progress made. To perform one of its primary mission objectives, the study of the universe's infancy, the HST must concentrate 70 percent of an object's light within a core image only 0.1 arc-second in diameter, but the HST's previous spherical-aberration defect distorted its 2.4-meter (94.5-inch) main mirror to the extent that only 15 percent of the light reached the sharp-focus zone. Two sets of corrective optics were installed--the Wide-Field Planetary Camera (due for replacement, anyway) and the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replecement (Costar), a two-meter-long set of five pairs of coin-size mirrors. A problem of jittering caused by solar-cell arrays was also resolved, and new gyroscopes, magnetometers, and computer electronics were installed and have been tested. (CSM, Jan 11/94)	* Over 200 scientists at a conference at the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, planned observations of the coming impact of the newly discovered comet Shoemaker-Levy-9 into Jupiter. University of Maryland astronomer Lucy McFadden, the conference organizer, discussed the preparations. Twelve observatories in Europe and the United States were scheduled to work in a joint effort called the Comet Impact Network Experiment. The astronomers were organizing observations by nearly every large observatory on the Earth as well as by the Hubble Space Telescope, other orbiting observatories, and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory. Astronomer Michael A'Hearn compared the anticipated power of the impact of the comet's train of 21 two-mile-diameter fragments in terms of nuclear explosions with that of the 6-12-mile-diameter comet that hit Yucatan, Mexico, 65 million years ago. Harvard University astrophysicist George Field said each fragment would unleash energy equal to 10 million megatons of TNT. Paul Chodas of the California Institute of Technology discussed the problems of predicting the impact for observations by the Galileo spacecraft. Both visible, infrared, and spectrographic observations were to be performed. (B Sun, Jan 11/94; AP, Jan 12/94; W Times, Jan 12/94)	* TRW, Inc., received a seven-year, $172 million contract to build the EOS Data and Operations System (EDOS), part of NASA's Earth Observing Data and Information System (EOSDIS). The contract called to TRW to build three facilities to deal with terabytes of climate data from the EOS platform each day, as part of an international study of worldwide environmental conditions. EOSDIS would be the largest database and archival system ever built and would process, distribute and store two trillion bytes of data daily--about equivalent to the amount of information in the Library of Congress. EDOS would use a network called ECOM--EOS Communications--to send data from White Sands to over eight centers. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 10/94)January 12: Dr. Carolyn Huntoon, the new Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), appointed George W.S. Abbey as Deputy Director of JSC. He succeeded Paul J. "P.J." Weitz, who was to serve as Acting Associate Director during transition of the new Center management team and who had been the Center's Deputy Director since 1987 and Acting Director since August 1993. (NASA Release 94-26; Def Daily, Jan 12/94)	* A study by Loren Thompson, Deputy Director of Georgetown University's National Security Studies Program, was one of several major sources examining the U.S. space industry's growing challenge from competition and domination by foreign governments' expanding space programs and their successes with smaller but cheaper launch vehicles.	Richard DalBello led another study by the White House's Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), while Mark Albrecht of Science Application International Corporation (SAIC) expressed the industry's concern. Further, the U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee (SASC) was to study launching U.S. military satellites on Ariane-5.	Norman R. Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta, which had agreed to buy General Dynamics Corporation's rocket division for $208 million, stressed that the industry was on its way to "being destroyed" if the U.S. government didn't help. The company wanted a law saying federal agencies must launch payloads only on U.S.-built rockets.	As competitors, Europe's Arianespace, Russia's Proton, and China's Long March offer increasingly reliable alternatives to the U.S. launch industry's former monopoly that extended through the 1970s. The foreign rockets offer substantial savings through remarkably lower production and servicing costs. Building the Proton takes one-fifth the employee hours needed to make a U.S. rocket, and it spends only a few hours on the launch pad, with a launch crew of 50. Ariane 4 spends 10 days, with a launch crew of 100, whereas the U.S. Deltas and Atlases need three to eight weeks and crews of 300, and the Titan 4 takes three months and a crew of 1000. Finally, for payload launch, the Russians and Chinese launches cost $4,000 per pound and Ariane 5 cost $8,000 per pound, while U.S. rockets cost $12,000. A table compares six cost factors of the seven major rockets. (W Post, Jan 12/94; H Chron, Jan 23/94)	* White House officials said President Clinton was scheduled to name a civilian panel of scientists to independently review human radiation test data in hundreds of thousands of documents uncovered by a government-wide search and to determine whether ethical standards had been violated. Energy Department spokesman Michael Gauldin said the panel members would consist of health physicists, experts on radiology, and specialists in medical ethics. He also said that an interagency "working group" formed to coordinate the search of records in eight agencies and departments was trying to define more clearly what experiments should be included. He predicted it would take "months, perhaps years" to find all the records and analyze them. (W Post, Jan 12/94)	* A dispute of possible long-term import with hundreds of millions of dollars at stake appeared to be brewing between NASA and the television industry over local multipoint distribution service (LMDS), pitting the satellite industry against proponents of this low-cost alternative to cable television. Further, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) was approaching an auction of some airwaves for a new generation of wireless communications services. Charles Force, NASA Associate Administrator for space communications, stated that "It appears that there is a significant possibility for interference with LMDS from satellite uplinks; this was no secret to the FCC." He suggested a four-year delay in LMDS service to deal with interference in the disputed 27.5-to-30-gigahertz spectrum band. The FCC believed that LMDS can coexist with satellite use and was preparing to authorize nationwide deployment of LMDS. (LA Times, Jan 12/94)	* Lieutenant General Malcolm O'Neill, Director of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO), proposed to Pentagon Acquisition Chief John Deutch cancellation of the purchase of four Russian Topaz II space nuclear reactors--believed to be the last in Russia's inventory--to be used in the DoD's Thermionic System Test Evaluation. Steven Aftergood, of the Federation of American Scientists, said that the Air Force might take over the ground test program. The Nuclear Electric Propulsion Space Test Program, with which they might have been used, was also dropped. These moves continued a trend in the cancellation of several NASA and Air Force efforts to develop space nuclear power. A White House Space Nuclear Power Interagency Working Group was scheduled to draft administration policy by July 1994 and a U.S. position for the February meeting of the United Nations Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPOUS) Science and Technology Subcommittee. (Def Daily, Jan 12/94)	* NASA Chief Engineer Michael Griffin, Director of NASA's former Exploration Office, planned to resign to join Space Industries International, Inc., as Senior Vice President of Program Development. (Def Daily, Jan 12/94)	* McDonnell Douglas awarded Computer Sciences Corp (CSC), with EER Systems and CTA, Inc., a five-year, $49 million subcontract to support NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The Systems Engineering, Integration and Management Support Services contract would support several space observation missions. (Def Daily, 12 Jan/94)January 13: Dr. Gary A. Bower, an astronomer at the Space Telescope Science Institute (STI) in Baltimore, said at an American Astronomical Society (AAS) conference that Hubble Space Telescope (HST) repairs were successful and would enable the HST to measure the velocity of stars and other matter rotating near the centers of galaxies and thereby more firmly establish the existence of black holes. (NYT, Jan 13/94; Reuter, Jan 13/97; AP, Jan 12/97; AP, Jan 13/94)	* Astronomer Holland C. Ford and COSTAR project manager Dr. Jim Crocker, both with the Space Telescope Science Institute (STI) at Johns Hopkins University, expressed scientists' jubilation at the remarkable photos from the recently repaired Hubble Space Telescope (HST). COSTAR is the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement package that repaired the HST. Dr. Gary A. Bower, an HST astronomer in a group of 1,800 attending an American Astronomical Society (AAS) conference in Crystal City, Virginia, predicted that the HST would be able to confirm evidence of black holes at the center of galaxies. Dr. Edward J. Weller, an HST program scientist at NASA headquarters, reserved judgement. (B Sun, Jan 13/94; AP, Jan 13/94)	* Engineers William Weist and Ray McLaughlin, with three other scientists and pilots of AlliedSignal, Inc., have since October 1991 been flying a converted 1952 Convair with powerful, updated turboprops at 300 feet in Florida testing a new system to detect low-level wind shear. In summer, bursts of concentrated cold air descend to the ground and violently spread out horizontally in all directions, causing unpredictable changes in wind direction at low altitude. Identified only two decades ago, wind shear has since 1964 caused at least 26 aircraft accidents in the U.S., killing more than 500 people. Although airports are installing radar, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) reported that air-traffic controllers might need two minutes to warn pilots, who might have only ten seconds to react. In contrast, this system can warn in 50 seconds, despite analyzing four million pieces of information per second and filtering out ground clutter such as traffic. (WSJ, Jan 13/94)	* The Earthwinds balloon flew 200 miles in seven hours from Reno, Nevada, over the Sierra Nevada and landed 200 miles north of Los Angeles in its fourth failed attempt since its initial try in February, 1992, to make the first nonstop round-the-world flight. The hourglass-shaped craft about the length of a football field consists of an upper teardrop-shaped, helium-filled bag separated by a three-man crew capsule from its lower round, air-filled anchor balloon. The project, sponsored mainly by hotel magnate Barron Hilton, has cost $7 million to date, with $700,000 for non-reusable balloons and helium for each flight. Project manager Don Engen expected no new flight this season, but project advisor, Apollo XVII commander Gene Cernan, predicted another attempt. (Reuters, Jan 12/94)	* SETI Institute President Frank Drake announced that the organization in Mountain View, California, will work with private backing, despite cancellation by NASA due to a funding cut by Congress. SETI--the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence--was to continue as the new Project Phoenix, with some NASA scientists doing the latter half of the former NASA project, which had been a sky survey by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and a targeted search by NASA's Ames Research Center. They planned to target areas around 1,000 nearby sun-like stars. The NASA project was begun as a $100-million, ten-year project on October 12, 1992, the 500th anniversary of Columbus' landing in the Americas, but was stopped less than one year into its planned ten-year life. Observations were now planned to last into the next century. Major donors included Arthur C. Clarke through the British Interplanetary Society (BIS) and the founders of Hewlett-Packard, Intel, and Microsoft. It was announced that $4.4 million of the $7.3 million needed for the next year had been raised. (Reuters, Jan 12/94; AP, Jan 13/94)	* NASA and the California Institute of Technology (CIT) signed a five-year, five-billion-dollar, cost-plus-award-fee contract to manage NASA's 7,300-member Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). This contract consolidated two previous contracts for CIT, which has managed JPL since NASA's inception in 1958. JPL, NASA's lead site for solar-system exploration, designed and built the Wide Field/Planetary Camera (WF/PC II) recently installed on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST). It also runs programs such as NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, its Galileo mission to Jupiter, and the Magellan mission to Venus, as well as the U.S. half of the NASA/ESA Ulysses mission to the sun, the NASA/CNES TOPEX/POSEIDON, and the SIR-C/X-SAR radar system on the Shuttle. (NASA Release C94-c)January 14: Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Brigadier General Elmer T. Brooks, USAF (Retired), as Deputy Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Space Communications (OSC) at NASA Headquarters. Charles Force, Associate Administrator for Space Communications, commented on the problems facing NASA's use of telecommunications technologies with reduced funding. OSC was responsible for planning, development, and operation of NASA's worldwide communications, telemetry, and data acquisition activities. (NASA Release 94-9)	* The National Research Council (NRC) warned in a third and final report to NASA that its Earth Observing System (EOS) would not meet users' needs without major revisions in the $2.6 billion EOS Data and Information System (EOSDIS) that was to handle, store, and distribute EOS data. An evolutionary system like EOSDIS must be open and extendable. The centralized nature of the EOSDIS Core System (ECS) being built was unresponsive to user needs and needed major revisions in its architecture, leadership, and user empowerment. Specifically, users would not be able to automatically combine data from different sensors or alter data products to meet particular needs. (Def Daily, Jan 14/94; Federal Computer Week, Jan 24/94)	* Russian cosmonauts Vasily Tsibliyev and Alexander Serebrov on the Soyuz TM-17 landed safely and without incident after six months in the Mir station, although the module had collided with Mir before descent. They were replaced by two cosmonauts, including Valery Polyakov, due to stay a record-breaking 14 months in space, to break the record 366 days set by Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov in 1988--1989. (Reuters, Jan 14/94)January 17: NASA announced that the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite had yielded data indicating that gamma-ray bursts show relative "time-dilation"--"a result of the General Theory of Relativity"--suggesting they occur not only near the Milky Way Galaxy but also far away, and thus indicating expansion of the universe. (NASA Release 94-10)January 18: NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology (OACT) scheduled a one-day forum, including an Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP), to encourage high-risk, high-payoff technology development. NASA responsiveness to industry's need was shown by industry participation in all aspects and phases of the AITP program, with representatives making presentations on both program content and structure. The fiscal 1994 budget allocation for this technology initiative was $20 million. (NASA Note to Editors N94-6)January 19: Ecologists Christopher Potter and Steven Klooster of NASA's Ames Research Center processed ten years of data to construct a map charting one month's exchange of the heat-trapping gas carbon dioxide between the atmosphere and the Earth's land plants and soils. This is a key process in determining the extent to which the release of this gas through burning fossil fuels and land-use changes might cause global climate warming, and this is the first time satellite data have been combined with computer simulation of soil processes. A 1990 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change gave estimates in billions of tons of carbon per year to try to answer the question of where missing amounts of extra human-released carbon dioxide go. Princeton University geochemist Jorge L. Sarmiento hypothesized a terrestrial sink, while Harvard University geochemist Steven Wofsy agreed with Potter that simulation also needed detailed studies of plant-soil processes. (CSM, Jan 19/94)	* Turkey scheduled the launch of its first satellite aboard an Ariane-4 rocket from French Guyana. (B Sun, Jan 19/94)	* The Hughes Network Systems telecommunication firm contracted with the Hawaiian corporation ITTI to install a high-speed satellite link dubbed "Teleport Asia" between the Eastern and Western hemispheres on the island of Oahu, with twin Earth stations facing toward Asia and North America. (W Times, Jan 19/94)January 20: Dr. Thomas S. Burks, executive vice president for research and academic affairs, and veterinarian Dr. Bradford S. Goodwin, professor and executive director for laboratory animal medicine and care at the University of Texas Health Science Center, discussed the scientific necessity of raising genetically uniform rats and mice. They are used as subjects for research throughout the community. NASA used four dozen aboard the Shuttle Discovery. (H Chron, Jan 20/94)January 21: The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, awarded the Engineering Design Group, Inc., Tulsa, Oklahoma, a contract for engineering, construction and environmental services in the rehabilitation, modification and construction of research and institutional facilities and systems. This small-business cost-plus-fee contract had a two-year basic period and three one-year renewals, a base value of $13.6 million, and a total value of $45 million. (NASA Release C94-e)January 24: Swales and Associates, Inc., Beltsville, Maryland, received an eight-year small-business set-aside cost-plus-award-fee contract of $275 million to support the Mechanical Systems Division of the Goddard Engineering Directorate at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). (NASA Release C94d)January 25: NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, selected Pioneer Contract Services for a five-year, $42 million cost-plus-award-fee contract for logistics support, such as all handling of property, warehouse, and bondroom operations. (NASA Release C94f)	* NASA announced the crew of the STS-60 mission aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for flight from February 3 to 11, 1994: Mission commander, Charlie Bolden; Pilot, Ken Reightler; mission specialists, Jan Davis, Ron Sega, Franklin Chang-Diaz, and Sergei Krikalev, Russian cosmonaut with two long-duration flights aboard the Mir Station. His flight will begin a new three-phase era of cooperation: ten Shuttle--Mir missions, joint work on the core Space Station, and expansion of the Station to all other partners.	The STS-60 will deploy the first Wake Shield Facility (WSF) to grow semiconductors. The WSF is a $13.5 million, 12-foot-wide satellite that was to float free of the Shuttle for three days. If the vacuum-grown film yielded optimum growth, future fleets of shields might grow crops of such film. This would also mark the second flight of the 1100-cubic-foot SPACEHAB facility for biotechnology and other payloads and the 100th Get Away Special (GAS) since its 1982 start, with five payloads. The crew also was to communicate with students in the United States and Russia with the Shuttle Amateur Radio Experiment-II (SAREX-II). STS-60 was scheduled to be the 18th flight of the Space Shuttle Discovery and the 60th flight of the Space Shuttle system. (NASA Release 94-11; H Chron, Jan 20/94; H Chron, Jan 21/94; NASA Note to Editors N94-9; AP, Jan 26/94, P Inq, Jan 28/94; USA Today, Jan 31/94; AP, Jan 30/94; AP, Jan 31/94; UPI, Jan 31/94; B Sun Feb 2/94)	* The University of Houston (UH) was scheduled to take over from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as home for a rocket laboratory researching the feasibility of charged plasma propulsion for future interplanetary flight. The facility was to be called the Advanced Space Propulsion Laboratory. Astronaut and plasma-physics expert Franklin Chang-Diaz was appointed the facility's director. Chang-Diaz hoped to create a small test rocket to release from a Shuttle. (H Post, Jan 21/94)	* Carl Pilchner, who works on advanced planning issues in NASA's Office of Space Science, told the agency's Space Science Advisory Committee that top NASA managers were drafting a 12-20 page strategic plan giving highest budget priority to the Mission to Planet Earth (MTPE). The MTPE was due to the insistence of Vice President Gore, reflecting messages NASA Administrator Goldin was receiving from the White House in response to his submitted proposals. (Def Daily, Jan 21/94)	NASA and the Department of Defense (DoD) scheduled the launch of their joint project, the Deep Space Program Science Experiment, dubbed Clementine, on a Titan IIG rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. This first U.S. lunar mission in two decades was scheduled to spend two months in polar orbit of the Moon every five hours, photographing it from as close as 250 miles with its three cameras (two infrared and one ultraviolet/ visible) and LIDAR (laser image detection and ranging) unit, and then was to go on to photograph the near-Earth asteroid Geographos.	The 933-pound craft was built by the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL), which was to also oversee ground command; it was to be tracked by NASA's Deep Space Network. Its main goal: to test five sensors designed to detect and track missiles. The project's other goal was to aid in the design of light-weight and low-cost components usable in a fleet of missile-defense satellites or guided missiles, which could be tested without violating the Anti-ballistic Missile Treaty. This reflected the project's roots in the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) or Star Wars, now called the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization.	Despite Apollo and later missions, NASA officials noted that the Moon, especially the far side, had never been mapped completely nor explored with modern instruments. The Clementine Program could provide the overall picture that researchers have always wanted. (Orlando Sentinal, Jan 24/94; W Post, Jan 24/94; H Post, Jan 24/94; B Sun, Jan 26/94; NY Times; Jan 26/94; W Post, Jan 26/94; USA Today, Jan 26/94; W Times, Jan 26/94; AP, Jan 26/94; B Sun, Jan 27/94	* The media reported that Pratt & Whitney and Rockwell International were negotiating a potential $1 billion deal with Russian aircraft manufacturer Ilyushin to produce jetliners. The project could involve the initial purchase of 20 aircraft by Aeroflot Russian International Airlines and create $1 billion in U.S. exports. Pratt & Whitney would provide the engines and Rockwell would provide the avionics The Il-96M is a four-engine wide-body craft that carries 300 passengers. (P Inq, Jan 22/94)	* Japan scheduled the launch of the H-2, its first rocket built without U.S. technology, whose development has taken ten years and $2.4 billion. A consortium of 74 Japanese companies built it and formed the Rocket Systems Corporation to market it. (C Trib, Jan 23/94, NY Times, Jan 26/94, WSJ, Jan 31/94, Reuters, Jan 30/94, Reuters, Jan 31/94, Reuters, Jan 30/94; CSM, Feb 3/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin had an extensive interview with US Black Engineer (USBE) Magazine on his past and current experience, commitment, and achievements in promoting minority advancement in the aerospace field. He detailed how in his long career in rising through the field he had worked for minority progress.	At TRW he worked with Hank Wilfong of the National Association of Small and Disadvantaged Businesses (SDB) in setting aside $250 million and searching the country for the top 30 minority-owned businesses, and he succeeded in contracting high-tech electronics projects with them.	The interview mentioned government programs, including the President's National Technology Initiative and a Congressional bill mandating NASA to do eight percent of its $12 billion in contracted business with minority groups. Mentioned also were set-asides, DoD's mentorship program, and the Office of Federal Contract Compliance (OFCC)	Coming to NASA, Goldin found only 14 African Americans in the agency's 535 senior executive service (SES) slots, so he instituted a hiring freeze until a new SES training program got underway. He also called in the chief executive officers (CEOs) of NASA prime contractors and told them to expand cultural diversity in their subcontractor work force.	* Joseph P. Martino, senior research scientist at the University of Dayton Research Institute, examined space launch costs in a study released by the Los Angeles-based Reason Foundation. Because of high costs, he noted that the United States was now farther away from having people on the moon than when President Kennedy launched the Apollo program. In 1994 it cost $3,500 per pound to put items into orbit. The cost increase started in the 1950s, when high performance of ballistic missiles was needed at any price and has been continued by NASA's policy of developing new technology for each new mission. Launch costs must be lowered and can be by three new approaches: use of commercial practices for vehicle construction, long production runs of single designs, and designing launchers to be reusable like aircraft instead of producing single-use like missiles. (W Times, Jan 25/94)	* Dr. Edward Tagliaferri, a physicist and consultant for the Aerospace Corporation, an engineering firm in El Segundo, California, that helps the Air Force run its many satellite programs, was lead author of a report discussing declassified Air Force studies of meteors and their possible threat. The report is a chapter in a book edited by Dr. Tom Gehrels, a planetary astronomer at the University of Arizona, and published by the university. The potential threat is viewed in the light of occurrences such as the strike in Tunguska, Siberia, and the probable strike in Yucatan, Mexico. (NY Times, Jan 25/94)	* NASA's budget was scheduled to face possible major cuts according to top congressional sources. The Space Station, Earth Observing System, International Ultraviolet Explorer, Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer, Cosmic Background Explorer, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, Mission Operations and Data Analysis, Cassini, AXAF, and two $1 billion wind tunnels for the High Speed Civil Transport program could be affected.	NASA reconfigured its account structure into four parts: space science and aeronautics, Shuttle and Space Station activities, tracking and personnel, and research and program management.	The Space Station, however, had presidential support and was a signature foreign policy initiative, especially in terms of cooperation with the Russians, which may protect it. (Def Daily, Jan 24/94; Sunnyvale Sun, Jan 12/94)	* The NASA-DoD National Aerospace Plane (NASP) achieved positive thrust for a scramjet engine at speeds of up to 9,500 miles per hour or Mach 14, according to contractor team member Pratt & Whitney. The tests were made at Calspan Corporation's hypersonic shock tunnel facility at Buffalo, New York. (Def Daily, Jan 24/94)	* Retired Air Force Colonel Ken Munechika, former chief of Onizuka Air Force Base's Satellite Test Center, was designated the new chief of NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC). (Sunnyvale Sun, Jan 12/94)	NASA established the Johnson Technology Commercialization Center, modelled on the Austin Technology Center, to promote space technology. The center was scheduled to accept and subsidize a few rigorously screened applicants as "start-up" and will nurture them through the "learning curve" over three years toward their "graduation" to independent operation in the marketplace. The program was part of NASA-sponsored Regional Technology Transfer Centers for technology assessment and licensing. Texas was also part of a 14-state Mid-Continent Technology Transfer Center, under the umbrella of the National Technology Transfer Center. (H Post, Jan 12/94)	* NASA's Office of Space Science was scheduled to use the Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Island Flight Facility to manage a Sounding Rocket Program of almost 50 missions worldwide in 1994. One study over Fairbanks, Alaska, was to examine auroras by using eight unguided suborbital sounding rockets at altitudes of 55 to 287 miles. One rocket was to carry a 21-foot-long payload called the Auroral Turbulence Rocket, with 28 instruments on a main payload and two subpayloads. The latter two would be deployed from the main payload in space, and simultaneous measurements from the three spacecraft would permit a study during 9 of the 12 minutes of flight. They were to measure the acceleration process that energizes particles and causes the emission of light called auroras. (NASA Release 94-12)	* Dr. Robert Wingate of NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, as chairman of an investigation board appointed by Jeremiah Pearson, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, released a study of the cause of an anomaly on Shuttle Discovery--STS-51. During deployment of the ACTS communication satellite, commands for firing a single explosive cord caused the firing of both primary and backup cords, which ruptured a containment tube and released debris into the cargo bay. The study described the primary and contributing causes--a ten-year-old design flaw--and made recommendations for corrections. (NASA Note to Editors 94-8, USA Today, Jan 28/94; AP, Jan 27/94)	* Spence Armstrong, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Human Resources and Education, announced its Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). This was a three-year, $500,000 annual award to six states as a new initiative to improve their research and competitive capability while expanding education and training opportunities for women and minorities. The funding would enable states to develop an academic research enterprise for long-term, self-sustaining, nationally competitive capability, contributing to the states' economic viability. The involved states were Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Montana, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.January 27: NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center opened its Clean Room--the world's largest at 100 feet by 125 feet and nine stories high--for journalists to inspect the 15,000 pounds of parts removed from the Hubble Space Telescope and returned for examination, particularly the Wide Field/Planetary Camera. Hubble flight systems chief Frank Cepollina and NASA expert John Wood discussed both the signs of wear from three years in space and problems of controlling contamination here. (B Sun, Jan 27/94; AP, Jan 27/94)	* British astronomers reported in the journal Nature on finding new physical evidence of "ripples" in space, hot and cold spots confirming 1992 findings by NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) Satellite, that shed light on the origin of the universe. Rod Davies of the University of Manchester discussed studies done by radio telescope in the Canary Islands that revealed microwaves from when the universe was only 300,000 years old. Astrophysicist Joseph Silk of the University of California at Berkeley commented that the findings could offer the most intriguing possibility that the universe is open, i.e., would expand indefinitely. (W Post, Jan 27/94; USA Today, Jan 27/94; AP, Jan 27/94)	* The DC-X unmanned Delta Clipper-Experimental launch vehicle project was dropped by McDonnell Douglas because of exhaustion of its initial $58 million funding by the Department of Defense (DoD). Bill Gaubatz, head of the project for McDonnell at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico, stated that DoD had informed him of cancellation of the contract.	The 42-foot-tall, 21-ton cone-shaped test model is one third the size of envisioned vehicle, which would be able to lift up to 25,000 pounds of cargo into orbit. The rocket was part of DoD's Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO) program to lift missile defense shields and weapons to orbit, but a final $5 million was shifted to DoD's Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA). ARPA, in turn, was reported to have been instructed by Defense Undersecretary John M. Deutch not to release the funds. (LA Times, Jan 27/94; NY Times, Jan 31/94)January 28: Science reported the results by researchers from Columbia and the University of California, San Diego, refuting past studies on global warming. They found flaws in a 1993 study of deep-core Greenland ice by European scientists that said global warming could cause abrupt, disruptive cold along the North Atlantic Ocean. The U.S. researchers said that Earth's climate is remarkably stable and likely to remain so. (USA Today, Jan 28/94)	* Numerous federal agencies, including NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), were accused in a Senate report of "offloading" by devising elaborate practices for circumventing federal law so that hundreds of millions of dollars in government business could go to favored companies. The Senate Governmental Affairs subcommittee on oversight of government management said they had "abused and misused" the law and otherwise could have cut costs by half. (W Post, Jan 28/94)	* German Economics Minister Guenter Rexrodt urged the U.S. to grant concessions in international talks on aerospace subsidies, particularly NASA's indirect subsidies on R&D. This issue was not dealt with in the 1993 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade GATT agreement. Germany was studying ways to shift direct support, and Deutsche Aerospace AG has released a 10-point program. (Reuters, Jan 27/94)January 31: As part of NASA's High-Speed Research Program, NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC) was using its National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex to study and curb the noise from the takeoff exhaust or "plume" of turbulent air in the wake of future supersonic jetliners without affecting takeoff performance. Project Manager Paul Soderman, an aeronautical and acoustical engineer, said that such future aircraft would have to comply with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations. An exhaust nozzle of an "ejector suppressor" type was being studied by laser and infrared video. (NASA Release, Jan 31/94)	* NASA reportedly transferred $990,000 to the Defense Department's Ballistic Missile Defense Organization to maintain the Delta Clipper program. McDonnell Douglas Aerospace had developed a rocket that takes off and lands vertically, which is covered by this program. NASA wished to keep the option of using the DC-X as a flight demonstrator of single-stage-to-orbit technologies in support of NASA's advanced launch technology effort. The program was operated from the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. (RTw, Jan 31/94; H Post, Feb 3/94)FEBRUARYFebruary 1: The Pentagon announced that Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition John Deutch had agreed to hold $10 million in Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) funding pending the outcome of a Department of Defense (DoD) launch modernization study and a 60-day NASA-DoD review of the Delta Clipper-Experimental (DC-X) flight test program. (Defense Daily, Feb 2/94; NY Times, Feb 2/94; AP, Feb 2/94; H Post, Feb 3/94)February 2: NASA announced a major milestone in the Space Station Program as of February 1, with the signing by NASA and contractor officials of documents ending the Freedom Work Package contracts. NASA had signed these agreements with Boeing Defense and Space Group, McDonnell Douglas Corporation, and the Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International. Instead, responsibility for design, development, and integration of work on the International Space Station program was being concentrated in a single contract with Boeing Defense and Space Systems Group, Seattle. (NASA Release 94-15)	* Although Congress killed NASA's search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) program, the subject survived as Project Phoenix. The SETI Institute in Mountain View, California, indicated existing contributions of $4.4 million of the $7.3 million needed for the project. NASA renamed the project High Resolution Microwave Survey to reflect the technology's ability to screen out Earth-based radio interference while listening for cosmic signals on millions of channels at once. (CSM, Feb 2/94; W Post, Feb 15/94)February 3: Shuttle Discovery blasted off from Cape Canaveral carrying for the first time a Russian cosmonaut, Sergei Krikalev, who already had spent 15 months aboard Mir Station, and five American astronauts. Discovery's eight-day research flight was to include deployment and retrieval of the Wake Shield Facility, designed for growing experimental semiconductor materials, and various microgravity and life science experiments. (AP, Feb 3/94; UPI, Feb 3/94; Reuters, Feb 3/94; LA Times, Feb 4/94; P Inq, Feb 4/94; W Times, Feb 4/94; W Post, Feb 4/94; NY Times, Feb 4/94; USA Today, Feb 4/94; WSJ, Feb 4/94; C Trib, Feb 4/94; AP, Feb 4/94)	* NASA announced the selection of astronauts Norman E. Thagard and Bonnie J. Dunbar as prime and backup crew members for a three-month flight on Russian Space Station Mir in March 1995. Both astronauts flew on previous U.S. Shuttle flights and conducted various scientific experiments. (NASA Release 94-16)	* NASA announced the first government/industry Technology Reinvestment Program (TRP) with Hi-Shear Technology Corporation, Torrance, California. The program was designed to create a new generation of portable emergency rescue equipment by using NASA-developed pyrotechnical technology to free accident victims from wrecks. (NASA Release 94-17)	* The launch of the H-II (also seen as H-2) rocket created by the Japanese consortium Rocket Systems Corporation was scheduled for February 4. The rocket, large enough to lift a two-ton payload into geostationary orbit, cost $2.5 billion to develop and was two years behind schedule. (CSM, Feb 3/94; Reuters, Feb 4/94; UP, Feb 4/94; LA Times, Feb 7/94)	* Air Force Colonel Sanford Mangold told members of the House of Representatives Government Operations Committee of his dismissal for recommending the cancellation of the $27 billion military satellite program Milstar. He considered Milstar, intended to provide worldwide military communications during a nuclear war, to have "fundamental, insurmountable problems," including "unacceptable" costs of $1.4 billion for each satellite. (NY Times, Feb 3/94)	* Following a final flight ceremony at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, NASA retired its last F-104 fighter jet of the 1950s. NASA used the plane, known as the Starfighter, for biomedical research and to simulate the X-15 jet. The F-15 was to replace Lockheed's Starfighter. (Bakersfield Californian, Feb 4/94)February 4: NASA announced the selection of 42 additional proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in its Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The programs supplemented the 130 firms announced in December 1993. (NASA Release 94-18)	* Andrea Donnellan, a geophysicist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, stated that Oat Mountain in the Santa Susana range, north of the San Fernando Valley, had jumped several inches during the 6.6 earthquake that hit Los Angeles January 17. NASA collected data from a global network of 45 stations. (NASA Release 94-19; W Post, Feb 8/94; P Inq, Feb 13/94; National Black Review, Feb/Mar/94)February 5: Burton J. Squires, an engineer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, in a letter to the editor, commented on the media's failure to commend the outstanding success of the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. (W Post, Feb 5/94)February 6: On February 5 and 6, NASA astronauts tried unsuccessfully to put the Wake Shield Facility satellite in orbit. They encountered problems first with radio interference from the Shuttle and then with failures in the satellite's guidance and navigation system. (UPI, Feb 6/94; Reuters, Feb 6/94; NY Times, Feb 6/94; W Post, Feb 6/94; NY Times, Feb 7/94; W Post, Feb 7/94; USA Today, Feb 7/94; P Inq, Feb 7/94; B Sun, Feb 7/94; AP, Feb 7/94)	* Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn Huntoon announced some organizational changes, including the closing of offices connected with integrating programs with the Russian Space Station Agency and the New Initiatives Office. (Fla Today, Feb 6/94)February 7: On February 9, the Discovery was to launch the Orbital Debris Radar Calibration Spheres, designed to help locate "little junk" orbiting in space, which could pose a hazard to space flight. (CSM, Feb 7/94)	* NASA announced a new Mars exploration program in fiscal year 1995 involving the development of a small Mars Surveyor orbiter. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, was to manage the program, which was designed to study the surface of Mars. (NASA Release 94-20)	* President Clinton, who was in Houston, spoke to the Discovery astronauts. Mission Control earlier had instructed them to abandon efforts to launch the Wake Shield Facility satellite. (UP, Feb 7/94; W Times, Feb 8/94; WSJ, Feb 8/94; W Post, Feb 8/94; P Inq, Feb 8/94; LA Times, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; USA Today, Feb 8/94)	* An Air Force Titan 4, the most powerful U.S. unmanned rocket, boosted a $1 billion military communications satellite (Milstar) into space. The satellite formed the initial link in a controversial $17.3 billion data relay network designed to provide secure communications during a nuclear conflict. (W Post, Feb 8/94; WSJ, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; AP, Feb 8/94)	* In the administration budget presented to Congress, NASA suffered a $281 million cut for the Space Shuttle program, the first cut in 22 years. The budget proposals increased amounts for new technology, aeronautics, computers, and global warming research but required cancellation of the Long Duration Orbiter, the Commercial Experiment Transporter, and the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor. (Reuters, Feb 7/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; USA Today, Feb 8/94; AP, Feb 8/94; W Post, Feb 10/94)February 8: A feature article described the potential scenario envisaged by David Morrison, chief of space science research at NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, and Clark Chapman of the Planetary Science Institute and Science Applications International Corporation, Tucson. Their 20-year study of asteroids led them to predict that the Earth was on a calamitous collision course with an asteroid that could kill 1 billion or 2 billion people. The odds of the collision in any one year were 1 in 500,000. (USA Today, Feb 8/94)	* Russian cosmonaut Krikalev aboard Discovery exchanged greetings with Russian cosmonauts aboard Space Station Mir. The Soviet cosmonaut also got through by ham radio to students in Mars, Pennsylvania. (AP, Feb 8/94; UP, Feb 8/94; Reuters, Feb 8/94; W Times, Feb 9/94; B Sun, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 9/94)	* The Space Telescope Institute released photographs made by the repaired Hubble Space Telescope of comet fragments that were to smash into the planet Jupiter in July. The fragments were projected to strike with the force of 100 million hydrogen bombs, with the explosions so bright that the light would be reflected off Jupiter's moons. (Reuters, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 9/94; AP, Feb 9/94)February 9: NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services, Inc., of San Diego, California, for contract negotiations for two definite launches and options for seven added launches using the Atlas intermediate expendable launch vehicle. The first mission was to be the Earth Observing System-AM-1 spacecraft scheduled for 1998. (NASA Release C94-g)	* NASA announced that as a result of a 10-year joint NASA-Army research program (the UH-60 Airloads Program) at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, on helicopter rotor vibration, noise, motion, and airflows, future helicopters would be quieter and more efficient. (NASA Release 94-21; UPI, Feb 9/94)	* NASA announced the appointment of Robert E. Whitehead as Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Aeronautics at NASA Headquarters. (NASA Release 94-23)	* Shuttle Discovery launched three pairs of stainless steel spheres as part of a study of space debris in which ground stations were to track junk that could pose a collision hazard for spacecraft. On February 8 it left a small German satellite, Bremsat, in orbit to conduct six science experiments. (Reuters, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 10/94; AP, Feb 10/94)February 10: NASA's Office of Safety and Mission Assurance, in conjunction with NASA's Inventions and Contributions Board, created the Software of the Year Award to recognize such technology used by NASA. (NASA Release 94-22)	* NASA announced that results of joint NASA-industry research experiments to reduce exhaust emissions of future supersonic airliners to environmentally compatible levels substantially exceeded program goals. Using an engine fuel combustion chamber sector, NASA surpassed its goal of generating no more than 5 grams of oxides of nitrogen per kilogram of fuel burned at supersonic flight speed. (NASA Release 94-24)	* NASA announced that Shuttle Columbia was scheduled to take off in March on a two-week mission to conduct various experiments entailing such areas as materials processing, biotechnology, microgravity, medical concerns, and environmental monitoring. (NASA Release 94-25)February 11: Space Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth after making an additional orbit because of bad weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. In spite of its inability to release the Wake Shield Facility, that satellite was the site for growing high-grade semiconductor films while attached to Discovery. Discovery also conducted 12 experiments in Spacehab, a commercial laboratory, in the cargo bay. (NY Times, Feb 12/94; B Sun, Feb 12/94; W Post, Feb 12/94; AP, Feb 12/94)	* Boyce Mix, deputy manager for the Shuttle main engine program at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, said that technicians at Paragon Precision Products of Valencia, California, had used a super-strength glue for as many as six years to make unauthorized repairs on Space Shuttle engines, without the knowledge of company officers. A January inspection revealed the glue and the situation was corrected. (AP, Feb 11/94; Reuters, Feb 12/94; W Post, Feb 12/94; NY Times, Feb 13/94; USA Today, Feb 14/94)		* NASA's Cleveland Lewis Research Center was scheduled to work with the Russians on a project to use the sun's rays to power the Russian Mir Space Station. In addition, the Lewis Center was to direct the building of two wind tunnels desired by the commercial aircraft industry to help design airliners that fly at 2.4 times the speed of sound. The two projects would help compensate for jobs lost at Lewis by funding cuts. (Plain Dealer, Feb 11/94)February 13: NASA's Astrophysical Data Service allowed access to an astronomical data base that ultimately was to contain nearly a billion stars and several million galaxies. The data resulted from the comprehensive National Geographic Sky Survey made by the Mount Palomar Observatory in the 1950s. To this Mount Palomar added a second survey, underway for several years, of the northern sky covering more than 50 million galaxies and nearly 2 billion stars. (W Times, Feb 13/94)February 14: Space Tec Ventures, a Hampton, Virginia, company created by Joseph Casas, helped NASA's Langley Research Center in Virginia build a laser scheduled to be be used to monitor Earth's environment from space. The laser was to measure the amounts of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and was to be aimed at Earth from Space Shuttle Endeavour's cargo bay. The firm built two other lasers that were scheduled for NASA flights in August and September.February 15: Glenn Cunningham, manager of the new program at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said NASA planned a new program of Mars exploration. The program was to begin with the launching of two small unpiloted flights in November 1996. Launchings were to occur every 25 months over the next 10 years, using relatively low-cost spacecraft. Funds in the current NASA budget were to go for designing the first of the orbiting craft, the Mars Surveyor. Another Mars program, the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR), was to establish a seismic network on Mars. The program was to begin with the already authorized $175 million Pathfinder mission. (NY Times, Feb 15/94; CSM, Feb 16/94)	* In an address to business executives, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also spoke of NASA's goal of putting a man on Mars. With the proper technical groundwork and economic and political conditions, Goldin felt 10 years was a reasonable time frame for accomplishing this. The plan was for innovative technology to cut the cost, such as drawing methane from Mars to use as fuel for the return trip, thus cutting the space vehicle's size in half. Another part of NASA's vision was to learn how to work together with other countries in space programs. (Reuters, Feb 15/94)		* Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland, in addressing a Maryland Space Business Roundtable, warned aerospace contractors that congressional budget cutters were targeting NASA's Space Station; meanwhile other congressional members supported increased funds for human services programs and sought to cut from science and technology projects. Senator Mikulski stressed the importance of investments in science and technology within the framework of a balanced budget. (B Sun, Feb 16/94)February 16: NASA announced that the official launch date of Space Shuttle Columbia would be March 3. During the 14-day flight, a five-person crew was to conduct numerous scientific experiments ranging from materials processing to biotechnology and environmental monitoring. (NASA Editor's Note N94-18; AP, Feb 16/94; Reuters, Feb 16/94; W Times, Feb 17/94)	* The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)February 17: Lawrence Dietlein, assistant director for life sciences at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, said that in 1963 and 1974 the Center conducted experiments involving the use of very small doses of radiation on humans. The experiments, done with the consent of the subjects, concerned bone loss and weightlessness during space flight. (Reuters, Feb 17/94; W Times, Feb 18/94; USA Today, Feb 18/94)February 18: Two NASA-sponsored scientists, Scott Hudson of Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, and Steven Ostro of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, created the first three-dimensional model of an asteroid based on radar data. The asteroid was the double-lobed 4769 Castalia, discovered by Eleanor Helen of JPL at the Palomar Observatory in 1989. The model and resulting pictures appeared in the February 18 issue of Science magazine. (NASA Release 94-26)	* The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) authorized airlines to begin using military satellite signals for navigation. The military's Global Positioning System, consisting of 24 orbiting satellites, according to the airlines would save them millions of dollars by flying more efficient routes. It was unclear what the FAA would do with existing microwave landing systems. (WSJ, Feb 18/94; W Post, Feb 18/94; NY Times, Feb 18/94)	* NASA's Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station, Wilbur C. Trafton, said he expected Russia to participate in the Space Station partnership in accordance with the agreement reached in 1993. Such participation was scheduled to allow the project to be completed in June 2002 instead of 2003 and save $2 billion. If Russia should withdraw from participation, backup plans existed. (AP, Feb 18/94; Reuters, Feb 18/94)	* Itar-Tass news agency reported from Moscow that nine Russian women went into training for long-haul space flights by starting a four-month stint of lying with their heads below their feet. The Institute of Medicobiological Problem was in charge of the experiment, which simulated lengthy space flights aboard the Mir Space Station. One woman was to be selected to fly on Mir in November. (Reuters, Feb 18/94; B Sun, Feb 23/94)February 20: Three cosmonauts aboard Russian Space Station Mir celebrated the eighth anniversary of the Soviet Union's launch of Mir in 1986. (AP, Feb 20/94; W Times, Feb 21/94)February 22: A feature article described the work of astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore. The astronomers devised plans for a Polar Stratospheric Telescope (POST) intended to reveal stars and galaxies in twice the detail possible with the Hubble Telescope and do so more cheaply. The telescope, which was to hang from a blimp tethered over the South Pole, was to be the prototype for a new generation of observatories that could follow Hubble into space. The Institute, together with Johns Hopkins University, a consortium of other universities, and two private manufacturers, planned to ask NASA for $500,000 to $1,000,000 for a six-month design and cost study. (B Sun, Feb 22/94)	* Norman Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta Corporation, said the company would not buy General Dynamics Corporation's space-launch business for $208.5 million as planned unless the government agreed to pay more for those services. Martin Marietta wanted a part of the more than $400 million in savings it anticipated that the government could realize over 10 years as a result of Martin Marietta merging its Titan IV heavy-launch rocket business with General Dynamics' medium-lift Atlas-Centaur system. (WSJ, Feb 22/94)	* A 20-month long Justice Department sting operation centered on NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston resulted in criminal fraud and bribery charges against nine men and one contractor. Two other contractors, General Electric Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation, which had employed two of those charged, agreed to pay the government $1 million to cover cost of the undercover operation, code named Operation Lightning Strike. The two firms cooperated with the probe and might continue to do business with the government. Among the charged were Astro International Corporation of League City, Texas, and two NASA employees. The sting, conducted by the FBI, NASA's Office of Inspector General, and the Defense Criminal Investigative Service, particularly targeted NASA's Space and Life Sciences Division in Houston. In October 1993 NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin told Congress that NASA had some 400 criminal fraud investigations underway. (Reuters, Feb 22/94; UP, Feb 22/94; W Post, Feb 23/94; W Times, Feb 23/94; USA Today, Feb 23/94; NY Times, Feb 23/94; B Sun, Feb 23/94; WSJ, Feb 23/94; AP, Feb 23/94; C Trib, Feb 23/94)	* The new Canadian Liberal government announced that budget constraints obliged it to discontinue participation in NASA's planned international Space Station. Later, the Canadian government said this was a misunderstanding and that Canada's commitment was to be reduced. (Reuters, Feb 22/94; UP, Feb 22/94; AP, Feb 23/94; AP, Feb 24/94)	* NASA downplayed a slip in the first U.S. assembly launch for the Space Station, promising no more schedule bumps. Originally scheduled for launch in July 1997, the Boeing-built node was now scheduled for launch in December 1997. Moreover, the U.S. Habitation module was now scheduled for launch in March 2002 instead of January 2001. The program changes annoyed congressional staffers because the program put more dependence on the Russians. NASA station chief Wil Trafton remained confident that the changes would not cause serious harm to station assembly. (Defense Daily, Feb 22/94)	* Jim Doyle, spokesman for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that additional federal funding would allow the Magellan Spacecraft to continue studying Venus's interior and atmosphere at least through September 1994. Space Shuttle Atlantis launched Magellan in May 1989, and it arrived at Venus 15 months later. (AP, Feb 28/94; W Post, Mar 1/94)February 23: A NASA engineering team succeeded in lifting the endangered Compton gamma-ray observatory to a safe orbit after its propulsion system malfunctioned. NASA said the reboost had extended the mission life of the observatory by five years, thus meeting its original two-to-eight-year life span--it was launched on April 5, 1991. (CSM, Feb 23/94)	* NASA announced the selection of astronaut Kenneth D. Cameron to manage NASA operational activities at Star City, Russia, and at the Russian control center at Kaliningrad. (NASA Release 94-27)	* NASA's Office of Space Communications announced the installation of a Video Teleconference System facility at Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, to expand video teleconferencing coverage to Russia. The installation supplemented the university's existing video teleconferencing capabilities with the Russian Institute of Space Research in Moscow. The new facility allowed NASA scientists and engineers to work directly with Soviet researchers. (NASA Release 94-28)	* Claude Arnaud, professor of medicine at the University of California, San Francisco, in a paper presented to the national meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, stated that his research indicated that the bone-weakening process experienced by astronauts in space as a result of extended weightlessness might be corrected with common drugs that prevented calcium loss. (AP, Feb 23/94; UP, Feb 23/94; USA Today, Feb 24/94; UPI, Feb 28/94)	* The seven astronauts who repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in December 1993 were designated recipients of the Freedom Forum's Free Spirit Award. In their names $250,000 was to be donated to a scholarship fund for dependents of NASA employees. The award ceremony occurred on March 28. (AP, Feb 23/94; AP, Mar 28/94; UP, Mar 28/94; USA Today, Mar 29/94)February 24: Spence Armstrong, NASA Associate Administrator for Human Resources, stated that in order to cut more than 1,000 jobs as Congress ordered, NASA needed to offer buyouts to staff. To restructure the Space Station Freedom project, NASA had to cut 1,300 positions, but employees were not leaving in normal attrition numbers--an attrition of only 600 to 700 persons was predicted for fiscal 1994, without buyouts. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said further cuts would endanger NASA's entire mission. The vice president's "reinventing government" group said NASA needed to accelerate its job cuts but stick with attrition and buyouts rather than reductions in force. The group offered no specifics as to positions NASA should cut. (Federal Times, Feb 24/94)	* Bernadette Cardenas, an aerospace engineer at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, filed a civil suit against astronaut Lt. Col. Charles (Sam) Gemar and his wife Charlene, also a NASA employee. The suit claimed the Gemars had harassed her mentally and physically; Mrs. Cardenas wanted to force Col. Gemar to submit to blood tests to establish paternity for her two-year-old son. NASA said the lawsuit would not prevent Gemar's participation in the forthcoming shuttle mission. (AP, Feb 24/94; NY Times, Feb 25/94; B Sun, Feb 25/94; USA Today, Feb 25/94)	* U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar arrived in Russia to begin their yearlong training. The training was to stress physical conditioning, essential for long-duration space flights in order to counter bone and muscle deterioration. The astronauts were to wear Russian space suits bearing both Russian and U.S. flags. (AP, Feb 24/94; AP, Feb 28/94; UP, Feb 28/94)	* Celebrating National Engineers Week, more than 20 engineers from NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center visited classrooms around Antelope Valley to discuss their careers. (Antelope Valley Press, Feb 24/94)February 25: NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced a report by the General Aviation Task Force of NASA's Aeronautics Advisory Committee. The report of the industry-led task force called on NASA to revitalize its general aviation program, make its wind tunnels, laboratories and simulators more accessible to the general aviation community, and better balance its technology program to meet general aviation needs. The four areas on which the report called on NASA to concentrate were: propulsion, noise, and emissions work; aeronautical systems research; structure and materials development; and aerodynamics research. (NASA Release 94-29; Wichita Eagle, Feb 26/94)	* NASA announced that the U.S. component of the Global Geospace Science (GGS) program, the Wind and Polar spacecraft, would experience launch delays to give NASA a chance to examine the materials and process used to build two power subsystem electronic boxes on each spacecraft similar in design to those determined to be the cause of the NOAA-13 spacecraft failure in 1993. The decision followed a GGS technical review at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Instead of launches occurring in April and June 1994, they probably would occur in the next fiscal year. (NASA Release 94-30; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)	* NASA announced the selection of Raytheon Service Company, Burlington, Massachusetts, to provide logistics support to the Mission Operation and Data Systems Directorate at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-h)February 28: The countdown began for the liftoff on March 3 of Shuttle Columbia. Columbia was scheduled for a basic 14-day research flight featuring materials development and protein crystal growth as well as medical experiments. (B Sun, Feb 28/94; AP, Feb 28/94; UP, Feb 28/94; Reuters, Feb 28/94)	* NASA announced the addition of Jerry M. Linenger to the crew of the fall 1994 flight of Space Shuttle Discovery. The mission of this flight was scheduled to be complex, including a rendezvous, proximity operations, and a spacewalk; thus crew operations needed to be more efficiently distributed. (NASA Release 94-31)	* NASA announced that Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was to develop and manufacture an improved, lighter version of the Space Shuttle External Tank. The Super Lightweight External Tank was to be made of aluminum alloys and weigh 8,000 pounds less than the current model. (NASA Release 94-32; AP, Feb 28/94; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)	* NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, announced the selection of Robert P. Madison International for an engineering, construction, and environmental services contract at the Lewis Research Center and at Plum Brook Station, Sandusky, Ohio. (NASA Release C94-i; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)	* A ceremony held at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility marked its return to its former status as an independent NASA center. For 13 years it was administered by NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, and designated a facility. Kenneth J. Szalai, formerly deputy director of Ames Research Center for Dryden, was named Dryden director. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 1/94)February: A feature article on NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and NASA described the Agency's ups and downs over the years. It cited Goldin's mantra "smaller, faster, cheaper" but said NASA's real problems were budgeting, contracting, procurement, and financial accounting systems. The article commended NASA's recent cost estimates as more realistic and referred to Goldin's push to include Russia in the Space Station project as a means of reducing costs. Stressing the agency's financial management problems, the article pointed out that NASA still lacked a chief financial officer, which Congress required. The article lauded the success of the Hubble rescue mission as a NASA triumph and referred to other Goldin plans such as focusing on Mission to Planet Earth to monitor the Earth's environment and improving aeronautical research. (Government Executive, Feb/94)	* NASA's appointment of France Cordova as the agency Senior Scientific Adviser, on a three-year leave of absence from Pennsylvania State University was featured. She was to serve as the principal link between NASA and the science community and ensure that NASA programs were regarded as scientifically and technologically well-founded. She was also to coordinate an integrated strategic plan for all the scientific disciplines within NASA. (The Penn Stater, Feb/94)MARCHMarch 2: NASA announced the postponement of the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia until March 4 because of a severe storm. (AP, Mar 2/94; Reuters, Mar 2/94; NY Times, Mar 3/94; P Inq, Mar 3/94; USA Today, Mar 3/94)	* Clementine spacecraft, launched January 25 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, took just released high-resolution color photographs of the moon. The purposes of the spacecraft were to test anti-missile military technology and explore space. Reportedly, the pictures, which were available to the public, were of high quality and the cost of the program was relatively low. (Reuters, Mar 2/94; W Times, Mar 20/94)	* Businessman James Robertson of James M. Beggs Associates consulting firm of Arlington, Virginia, pleaded guilty to accepting inside bid information involving NASA contracts at Johnson Space Center, Houston. (AP, Mar 2/94)March 3: NASA announced the selection of a system to control microbial contamination in drinking water as both the NASA 1993 Invention of the Year and the NASA 1993 Commercial Invention of the Year. NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Deputy Chief of the Biomedical Operations and Research Branch Richard L. Sauer developed the system together with Gerald V. Colombo and Clifford D. Jolly of Umpqua Research Company, Myrtle Creek, Oregon. The process had applications for long-term space flight as well as commercial use in developing nations particularly. (NASA Release 94-33)	* NASA announced that transmission of data from Galileo spacecraft indicated its observation of what was probably a satellite of the asteroid Ida, which would be the first moon of an asteroid ever sighted. The flyby of Ida occurred August 28, 1993. (NASA Release 94-34; AP, Mar 4/94)March 4: Preparations for the launch, the launch itself, and experiments conducted aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia received extensive media coverage. Fueling began the morning of March 4 prior to the crew's boarding. The mission commander and the pilot wore newly devised long johns with tubes that plugged into water pumps to keep them cool while awaiting takeoff and during reentry. Most of the major experiments were to be operated from the ground so that the astronauts could concern themselves with medical tests, some mechanical structures, and observation of the 12 rats used in a bone density study. On March 5, one of Columbia's three auxiliary power units registered an unusually high pressure reading, causing concern; the readings returned to normal when the crew switched to other heaters. It developed that the high pressure apparently resulted from an ice buildup in one of the auxiliary power units. Meanwhile, several articles expressed concern that budget cuts endangered the safety of NASA flights, but NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin denied this was true. As the space flight progressed, two crew members at a time took turns in taking four hours off duty in view of the lengthy nature of the mission. (W Post, Mar 4/94; AP, Mar 4/94; UP, Mar 4/94; Reuters, Mar 4/94; W Times, Mar 5/94; NY Times, Mar 5/94; W Post, Mar 5/94; B Sun, Mar 5/94; P Inq, Mar 5/94; W Times, Mar 6/94; W Post, Mar 6/94; P Inq, Mar 6/94; Daily News, Mar 6/94; UP, Mar 6/94; Reuters, Mar 6/94; NY Times, Mar 7/94; AP, Mar 7/94; UP, Mar 7/94; Reuters, Mar 7/94; NY Times, Mar 8/94; CSM, Mar 8/94; W Post, Mar 8/94; C Trib, Mar 8/94; Reuters, Mar 8/94; AP, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 9/94)	* One of the major experiments conducted on Columbia involved growing crystals, which had many potential commercial and medical applications. However, results to date were not promising and caused criticism of expenditures involved. (Fla Today, Mar 4/94)March 7: NASA announced that the second mission of its Small Expendable-tether Deployer System (SEDS-2) was scheduled for launching from a U.S. Air Force Delta II rocket no sooner than March 9 from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The project was designed to demonstrate an economical way of delivering smaller payloads, such as micro-satellites, to higher orbits. (NASA Release 94-35)	* NASA announced that its Office of Safety and Mission Assurance, Washington, D.C., was to receive valuable data from a flight test in June of a new laser-diode initiated ordnance system on Orbital Science Corporation's Pegasus air-launch space booster. (The intent is that space flight operations be safer and more efficient than with present electrical systems.) (NASA Release 94-36)	* Following a protest ruling in its favor, Recom Technologies, San Jose, California, received payment for its Computational, Administrative, Professional, and Engineering Services contract with NASA's Lewis Research Center. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 7/94)March 8: NASA announced that it and the Department of Defense had instituted policies to standardize requirements so as to improve the quality of contractor-delivered products to both agencies. (NASA Release 94-37)	* George Brown, Democrat from California and chairman of the House of Representatives Science Committee, told the seven-member Space Shuttle crew that repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in September 1973, that their successful mission would help restore support for the space program. (Reuters, Mar 8/94; B Sun, Mar 9/94)	* A federal grand jury indicted Ram Bachan Ram, chairman of the mathematics department at Hampton University, on seven counts of mail fraud related to alleged plagiarism in submitting a proposal for a research grant to NASA. The proposal concerned "Implications of Pressure Diffusion for Shock Waves," and for it Ram received $100,810 from NASA's Langley Research Center. However, it developed that Ram had stolen the proposal and findings from the work of a professor at Clemson University in South Carolina. (Virginia Pilot, Mar 9/94)March 9: NASA announced the scheduled delivery on March 24 of a Boeing 757-200 aircraft to serve as a "flying laboratory" for aeronautical research. The research was intended to benefit the U.S. aviation industry and commercial airline customers. (NASA Release 94-39)	* NASA announced that Space Shuttle Endeavour was to be launched in April to study Earth's global environment. The Space Radar Laboratory was to consist of the Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C/X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar and the Measurement of Air Pollution from Satellite. Of these instruments, the German Space Agency (DARA) and the Italian Space Agency (ASI) were to provide the X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar. An international team of 49 science investigators from 13 nations were to conduct the experiments. In addition, the mission was to include NASA's Get Away Special experiments that allow average persons a chance to perform experiments in space; it was also to be the first cooperative initiative with the National Institutes of Health using a special cell culture system. (NASA Release 94-38)	* An Air Force Delta 2 rocket blasted into orbit carrying the final advanced satellite in the U.S. military's Global Positioning System, Navstar. Delta 2 also carried NASA's experiment to test a space tether 12.5 miles long to determine how long it survived in orbit among space junk. The tether could ultimately be used for various purposes such as generating electricity or changing spacecraft altitudes. (Reuters, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 9/94; AP, Mar 10/94; NY Times, Mar 11/94; NY Times, Mar 15/94)	* As the astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia neared and passed the halfway point of their mission, they continued medical and metal research experiments, growth studies with protein crystals, and physical exercises. Lettuce and other seeds flown on Columbia were to be planted after the shuttle returned and then tested. Apart from the desire for a hot shower, the astronauts had no complaints and hoped they might break the U.S. record of time in space flight. The study of spacecraft glow on March 12 experienced difficulty when the ultraviolet light detector malfunctioned. On March 14, the astronauts began tests of a robot arm targeting system. On March 17, the astronauts started packing up experiments in preparation for landing the following day. Columbia landed uneventfully on March 18, having completed 223 orbits over 5.8 million miles. (Reuters, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 10/94; AP, Mar 10/94; Reuters, Mar 10/94; Reuters, Mar 11/94; AP, Mar 11/94; UP, Mar 11/94; B Sun, Mar 12/94; W Post, Mar 12/94; NY Times, Mar 12/94; Reuters, Mar 12/94; W Times, Mar 12/94; LA Times, Mar 13/94; B Sun, Mar 13/94; Reuters, Mar 13/94; UP, Mar 13/94; B Sun, Mar 14/94; P Inq, Mar 14/94; USA Today, Mar 14/94; AP, Mar 14/94; UP, Mar 14/94; AP, Mar 15/94; Reuters, Mar 15/94; UP, Mar 15/94; W Post, Mar 16/94; AP, Mar 16/94; C Trib, Mar 16/94; USA Today, Mar 17/94; W Times, Mar 17/94; AP, Mar 17/94; UP, Mar 17/94; Reuters, Mar 17/94; UP, Mar 18/94; AP, Mar 18/94; Reuters, Mar 18/94; B Sun, Mar 19/94; NY Times, Mar 19/94; W Times, Mar 19/94; W Post, Mar 19/94; USA Today, Mar 21/94)March 10: The government announced that it would allow companies to market sophisticated spy satellite technology worldwide. U.S. firms could build and operate for-profit satellite systems powerful enough to take photographs from 22,300 miles above the Earth and show objects on the ground as small as one square yard. (NY Times, Mar 11/94; USA Today, Mar 11/94; W Post, Mar 11/94; WSJ, Mar 11/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin addressed the National Space Society's conference and challenged the space community to define the U.S. role in space. He expressed frustration at repeated congressional efforts to kill the planned International Space Station. (Fla Today, Mar 11/94)March 13: NASA budget cuts and various problems experienced in recent flights aroused concern for the safety of astronauts, according to NASA critics. Despite assurances by Daniel Mulville, Director of NASA's Engineering and Quality Management Division that standards were not compromised, fears of another Challenger type disaster persisted. (AP, Mar 13/94; P Inq, Mar 14/94; LA Times, Mar 20/94; Fla Today, Mar 24/94)	* Orbital Sciences Corporation launched the Taurus rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, placing two military satellites into orbit. (C Trib, Mar 14/94; W Post, Mar 15/94)	* Ten Louisiana colleges were scheduled to benefit from NASA's Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research. They were selected for a three-year award of up to $500,000, which must be matched by the Louisiana Educational Quality Support Fund. The funds were designed to enable states to develop an academic research enterprise directed toward long-term capability in space science and applications, aeronautical and space research, and technology programs. (Picayune, Mar 13/94)March 14: NASA announced the selection by its NASA-industry team of two engine cycle concepts on which to focus the next three years of propulsion research for a next-generation supersonic airliner. The two concepts--"mixed flow turbofan" and "FLADE" (fan-on-blade)--were designed to be environmentally compatible and economically practical. (NASA Release 94-41)	* NASA announced the opening of a new, remote ground station in Tidbinbilla, Australia, called the Gamma-Ray Observatory (GRO) Remote Terminal System. The station was to receive scientific data from the Compton GRO via a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite that was moved into position over the Indian Ocean. (NASA Release 94-42)	* NASA announced that its Office of Space Communications, Headquarters, Washington, D.C., was initiating an opportunity for private industry to conduct experiments of future telecommunications technologies via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS). Called the Mobile Satcom TDRSS (MOST) Experiment Program, it was designed to enhance U.S. competitiveness in the global satellite telecommunications area. (NASA Release 94-43)March 15: Volodymyr Gorbulin, head of Ukraine's space agency, appealed to the West for full space research cooperation to save Ukraine's aeronautics industry from collapse. Gorbulin expressed disappointment that NASA officials had refused to discuss joint space construction at talks in Kiev the following week because Ukraine had not yet signed international agreements on proliferation of advanced rocket technology. (Reuters, Mar 15/94)	* Russia's Interfax news agency reported that the previous week a fire had destroyed a control facility at the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Experts stated, however, that launches would not be affected. (AP, Mar 15/94)	* NASA Space Shuttle Director Tom Utsman announced NASA's intent to accomplish all major modification work on the Space Shuttle fleet at Rockwell International's facility in Palmdale, California. The decision resulted from expanding requirements associated with the Russian cooperative effort, the ability to support future operations of the International Space Station, and the desire to continue to prelaunch process the Shuttle orbiters for flight at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 94-44; Antelope Valley Daily News, Mar 16/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 16/94; Fla Today, Mar 19/94; AvWk, Mar 21/94)	* Naval Academy graduate Wendy B. Lawrence was scheduled to fly on Space Shuttle Columbia in December. After earning a Master's degree in ocean engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, she taught physics at the Naval Academy. (Capitol, Mar 15/94)March 16: Diane Farrar of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, stated that NASA, the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration, and the National Science Foundation were conducting an eight-month airborne study of the Antarctic ozone hole and its possible effects. The study, which was to use high-altitude ER-2 NASA aircraft, was to be based in Hawaii and New Zealand. This was the first NASA-sponsored airborne study of the southern polar region since the 1987 campaign that confirmed chlorofluorocarbons were the primary cause of ozone destruction. (UP, Mar 16/94)March 17: NASA announced that the System Design Review (SDR) for the International Space Station Program was to be held March 23 and 24 at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The following were to be present: NASA managers and those from the Canadian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, the Italian Space Agency, the Japanese Space Agency, the Russian Space Agency, the prime contractor Boeing, and Tier I subcontractors Rocketdyne and McDonnell Douglas. Randy Brinkley, Space Station Program Manager, said the SDR was scheduled to "lock in the key technical elements of the system as well as the schedule and cost." (NASA Release 94-45)	* NASA announced that in cooperation with the Civil Air Patrol and the Federal Aviation Administration it was hosting a national conference for educators on "Aviation and Space Education: America's Leading Edge" in Norfolk, Virginia, April 6-9. (NASA Release 94-46)	* NASA announced the selection of Kathryn C. Thornton and Catherine G. Coleman for the 16-day Microgravity Laboratory mission scheduled for launch in the fall of 1995 aboard Space Shuttle Columbia. (NASA Release 94-47)March 18: The United States, Canada, Japan, and the European Partner met in Paris with officials of the Russian Federation for the first time to discuss steps to implement the decision to bring Russia into the Space Station partnership. The resulting joint statement referred to Russia's planned contribution, enhancing Station capabilities, needed changes to the legal framework of the 1988 agreements to include Russia, and a schedule to complete negotiations, beginning with an April meeting. (NASA Editor's Note N94-23)	* NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center's Western Aeronautical Test Range passed a milestone on March 18: the 10,000th mission monitored by the range. In this case it was NASA's F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle's second flight of the day. (Antelope Valley Press,Mar 19/94)March 19: U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry arrived in Kazakhstan from Russia. On March 20, he visited the formerly super-secret Baikonur space center. He saw a Soyuz space rocket being readied for an unmanned mission to Russia's Mir Space Station and the former Soviet Union's grounded Space Shuttle rockets. Baikonur had launched more than twice the 453 space launches of Canaveral since 1957. Bob Clarke, a NASA administrator who accompanied Perry, noted that ground crews for Soyuz-manned flights could prepare the pad for a new launch only six hours after one capsule took off whereas the Cape Canaveral turn-around time was one month. Admiral William Owens, vice chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, marveled at the workmanship of the welds on the Soyuz rocket being readied. (Reuters, Mar 19/94; AP, Mar 20/94; Reuters, Mar 20/94; W Post, Mar 21/94; NY Times, Mar 21/94; Moscow Times, Mar 22/94)March 21: Jack Anderson's column concerned the probe by the Office of Special Investigations (OSI) of NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin for alleged serious misconduct. Two OSI investigators reportedly began the probe in late 1992. The investigation centered on whether Colvin had lost the independence necessary for a watchdog by becoming too friendly with NASA executives. (W Post, Mar 21/94)	* NASA announced the selection of two Winston-Salem State University faculty members to participate in the NASA/University Joint Venture Program (JOVE). The program enabled faculty and students to become involved in space science research. NASA was to invest $138,000 over three years to support Winston-Salem State's program participation. As part of the program, two faculty members would spend 10 weeks in the summer of 1994 at NASA field centers being "mentored" by NASA scientists. (NASA Release 94-48)	* An Air Force panel was completing the space launch modernization study mandated by Congress; and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy was preparing recommendations on vehicle developments. The trade Aviation Week & Space Technology publication advocated the United States' developing a modern expendable launch vehicle with money both from government and industry. The next step, which would need multi-billion-dollar investment, would require "leapfrog technology" such as the use of propulsion, and could benefit from cooperation with the Commonwealth of Independent States. (AvWk, Mar 21/94)	* NASA encountered difficulties in its desire to deliver planetary video data to microcomputer users because of the limitations of the technology. Mike Martin, a science data systems technologist with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said that so far he and his colleagues had been unable to incorporate Apple Quick Time video into multimedia presentations to run on the Macintosh and multimedia PCs. (Government Computer News, Mar 21/94)March 22: NASA announced that Jack Farmer, a paleontologist and geologist at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had developed a strategy to search for microfossils on the planet Mars. Farmer presented his strategy, which was based on principles of Precambrian paleontology, at the Geological Society Meeting of America in San Bernardino, California. (NASA Release 94-49)	* Franklin Chang-Diaz, a Costa Rican immigrant to the United States, addressed the National Hispanic University mathematics and science convocation in San Jose to tell Hispanic students how he became the first Hispanic in space. He flew with the NASA five-person crew with Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev on Shuttle Discovery in February. (San Jose Mercury News, Mar 22/94)March 23: NASA showed photographs taken by Galileo spacecraft revealing for the first time an asteroid orbited by its own moon. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory released the photos of asteroid Ida. (NASA Release 94-50; Reuters, Mar 23/94; P Inq, Mar 24/94; LA Times, Mar 24/94; W Post, Mar 24/94; USA Today, Mar 24/94; NY Times, Mar 24/94)	* An independent safety review panel said NASA's Space Shuttle fleet urgently needed a safer fuel pump and feared that continued job cuts at Kennedy Space Center would endanger astronauts. The panel also advocated the need for more specific plans to avoid crashing into orbiting "space junk" as well as the need to finalize a quick-escape system for Space Station astronauts. (H Post, Mar 24/94)	* A congressional report, based on a House Subcommittee on Space tour of the European and Russian space communities, said Europeans were tired of U.S. changes in the International Space Station project and uncertain about U.S. plans to take Russia in as a full partner. The report also expressed concern about how well Russia could support its part of the Space Station agreement. (AP, Mar 23/94)	* NASA announced the signing of a memorandum of understanding with the Commission for Space Activities of the Federative Republic of Brazil (COBAE). The two parties were to conduct a sounding rocket campaign in Brazil from July through October 1994 to investigate the electrodynamics and irregularities in the ionosphere and mesosphere along the Earth's magnetic equator and study their relationship with the neutral atmosphere and winds. NASA was to launch, with the support of COBAE, 33 rockets from the new Brazilian launch range, Centro de Lanamentos de Alcntara in Maranho. Brazilian scientific participation was to be coordinated by the Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE) and was to be named the Guara Campaign after a lovely bird native to the equatorial region of Brazil. (NASA Release 94-51)	* NASA announced the selection of 55 researchers to receive two-year grants to conduct microgravity research. Annual funding of each proposal was approximately $50,000, for an overall total of more than $5.6 million. Proposals selected were 24 in fluid physics, 26 in materials science, and six in fundamental physics. The goal was to explore new ideas about the influence of gravity on physical and chemical processes that might improve Earth-based production methods and materials. (NASA Release 94-52)	* NASA announced the completion of the International Space Station System Design Review. Using approximately 75 percent of Space Station Freedom hardware, the completed Station was to consist of U.S. elements, including the integrated truss, habitation module, and laboratory module; the Russian science power platform, service module, and functional cargo block vehicle (FGB); the European laboratory module; the Japanese experiment module and exposed facility; and the Canadian remote manipulator system. The assembly was to begin with launch of the FGB vehicle in November 1997. The U.S. contribution to the Station was estimated to cost $17.4 billion from Fiscal Year 1994 until assembly was complete in 2002. The ground system for the Station was to build on the Shuttle and Freedom programs. (NASA Release 94-53; USA Today, Mar 25/94; W Times, Mar 25/94; AP, Mar 25/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 26/94)	* The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) in its report faulted NASA's effort to fit a program projected in the late 1990s to cost more than $20 billion a year into an annual budget of $14 billion. The CBO said such effort risked delay and failure, and the CBO offered the alternative of grounding the astronauts and ending the Space Shuttle program. Specifically, the report proposed one of the following: ending costly piloted space flight, concentrating instead on robot aircraft and new technology for industry; emphasizing a roboting spacecraft and conducting only four instead of eight Space Shuttle flights a year; concentrating on piloted space flight, building the Space Station and planning for manned missions to the moon and Mars, limiting robot missions to pathfinder projects for the moon-Mars effort. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said NASA would not back away from the Administration's balanced aeronautics and space program. He added that any of the three CBO alternatives would destroy that balance and that NASA could accomplish daring and difficult missions on a tight budget. (NASA Editor's Note N94-27; B Sun, Mar 25/94; W Times, Mar 25/94; P Inq, Mar 25/94; NY Times, Mar 25/94; O Sen Star, Mar 25/94; W Post, Mar 25/94; AP, Mar 25/94; LA Daily News, Mar 27/94; Federal Computer Week, Mar 28/94; O Sen Star, Mar 31/94)	* James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, and ranking member of the House Space Subcommittee, wrote NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin requesting information about U.S. dependence on Russia, payments to the Russian government, cost constraints on the Space Station in view of NASA's tight budget, and financial agreements with Station international partners. He expressed reservations over the decision to move the Station to a higher orbital inclination at the Russian request and expressed the fear that the agreement with Russia was negotiated from a position of U.S. vulnerability because of budgetary limits. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)March 24: Six astronauts went through a countdown drill aboard Shuttle Endeavour, and NASA set the date of April 7 for the spaceship's launch on an environmental research mission. (Reuters, Mar 24/94)	* An unmanned cargo craft bearing food, fuel, and equipment docked with Russia's Mir orbiting Space Station according to Itar-Tass news agency. (Reuters, Mar 24/94)March 25: Former NASA Space Station Director Richard Kohrs was a member of a team to revamp the Cassini mission for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also contacted him, reportedly asking that he look at the troubled Space Station program. (SP News, Mar 28-Apr 3/94)	* Eric Glomboske, an 11th grader at Highland High School, was one of 10 regional winners in the NASA-sponsored Space Science Student Involvement Program. To compete, Eric designed, planned, and mapped out a human journey to Mars. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 25/94)March 28: GOES-8, a sophisticated weather satellite, was the first of five advanced GOES-NEXT satellites scheduled to be deployed by 2003. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration managed the GOES program but engineers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center oversaw development of the spacecraft. These engineers redesigned weather instruments used by polar-orbiting weather satellites that flew 500 miles high to operate instead at 22,300 miles high. The system had vast potential benefit for firefighters, farmers, marine and aviation navigators, and others through improving the accuracy of weather forecasting. (W Post, Mar 28/94)	* In connection with its April mission, Space Shuttle Endeavour was to carry a radar imaging experiment that would collect data on surface texture in several areas of the globe, including California's Mojave Desert and Death Valley. The movement of sand was determined by a complex interrelationship among wind velocity, wind intensity, and the surface texture of the ground. Diane Evans, a geologist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, explained that if the experiment works well it might become a permanent part of NASA's comprehensive study of global change. The experiment also was to study vegetation around the world; in order to see as much of the Earth as possible, the Endeavour was to be launched on a trajectory that would cover most of the globe, with the orbit ranging from 57 degrees north of the equator to 57 degrees south. (LA Times, Mar 28/94)	* Russia inherited the Soviet Union's ambitions in space but lacked its main launch pads. Russian President Boris Yeltsin in a visit to his Kazakh counterpart, Nursultan Nazarbayev, hoped to sign a 30-year lease on the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The outcome was a 20-year lease with an option to renew for 10 more years, and an annual payment of about $115 million. However, should this effort proved unsuccessful, Russia was developing other sites. Russian space scientists considered the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Far North unsuitable for manned flights, but Colonel General Vladimir Ivanov told the Itar-Tass news agency that Russia planned to build a major new space center in the Far East at Svobodny, north of Blagoveshchensk. (LA Times, Mar 28/94; Reuters, Mar 28/94; W Post, Mar 29/94)	* George Brown, Democrat from California, chairman of the House Science Committee, sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin asking that NASA develop cost estimates for upgrading the infrastructure surrounding Russia's Baikonur Cosmodrome. He also requested that NASA explore options for establishing direct relations with Kazakhstan in the areas of science and technology. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)March 29: Douglas B. Shaffer, president of Astro International Corporation, and Kenneth E. Smith, the company's director of NASA programs, pleaded guilty to soliciting and accepting inside information on a $3.3 million NASA contract. The company also pleaded guilty. (AP, Mar 29/94)March 30: NASA announced the development at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, of a new tile known as Toughened Uni-Piece Fibrous Insulation (TUFI). The low-density composite thermal insulation was to undergo its first flight test on the Endeavour in April. (NASA Release 94-54)	* Thomas D. Jones was one of the astronauts scheduled to fly on the Endeavour. Since boyhood he always wanted both to fly and to study science. (B Sun, Mar 30/94)	* India signed a new agreement to buy seven rocket engines from Russia's commercial space organization, according to U.R. Rao, outgoing head of the Indian Space Research Organisation. The first engine was to be delivered in 1996 and the remainder over a three-year period. (Reuters, Mar 30/94)March 31: NASA announced that the first cooperative space flight research between NASA and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) was intended to help scientists better understand the effects of microgravity on the growth of human bone and muscle cells during space flight. It might also increase understanding of changes in muscle and bone on Earth after severe injury, certain degenerative diseases, or prolonged bedrest. This research was to be a part of the April Space Shuttle mission. (NASA Release 94-55)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin paid a 90-minute visit to Rocketdyne's main factory in Canoga Park. He said the company had made some progress in correcting quality control problems that caused two shuttle launches to be aborted seconds before liftoff and two other scheduled flights to be postponed. (LA Times, Apr 1/94)March/April: The Space Shuttle crew that repaired the $1.6 billion Hubble Space Telescope were commended for their work, which enabled the view of stars 10 times as faint as previously. The instrument more than doubled the telescope's previous range. (Life Magazine, Mar/Apr/94)APRILApril 1: Abe Martinez, assistant U.S. attorney in Houston, said that one corporation and eight individuals, including a NASA contracting officer, Stephen Cleland, had pleaded guilty to criminal charges in connection with Operation Lightning Strike at NASA's Johnson Space Center. The U.S. attorney's office was to ask a grand jury to indict another Johnson official, David Proctor. (SP News, Apr 4-10/94)April 4: NASA announced the rescheduling of the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour to April 8 to allow further inspections of metallic vanes in the high pressure oxidizer preburner pump volute housings of its main engines. (NASA Release 94-028; AP, Apr 4/94; UP, Apr 4/94; Reuters, Apr 4/94; P Inq, Apr 5/94; W Times, Apr 5/94; USA Today, Apr 5/94)	* Laurie Boeder, NASA Associate Administrator for Public Affairs, discussed NASA's struggles to fund NASA Select, a television channel that covered Space Shuttle missions for broadcast on cable and use by commercial networks. (SP News, Apr 4-10/94)	* Sidney Gutierrez was featured as making history because he was the first Hispanic to command a spacecraft. Scheduled to command the Endeavour on its April flight he said he was happy if he could serve as a role model for young people. (H Post, Apr 4/94)April 5: A joint statement was issued following a meeting of the heads of space agencies involved in the International Space Station: the Canadian Space Agency (CSA), the European Space Agency (ESA), the National Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA), the Russian Space Agency (RSA), and NASA. This was the first group meeting since Russia accepted the collective invitation to join the International Space Station partnership in December 1993. The heads of agencies discussed the outcome of the recently completed Space Station System Design Review. CSA, ESA, and NASDA noted the remarkable progress made to accommodate Russia as a new partner and to satisfy the interests of all the partners in the new program structure, and they commended NASA for its efforts to improve program efficiency and to clarify the potential for additional partner contributions.	Activities at the government and agency levels have paved the way for negotiation of the agreements necessary to formalize Russia's inclusion in the program. All expressed support for proceeding with these negotiations, scheduled to start in late April, in an expeditious manner. The heads of agencies also noted the importance of concluding, in a timely manner, the interim agreement between NASA and RSA to facilitate Russia's early participation in program management mechanisms. (NASA Editor's Note N94-28)	* NASA announced its intent to grant the Arkansas Aerospace Education Center $500,000 to implement its Technology Industry Resource Project to help develop enrichment opportunities for secondary school students statewide in mathematics, applied sciences, and technology. (NASA Release 94-56)	* NASA announced the departure from NASA, effective April 11, of Space Shuttle astronaut Ronald J. Grabe. He was to become Vice President, Business Development, for Orbital Sciences Corporation's Launch Systems Group. (NASA Release 94-57)	* NASA found no defects in Endeavour's three pumps during its inspection and cleared the spacecraft for launching on April 8, weather permitting. (AP, Apr 5/94; UP, Apr 5/94; Reuters, Apr 5/94; W Times, Apr 6/94; AP, Apr 6/94; UP, Apr 6/94; Reuters, Apr 6/94; NY Times, Apr 7/94; W Post, Apr 7/94; USA Today, Apr 7/94; W Times, Apr 7/94)	* A study released by the Virginia-based Teal space consulting group said that since the space age began, 271 missions have failed or malfunctioned. Of the 271 missions, 108 were considered failures and of these, two-thirds or an estimated 71 were Soviet. The remaining 34 failures were American. The most failure-prone spacecraft over the period appeared to be the Soviet-made Cosmos satellite. (Reuters, Apr 5/94)	* Russian Military Space Forces official Sergei Gorbunov said that Russia had decided to develop a new giant booster rocket that was to have a reusable first stage and burn a special, safer low-pollution fuel mixture. The rocket, Angara-24, would be appropriate for a new Far Eastern launch site if Russia decided to build it as an alternative to the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The booster was to be tested in 1998 and the first launch was planned for 2000. (Reuters, Apr 5/94)	* Gregory Reck, Acting Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology (OACT), said that NASA had tasked an industry team with reviewing the direction of its research and development (R&D) efforts in space communications technologies. The group, which was to be composed of satellite manufacturers such as Hughes and Space Systems/Loral, ground station builders like Harris Corporation, and small aerospace firms like Orbital Sciences Corporation, was to identify future space-based systems, both in low-Earth and geosynchronous orbits, and how they might tie into the National Information Infrastructure. NASA's role in the activity was to be directed by Samuel Venneri, head of spacecraft and remote sensing in OACT. The consensus findings of the team were to be used in relation to NASA fiscal year budgets. According to the NASA officials, the key motivation behind the initiative was to minimize inroads by European and Japanese competitors into the 60 percent market share held by U.S. firms in satellite communications. (Defense Daily, Apr 7/94)April 6: Lieutenant Colonel Tom Akers, an astronaut, presented NASA's $500,000 check to the state of Arkansas's Aerospace Education Center. (Arkansas Democrat Gazette, Apr 6/94; Fla Today, Apr 17/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said he would personally discuss the Space Station program with 220 members of Congress before the House of Representatives votes on the Station in the summer. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94; AvWk, Apr 11/94)	* Kenneth J. Szalai, Director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center, received the Distinguished Executive Presidential Rank Award. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 6/94)April 7: Jack Anderson's column reported that Margaret Barnes, a NASA employee, sent a confidential letter to Senator John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, on September 2, 1993, alleging among other things, that women in NASA Inspector General Bill D. Colvin's office were treated like "second-class citizens." Barnes was called in and berated by Colvin who had a copy of the letter, which was apparently leaked by Glenn's office. NASA sources said GAO had added the Barnes/Glenn episode to its investigation of Colvin. (W Post, Apr 7/94)	* NASA announced the selection of 39 researchers to receive three- to four-year grants for microgravity combustion research totaling more than $13 million. Of the grants, 33 were for Earth ground-based research and six for flight definition efforts. (NASA Release 94-58)	* NASA spokesman Bruce Buckingham at Kennedy Space Center said the tether launched by the Space Shuttle was working well. It could be used to move satellites around in different orbits in space. Originally about 12 miles long, atomic oxygen and tiny meteorites ate it so that it was now only about five miles long. (O Sen Star, Apr 7/94)	* The International Federation of Professional and Technical Engineers filed unfair labor practice charges against NASA because of the April 4 memorandum from Jeremiah Pearson, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, transferring several positions from headquarters to Johnson Space Center and Kennedy Space Center without collective bargaining. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94)April 8: NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin addressed the University of Arizona's Open Sciences Forum at which professors presented overviews of their space-related work. He assured the faculty and students that NASA would continue to fund University of Arizona research projects such as the $3.6 billion Cassini Saturn probe. He urged scientists to simplify the way in which they discuss their experiments so that lay people would understand them and thus increase scientific awareness. Stressing the concept that "small is better," he mentioned the development of robots that may one day extract fuel from the moon or Mars, thus reducing the amount of propellant that would need to be stored on moon- or Mars-bound spacecraft. (Tucson Citizen, Apr 9/94)	* In a telephone interview, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, who was formerly general manager of TRW's Space and Technology Group in Redondo Beach, California, answered questions about NASA and his efforts to revive the agency. Among other topics, he discussed the International Space Station, the difficulties of working in space, and the problems of budget cuts that NASA faced. (Orange County Register, Apr 8/94)April 9: Space Shuttle Endeavour, which had been rescheduled to lift off on April 8, was launched April 9 because of bad weather. In its cargo bay was the Space Radar Laboratory, weighing 23,000 pounds and containing $366 million worth of imaging systems. The system was to bounce radar waves off Earth in three frequency bands to produce three-dimensional maps of ocean currents, river valleys, forests and farm lands, the geology of volcanoes, and features under desert sands. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and the German and Italian space agencies developed the equipment. The radar developed a glitch after the first day, but ground control was able to repair it and the results were most successful. (NY Times, Apr 8/94; W Post, Apr 8/94; B Sun, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 8/94; USA Today, Apr 8/94; AP, Apr 8/94; UP, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 9/94; AP, Apr 9/94; W Post, Apr 10/94; NY Times, Apr 10/94; B Sun, Apr 10/94; P Inq, Apr 10/94; UPI, Apr 10/94; Reuters, Apr 10/94; AP, Apr 11/94)	* NASA researchers were to go underground on April 11 in Lechuguilla Cave in Carlsbad Caverns National Park in New Mexico to try to replicate conditions on Mars. NASA engineer Larry Lemke was mainly interested in the technology aspect of developing robots to collect the microorganisms in Lechuguilla if it proved a useful source. NASA planetary scientist Chris McKay and contract microbiologist Penny Boston wanted to see if microorganisms living inside Lechuguilla could reveal life that might exist on Mars. Bacteria in the cave get their energy from sulfur and iron, believed to be two main ingredients of Mars's soil. Samples taken during the five-day underground stay that ended on April 16 were to be analyzed at the U.S. Geological Survey laboratory in Denver, a NASA-contracted laboratory in Boulder, Colorado, and the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. (AP, Apr 9/94; AP, Apr 13/94; AP, Apr 18/94)April 11: Astronaut Tom Jones on Space Shuttle Endeavour answered questions about radar mapping and the Earth's ozone layer from students at his former school in Stemmers Run. Among the areas Endeavour radar was mapping were traces of ancient rivers beneath the Sahara Desert. Other areas being targeted for mapping were the Andes and the East Australian Current as well as fires in China south of the Yellow River and flooding in the Midwest. Astronauts assured C-span television questioners that the mapping radar was strictly for scientific not military purposes. At the halfway point of the mission, NASA said Endeavour already had collected 95 percent of the data it was to gather. The astronauts were divided into two shifts of three persons each in order to work round the clock monitoring radar performance, taking pictures of the Earth, and recording observations on tape. An air pollution monitor aboard Endeavour found surprisingly high level of carbon monoxide in the Northern Hemisphere, according to NASA. NASA scientists on the ground were delighted with the quality of pictures and other data beamed by radar.	As part of their preparations for returning to Earth on April 19, the astronauts test-fired their steering jets and wiggled their flaps on April 17. On April 18, Endeavour took radar pictures of 19,300 square miles of north China from 140 miles up in space. Meanwhile, according to the official Xinhua News Agency, Chinese remote-sensing aircraft at 3.7 miles up used radar and a mobile microwave scatter meter and surveyors on the ground also joined in. The astronauts then began to stow away equipment and turn off radars in preparation for landing. Because of adverse weather conditions April 19, Endeavour was unable to land until April 20 and was diverted to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (UP, Apr 11/94; Reuters, Apr 11/94; B Sun, Apr 12/94; USA Today, Apr 12/94; Fla Today, Apr 12/94; O Sen Star, Apr 12/94; H Chron, Apr 12/94; AP, Apr 12/94; UP, Apr 12/94; W Post, Apr 13/94; H Chron, Apr 13/94; H Post, Apr 13/94; USA Today, Apr 14/94; Fla Today, Apr 14/94; Reuters, Apr 14/94; UP, Apr 14/94; USA Today, Apr 15/94; H Chron, Apr 15/94; AP, Apr 15/94; C Trib, Apr 16/94; W Times, Apr 16/94; UP, Apr 16/94; AP, Apr 16/94; W Times, Apr 17/94; UP, Apr 17/94; P Inq, Apr 18/94; CSM, Apr 18/94; USA Today, Apr 18/94; AP, Apr 18/94; UP, Apr 18/94; Reuters, Apr 18/94; USA Today, Apr 19/94; AP, Apr 19/94; Reuters, Apr 19/94; H Post, Apr 20/94; H Chron, Apr 20/94; AP, Apr 20/94; UP, Apr 20/94; Reuters, Apr 20/94; NY Times, Apr 21/94; W Post, Apr 21/94; W Times, Apr 21/94; USA Today, Apr 21/94; B Sun, Apr 21/94; C Trib, Apr 21/94; AP, Apr 21/94)	* Although NASA as yet lacked congressional approval for a proposed $2 billion wind tunnel complex for testing commercial aircraft, California's congressional delegation lobbied NASA's Administrator Daniel Goldin to have the wind tunnel built in California at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View. Goldin refused to discuss the subject. Virginia also expressed interest in being a site for the wind tunnels, according to Representative Robert C. Scott. (LA Times, Apr 12/94; SF Chron, Apr 12/94; San Jose Mercury News, Apr 12/94; LA Times, Apr 12/94; Daily Press, Apr 20/94)	* Harry Holloway, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences and Applications, stressed that both the Spacelab and Mir were critical elements in NASA's orbital research program. During the next three years, NASA was scheduled to fly four Spacelab missions and five of the scheduled 10 Shuttle flights to Mir were to use the long Spacelab module to conduct priority research in fluid physics and combustion. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94)	* Arthur F. Obenschain, project manager for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, had overseen construction of the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) weather spacecraft. He reported that all previous major technical problems had been overcome and that the first of the GOES was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral on behalf of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on April 13. Launched on schedule, GOES was predicted to provide more accurate tracking of hurricanes and other storms than did previsous weather spacecraft. (NY Times, Apr 12/94; Fla Today, Apr 12/94; H Chron, Apr 12/94; AP, Apr 13/94; USA Today, Apr 14/94; W Post, Apr 14/94; NY Times, Apr 14/94; Plain Dealer, Apr 14/94)	* As part of the Administration's efforts to gain congressional support for NASA's International Space Station project, NASA was considering removal of the Russian Salyut Functional Cargo Block (FGB) vehicle from the redesigned configuration. If the FGB were removed, which some key members of Congress wanted in order to reduce dependence upon Russia, NASA might replace it with Lockheed's Bus-1. Following the March International Space Station System Design Review, international partners and White House advisers, including members of the presidential panel reviewed the Station redesign and, in general, seemed favorably disposed to the Station. The panel was headed by Charles Vest, president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. (AvWk, Apr 11/94)	* NASA in a cooperative agreement notice called on third parties to develop public-use applications of its remote sensing databases in order to make use of the reams of Earth and space science data collected to date. Paul Hunter, Program Manager for NASA's Information Infrastructure Technology Applications program, said NASA planned to grant about eight to 10 large awards of $500,000 to $1.5 million per year, and eight to 20 smaller awards of about $100,000 to $300,000. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 11/94)April 12: NASA announced the signing on April 7 of a technology reinvestment program agreement to develop hybrid rocket motor technology between NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, and a consortium of three U.S. aerospace companies. The firms consisted of Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems, New Orleans; United Technologies Corporation's Chemical Systems Division, San Jose, California; and the American Rocket Company, Ventura, California. (NASA Release 94-59)	* Russia marked its Space Day in a subdued mood, with the Baikonur Cosmodrome having become part of Kazakhstan and Russia's cosmonaut team decreased from 100 to 40 people. The Buran Space Shuttle was ended after its only unmanned test flight in 1988. But workers remaining at the Molniya complex in northwestern Moscow, established to construct Buran, hoped to work on the MAKS project involving small shuttles launched from the giant An-225 Mriya transport plane to carry cargo into space. (AP, Apr 12/94)	* Lockheed Corporation in Calabasas, California, and Rocketdyne, the Canoga Park division of Rockwell International, teamed up to compete with other aerospace companies for $167 million in grants from NASA over the next five years to explore the feasibility of a "single-stage-to-orbit" (SSTO) rocket. It was uncertain whether the White House and the Pentagon favored such a plan, which NASA considered a cost-saving alternative to updating current rockets. (LA Times, Apr 12/94)April 13: NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Space Subcommittee the Space Station program was proceeding but cost and schedule savings were decreasing. NASA earlier estimated Russian participation would save two years and $2 billion. After the Systems Design Review, it appeared time would be speeded by 15 months and savings probably would be $1.5 billion. Also, Russia now wanted $650 million instead of $400 million for lease of the functional cargo block vehicle. Furthermore, agreement needed to be reached with Russia on the cost of a major component required to provide navigation and reboost capability for the Station. NASA assured the Committee that the agency would never cede control of the Station to Russian ground commanders. Goldin also said it was essential for NASA to have stable funding. (Reuters, Apr 13/94; Defense Daily, Apr 14/94; O Sen Star, Apr 14/94; H Post, Apr 14/94)	* China recently suffered a fire at its Xichang Long March launch facility, damaging a Fengyun II weather satellite and adjacent work areas. (Defense Daily, Apr 14/94)	* NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science told the NASA Advisory Council that NASA wanted to launch one Discovery mission every 12 to 15 months on a Delta or smaller expendable launch vehicle (ELV). NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center planned to issue a competitive procurement later in the year for up to 15 ELVs, paying $25 million to $30 million per vehicle. (Defense Daily, Apr 14/94)April 14: NASA announced that 100 girls, ages nine to 15, were to join the NASA Headquarters workforce on April 28. (NASA Release 94-60; AP, Apr 20/94)	* Representative Ralph Hall, Democrat from Texas and chairman of the Space Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, said he was not sure the President was doing enough to prevent defections among Space Station supporters. Representative George Brown, Democrat from California and chair of the parent committee, threatened to withdraw his support if the President could not get sufficient funds for other science projects. (H Chron, Apr 15/94; National Journal, Apr 23/94)April 16: On April 9-10, radio astronomy experts from Stanford University and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena sent a signal from the Clementine spacecraft, which was engaged in a moon-mapping mission for the Pentagon, into a huge crater on the lunar South Pole. NASA's Deep Space Network picked up the reflection of the signal, and the Pentagon was scheduled to undertake a preliminary review of the data to determine whether the moon contained ice. (AP, Apr 16/94)April 18: NASA announced the updated schedule of Space Shuttle/Space Station missions through calendar year 1997 and expendable launch vehicle missions through calendar year 2001. Included were 10 Space Shuttle flights to Russian Space Station Mir between 1995 and 1997. (NASA Release 94-61)	* The six pilots at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base believed that they had the best flying job in the world. Their work entailed a great deal of variety, flying in different types of planes and conducting numerous research experiments. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Apr 18/94)April 19: NASA announced the selection of Praxair, Inc., of Danbury, Connecticut, and Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., of Allentown, Pennsylvania, for 15-year contracts to supply liquid hydrogen to government and contractor facilities. (NASA Release C94-j)	* A House Natural Resources subcommittee sought to get the Interior Department out of the helium business and limit losses to the U.S. Treasury. The greatest government demand for helium was from NASA, and by law government agencies must buy helium from the Bureau of Mines. Congress sought to end government participation in the sale of helium. (AP, Apr 19/94)April 20: NASA announced that it and the Federal Emergency Management Agency were exploring a cooperative venture to test and implement a prototype remote sensing system that was to acquire, process, and distribute photographic-like digital images of disaster-damaged areas to response and recovery officials in near-real time. (NASA Release 94-62)	* NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced the award of a grant to Sierra College, Rocklin, California, for a hands-on community college engineering curriculum as part of the government's technology reinvestment project. (NASA Release 94-63)	* NASA announced the development by the Ames Fatigue Countermeasures Program of a training course that taught pilots steps to be used against fatigue. The first workshop was to be held at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, on May 18-19. (NASA Release 94-64)	* NASA faced tough opposition over Russian participation in the International Space Station during hearings of the House Subcommittee on Space. Both committee chairman Ralph Hall, Democrat from Texas, and James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking Republican member, believed strongly that it should be an American Station. (O Sen Star, Apr 21/94)April 21: NASA announced that a small quantity of nitrogen tetroxide (N2O4) was accidentally released from the Thermochemical Test Area at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, during a test setup. The resulting cloud of N2O4 gradually dissipated, but area traffic was halted briefly and some 46 people were treated in local medical facilities for mild respiratory symptoms. Nitrogen tetroxide is an oxidizer used in some rocket engines. (NASA Release 94-030; AP, Apr 21/94; Reuters, Apr 21/94; H Chron, Apr 22/94; NY Times, Apr 22/94; W Post, Apr 22/94; USA Today, Apr 22/94; UP, Apr 22/94)	* Flight tests of the X-31 at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base were featured. Dryden director Kenneth J. Szalai noted that the X-31 had completed more flights than any other experimental aircraft, demonstrating methods of enhancing fighter maneuverability. Gary Trippensee was NASA project manager and director of the International Test Organization that included the Department of Defense's Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Navy, Air Force, Rockwell Aerospace, the German government, and Deutsche Aerospace. The program focused on technology transfer--industrial use of data gathered during government research projects. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 21/94; Bakersfield Californian, Apr 21/94)April 22: NASA announced that some 50 U.S., Canadian, and European scientists had begun the second phase of a detailed ecological study of the forests of Canada and the role these forests played in climate change. The Boreal Ecosystem-Atmosphere Study (BOREAS) was a large-scale, ground-based, and remote-sensing investigation of the way the forests and the atmosphere exchange energy, heat, water, carbon dioxide, and other trace gases. From April 11 to May 2, scientists were to study the forests during the annual snowmelt. The Focused Field Campaign-Thaw, the second of five parts of BOREAS, was to build on spaceborne data resulting from the first flight of the Space Radar Laboratory (SRL) aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour. BOREAS and SRL formed part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 94-65)	* Astronomer Alexander Wolszczan at Pennsylvania State University in an article published in Science magazine, claimed "irrefutable evidence" of at least two planets orbiting a nearby star--the first confirmed observation of planets outside the Earth's solar system. The planets were in orbit around an unusual neutron star located 1,200 light-years away in the constellation Virgo. Various NASA staff members commented on the discovery. Robert Millis, director of the Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona, said NASA had a major effort underway to search for planets around stars but its program focused on ordinary stars like the sun. (LA Times, Apr 22/94; USA Today, Apr 22/94; P Inq, Apr 22/94; W Post, Apr 22/94; NY Times, Apr 22/94)	* NASA's inspector general in a report published in February indicated that an audit showed that astronauts flew two-seater supersonic training jets, T-38 Talons, to Colorado Springs on weekends during ski season as well as to New Orleans and Fort Lauderdale, Florida. NASA required astronauts to log 15 hours of proficiency flying each month. Steve Holly, NASA Deputy Director for Flight Crew Operations, said although flying 10 to 12 hours a day was efficient in a time management sense, improved proficiency was gained through more shorter flights. (NY Times, Apr 24/94; B Sun, Apr 24/94; UP, Apr 25/94)	* In discussing the role of the South Pole infrared explorer (SPIREX), and two other projects operated by the National Science Foundation's Center for Astrophysical Research in Antarctica (CARA), a comparison was made of the way in which work from the South Pole on the ground resembled work of the Hubble Telescope in space. The astronomers involved, together with those at the Johns Hopkins University and the Space Telescope Institute in Baltimore were seeking NASA support for a design and cost study of a balloon that would float 40,000 feet above the South Pole and carry a powerful telescope. (AP, Apr 22/94)April 25: Jack Anderson's column indicated that the ties of Isadore Hyde, convicted in 1993 of defrauding the federal government, to Senator Trent Lott, Democrat from Mississippi, were investigated by NASA officials among others. Hyde's company received a contract in 1984 to provide security services at the Stennis Space Center in Mississippi, and diverted more than $186,000 for personal use. Former Hyde employees alleged that Hyde used NASA resources to do political favors for Lott and put Lott's mother, who was 71 at the time, on the company's payroll. (W Post, Apr 25/94)	* Some 20 students in the Student Rocket Program at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks, built a rocket from scratch over the preceding year and a half. The rocket was to be launched when NASA radar technicians came to Poker Flat for other planned launches. NASA and other U.S. government agencies invested millions of dollars to upgrade 25-year-old Poker Flat, the world's only university-owned rocket range, which had an excellent far northern location. The objective of the rocket flight was technical performance: to get the $20,000 rocket into the Earth's stratosphere and to keep in contact with it during its brief flight by satellite-relayed signals. (AP, Apr 25/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin spoke to workers at Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems in eastern New Orleans, praising the company's new contract with NASA to make lightweight Space Shuttle external fuel tanks, calling the tanks an essential part of the Space Station. (Times-Picayune, Apr 26/94)	* NASA was to award a Program Information System Mission Services (PrISMS) contract worth up to $800 million by May 1. Three companies were seeking to win the eight-year Marshall Space Flight Center contract: Computer Sciences Corporation, Harris Corporation, and incumbent Boeing Computer Services, Inc. The winning PrISMS vendor was to manage NASAwide communications, provide some NASAwide information management services, and run extensive computational services at Marshall. PrISMS had a two-year base with six one-year options; 10 percent of the work was to be set aside for small, disadvantaged businesses. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 25/94)	* The launching of GOES-1 on April 13 opened a new era for the National Weather Service's (NWS) Modernization Program. GOES was not the only NWS program to experience trouble because the Next-Generation Weather Radar (Nexrad) also had technical problems but according to Randolph Hite, assistant director in the General Accounting Office's Accounting and Information Management Division, was now working well. More accurate forecasts could now be made further in advance. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 25/94)April 26: Reporting on Spacecraft Clementine, an $80 million joint military-civilian venture, which sent the first close-up pictures of the moon in more than 20 years, the mission was considered a possible model for NASA. On May 3, Clementine's rocket was to be fired to leave lunar orbit and head for a rendezvous at the end of August with a small asteroid, 1620 Geographos. Soon thereafter Clementine might disappear from view; hence the name. Meanwhile Eugene M. Shoemaker, Clementine's chief scientist and a planetary geologist assigned by NASA, was studying pictures sent by the spacecraft, including the possible existence of ice at the lunar poles. The mission was considered an example of a "cheaper, faster, better" approach that could pay off. (NY Times, Apr 26/94)	* China's space agency said that the April 2 blast that killed one person and injured 20 would not delay the launching of three foreign communications satellites from the Xichang Satellite Launching Center in southwestern China. The three satellites were manufactured by Hughes Space and Communications Company for Hong Kong and Australian customers. (NY Times, Apr 27/94)	* Paul F. Holloway, Director of NASA's Langley Research Center, said the Center had no desire to serve as a site for the two new wind tunnels. The Center feared its existing research would suffer if the new structures were located there. California, West Virginia, Tennessee, and Washington were vying as wind tunnel sites. (Daily Press, Apr 27/94)April 27: The U.S. company Space Express Corporation planned to build a rocket launch site in northern Germany to send satellites into space, according to Stern magazine. Richard Coleman, head of the Washington, D.C.-based company, discussed the project with NASA. (UP, Apr 27/94)April 28: NASA announced a number of personnel changes in the Office of Space Flight (OSF) at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. These included the appointment of Bryan O'Connor, currently OSF Deputy Associate Administrator, to assume the post of Space Shuttle Program Director. O'Connor's position was to be assumed by Richard Wisniewski, who retired from NASA in 1990 after 35 years of government service. (NASA Release 94-66; WP, May 20/94)	* The Justice Department joined a whistle-blower, David Vosoughkia, in a lawsuit accusing the Rockwell International Corporation of overcharging NASA by millions of dollars for contracts to build parts for the Space Shuttle. (Reuters, Apr 28/94; UP, Apr 28/94; NY Times, Apr 29/94; WSJ, Apr 29/94)	* The ashes of "Star Trek" creator Gene Roddenberry were flown on a Space Shuttle after his death in October 1991, at the request of his widow, according to a NASA spokesperson. (AP, Apr 28/94; UP, Apr 28/94; Reuters, Apr 28/94)April 30: The Boeing Company denied any intentional wrongdoing but paid the U.S. Government $75 million to settle accusations that it systematically overcharged and mischarged the Government on military contracts. U.S. Attorney Kate Pflaumer said the most egregious mischarging was in Boeing's divisions that explored artificial intelligence applications to robotics, military command and control, high-speed jets, and Space Stations. Boeing admitted having improperly charged the Government several million dollars in costs incurred in selling aircraft overseas and having charged the Government millions of dollars for hazardous-waste disposal. (NY Times, Apr 30/94; WSJ, Apr 30/94)March/April: NASA achieved its congressionally mandated small disadvantaged business (SDB) contracting goal one year early. It was to reach an 8 percent SDB goal by fiscal year 1994. Instead, in 1993 NASA awarded 8.5 percent of its contracting budget to SDBs, women-owned firms, and Historically Black Colleges and Universities. (Minority Business Entrepreneur, Mar/Apr 94)April: NASA opened its first Small Business Outreach Program at the New Hampshire Technical College in Nashua. The Center for Technology Commercialization, one of NASA's six Regional Technology Transfer Centers, signed an agreement to oversee the program, which was a pilot project to assist New England businesses competing for NASA contracts. The Program was to focus on small and disadvantaged businesses. (Black Media News, Apr 94)	* NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) since 1987 had cooperated to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning System (FEWS). NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, were the principal data providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms. Using daily data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellites, scientists measured the density of green vegetation every 10 days. When drought conditions were detected, an AID-FEWS team could begin to coordinate relief efforts, if needed. The same data also were used for locust control purposes. (Black Media News, Apr 94)	* A feature article described repairs executed by NASA astronauts, and particularly board-certified surgeon Story Musgrave, to the Hubble Telescope. The Hubble now could spot the light of a firefly 8,500 miles away. James Crocker, an engineer with the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, proposed Hubble's "eyeglasses," called COSTAR (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement); other equipment also was added. Details concerning Mars Observer spacecraft also were given. (Popular Science, Apr 94)MAYMay 1: Of the 250 people who flew in orbit on U.S. spaceships since 1961, only six astronauts were black. This surprised J. Alphred Phelps, a retired Air Force master sergeant and author of a just published book: They Had a Dream: The Story of African-American Astronauts. The author described two black Americans who almost became astronauts in the 1960s, as well as the six who made it: Guion Bluford, Ronald McNair, Frederick Gregory, Mae Jemison, Charles Bolden, and Bernard Harris. (Fla Today, May 1/94)	* Worldwide pollution was revealed among other things by the Measurement of Air Pollution by Satellite (MAPS) instrument, flown on Space Shuttle Endeavour, which showed atmospheric carbon monoxide levels. Not only can this pollution contribute to global warming but it also can make it more difficult for the atmosphere to cleanse itself. (Fla Today, May 1/94)	* The publication of Moon Shot by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton was set for release one month before the 25th anniversary of the Apollo 11 lunar landing. The book gives a history of space flight and includes many little-known anecdotes. (Fla Today, May 1/94)May 2: NASA announced that the six astronauts who recently returned from Endeavour's mission would be available for interviews as time permits during their debriefing schedule. (NASA Release 94-67)	* Astronaut Tom Jones was featured in a telephone interview in which he described his thrill with the experience of weightlessness, the spectacular views from the air, especially of the oceans and the distinctiveness of the various continents, the beauty of the United States, and the difficulty of readjusting physically to Earth's atmosphere. (B Sun, May 2/94)	* NASA's last SCOUT (Solid Controlled Orbital Utility Test) launch vehicle was scheduled to blast off May 6 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Lompoc, California, the final of 118 space missions that began July 1, 1960. Called the Miniature Seeker Technology Integration spacecraft, the satellite is one in a series of military spacecraft being launched to develop sensors for ballistic missile devices. Since the mid-1960s, NASA gradually has gotten out of the unmanned rocket business, which was transferred to commercial manufacturers. (Fla Today, May 2/94; NASA Release 94-72; Fla Today, May 9/94; Reuters, May 9/94)	* NASA announced the selection of a research consortium headed by IBM to carry out research and test computer systems for a new national aeroscience research program using parallel computer technology. NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, was to be the main computational site for the new program (NASA Release C94-k)	* NASA astrophysicist Fred Espenak stated that an annular eclipse would be visible to observers within a 145-mile wide path from El Paso, Texas, through Toledo, Ohio, and much of New England on May 10. The moon will appear completely silhouetted against the sun, which will form a dazzling unbroken outer ring for up to six minutes. People outside the ground path will see only a partial eclipse. (Reuters, May 2/94; W Post, May 4/94; B Sun, May 8/94; W Times, May 8/94; W Post, May 9/94)	* The enthusiastic response of girls to attending NASA's "Take Our Daughters to Work Day" on April 28 was highlighted. The girls, ages nine to 15, heard speakers and then trailed their parents or other staff members. (Federal Times, May 2/94)	* Vice President Al Gore made a brief fundraising stop in Huntsville, Alabama. He said that the International Space Station had tremendous foreign policy advantages for the United States as part of a new effort to create a partnership with Russia. Gore also cited Russia's decision to channel its resources into the Station rather than ballistic missile programs, for example. (Huntsville News, May 3/94; Htsvl Tms, May 3/94)May 3: Robot spacecraft Clementine successfully completed a two-month mission to map the moon's surface in unprecedented detail. Radar data indicate what scientists term an "astonishing" depth of 7.5 miles in one of the moon's ancient basins. Other data may reveal ice in a permanently shadowed spot at the lunar south pole. At 6:20 p.m. EDT, controllers were to command the spacecraft to fire its rockets for four minutes to remove it from lunar orbit, loop around Earth, and head for the small asteroid 1620 Geographos for a late August rendezvous. NASA provided funding to refocus the mission effort, substituting the moon and asteroids for man-made "Star Wars" objects. (W Post, May 3/94; NY Times, May 4/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced agency plans to proceed with the use of the nearly completed facilities at Yellow Creek in Iuka, Mississippi, originally designed for use with the proposed Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM), for use with the manufacture of nozzles for the current Space Shuttle Redesigned Solid Rocket Motor (RSRM) program. NASA and the Thiokol Corporation worked out plan implementation, which was scheduled to take approximately two and a half years. Thiokol plans to move all of its nozzle operations to the Yellow Creek facility. In view of the federal government's investment of taxpayer money in the construction of the Yellow Creek facility, NASA was committed to obtaining maximum return while seeking to mitigate the economic impact on the region resulting from the ASRM termination. (NASA Release 94-68)	* NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, awarded the Computer Sciences Corporation, Arlington, Virginia, an eight-year contract to provide Program Information Systems Mission Services (PrISMS). (NASA Release C94-l; W Post, May 4/94)	* The Air Force launched a Titan 4 rocket with a Defense Department secret payload from Cape Canaveral, Florida. (Reuters, May 3/94; H Chron, May 4/94; H Post, May 4/94)May 4: NASA Program Manager for Human Systems Technology in the Office of Aeronautics, Washington, D.C. announced that NASA was designing an electronic chart to make flying safer for aerial firefighters who often fly in potentially dangerous conditions above forest fires. The Electronic Chart Display being developed at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, shows pilots an area's terrain and obstacles on a computer screen. (NASA Release 94-69)	* NASA recognized 24 students from public and private schools across the United States as winners in its 14th annual Space Science Student Involvement Program. Co-sponsored by NASA and the National Science Teachers Association, the program involved more than 4,000 students in elementary, junior high, and high school who competed in five categories: mathematics, science, technology, art, and creative writing. In addition to being recognized in Washington at the National Space Symposium, May 7-11, students were to have the chance of interning at a NASA field center for a week in summer and to receive a Space Camp scholarship. (NASA Release 94-70)	* NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, announced the selection of EG&G Langley, Inc., Hampton, Virginia, for a contract to provide maintenance, construction, and engineering support for the Center. (NASA Release C94-m)	* Interfax news agency reported that following unsuccessful talks with Kazakhstan about extending the use of its traditional base at Baikonur, Russia planned to launch a post-Soviet space ship in 1996 from its own territory, using the rocket complex at the city Svobodny-18 in the northeastern Amur region. (Reuters, May 5/94)	* Jack Levine, Director of Flight Programs in NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology, said that after considering the findings of a technical review panel, NASA decided to cut off funding for the Commercial Experiments Transporter (Comet) in FY 94. Comet was conceived as an alternative to the Space Shuttle; it would use an expendable rocket to orbit commercial experiments, some of which would be brought back to Earth aboard a recovery capsule after 30 days. Costs exceeded estimates and for that reason and the panel's findings, NASA decided to discontinue the program. (Defense Daily, May 5/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin gave an impassioned defense of NASA to a group of aerospace executives attending an American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics conference in suburban Washington. He described the budget fight as part of Congress's continuing effort to turn the space program into a "debating society" and said it was time for the talk to stop. He deplored the fact that NASA was not given enough money to create a space program that American youth could dream about. Jim Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, who sat next to Goldin, in contrast spoke of "a fatally flawed space station program" on which space dollars should not be risked. (O Sen Star, May 5/94; Space News, May 9/94)May 5: George Brown, Democrat from California and chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, called a closed-door meeting on May 5 to discuss the $30 billion International Space Station. He called the meeting after Administration officials assured him that Space Station costs would not shortchange other NASA programs. Observers said Brown wished to assure that NASA received sufficient funds to conduct its activities. Committee members decided they could take no action until they heard of the decisions of the Appropriations Committee. (Fla Today, May 5/94; AP, May 5/94; O Sen Star, May 6/94; H Chron, May 6/94; H Post, May 6/94; Fla Today, May 6/94; LA Times, May 11/94; Huntsville News, May 11/94)	* A Russian Military Space Forces official told Reuters that Russia planned a series of unmanned space launches to its orbiting Space Station Mir in May before a manned launch in June with a cosmonaut from Kazakhstan. The unmanned launches were to consist of a cargo spacecraft, a communications satellite in a joint program with the U.S. company Rimsat, and two military satellites. (Reuters, May 5/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that members of the NASA Hubble Space Telescope Recovery Team would receive the 1993 Robert J. Collier Trophy from the National Aeronautic Association on May 6 for their outstanding work. (NASA Release 94-71; H Post, May 6/94)May 6: Two former employees of Rockwell International Corporation who worked in company machine shops in Houston and Canoga Park, California, called the New York Times to charge that they observed supervisors falsifying accounts by charging items to NASA when workers were actually idle or working on personal projects. Rockwell officials indicated they found the charges hard to believe. (NY Times, May 7/94)May 8: Dale Hemke, a spokesman for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that not only does NASA want the public to know about some of the important work being done at the Center but also it wants children to participate in the technology so that their interest in mathematics will continue. Children can spin in the gyro chair, command a mock Gemini spacecraft, and retrieve a satellite. But the most popular event occurs on the first and third Sundays of the month when a launch pad is set up and enthusiasts may watch or participate in safe model rocket launches. (B Sun, May 8/94)	* NASA plans to show "Destiny in Space" on the 25th anniversary of the historic Apollo 11 launch, July 16, according to Eddie Harrison, chief of the media services branch at Kennedy Space Center. The IMAZ film to be shown at Spaceport USA includes photos of the Hubble Telescope repair mission. (Fla Today, May 8/94)May 9: Representatives of NASA and the Departments of Commerce, Defense, Energy, and Transportation conducted a National Facilities Study. The study established the need for two new wind tunnels and made 70 recommendations affecting aeronautics and space facilities nationwide. (NASA Release 94-73; Fla Today, May 22/94)	* NASA announced the signing of a contract modification with Rockwell International Space Systems Division, Downey, California. The contract provided for the production of the Multifunction Electronic Display Subsystem (MEDS) to be installed in each of the four Space Shuttle orbiters. MEDS is to replace some of the current electromechanical flight instruments and meters in the shuttle cockpit. (NASA Release C94-n)	* The Defense Department said that robot spacecraft Clementine suffered a malfunction on May 7 that would prevent it from flying by and photographing the asteroid Geographos. However, Clementine was to continue to perform a military mission that would test 23 "advanced technologies." On May 19 the managers of Clementine were to fire its main thruster to ease the craft into a circular path between the moon and Earth, where they can continue to test its prototype military components in the upper reaches of the Van Allen radiation belts around the planet. Since its January 25 launch, Clementine has provided 1.5 million images of the moon at a bargain price. (W Post, May 10/94; NY Times, May 10/94; USA Today, May 10/94; W Post, May 11/94; W Times, May 13/94; W Post, May 19/94)	* The Boeing Company announced that it planned to cut about 900 jobs at its plant in Huntsville, Alabama, because it lost an eight-year, $1.05 billion contract with NASA. However, Boeing anticipated that Computer Sciences Corporation, which won the NASA contract, would hire most of the affected workers. (NY Times, May 10/94)	* On May 9, NASA stopped accepting proposals for its pilot project High Performance Computing and Communications Program. More than 400 communities, corporations, and school districts submitted proposals for using NASA's vast databases via the Internet. Winners of the cooperative agreements were to be announced in July. Scottsdale, Arizona, one of the communities that submitted a proposal, hoped to use NASA data to help urban development and balance such development against environmental considerations. (LA Times, May 10/94)	* Lockheed Space Operations Company in Titusville announced that 183 personnel would lose their jobs as a result of NASA budget cuts. Lockheed was the main contractor in a $607 million-a-year shuttle processing agreement with NASA. (Fla Today, May 10/94)	* Robert Raspen, NASA deputy assistant inspector general for auditing, said NASA had rejected its auditor's advice that it discontinue its use of Spacehab Corporation. NASA felt it needed Spacehab to conduct its commercial experiments. (Fla Today, May 10/94)May 10: NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, announced the award to Gilcrest Electric and Supply Company, Elyria, Ohio, of a contract to provide technical and fabrication services for the Center's in-house research and development program. The Lewis Center also announced the selection of R&R International, Akron, Ohio, for a contract for facilities operations and technical support services. (NASA Release C94-o; NASA Release C94-p)	* John Gibbons, White House science adviser, said that as a result of tight budgets the Government would combine the operations of civilian and military weather satellite systems: two belonging to the Defense Department and two belonging to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The combining should save as much as $300 million by the end of 1999. Under an interagency agreement, the Defense Department was to procure future weather satellites, the Commerce Department's Atmospheric Agency was to operate the system, and NASA was to conduct research on advanced technology to be incorporated into the new spacecraft. The program became a joint Defense Department-NASA project in 1993. NASA was to build and launch a Landsat 7 spacecraft to replace the aging Landsat 4 and 5 spacecraft. NASA also was to design a new generation of spacecraft to compete with foreign satellites that provide similar data. On May 11 John Morgan, Director of the European weather satellite operations (Eumetsat) said he would discuss with nations that participate in European satellite and space programs NOAA's invitation to join the combined weather satellite system. These agencies already cooperate with NOAA on developing a Joint Polar System. (AP, May 10/94; NY Times, May 11/94; W Post, May 11/94; O Sen Star, May 11/94; Fla Today, May 12/94)	* The General Accounting Office, in a report to Congress, said that NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, managed by the California Institute of Technology, was poorly controlled and lost about $1 million in property annually. (Reuters, May 10/94; O Sen Star, May 11/94; Fla Today, May 11/94; AP, May 11/94)May 11: NASA announced that as a result of tests it conducted jointly with McDonnell Douglas and the U.S. Army, converting a small area of a helicopter main rotor blade into a controllable flap reduced by 40 percent the strength of the sound from "blade slap." (NASA Release 94-74; W Post, May 12/94; Daily Press, Jun 13/94)	* The new chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, David Obey, Democrat from Wisconsin, divided a $540 billion federal spending budget in such a way that NASA had a good chance of getting 98 percent of the funds it requested for fiscal 1995. Efforts to kill the International Space Station project on the House floor remained likely. (O Sen Star, May 12/94; Fla Today, May 12/94; H Chron, May 13/94; H Post, May 13/94; W Post, May 13/94; SP News, May 16/94)	* The Technical and Business Exhibition and Symposium (TABES) held a two-day session in Huntsville, Alabama. The five panelists at the opening session were Ben Bova, ex-president of the National Space Society; John Pike, space policy director for the Federation of American Scientists; Harry Craft Jr., director of the Technology Transfer Office at NASA/Marshall Space Flight Center; Peter Diamandis, co-founder of the International Space University; and Richard Jacobson, former president of Spacehab, Inc. The panelists debated how practical NASA could be and still have a visionary program for science exploration. Panelists concluded that NASA needed to do a better job of marketing its product. (Huntsville News, May 11/94; Htsvl Tms, May 11/94)	* Japanese Prime Minister Tustomu Hata's Space Activities Commission announced that Japan's first woman astronaut, Chiaki Mukai, a medical researcher, was to take part in NASA's Columbia flight set for launch July 8. The flight was to conduct some 80 experiments under the second International Microgravity Laboratory Project, of which Japan is a member. (UP, May 11/94)May 12: NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that NASA would stop work on the Polar spacecraft and would continue with pre-launch activities on the Wind spacecraft. Work on Polar was to resume only after the Wind spacecraft had operated successfully on-orbit and after a reevaluation of resources needed to complete the program within budgetary limits. (NASA Release 94-75; SP News, May 16-22/94)	* NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center began moving into a new $72 million building where all U.S., European, Japanese, and Canadian station hardware were to be prepared for launch. The modern computers and equipment in the new control rooms were commended particularly in the media. (Fla Today, May 13/94; B Sun, Jun 2/94; W Post, Jun 2/94; O Sen Star, Jun 2/94; CSM, Jun 3/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin gave the commencement address at Tullahoma to 22 University of Tennessee Space Institute graduates. He said Congress had been supportive but the nation needed to decide where it was going. America used to have a vision and be willing to take risks, but it had lost confidence in itself and was willing to settle for mediocrity. He pointed out that the cost of the entire space program "was only a quarter of a percent of the gross national product" so canceling one program would not solve the nation's problems. (Htsvl Tms, May 13/94; Independent, May 14/94)	* While visiting the University of Tennessee, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said NASA had to share responsibility for the failure of the canceled Commercial Experimental Transporter (Comet) spacecraft program. The University of Tennessee Space Institute (UTSI) managed the project, which involved other universities and private contractors. The goal was to provide a lower cost alternative for ferrying private industrial experiments into orbit. Goldin said UTSI was not to blame for the cost overruns that nearly doubled the project's price; in retrospect, NASA should have been more active and offered help to UTSI. (AP, May 13/94)May 13: NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of Boeing Defense and Space Group, Missiles and Space Division, Seattle, Washington, for a contract to provide the Shuttle Upper Stage system with related integration and launch support services for the space-based Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). (NASA Release C94-q)May 15: Rene Pellat, head of the French space organization CNES, said that both the Mars 94 and Mars 96 proposed Russian missions with large international participation were to be postponed by at least two years because of Russia's economic difficulties. (W Times, May 15/94)	* Hal Francis, the former FBI agent who led the 20-month investigation of NASA conducted by the FBI, the NASA Office of the Inspector General, and the Defense Criminal Investigative Agency, said at least 25--and perhaps as many as 50--cases of suspected corruption among employees and contractors at NASA were strong enough to merit criminal charges. To date, however, charges had been filed against only eight individuals and one company as a result of Operation Lightning Strike. Francis believed that the U.S. attorney's office pursued only the "easy" cases, but Assistant U.S. Attorney Abe Martinez denied this and said other charges were to be filed. Francis and his colleagues in the sting operation demonstrated they could influence illegally major government contracts worth nearly $2.4 billion at the Johnson Center alone. (H Chron, May 15/94)May 16: The anticipated fight over the budget and, specifically, the likelihood that NASA's appropriation would be cut and that further efforts would be made to eliminate funding for the International Space Station was featured prominently in the media. (SP News, May 16-22/94; Fla Today, May 16/94; Defense Daily, May 16/94; H Chron, May 17/94)	* In the absence of a National Space Council chaired by the Vice President, Vice President Al Gore's office became the focal point for space policy. Gore and the White House seemed confident that the administration had sufficient support to pass the Space Station. (SP News, May 16-22/94)	* More than 1,200 NASA workers of the nearly 2,000 NASA staff who applied received an early retirement bonus. The early retirement program reduced NASA personnel from 24,000 at the beginning of 1994 to 22,500 as of the beginning of 1995. (SP News, May 16-22/94)	* Sayed Z. Shariq, director of the Office of Commercial Technology at NASA's Ames Research Center, said NASA had reshaped its technology transfer program so as to make it an integral part of NASA's business relationships with the private sector. In this regard, Shariq said that Government should adapt to industry's practices and both NASA and industry should work together during the research and development, product planning, prototyping, and fabrication stages. In addition, agency staff performance evaluations, incentives, and awards should be structured to foster commitment to the commercial program. One of the first signs of NASA's commercialization mission was the Aerospace Industry Technology Program, funded at $20 million for fiscal 1994. (AvWk, May 16/94)	* U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar, who are training in Russia, returned to Johnson Space Center with the four Russian cosmonauts with whom they will fly in March 1995. The six were in Houston for three weeks to learn about U.S. science experiments planned for their flights. (H Post, May 17/94)	* Astronaut Bill Shepherd, deputy manager of the Space Station program office in Houston, said that NASA had contingency plans for building the International Space Station without Russian assistance, if necessary. However, NASA fully expected Russian participation. (Fla Today, May 17/94; H Chron, May 17/94)May 17: NASA was commended for raising the problem of debris mitigation in space to a high policy goal and for being in the process of drawing up a detailed rule book for its spacecraft designers, launchers, and operators to avoid creating debris. The commercial sector was the unknown in this regard, particularly with reference to communications satellites. The matter was a vital one because over the years several satellites were lost for unknown causes and may have been victims of "space junk." (NY Times, May 17/94)	* Terri Bracher, Patrick Air Force Base spokeswoman, said the first nighttime practice rescue operation for Space Shuttle crew who might be downed at sea is to be conducted on May 18 near Kennedy Space Center. More than 200 members of the Air Force, Air National Guard, Marines, Air Force Reserve, Coast Guard, and NASA were to take part. Rescuers were to use night vision goggles and NAVSTAR Global Positioning System receivers to find the floating crew members. (O Sen Star, May 17/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Appropriations Subcommittee meeting to consider NASA's budget, that NASA needed $2.1 billion for the International Space Station and could not build the station for less. (AP, May 17/94)	* William Baragar, Boeing Company's corporate director of congressional affairs, said that Boeing planned to help NASA develop a High Speed Arm Transport (HSAT) that could cut flying time from Los Angeles to Tokyo from 12 hours to four. Baragar said NASA had asked Congress for $220 million for research on the plane, which could fly at about 2.4 times the speed of sound or slightly faster than the Concorde and carry about 300 people. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also discussed the project with a British newspaper. (Antelope Valley Press, May 17/94; Financial Times of London, May 30/94; LA Times, Jun 1/94)May 19: NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope's Wide Field Planetary Camera 2 returned valuable new images of the supernova 1994 I in the inner regions of the "Whirlpool Galaxy," M51, located 20 million light-years away in the constellation Canes Venatici. A supernova is a violent stellar explosion that destroys a star while ejecting the products of nuclear burning into the gas between stars. (NASA Release 94-76)	* NASA also announced that the Hubble Space Telescrope had obtained the best images yet of a mysterious mirror-imaged pair of rings of glowing gas that encircle the site of the stellar explosion supernova 1987A. The explanation of the pair of rings was uncertain. (NASA Release 94-77; Reuters, May 19/94; AP, May 19/94; NY Times, May 20/94; B Sun, May 20/94; W Post, May 20/94; USA Today, May 20/94; CSM, May 26/94)	* NASA announced the award of contracts to 16 research teams for advanced aeronautics projects and studies in its largest solicitation of breakthrough ideas from industry, universities, and other government agencies. Sponsored by NASA's Office of Aeronautics, under the Advanced Concepts for Aeronautics program, the contracts were to develop aeronautical concepts that were technologically risky, but had a high potential payoff for U.S. industry. (NASA Release C94-r)	* NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and its affiliated sites--Wallops Flight Facility in Wallops Island, Virginia, and NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C.--announced the selection of Cortez III Services Corporation of Albuquerque, New Mexico, to provide comprehensive logistics services to these sites. The services included transportation, flight project planning and coordination support, supply management, warehousing, property management and disposal, mail services, forms and records management, and interior design. (NASA Release C94-s)	* George E. Brown, Jr., Democrat from California and chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, said that if Congress allocated NASA less than $14.15 billion in the 1995 budget, he would probably oppose continuing the Space Station program in its present form. He said that he would submit a reduced NASA budget to Congress that kept Space Station funding intact but eliminated one Shuttle flight, the planned Mars Surveyor project, and other items. Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's annual appropriation, said the subcommittee needed to receive a higher 602 (B) budget allocation than its House counterpart to sustain NASA's programs. She added that if the Space Station lost in the House, she thought it would be difficult to maintain it. (W Post, May 20/94; NY Times, May 20/94; Fla Today, May 20/94; O Sen Star, May 20/94; Defense Daily, May 20/94; W Post, May 20/94; AvWk, May 23/94)May 20: NASA announced that it had assumed the satellite-development contract for Landsat 7 from the Department of Defense. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was to manage the contract with Martin Marietta Astro Space, Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. Landsat 7 was to provide essential land remote-sensing data critical to understanding environmental change. (NASA Release 94-78)	* NASA announced that the first set of solar array modules for the International Space Station program were to be shipped from the United States to Russia at the end of May. The modules were prototypes of flight units to be delivered in September to be incorporated into advanced solar arrays for use on Russia's Space Station Mir. (NASA Release 94-79; UP, May 23/94)	* From Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, Russia launched one of its Gorizont communications satellites for the U.S. firm Rimsat, putting it into orbit at about 22,300 miles above Earth. This was the second launch of a Russian spacecraft for Rimsat. The Gorizont went into orbit over Malaysia, with AllAsia Sat of Manila as its first customer. (UP, May 20/1994)	* The American Society of Mechanical Engineers task force studying budgeting for NASA issued its report to the subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee. It said that "The proposed funding levels are inadequate to support both a balanced aerospace science-technology program and an active program of human spaceflight, including the redesigned space station." The report maintained that the work intended for the proposed Space Station could be done by robotic spacecraft or other efforts. (H Chron, May 21/94)May 22: Alex Roland, a professor of military history and technology at Duke University, wrote a feature article in the "Outlook" section in which he maintained that promoters of the costly Space Station and the Space Shuttle were forcing abandonment of science experiments that would be more valuable. (W Post, May 22/94)May 23: Former NASA astronaut and Space Shuttle commander Ronald J. Grabe assumed his new post as vice president of business development for the launch systems group of Orbital Sciences Corporation (OSC) in Sterling, Virginia. He explained that OSC's specialty was providing access to space for small satellites at reasonable cost. One of his priorities was to find new markets for OSC's Taurus and Pegasus rockets. OSC also was about to enter the communications field through its ORBCOMM satellite system. (W Post, May 23/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the signing of an agreement between NASA and the Multiple Sclerosis Association of America (MSAA) to collaborate to advance the application of cool suit technology for multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. More than 300,000 Americans suffer from MS, for which there is no known cure. About 1,000 MS patients use the current cool suit, used as a space suit undergarment for cooling astronauts on the surface of the moon or during space walks, for systematic relief. Members of NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, and Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were to work with MSAA staff to improve the performance of cool suits. (NASA Release 94-80)May 24: NASA announced that together with the American Geophysical Union it was honoring pioneer space scientist James A. Van Allen on his 80th birthday. Dr. Van Allen, Professor Emeritus at the University of Iowa, over a 50-year period studied planetary magnetospheres and cosmic rays. He discovered the belt of radiation around the Earth that bears his name. (NASA Release 94-81; Fla Today, May 25/94)	* Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev planted a 12-foot live oak tree beside NASA's headquarters building at Kennedy Space Center. This was to commemorate his flight on Space Shuttle Discovery in January. In Russia, cosmonauts plant trees to commemorate each of their space flights. (Fla Today, May 25/94)May 25: NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had discovered the best evidence yet of a black hole in the constellation Virgo. The proof consisted of a whirlpool of hot gas at the core of galaxy M87, which lies more than 52 million light-years from Earth. The stars in the whirlpool appeared to be streaming toward the galaxy's center and then into orbits bound to an apparent black hole hidden at M87's core. Data from the Hubble spectrometer, used to measure the velocity of stars orbiting within the nucleus of the M57 galaxy, also appeared to confirm the black hole. Sally Heap, a NASA astronomer, at a national meeting of the American Astronomical Society, commented on the Hubble findings in terms of her own research. (NASA Release 94-82; Fla Today, May 25/94; B Sun, May 26/94; USA Today, May 26/94; W Post, May 26/94; NY Times, May 26/94; W Times, May 26/94; Fla Today, May 26/94; WSJ, May 26/94; O Sen Star, May 26/94; AP, May 26/94; CSM, May 26/94; Oregonian, May 27/94; Fla Today, May 29/94; AP, May 30/94; H Chron, May 31/94; C Trib, May 31/94; W Post, Jun 2/94; Plain Dealer, Jun 2/94; Newsweek, Jun 6/94)	* NASA released new pictures of asteroid 243 Ida and its recently discovered moon taken by the Galileo spacecraft. Although similar in color and brightness, Ida and its moon appear to be composed of different types of material. (NASA Release 94-83)	* The Space Coast Science Center in Melbourne, Florida, which was used to educate children in the area about science, closed because of lack of funds. (Fla Today, May 27/94)May 26: Major Oleg Kulakovsky of the Military Space Forces, the branch of the Russian army that runs Baikonur Cosmodrome, was quoted as saying that people were leaving adjacent Leninsk because "There's nothing to stay for." The population was said to have fallen from 100,000 to 45,000 since Kazakhstan gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. Kazakhstan has a severe energy crisis and a chronic water shortage, which contribute to the harsh life for the population. Since the first Soviet manned space flight by Yuri Gagarin in 1961, Baikonur has averaged one launch a month, according to General Oleg Goryushkin, space center deputy commander. However, the space industry appears to be undergoing a crisis of confidence, and in view of Russia's economic crisis, the cost of maintaining Baikonur is being questioned. (UP, May 26/94)	* NASA announced that the Clementine mission, sponsored by the Department of Defense Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, had completed systematic mapping of the lunar surface to produce the first global digital map of the moon. NASA's Clementine science team mapped the topography and composition of major regions of the moon in detail and produced other important science results released at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore, Maryland. The digital data cover 38 million square kilometers of the moon mapped in 11 colors in the visible and near infrared parts of the spectrum during the mission's 71 days in lunar orbit. (NASA Release 94-84; B Sun, May 27/94)	* After the Senate decided to adjourn on May 25 for the Memorial Day holiday, the Senate Appropriations subcommittee that controls NASA spending postponed its initial hearings on NASA to June 7. (Fla Today, May 27/94)	* In a speech to the American Geophysical Union, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin challenged scientists to establish an ambitious new goal for space science that would unite competing research disciplines and resurrect public excitement. As a possible goal, Goldin suggested that NASA commit itself to finding habitable planets outside the solar system. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)	* Bowman Cutter, deputy assistant to the President for economic policy, took a lead in developing a space policy for the administration, according to a statement he made on May 26. As a first step, he convened a meeting May 13 at the White House with a diverse and bipartisan group of industry representatives, NASA managers, military officers, and academicians to discuss the space program's future. Although there was some talk about the Space Station, the major emphasis was on longer-term policy. Rather than new programs, White House officials said the focus was to be on streamlining NASA's bureaucracy, focusing research and development to help private industry, and pushing small missions to demonstrate advanced technologies. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)May 27: Space Shuttle Atlantis, refitted over a 19-month period at a cost of $96 million to enable it to dock with Mir, was expected to arrive at Kennedy Space Center from its overhaul at Rockwell Space Systems Division in Palmdale, California. The plan was for Atlantis to dock with Mir during a series of 10 shuttle flights between 1995 and 1997. Other modifications were designed to make Atlantis safer. Atlantis's return means limited space at Kennedy Space Center for processing the various Shuttles. (Fla Today, May 27/94; AP, May 29/94; W Post, May 30/94; Fla Today, Jun 1/94)	* NASA announced the selection of six Hispanic-Serving universities to receive five-year, Institutional Research Award grants for multidisciplinary research in science and engineering. The universities were to receive $400,000 the first year, $600,000 the second year, $800,000 the third year, and $1 million in the fourth and fifth years, for a total of $3.8 million over the five-year period. The universities selected were: California State University at Los Angeles; Florida International University, Miami; New Mexico Highlands University, Las Vegas; City College of New York; University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras; and University of Texas at San Antonio. (NASA Release 94-85)	* NASA announced that scientists at its Marshall Space Flight center, Huntsville, Alabama, had discovered unusual gamma-ray flashes in the upper atmosphere high above thunderstorms. The heretofore unseen flashes were detected by the Burst and Transient Source Experiment, a Marshall instrument aboard NASA's orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. (NASA Release 94-86; W Post, May 30/94)	* NASA announced that Space Shuttle astronaut William E. Thornton would retire from NASA on May 31. (NASA Release 94-87)	* Jon Linderman, a National Research Council fellow at NASA's Ames Research Center, said that based on experiments with rats, exercise combined with growth hormone may help prevent muscle atrophy in astronauts, seniors, and patients confined to bed following illness or injury. Russian cosmonauts discovered that extensive exercise alone was insufficient to prevent muscle atrophy. (UP, May 27/94; UP, Jun 3/94)	* As a result of an investigation by NASA's Inspector General, Omniplan Corporation, with offices near the Johnson Space Center, four related companies, and five employees, together with the Chief Executive Officer Ralph Montijo Jr. and his wife, Guillermina, were named in a federal grand jury indictment. They were charged with conspiracy to present false claims to NASA, embezzling from an employee benefits plan, money laundering, and making false statements to NASA, the Internal Revenue Service, the Small Business Administration, and the Defense Contract Audit Agency. The company had been previously indicted for allegedly swindling $4 million from NASA and its own employees. Omniplan subcontracted through Rockwell Space Operations Company to write flight plan documentation for the Space Shuttle. The government filed a lawsuit to try to recover $3.75 million. (H Post, May 28/94)May 29: The Book Review section carried an extensive review of Eric J. Chaisson's The Hubble Wars: Astrophysics Meets Astropolitics in the Two-Billion-Dollar Struggle Over the Hubble Space Telescope. Chaisson served as spokesman and director of educational programs for the Space Telescope Science Institute, a NASA-supported group of astronomers responsible for planning and directing the telescope's observational program. According to the author, the space telescope's progress toward scientific discovery was hampered by squabbling among NASA, the military intelligence community, industry, the press, and scientists. Some of the problems might have been avoided if the Hubble scientists had had access to the technical experience of the military intelligence community. (NY Times Book Review, May 29/94)May 30: Jean-Marie Luton, director general of the European Space Agency (ESA), announced at a news conference in Berlin that veteran German astronaut Ulf Merbold would join two Russian cosmonauts for the first joint European and Russian EUROMIR 94 space flight scheduled for October 3. During the 30-day flight, 30 experiments prepared by scientists from ESA states were to be performed on board Russian Space Station Mir. (Reuters, May 30/94)	* European Space Agency (ESA) scientific director Roger Bonnet told a news conference that scientists and officials from the world's main space agencies were to meet in Switzerland on May 31 to discuss an ESA proposal for a joint international moon program. The program, to cover a period up to 40 years, would begin with modest lunar orbit satellite missions and conclude by setting up human outposts on the moon. Participants in the four-day conference were to include NASA, and the Russian and Japanese space agencies. (Reuters, May 30/94)	* NASA scientist Michael Van Woert discussed plans for a satellite in NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, which was to be a follow-on to the U.S./French topex/Poseidon then in orbit. The successor, to be launched in 1998, would be smaller and cost $200 million. However, NASA cannot find the $120 million for its share, which was to include building the spacecraft bus and integrating the instruments. The French space agency, CNES, offered to build the bus if NASA would help with integration and launch it, which should save the United States some $50 million. (AvWk, May 30/94)	* Ken Szalai, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, said that construction of the hypersonic National Aero-Space Plane (NASP), the X-30, and its first flight scheduled for 2000 were no longer goals. Funding for the plane runs out in 1994, but Szalai said research into supersonic flight would not end. John Bass, deputy program manager for the NASP consortium of government and industry, including five aerospace firms, the Department of Defense and NASA, considered the decision a great loss. The one area remaining a problem was that of propulsion, which engineers could not test because the scramjet engine required to power the X-30 needed an environment where wind speeds reach 25 times the speed of sound. (Bakersfield Californian, May 30/94)	* Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's appropriation, wrote a major article on space policy for a space trade journal. In it she discussed the Space Station and NASA's various redesigns of it, and the lack of a clear mission and a clear purpose. She said the redesigned station cost too much and its early scientific capabilities were too limited. Specifically, she pointed out that in the summer of 1993, NASA and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy promised the Senate Appropriations Committee with NASA oversight that there would be the same level of science capability on the new station as on Space Station Freedom. That meant twice the power and space available on the current Space Shuttle. However, by November 1993, the power for science had been cut to about half of that available on the current Shuttle. This meant that it was far more difficult to win congressional support for the Space Station, particularly as budgets became tighter. Mikulski questioned whether enough votes for the Station would be available if it meant "killing the increase for National Science Foundation grants, national service, and funding for environmental technology or climate change." Furthermore, to avoid defeat, the Station needed to be approved by the House by a reasonable margin. She maintained that "Space policy should no longer be driven by the domination of space station," adding that the United States needed to establish a consensus on space policy. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)	 * Sandy Valenti, project team leader at NASA's Lewis Research Center, said the Center had compiled an inventory of space-related technology that has relevance to biotechnology and the work of medical researchers in northeastern Ohio. NASA's goal was to support existing organizations in he community, such as local hospitals and universities. Five specific research areas in which NASA could provide technological support were fluid mechanics, electronics, communication and instrumentation, materials development and structural design, surface modification, and energy storage systems. (Crain's Cleveland Business, May 30/94)May-June: A feature article on the International Space Station quoted the project's Chief Scientist Robert W. Phillips at the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in San Francisco as saying that the Station "is a facility that supports lots of individual experimentssmall science." The author assessed the chances of the Station being realized in the face of congressional budgetcutting pressures and commended the political savvy of NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin. (Space, May-June 94)JUNEJune 1: NASA announced the dedication of the Independent Verification and Validation facility, a new research facility in Fairmont, West Virginia, that was to support NASA's work in advanced research, stimulate commercialization efforts, and provide training in a variety of engineering and technology areas. In addition to housing staff working on software for the International Space Station, it was to house parts of the Earth Observing System Data and Operations System. Senator Robert C. Byrd attended the opening. (NASA Release 94-88; Times-West Virginian, Jun 2/94)June 2: University of Maryland radio astronomers indicated they had spotted water clouds near the center of a galaxy called Markarian 1, which is about 200 million light years away in the constellation Pisces. The finding was reported at the Minneapolis meeting of the American Astronomical Society. At that meeting, Johns Hopkins University astronomers reported several days previously having "very strong" evidence of a black hole at the center of the Andromeda galaxy. (B Sun, Jun 2/94; P Inq, Jun 3/94; W Post, Jun 3/94; USA Today, Jun 3/94; NY Times, Jun 3/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited the University of North Dakota's Center for Aerospace Sciences (CAS). Goldin visited at the invitation of Senator Byron Dorgan, a member of the Commerce Committee, which oversees NASA and its budget. Goldin was impressed with CAS's new technology and the educational services and programs it conducted for children and the public as well as college students. (Grand Forks Herald, Jun 3/94)June 3: NASA and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) announced their agreement to put their space cooperation on a long-term basis. The arrangement provided for expanded cooperation in space science, microgravity research, and the Mission to Planet Earth, as well as Canada's continued full partnership in the International Space Station program. (NASA Release 94-89)	* NASA announced names of members of the crew of Atlantis for its mission in mid-1995 to perform the first docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. Robert L. Gibson was to command the 10-day mission, which was to include a Spacelab module. (NASA Release 94-90; H Chron, Jun 4/94; H Post, Jun 4/94)June 6: NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology announced its solicitation of proposals from all sources for industry-led research and development projects under the Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP). AITP aims to develop and apply advanced technology rapidly in the aerospace industry and in the non-aerospace commercial marketplace. (NASA Release 94-91)	* A feature article described ways in which Pittsburgh was becoming "Robot City, USA." One of the reasons was NASA's $2.5 million grant in May 1994 to Carnegie Mellon University's Robotics Institute to establish an engineering consortium that would transfer robotics technology to U.S. industry. Other robotic firms also came to Pittsburgh recently. Other than industrial uses for robots, NASA wants to use robots to explore Mars and get instruments on the planet's surface. David Pahnos, director of the new NASA-CMU consortium, saw an opportunity for Pittsburgh to become a technical center that pushed technology forward. (CSM, Jun 8/94)	* Russian and U.S. Mars mission planners were meeting the week of June 6 at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to define how the two countries could best cooperate in a proposed multinational space exploration program to be called "Mars Together." France, Germany, and Italy were also considering joining the new 1998 mission to Mars. The new mission resulted from Russia's delay in its originally proposed "Mars 94" and "Mars 96" flights. The idea would be to combine major technological elements on which individual nations were already working. (AvWk, Jun 6/94)	* NASA and the Defense Department were evaluating a lunar rover mission for a Clementine 1 follow-on flight that would continue the validation of advanced, lightweight technologies for antiballistic defense applications. Clementine 1 was a Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO) mission that tested new avionics and sensor technologies during its lunar mapping. The Clementine follow-on flight could apply BMDO's technology to bring a rover to the moon's surface. (AvWk, Jun 6/94)June 7: NASA announced the selection by the White House of Charles R. Chappell, Associate Director for Science at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to serve a one-year assignment as Deputy Director of the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program. Chappell was to head NASA's participation in the GLOBE program and was to report directly to the NASA Administrator. Chappell was to be assigned to the White House and together with the GLOBE Director, Thomas Pyke Jr., was to work on the design and implementation of the GLOBE program for the Vice President. (NASA Release 94-92)	* NASA announced the award of a contract to the Boeing Company, Commercial Airplane Group, Renton, Washington, for engineering design and trade studies in support of the National Wind Tunnel Complex (NWTC). The NWTC was a joint effort between government and industry to construct state-of-the-art transonic and low-speed wind tunnels to meet the turn-of-the-century needs of the aerospace industry. The Wind Tunnel Program Office at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, was to manage the contract. (NASA Release C94-u)	* Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and head of the Appropriations subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding, informed NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin that he must consider cutting one of two major programs: the Cassini mission to Saturn or the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility that included the Hubble Space Telescope. Reportedly, Mikulski said that if NASA did not make the decision, Congress would. On June 8, Goldin met with James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and the highest ranking Republican on the House space subcommittee, to answer his concerns about Russia's stability in view of its major Space Station role. (NY Times, Jun 8/94; B Sun, Jun 8/94; USA Today, Jun 8/94; C Trib, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 8/94; H Post, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; O Sen Star, Jun 13/94; USA Today, Jun 13/94)	* Canadian Industry Minister John Manley said that Canada was cutting its contribution to the International Space Station program from $1.2 billion to $500 million. It could not afford the proposed level of funding and instead was focusing its energies on helping Canadian space industries. (H Post, Jun 7/94)June 8: NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced contract awards for two new "Smallsat" satellites to observe the Earth with unprecedented sensor technology. The awards went to two teams led by CTA of Rockville, Maryland, and TRW, Inc., of Redondo Beach, California. The teams were to build, launch, and operate the satellites--each no bigger than a console television set--for less than $60 million each. The satellites were to be developed, launched, and delivered on orbit in 24 months or less on a Pegasus launch vehicle. (NASA Release 94-94; AP, Jun 8/94; Reuters, Jun 8/94; NY Times, Jun 9/94; W Post, Jun 9/94; USA Today, Jun 9/94; WSJ, Jun 9/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; H Post, Jun 9/94; SP News, Jun 13-19/94; W Post, Jun 14/94)	* NASA announced the selection of 38 college students for an intensive six-week Space Life Sciences Training Program at its Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The summer residence training program was for undergraduate students majoring in life sciences, bioengineering, and related science and engineering fields. (NASA Release 94-95)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin released a statement in response to the markup of NASA's budget by the House Appropriations Subcomittee on VA-HUD-Independent Agencies. He said that "Given the enormous challenge that Chairman Stokes and the members of his committee had in adequately addressing the many needs of the agencies covered in this budget, NASA is pleased with today's markup." He added that NASA was pleased to comply with the further challenge Stokes presented in the markup. (NASA Release, Jun 9/94; AP, Jun 9/94; W Times, Jun 10/94; O Sen Star, Jun 10/94; Plain Dealer, Jun 10/94; H Post, Jun 10/94; Fla Today, Jun 10/94; AP, Jun 10/94; SP News, Jun 13-19/94)June 9: The U.S. attorney confirmed that David R. Proctor, an engineer assigned to the Life Sciences Project Division, was the first NASA Johnson Space Center employee indicted as part of the FBI's Operation Lightning Strike. The Operation began in December 1991 as an undercover probe into aerospace contractors. Proctor was indicted on charges of conspiracy and bribery, among others. (UP, Jun 9/94)June 12: Ulysses, a European spacecraft deployed by U.S. Shuttle Discovery in October 1990, took three and a half years to travel the 93 million miles from Earth to the sun's south pole. Between June and the fall of 1995, when it was due to pass the sun's north pole, it would exhaustively examine the sun--the first time the sun had been observed from pole to pole. Ulysses was to examine the sun's magnetic field, which influenced the solar cycles as well as the climate on earth. The spacecraft also was to search for the source of gamma and gravity rays and to examine solar flares. (W Times, Jun 12/94)	* A feature article on astronaut Eileen Collins, based at Ellington Field, indicated that she was scheduled to be the first woman to pilot a Space Shuttle when the flight occurred in February 1995. (Texas, Jun 12/94)	* Astronaut Jannice Voss Ford, training for a mission aboard Russian Space Station Mir, appeared in a two-hour electronic conference concerning the Mir flight, NASA, the Space Station, and her qualifications for being an astronaut. (Fla Today, Jun 12/94)June 13: Vice President Al Gore's Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) program was described. GLOBE was a joint effort among the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), NASA, the EPA, and private contributors. Funding was proposed in the budget at $13 million: $7 million from NOAA, $5 million from NASA, and $1 million from EPA. The goal was to promote technical education while collecting environmental data. (Federal Computer Week, Jun 13/94)	* NASA planned to launch a Mentor-Protege Program later in 1994. The goal was a three-year pilot program to encourage prime contractors to take young minority- and woman-owned businesses under their wings and teach them corporate skills. (Federal Computer Week, Jun 13/94)	* The Hubble Space Telescope enabled a team led by Rice University astrophysicist Robert O'Dell to survey 110 young stars in a field of 3,000 in the Orion Nebula, which was 1,500 light-years from Earth. As a result, O'Dell reported at a NASA news conference, scientists found that the material required to create planets was common around stars; the same would be true of Earth's home galaxy, the Milky Way. (Reuters, Jun 13/94; W Post, Jun 14/94; B Sun, Jun 14/94; NY Times, Jun 14/94; LA Times, Jun 14/94; USA Today, Jun 14/94; H Post, Jun 14/94)June 14: Groups of citizen lobbyists, particularly from Florida, Texas, and Ohio, came to Washington to lobby Congress on the importance of the Space Station to the continuation of a manned space program. (Fla Today, Jun 15/94; O Sen Star, Jun 15/94)	* Former General Electric Aerospace employee Vincent S. Maleche was sentenced to a two-month prison term and a fine for providing confidential NASA documents to an undercover agent. The charge of fraud occurred in connection with Operation Lightning Strike. On June 15, former Armstrong Laboratory employee at Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio, William C Alexander, pleaded guilty to providing documents to an FBI undercover agent. (Reuters, Jun 14/94; UPI, Jun 15/94; H Chron, Jun 16/94)June 15: NASA announced the selection of Honeywell, Inc., for a contract for developing flight deck technologies in support of NASA's High Speed Research program. NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, was to manage the eight-year project. The advanced technologies to be developed included design for a potential future High Speed Civil Transport. (NASA Release C94-r)	* Space Shuttle Columbia was moved to the launch pad to begin preparations for a July launching at Kennedy Space Center. (Reuters, Jun 15/94; H Chron, Jun 18/94)	* After a closed door session of the House Space Committee, Chairman George Brown, Democrat from California, said he would support the Space Station. The growing support for the Space Station also was reflected in public opinion polls. However, James Sensenbrenner Jr., Republican from Wisconsin and senior Republican on the Committee, was angry at the response to his concern about Russian participation in the space program from White House science adviser John H. Gibbons. (H Chron, Jun 16/94; H Post, Jun 16/94; Fla Today, Jun 16/94; H Chron, Jun 17/94)	* Vice President Al Gore addressed a group of NASA employees in Washington and commended the work of NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). He indicated that in the past few years the KSC shuttle team had cut the cost of each shuttle flight by $43 million and assembled shuttles and moved them to the launchpad 40 percent faster and with one-third as much labor. (Fla Today, Jun 16/94)June 16: NASA Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn L. Huntoon announced a number of changes designed to assure the success of the Shuttle and International Space Station programs. Changes included the establishment of a new Projects Office, a new Business Management Directorate, and a new Information Systems Directorate; encouragement of rotational assignments and "teaming"; and new leadership appointments. Larry Bourgeois became head of the Projects Office, Terrence Hesse became director of the Business Management Directorate, and Jane Stearns became director of the Information Systems Directorate. A number of other appointments also were announced. (NASA Release 94-036; H Chron, Jun 17/94; H Post, Jun 17/94)	* Martin Marietta Corporation announced it would eliminate 1,800 of its 2,100 jobs at its recently acquired space launch business in San Diego. The company planned to move the production of Atlas and Centaur launch systems to its Titan rocket plant in Denver. (LA Times, Jun 17/94)June 17: NASA announced that Space Shuttle Columbia was to conduct the second flight of the International Microgravity Laboratory-2. The flight would entail world-wide research into the behavior of materials and life in the weightless environment of Earth-orbit. Experiments were to include studies of subtle forces that affect microgravity and the reaction of living organisms to microgravity. Scientists from NASA, the European Space Agency, the French Space Agency, the German Space Agency, the Canadian Space Agency, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan cooperated in planning the experiments. (NASA Release 94-96)	* NASA announced that astronaut Charles F. Bolden Jr. was leaving NASA after 14 years to return to the Marine Corps to serve as Deputy Commandant of Midshipmen at the Naval Academy. (NASA Release 94-97; W Times, Jun 19/94)	* Guy Bluford, the first African-American astronaut in space, served as master of ceremonies of a celebration the week of June 13, honoring the 30th anniversary of the Civil Rights Act. The Tuskegee Airmen participated as NASA honored those known as the "Civil Rights Movement of the Armed Services of World War II." (Metro Herald, Jun 17/94; Washington Informer, Jun 23-29/94)	* In a patent case, Hughes Aircraft Company won $114 million from the U.S. Government (represented by the Defense Department and NASA) as opposed to the $4.8 billion it sought. At issue were royalties due under a patent developed by former Hughes engineer Donald D. Williams in 1959 for a single rocket nozzle for satellites. (NY Times, Jun 18/94; P Inq, Jun 19/94; W Times, Jun 19/94; WSJ, Jun 20/94)June 20: NASA announced the selection of specialists for the Spacelab mission. (NASA Release 94-98)	* The Russian embassy in Washington announced that during Prime Minister Victor Chernomyrdin's visit to the United States the week of June 20, an agreement on joint space exploration was scheduled to be signed. (Reuters, Jun 20/94; USA Today, Jun 21/94; AP, Jun 21/94	* During Russell Colley's 35 years of employment as an engineer and inventor at B.F. Goodrich Company in Akron, he earned 65 patents. Among these was the spacesuit and a deicing device for planes. In the recent past, NASA awarded Colley its Distinguished Public Service Medal, the highest honor for a civilian. (Plain Dealer, Jun 20/94)	June 21: Former CBS news anchor Walter Cronkite was quoted as saying that in view of the lack of a guarantee that money saved from the space program would be used for urgent needs such as health, housing, education, and crime, the United States could not afford not to continue going into outer space. (LA Times, Jun 21/94)	* NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology announced the selection of six research proposals for contracts under Phase I of the Small Business Technology Transfer Program. This phase allows contracts valued at up to $100,000 with 12 months to complete. (NASA Release 94-99)June 22: NASA announced the selection of 34 scientists to participate in the experiment definition phase of the Neurolab Space Shuttle mission. This was to be a 14- to 16-day mission jointly with the National Institutes of Health, devoted to brain and behavioral research and was scheduled for launch in early 1998. Various domestic and international partners also were participating, such as Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, and Nigeria. (NASA Release 94-100; Reuters, Jun 22/94)	* The House Appropriations Committee approved a NASA budget of $14 billion, $240 million less than the Administration's request. The approved budget included full funding, $2.1 billion, for the Space Station. However, opponents threatened a major fight once the budget came to the House floor. Following receipt of assurances "protecting the American taxpayers from any unforeseen failure in the U.S.-Russian space partnership" in a letter from President Clinton the evening of June 22, the ranking Republican on the House subcommittee on space, James Sensenbrenner from Wisconsin, said he would support the Space Station. (AP, Jun 22/94; Reuters, Jun 22/94; W Times, Jun 23/94; W Post, Jun 23/94; H Post, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 24/94; USA Today, Jun 28/94; W Times, Jun 28/94 )	* NASA Associate Administrator Charles Kennel visited the University of North Dakota's (UND) Center for Aerospace Science (CAS). Kennel was in charge of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, for which UND's Associate Dean George Seielstad said UND had a small contract. Kennel stated that CAS was well equipped and positioned to make data about the Earth available to nontraditional users. (Grand Forks Herald, Jun 23/94)	* Commenting on NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's urging of space scientists to search for a habitable planet among the stars, science columnist Robert C. Cowen viewed such a quest as feasible in view of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope. He saw the next phase of the search as involving a look for signs of gravitational interaction of a star and planets. (CSM, Jun 22/94)June 23: NASA announced that it and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) had signed an "Interim Agreement for the Conduct of Activities Leading to Russian Partnership in Permanently Manned Civil Space Station." The agreement governed Russian participation until an Intergovernmental Agreement and a NASA-RSA Memorandum of Understanding could be concluded. NASA and RSA also signed a separate $400 million contract under which NASA was to buy hardware and services from RSA for approximately $100 million annually through 1997 in support of a joint program involving the U.S. Space Shuttle and the Russian Mir Space Station. Key elements of the contract were spelled out. The agreement and contract were signed separately by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and RSA Director General Yuri Koptev at the end of the U.S.-Russian Joint Commission on Economic and Technological Cooperation meeting headed by Vice President Gore and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin. (NASA Release 94-101; AP, Jun 23/94; P Inq, Jun 24/94; C Trib, Jun 24/94)	* NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration announced their joint sponsorship of a general aviation design competition for students at U.S. aeronautical and engineering universities. Teams of graduate and undergraduate students, working with faculty advisers, were to develop a multidisciplinary design for a general aviation aircraft. (NASA Release 94-102)June 24: Alumni of the Aerospace Human Factors Division office of NASA's Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, south of San Francisco, reportedly were exerting pressure to maintain the division as a separate entity in the restructuring taking place under new director Ken K. Munechika. These alumni had prominent positions in the airline industry, aircraft manufacturing, and government. Moreover, NASA created human factors research and a human factors pioneer such as John Lauber, of the National Transportation Safety Board, maintained that a separate organizational structure, combining computer sciences, engineering, psychology, medicine, and other disciplines, was essential. (W Post, Jun 24/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that the "GAO report is a validation of what we've been saying for months--Russian participation in the Space Station is a good deal for the American taxplayer." Goldin added that it would save hundreds of millions of dollars. He was "particularly pleased with the GAO's positive assessment of how valuable the Russian contribution will be in terms of significantly improving the capability for science and engineering research." Other benefits of Russian cooperation included completing the Space Station 15 months earlier than otherwise would be possible. (NASA Release 94-103; AP, Jun 24/94; Reuters, Jun 24/94)	* "Destiny in Space," the latest IMAX space film, being shown in Langley Theater in the National Air and Space Museum, took viewers on a 40-minute hi-tech space ride that examines space exploration by astronauts and robots. (Journal, Jun 24/94)June 27: In an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin concerning dangers to the proposed Space Station from man-made space junk, he said the danger of debris smashing through the Station shield was 20 percent over its expected 10-year life and that NASA would do whatever was necessary to get adequate safety. Because of the lengthy period the Space Station was scheduled to spend in space, the danger was greater that for a single Shuttle flight. William M. Shepherd, deputy manager for the Johnson Space Center in Houston, said that each module for astronauts was getting about 3,000 pounds of added shielding to help protect it from the greater velocity of orbiting junk. Goldin asserted that an international agreement for controlling the contamination of space was needed to deal with the situation. (NY Times, Jun 27/94; USA Today, Jun 27/94; C Trib, Jun 27/94; Fla Today, Jun 28/94)	* NASA announced that the Ulysses spacecraft had become the first robotic exploration vehicle in history to reach a polar region of the sun when it passed over the sun's southern polar area June 26 after a journey of almost four years from Earth. The European Space Agency built Ulysses, and Space Shuttle Discovery deployed it in October 1990. In February 1992, Ulysses spent nearly 11 days exploring unknown regions of Jupiter before it gained enough momentum to loop into an orbit that passed over the poles of the sun. The sun has a global magnetic field and magnetic poles, but many details concerning the polar caps and magnetic fields, including the influence of incoming cosmic rays, remain unclear. (NASA Release 94-104; Fla Today, Jun 29/94)	* An unmanned DC-X (Delta Clipper Experimental) rocket made an emergency landing at the White Sands Missile Range following a mysterious explosion soon after its engines started. The Ballistic Missile Defense Organization developed the missile, and McDonnell Douglas Corporation manufactured it. The flight was the fifth for the unusual rocket, which was made to take off and land vertically. The DC-X was grounded in the fall of 1993 when the project ran out of money. However, NASA came up with enough funds to keep the program going until Congress appropriated $5 million to complete its flight test program. Ultimately the rocket was to be turned over to NASA. (NY Times, Jun 28/94)June 28: In preparation for commemorating the 25th anniversary of Neil A. Armstrong's walk on the moon on July 20, 1969, the media featured various articles, books, films, television specials, and high-level conferences on the meaning of the moon landing. One article commented on the significance of these publications and events, with particular reference to Moonshot, a memoir cowritten by Alan B. Shepard Jr. and the late astronaut Deke Slayton. (LA Times, Jun 28/94)	* NASA announced that Suzanne Smrekar, a geophysicist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, who had been working on data from NASA's Magellan mission, had found that the planet Venus was still geologically active in places, even though radar images of its surface indicated little change in the past half-billion years. Data suggested that there were at least two, and possibly more, active hot spots on Venus. (NASA Release 94-105)June 29: NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement hailing the vote in the House of Representatives that defeated an amendment to end the Space Station program. In his statement, he expressed appreciation for the leadership of the President, the efforts of the Vice President, and the hard work of Chairman Brown and Representative Walker. He also praised the collaboration of NASA with international partners, which strengthened the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 94-106)	* The House by a 278 to 155 vote rejected the amendment that would have ended the Space Station program the next fiscal year and redirected $2.1 billion in proposed funding to other NASA programs. A key factor in building support was the Station's foreign policy significance as a result of bringing Russia in as a Station partner. Intense lobbying efforts by the Clinton administration also were a factor. (Reuters, Jun 29/94; AP, Jun 29/94; UP, Jun 29/94; WSJ, Jun 30/94; P Inq, Jun 30/94; W Post, Jun 30/94; USA Today, Jun 30/94; W Times, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jul 1/94; C Trib, Jul 5/94)June 30: NASA announced that based on technology developed for its Hubble Space Telescope, a new, non-surgical breast biopsy technique had been developed. The new technique, known as stereotactic large-core needle biopsy, was predicted to reduce national health care costs by about $1 billion annually. The technique involved an improvement to digital imaging technology called a Charge Coupled Device, a high tech silicon chip that converted light directly into an electronic image. (NASA Release 94-107)JULYJuly 1: Stu Grissom, manager for project development of hardware at NASA's Johnson Space Center, said NASA was evaluating mechanical difficulties with a Russian-made docking device critical to plans for a first linking of a Space Shuttle to the Mir Space Station in mid-1995. NASA was surprised to learn earlier that the Mir side of the docking device had explosive charges on only the active hooks whereas the Shuttle side had charges on both the active and passive mechanisms. The second problem was the failure of a laboratory version of the Shuttle/Mir docking mechanism to fully pass two of five cold temperature runs in June at NPO Energia (a subcontractor to Rockwell International) facilities in Russia. The failure, which was being investigated, might be the result of the quality of lubricant used. (H Chron, Jul 2/94; H Post, Jul 2/94; AvWk, Jul 4/94)July 3: Itar-Tass news agency reported that a Russian spaceship manned by a Russian and a Kazakh cosmonaut had docked with Mir. (H Post, Jul 4/94)	* The nature of experiments scheduled to be performed by astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia in its forthcoming flight was described. In the field of life sciences, the experiments were intended to reveal the role gravity played in the reproduction and early development of plants and animals. In the second area, materials science, in the absence of gravity, engineers hoped to show a potential for forging strong, new metal alloys, high-speed semiconductors, and other components for use in aerospace and electronics products. (H Chron, Jul 3/94)	* An article about U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar and their training in Russia stressed their intensive Russian language lessons and their sense of Russia's space program accomplishments in the face of the country's serious economic problems. They believe both countries would benefit from space cooperation: the United States would gain from the experience and data Russia had collected from long stays in space and Russia would profit from U.S. technology and the use of the U.S. Shuttle to ferry large cargos to Mir. (C Trib, Jul 3/94)	* The condition of the Russian space program was described in view of Russia's new space cooperation with the United States. Russian policy was to activate the control center for Space Station Mir only when the ground was in contact with Mir. Otherwise the center was closed and personnel returned to their primary employment: moonlighting jobs. The primary Russian contractor on the Space Station, NPO Energia, had made progress toward privatization, but upper management remained committed to the traditional Soviet pattern of secrecy and exclusion of outside supervision. (O Sen Star, Jul 3/94)	* In connection with the upcoming 25th anniversary of the first moonwalk, NASA's current role and the ways it had changed from earlier days were assessed. Among the differences noted were the emphasis on science rather than the ability to engineer space travel, global teamwork rather than a race to beat the communists, and the stress on "smaller, cheaper, faster, better" as NASA's new motto. (P Inq, Jul 3/94)July 5: The approaching 25th anniversary of the first moon landing by Neil Armstrong occasioned a feature article on Gene Kranz, NASA Flight Director, who enabled the operation to occur. (LA Times, Jul 5/94)	* The countdown began for the launch of Shuttle Columbia scheduled for July 8. (W Times, Jul 6/94; USA Today, Jul 6/94)July 6: The pressure on California's space firms to adapt to a new mission, survival, in view of congressional budgetcutting and constant funding problems was highlighted. The role of commercial firms in the space industry as opposed to NASA was raised as was the fact that the space program no longer revolved around competition with the Soviet Union. (LA Times, Jul 6/94)	* NASA announced that astronaut Richard O. Covey would leave NASA as of July 11 and would retire from the Air Force on August 1. He was scheduled to become Director of Business Development at Calspan Services Contracts Division, a part of Space Industries, Inc. (NASA Release 94-110)	* NASA announced its selection of Brown & Root Services Corporation, Houston, as a contractor to provide minor construction, modification, and rehabilitation to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-y)	* NASA announced that an international team of astronomers had used the European Space Agency's Faint Object Camera on the Hubble Space Telescope to confirm a prediction of the Big Bang theory--that helium should be widespread in the early universe. The July 7 issue of the British science journal Nature reported the way in which the helium was detected. (NASA Release 94-109)	* NASA announced that it would negotiate contracts with 15 small companies to enable them to fully develop innovative new high technology products they had proposed for application in the aerospace industry. The contracts would be financed under NASA's Small Business Technology Transfer Program. (NASA Release 94-111)	* NASA announced members of the crew for the second Wake Shield Facility Shuttle flight aboard Endeavour, scheduled for mid-1995, under the command of David M. Walker. (NASA Release 94-112)July 8: NASA announced the selection of two Space Grant Consortiums: Virginia and Colorado, and two universities: Pennsylvania and Cincinnati, to participate in the Student Launch Program. The program was intended to provide undergraduate students hands-on experience in flying space and Earth science experiments on suborbital sounding rockets and scientific balloons. (NASA Release 94-113)	* NASA announced that in August 1994 scientists would have a chance to study how the Earth's global environment was changing when Space Shuttle Endeavour began its 10-day mission, carrying the Space Radar Laboratory on its second flight. The mission, which would feature various international scientific experiments, would be under the command of Michael A. Baker. (NASA Release 94-114)	* Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off on schedule, and the seven astronauts, including the first Japanese woman in space, began their experiments. The embryonic newts were thriving, and the adult female newts had produced additional eggs. The astronauts also began performing tests to determine how their bodies were adapting to weightlessness. One effect of the absence of gravity was that astronauts tended to grow two or more inches in space because of an elongated spine; they would revert to normal height on Earth. Findings could help in treating back pain on Earth. Among the animals carried for experimental purposes were four pregnant newts. By July 17 the second newt had died for an undetermined reason. The scientists also levitated a pea-sized drop of gold inside an electromagnetic field to investigate ways to exploit the absence of gravity in manufacturing. The astronauts worked in two shifts around the clock in order to complete all but one of the planned 82 experiments. A blown fuse in the French-built electrophoresis unit kept the astronauts from conducting their final experiment before preparing to return to Earth. On July 20 the astronauts marked the 25th anniversary of the moon landing. Because of heavy rainstorms, the projected landing on July 22 was postponed; because of the delay, the mission set a new Space Shuttle flight duration record. In the course of the flight, a number of the eggs hatched, and scores of eggs were laid by the various animals aboard. (B Sun, Jul 9/94; C Trib, Jul 9/94; NY Times, Jul 9/94; W Post, Jul 9/94; W Times, Jul 9/94; Reuters, Jul 9/94;B Sun, Jul 10/94; W Post, Jul 10/94; AP, Jul 10/94; UP, Jul 10/94; Reuters, Jul 10/94; USA Today, Jul 11/94; W Times, Jul 11/94; AP, Jul 11/94; Reuters, Jul 11/94; B Sun, Jul 12/94; W Post, Jul 12/94; USA Today, Jul 12/94; AP, Jul 12/94; Reuters, Jul 18/94; UP, Jul 18/94; Reuters, Jul 18/94; NY Times, Jul 19/94; USA Today, Jul 19/94; W Post, Jul 19/94; AP, Jul 19/94; UP, Jul 20/94; AP, Jul 20/94; AP, Jul 22/94; UP, Jul 22/94; Reuters, Jul 22/94)July 9: Itar-Tass news agency reported that two Russian cosmonauts had returned to Earth near Arkalyk, Kazakhstan, after nearly six months on board Space Station Mir. They left behind a colleague who intended to break the current record of 366 consecutive days spent in space by remaining on Mir 429 days. (B Sun, Jul 9/94; AP, Jul 9/94)July 10: A lengthy review of the four-hour TBS documentary film "Moon Shot," described the extraordinary footage obtained from NASA, primarily from the Johnson Space Center, and the story behind the U.S. 10-year race to beat the Soviet Union to the moon. (TV Times, Jul 10-16/94)	* Various special television programs were scheduled to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the moon landing. In addition, the press planned to feature accounts recalling events of the first moonwalk. (B Sun, Jul 10/94; C Trib, Jul 10/94; LA Times, Jul 10/94; AP, Jul 10/94; USA Today, Jul 11/94; W Post, Jul 11/94; AP, Jul 11/94)July 11: In connection with the July 16 projected smashing into Jupiter of fragments of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 at a speed of about 130,000 miles an hour, numerous media presentations appeared. Although collisions were scheduled to occur on the far side of Jupiter, the impact sites should rotate into view in less than an hour, so lasting effects could be studied by observatories on earth and by NASA's crippled Galileo spacecraft. NASA was setting up an around-the-clock Comet Impact Newsroom at Goddard Space Flight Center to assist scientists interpreting the event. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; LA Times, Jul 11/94; NY Times, Jul 12/94; LA Times, Jul 12/94; USA Today, Jul 12/94; Reuters, Jul 12/94)	* The National Research Council reported that NASA officials had not yet established a solid working relationship with the Russian Space Agency. The Council found tremendous improvement in NASA management but considered that NASA thus far lacked a strong grip on Russian involvement. Since 1985 the Council, the operating arm of the National Academies of Science and Engineering, had reviewed the Space Station regularly under federal funding. The Space Station Committee, headed by Jack Kerrebrock, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor, also expressed concern that NASA needed to invest more in experiment development and preparatory work on Spacelab, the Shuttle's science laboratory. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; NY Times, Jul 29/94; Phillips Business Information, Jul 29/94)	* Officials at NASA, Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said mission designers were being discouraged from including Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators (RTGs) in future satellites. RTGs were plutonium-powered and were used most frequently on spacecraft traveling beyond Earth's orbit because solar panels became increasingly less efficient the farther they were from the sun. Scientists and engineers planning NASA's proposed Pluto Fast Flyby mission wanted to use an RTG, but thus far approval had been refused. The scientists were concerned that NASA was becoming anti-nuclear, but NASA officials and the White House denied there was a policy decision to end the use of RTGs. In late June, a Technology Challenge team headed by Dwight Duston, director of science and technology for the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, "unanimously recommended the use of an RTG without reservation" for the Pluto Fast Flyby. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94)July 12: A feature article described the training program in Russia of U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar. Thagard was scheduled to blast off to Russian Space Station Mir with two cosmonauts in March 1995; Dunbar was his backup. They were studying Russian intensively, both the spoken language and technical terminology. In addition, they practiced on a Soyuz simulator, conducted serious physical workouts, and engaged in Russian psychological training for long-haul space crews. (LA Times, Jul 12/94)	* NASA announced that astronaut William F. Readdy would replace Kenneth D. Cameron as NASA manager of operational activities at Star City, Russia. As Director of Operations, Russia, Readdy would work with Russian trainers, engineers, and flight controllers to support the training of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center, Star City, and to enhance continued cooperation between NASA and Russia's Space Agency. (NASA Release 94-115)July 13: NASA announced the appointment of Brian Welch as Chief of News and Information at NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-116)July 14: NASA announced the selection of a team led by Lockheed Space Operations, Inc., Titusville, Florida, for a contract to provide propulsion test and technical services at the John C. Stennis Space Center in Hancock County, Mississippi. (NASA Release C94-aa)July 15: NASA announced that the Space Station Control Board had approved a revised assembly sequence that provided significantly more power for the U.S. laboratory, provided an earlier U.S. capability for essential Space Station systems, and produced hardware in an efficient and cost effective manner while still meeting the $2.1 billion annual spending cap. (NASA Release 94-117)	* NASA announced the award of a $440 million contract to Boeing Commercial Airplane Group, Seattle, Washington, with McDonnell Douglas Aerospace, Long Beach, California, and other companies to develop airframe technologies for aerodynamics, flight systems, and materials and structures. The award marked the first time the two leading U.S. airplane manufacturers would have teamed up to develop technologies for a potential future U.S. High-Speed Civil Transport. (NASA Release 94-118)July 16: An article discussed finding other planetary systems as an inspiring new challenge for astronomy and pointed out NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's proposal that NASA's core mission might be the search for a habitable planet. Mention was made of Proxima Centauri, the nearest neighbor of a bigger, hotter, brighter star: the sun, which made it an easy star around which to look for planets. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope was used to study Proxima Centauri and recently the Hubble discovered discs in the Orion nebula, which might produce planetary systems. Although the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) was eliminated by Congress, SETI continued with private money and became Project Phoenix, scheduled to be connected with the Parkes radio telescope in Australia in early 1995 and to listen for faint radio signals from hundreds of stars. (Economist, Jul 16/94)July 17: A biography of NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin based on an interview with him, said that Goldin put in 15-hour days; originally, he did this seven days a week but now he did it five and a half days a week. In returning to NASA from TRW, he determined to battle the bureaucracy and did so. He expressed concern about America having become a nation of consumption, interested mainly in entertainment and recreation. His major present concern was keeping the Space Station on track. (News Register, Jul 17/94)July 18: NASA announced that it and the National Space Agency of Ukraine (NSAU) had agreed July 13 to explore possible cooperation in remote sensing and Earth sciences, telemedicine, space biology, space welding, advanced concepts and technology, and student and scientist exchanges. Robert W. Clarke, NASA Associate Administrator for Policy Coordination and International Relations, headed the U.S. delegation and Valeriy G. Komarov, Deputy Director General of NSAU, headed the Ukrainian delegation. (NASA Release 94-119)	* The impact of a huge Fragment G, a two-mile-wide piece of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, was as great as 6 million megatons of TNT when it hit Jupiter early July 18, according to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. A similar piece hit late July 18, and a further piece was expected on July 20. In contrast the total energy that could be created on Earth with atomic bombs was 10,000 megatons. The comet left a scar larger than Earth's diameter on Jupiter's gaseous surface. Scientists began to study the long-term effects on Jupiter of the comet's impact. The media also focused on the work of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in tracking developments on Jupiter and the excellent view of Jupiter for astronomers at the South Pole. In the final stage of the comet barrage that ended late July 21, four large comet fragments hit Jupiter, creating tremendous fireworks for watching astronomers. Furthermore, as a result of the scars made by the fragments, white hot gases from the planet's interior erupted through the holes in great fireballs. In measuring the dazzling light produced, astronomers believed they had detected hydrogen sulfide, which could contribute to Jupiter's colors. The potential dangers associated with the comet collision with Jupiter led the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology to propose legislation that, if passed, would direct NASA to submit a plan by February 1995 for a 10-year program to catalog "all comets and asteroids that are greater than one kilometer in diameter" traveling along orbits that intersect that of the Earth. (LA Times, Jul 18/94; C Trib, Jul 18/94; LA Times, Jul 19/94; W Post, Jul 19/94; W Times, Jul 19/94; USA Today, Jul 19/94; B Sun, Jul 19/94; C Trib, Jul 19/94; NY Times, Jul 20/94; USA Today, Jul 20/94; W Times, Jul 20/94; LA Times, Jul 20/94; B Sun, Jul 20/94; CSM, Jul 20/94; C Trib, Jul 20/94; P Inq, Jul 20/94; NY Times, Jul 21/94; USA Today, Jul 21/94; B Sun, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94; C Trib, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 22/94; NY Times, Jul 22/94; W Post, Jul 22/94; B Sun, Jul 22/94; USA Today, Jul 22/94; W Times, Jul 22/94; Time, Jul 25/94; LA Times, Jul 26/94; NY Times, Jul 26/94; USA Today, Jul 26/94; CSM, Jul 28/94; NY Times, Aug 1/94)	* Astronaut Neil Armstrong made a rare public appearance at an airshow in New Knoxville, spoke briefly to reporters and signed autographs. He said he had accepted an invitation to the White House on the 25th anniversary of his moon walk. (Western Star, Jul 20/94)July 19: A feature article on NASA stated that cooperation with the Russians in space was an important foreign policy initiative of the Clinton Administration. In this connection, NASA was working hard at merging many of its programs with those of Russia, as NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin indicated in a recent interview. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)	* Roger Bonnet, science director of the European Space Agency (ESA), stated in an interview that the ESA, a consortium of scientists from 14 countries, sought some $350 million from member states to fund the first in a series of lunar programs that could end in a manned moon station within 25 years. The first European emissary to the moon, a small, unmanned craft named LEDA (Lunar European Demonstration Approach), could land on the moon by 2001. LEDA would carry instruments to measure the darkness of the lunar sky, the frequency of meteorite impacts, and the stability of the ground, factors that would affect the functioning of a future astronomical observatory. LEDA would also need to analyze lunar soil for components to be used in the construction and operation of a permanent station. Such a European approach would bypass NASA's plans for an orbiting Space Station, a plan with which many European countries had become disenchanted. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)	* Fifty-four minority high school students, mostly African Americans, from the Los Angeles area, began a four-week stay at Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio, studying computer science, Earth sciences, and mathematics. NASA sponsored the $300,000 Earth to L.A. program in order to encourage minority students to pursue such courses at traditionally black colleges and universities. Following the courses at Central State, the students would spend two weeks visiting 12 black colleges, looking toward future college entrance. (LA Times, Jul 21/94)July 20: NASA announced that as of July 25 it would no longer distribute news releases or contract announcements by mail. Instead it would use electronic distribution services. (NASA Release 94-121; P Inq, Jul 29/94)	* A biographic account of NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stressed his enthusiasm for sending humans into space combined with a tremendous work ethic. As an administrator at aerospace manufacturer TRW, he developed strong ideas about what was wrong with the space program and how to fix it. Space advisers to President George Bush found NASA unresponsive to change and decided to offer the NASA Administrator's job to Goldin. Among his management tools, Goldin said, was the creative use of chaos. (W Post, Jul 20/94)	* Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland, described some of the benefits Americans enjoyed in their daily lives that resulted from space-based research. Among these were insulation techniques used by Meals on Wheels to deliver food to senior citizens, miniaturization and computers, laser technology for use in the information superhighway, and biomedical discoveries. The latter included laser systems used in heart treatment, pacemakers, and body imaging techniques used in breast cancer detection. In addition, the space program created thousands of jobs. Despite the above achievements, Mikulski admitted that NASA in the past had over-promised technology and underestimated cost. NASA needed a clear set of priorities, and space programs must become multinational. (W Post, Jul 20/94)	* The 25th anniversary of the first moonwalk was the occasion of several articles looking back at the excitement of that event and developments since as well as an assessment of the current status of the space program. Noting that one-third of the U.S. population was not alive in 1969, the articles especially remarked upon lack of enthusiasm about space, together with expressing concern about earthly matters. Neil Armstrong's role in the moon landing and the fact that he never became a public hero also was touched upon. (W Post, Jul 20/94; NY Times, Jul 20/94; USA Today, Jul 20/94; C Trib, Jul 20/94; WSJ, Jul 20/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94; H Post, Jul 22/94; P Inq, Jul 22/94)	* On the 25th anniversary of the moon landing, President Clinton and Vice President Gore welcomed the three Apollo 11 astronauts: Neil Armstrong, Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin, and Michael Collins, at a White House ceremony. The U.S. Post Office also issued a stamp commemorating the 1969 event. (UP, Jul 20/94; Reuters, Jul 20/94; W Post, Jul 21/94; NY Times, Jul 21/94; B Sun, Jul 21/94; USA Today, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94)	* NASA and Carnegie Mellon University scientists gave a preliminary test to an eight-legged robot name Dante II. They sent it down a gravel quarry to test the $1.8 million robot's satellite and fiber-optics links and software. On July 22 or soon thereafter they planned to send it down Mount Spurr, an active volcano, 80 miles west of Anchorage. Such robots would be useful in extreme terrains and climates. On July 28 a NASA scientist, Butler Hine, said that a communications problem resulting from a poor satellite link with the robot was delaying the robot's mission into the volcano. The robot took its first steps on July 29 and was scheduled to walk 12 hours a day. By late on July 31, the robot was about 150 feet from its goal, a field of volcanic vents on the bottom of the crater. As of August 2, the robot was sending back valuable scientific data from inside the crater, despite being hit by a falling rock. On August 3, Dante II began its steep walk out of the crater. The climb halted on August 4 because of a faulty power unit on the crater rim. Scientists fixed the electrical problem but on August 6 the robot fell on its side. Possible methods for retrieving the robot were under consideration. An attempt to airlift the robot by helicopter on August 9 failed when the cable snapped, dropping Dante II further down the crater. On August 13 two experienced climbers climbed into the crater and manually wrapped a sling around the robot and attached it to a line from the helicopter, which then pulled Dante II up. (AP, Jul 21/94; AP, Jul 26/94; USA Today, Jul 27/94; Reuters, Jul 28/94; NY Times, Jul 30/94; AP, Jul 30/94; W Times, Jul 31/94; C Trib, Jul 31/94; NY Times, Aug 2/94; Reuters, Aug 2/94; AP, Aug 2/94; AP, Aug 3/94; AP, Aug 4/94; Reuters, Aug 4/94; USA Today, Aug 5/94; Reuters, Aug 6/94; USA Today, Aug 8/94; NY Times, Aug 9/94; USA Today, Aug 9/94; AP, Aug 9/94; Reuters, Aug 9/94; B Sun, Aug 10/94; W Post, Aug 10/94; AP, Aug 10/94; Chronicle of Higher Education, Aug 10/94; AP, Aug 13/94; Reuters, Aug 14/94; W Post, Aug 15/94; NY Times, Aug 15/94; USA Today, Aug 15/94; CSM, Aug 15/94; Time, Aug 15/94; AvWk, Aug 15/94; Chemical and Engineering News, Aug 15/94; AP, Aug 22/94; LA Times, Aug 28/94)July 21: NASA announced that of the various devices left by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin on the moon 25 years ago, a laser ranging retroreflector continued to provide fundamental scientific data. From the data obtained and new observations scientists now believed that the moon might have a liquid core. Among other findings from the laser ranging experiments were a verification of Einstein's theory of relativity and the direct influence on the moon's orbit of ocean tides on Earth. (NASA Release 94-122)	* The Italian Foreign Ministry announced that Italy and the United States would launch a spacecraft in October 1997 on a seven-year voyage to Saturn. The Cassini would leave a special probe, called Huygens, on the surface of Saturn's largest moon, Titan, to gather data on the atmosphere, magnetosphere, and chemical make-up of the rings of Saturn and the movements of its satellites. An agreement to conduct the mission, which was being developed by NASA and the Italian Space Agency, was signed by Italian Foreign Minister Antonio Martini and U.S. Ambassador to Italy, Reginald Bartholomew. (Reuters, Jul 21/94)July 25: The National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex (NFAC), the world's largest wind tunnel, turned 50 in 1994. The NFAC, located on 12 acres of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, tested World War II aircraft and continued to operate by testing the Space Shuttle and other aircraft and equipment. (UPI, Jul 25/94)	* Scottsdale, Arizona, received $750,000 in grants from NASA and the Department of Energy to use multispectral imaging to map and study the nearby McDowell Mountains. In August, a Learjet provided by NASA and equipped with instruments that measured light ranging from infrared to ultraviolet was scheduled to be flown over the McDowells. The remote sensing system would permit a precise study of all that composes the mountain range and would be used to produce a three-dimensional map. NASA made the system available for civilian use, and Scottsdale was the first city to take advantage of the possibility. (Arizona Republic, Jul 25/94)July 26: NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the New York Medical College (NYMC) in Valhalla, New York, were using satellite remote sensing and computer technology to predict the risk of Lyme disease transmission. The NASA team, working with Dr. Durland Fish of NYMC and Westchester County Health Department investigators, found that the higher the proportion of vegetated residential area next to woods within a municipality, the higher the transmission risk. (NASA Release 94-123)	* NASA announced that it had recorded on video for the first time hundreds of spectacular red and blue flashes of light that extended upward from electrical thunderstorms to altitudes as high as 60 miles. The flashes occurred over thunderstorms in the Midwest between June 28 and July 12 during a NASA-sponsored investigation into the phenomenon. The principal investigators were two University of Alaska, Fairbanks, professors, Davis Sentman and Eugene Wescott, who used special low-light-level cameras aboard two jet aircraft flown out of Oklahoma City. (NASA Release 94-124; W Post, Aug 1/94)July 27: In a hearing of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, chairman John Dingell, Democrat from Michigan, pressed NASA officials to explain why they had selected Boeing as prime contractor for the Space Station in late 1993 in spite of the firm's having failed NASA's own cost-control reviews. NASA officials admitted they did not know that Boeing was under 21 federal criminal investigations and was forced to pay the government $161 million in settlements. Testifying for NASA were Deirdre A. Lee, Associate Administrator for Procurements, and Deputy Administrator John R. Daily. In addition to the problems with Boeing, Michael Thibault, Assistant Director of the Defense Contract Audit Agency, said that an audit of charges by IBM, a subcontractor to McDonnell Douglas, one of the earlier Space Station contractors, found that about 20 percent of IBM's $490 million charges were not allowable under its contract. (LA Times, Jul 28/94; SP News, Aug 1-7/94)July 28: Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, released photos of the Chicxulub crater on the Yucatan peninsula in Mexico. The photos, taken from NASA's spaceborne radar, showed the site where scientists considered an impact 65 million years ago might have caused climatic changes that killed the dinosaurs. (USA Today, Jul 29/94)July 29: NASA agreed to launch in January 1996 South Africa's first satellite, Sunsat, which was developed at Stellenbosch University near Cape Town. A four-member NASA team evaluated the Stellenbosch project and offered the university a free launch in return for minor additions of U.S. equipment. Stellenbosch project leader Garth Milne said the satellite would deliver high-resolution multispectral stereo images of the Earth and would carry amateur radio equipment that would allow children to talk to the satellite. NASA structural engineer Marisa Achee said NASA was keen to launch Sunsat because it could carry a U.S. Global Positioning System receiver and a laser reflector needed to monitor variations in the Earth's gravitational field. The university was scheduled to control the satellite during its four-year life. (Reuters, Jul 29/94)July 30: The official newspaper, China Daily, quoted a spokesman for the China Aerospace Corporation as expressing confidence it would fulfill all launch services for overseas clients in 1994. China launched the Apstar-1 satellite made by U.S. Hughes Aircraft, from the Xichang Space Center in southwest China on July 21. An Australian satellite was scheduled to be launched in August. China sought a larger share of the commercial space market dominated by NASA, Europe's Arianespace, and Russian launchers. (UPI, Jul 30/94)July/August: A lengthy interview with NASA Administer Daniel Goldin stressed his emphasis on the future rather than NASA's past. In this connection he concentrated on four objectives: determine how people could live and work productively in space, how to do this on an international basis, improve systems management in order to accomplish these objectives in eight years, and America must regain its self-confidence. Goldin believed all these objectives could be accomplished by creating the International Space Station. (Final Frontier, Jul/Aug 94)AUGUSTAugust 1: Space News reported on the financial and other difficulties confronting the Russian space program. Few of the staff of the Russian Space Agency (RSA) were receiving pay checks; many space workers were on unpaid leave and other scientists and engineers had left RSA; unlike NASA, RSA had oversight responsibility but did not manage space projects, leading to power struggles with companies engaged in space work and with the military with whom RSA must negotiate such matters as rental fees for using military facilities for launches. (SP News, Aug 1-7/94)	* NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had signed an agreement with McDonnell Douglas Aerospace in Huntington Beach, California, to reconfigure the Delta Clipper experimental vehicle (DC-X) using advanced lightweight materials and advanced auxiliary propulsion systems. NASA was acquiring the DC-X from the Department of Defense to test new technologies needed to develop a reusable launch vehicle that could assist NASA's ultimate goal of gaining low-cost access to space. (NASA Release 94-125)	* NASA announced that it would conduct a joint campaign with Brazilian space agencies to study the Earth's space environment over the magnetic equator from August 15 through October 20, 1994, as part of the International Equatorial Electrojet Year. During the campaign, NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, was scheduled to launch 33 rockets from the Centro de Lancamento de Alcantara launch range in the northeastern state of Maranhao, Brazil. (NASA Release 94-126)	* NASA was experiencing difficulties finding sufficient amounts of materials to fill the Shuttle's cargo bay in order to justify a planned ten Shuttle flights to Russian Space Station Mir. It might develop that only six or seven flights would be needed according to NASA Shuttle chief Bryan O'Connor. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 1/94)August 2: The General Accounting Office issued a report to the Congress stating that Russian participation in the U.S. Space Station project would add nearly $400 million to the Station's cost as well as $1.4 billion for other NASA programs that supported the Station, instead of saving that amount, as had been predicted. (Reuters, Aug 2/94; P Inq, Aug 3/94; AP, Aug 3/94)August 3: The Senate voted 64 to 36 to defeat the amendment offered by Senator Dale Bumpers, Democrat from Arkansas, to end funding for the International Space Station. (W Post, Aug 4/94; W Times, Aug 4/94; Huntsville News, Aug 4/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement following the defeat of the Senate amendment to end funding for the International Space Station. Goldin praised the Senate's vote of confidence as an indication of a bipartisan coalition of support. He said that the Space Station was a "truly international scientific effort, and a powerful symbol of peaceful cooperation in the post Cold War world." Subsequent to Goldin's statement, various media comments appeared stressing the commitment of "time and political capital" by the President and the Vice President to supporting the Space Station, in addition to Goldin's tireless efforts. (NASA Release 94-127; SP News, Aug 8-14/94; B Sun, Aug 12/94)	* NASA announced the establishment of a committee to develop a plan to identify and catalogue, to the extent practicable within 10 years, all comets and asteroids that might threaten the Earth. Eugene Shoemaker, an astronomer with the Lowell Observatory, was appointed chairman of the eight-member Near-Earth Object Search Committee. The committee was formed in response to congressional direction to NASA to develop a plan in coordination with the Department of Defense and the space agencies of other countries. Gregory Benford, professor of physics at the University of California, Irvine, commented on the congressional charge by saying that publicizing such tracking would be an opportunity for NASA for "smart public relations and smart science." (NASA Release 94-128; LA Times, Aug 21/94; B Sun, Aug 24/94)	* NASA announced its selection of NSI Technology Services of Sunnyvale, California, for a contract to provide engineering, technical, logistical, and administrative technical services to support two airborne science aircraft at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release C94-bb)		* A NASA B-52 successfully launched a standard Pegasus booster carrying an Advanced Photovoltaic and Electronic Experiments (APEX) spacecraft, which Orbital Sciences Corporation had developed for the U.S. Air Force. APEX was the first satellite developed using Orbital's standard satellite platform and represented the first Pegasus mission that maximized the payload and weight capability of the standard booster. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)August 4: NASA announced that astronaut Sidney M. Gutierrez would leave NASA effective August 8 and retire from the Air Force to become Manager for Strategic Planning and Development at Sandia National Laboratories in his hometown of Albuquerque, New Mexico. (NASA Release 94-129)	* NASA stated that it planned to launch Space Shuttle Endeavour on August 18 for a 10-day Earth-monitoring mission. (AP, Aug 4/94; Reuters, Aug 4/94; USA Today, Aug 5/94)August 7: Some 100 astronomers from around the world, including Tim Livengood from the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, traveled to the European Southern Observatory at La Silla in the mountains of northern Chile, to view the collision of the comet with Jupiter in July. (W Times, Aug 7/94)	* An article on electronic navigation and the Global Positioning System (GPS) using 24 satellites described the advantages of GPS and its uses. The article reported that using GPS and a sophisticated flight computer aboard a 737 aircraft owned by NASA, more than 36 "hands-off" precision landings were completed at Wallops Island airfield in Virginia. (C Trib, Aug 7/94)August 8: NASA announced the appointment of J. Stuart Fordyce, currently Deputy Director of NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, as Chief Scientist at the Ohio Aerospace Institute, Cleveland, effective September 18. (NASA Release 94-130)	* NASA announced the selection of BDM Federal, Inc., McLean, Virginia, to form a Remote Sensing Public Access Center for demonstrating, testing, and transferring technology to help provide public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. (NASA Release 94-131; Federal Computer Week, Aug 22/94)	* The nature of Space Ship Endeavour's forthcoming mission, after its projected launch on August 18 was described. In comparison to the April flight that mapped vegetation across the globe, searched for ancient rivers and trade routes, and studied the world's oceans, the August flight, using the $600-million Space Radar Laboratory, by taking the same trajectory was to compare seasonal variations and verify scientists' ability to interpret radar data. The first six days of the 10-day flight essentially were to be a near duplicate of the April flight. The last four days were to use the radar lab's instruments to perform interferometric measurements of the Earth's surface. Interferometry typically used multiple antennas to observe a single site, then calculated the difference in the returned signals to determine the distance to that site. Endeavour scientists hoped to achieve the same result by using their single set of radar to observe the same ground tracks from parallel orbits. They expected to have three opportunities to observe long ground tracks in North America and two for Central Africa, each for about 20 minutes. The operation would require expert navigation and flying to maintain a correct observation position within 850 meters. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)	* The requirements for Rockwell International's Space Systems Division in integrating a Russian-built mechanism into airlock hardware it had manufactured so Space Shuttle Atlantis could dock with Space Station Mir were described. The docking assembly would be the first in what could be a long line of hybrid U.S.-Russian space hardware. Rockwell executives were confident they could meet the May 1995 launch date for Atlantis. Rockwell's Russian partner was NPO Energia, with whom it had worked some 20 years previously on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Some of the complications of the collaboration were discussed. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)	* A Japanese cabinet advisory commission report stated that Japan needed to double its space budget over the next 15 years to initiate planetary expeditions, become a leader in Earth observation, and develop advanced robotics. The new space plan confirmed Japan's existing commitment to international space programs, inclduing the Japanese Experiment Module for NASA's International Space Station. The recommendations came from a long-term planning group within the Space Activities Commission and were to be forwarded to Japan's Finance Ministry at the end of August when the fiscal 1995 budget would be prepared. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)August 9: An article highlighted the benefits satellite reporting could provide for various earthly activities. An example given was the way in which Frank Lamb, president of Eastern Oregon Farming Company and Cropix, Inc., who had a grant from NASA's Earth Observation Commercialization Applications Program, used satellite observations to check on the health of plants in his Oregon farm by determining the rate of photosynthesis. The images enabled a farmer to detect problems such as irrigation-equipment failure, drainage problems, and pest infestation. Satellite images were also used by the South Florida Water Management District to update its maps and identify illegal tampering of wetlands, as well as to create maps of Midwest flood areas for damage and rebuilding plans. (USA Today, Aug 9/94)	* U.S. astronauts and Russian cosmonauts met at the 10th congress of the Association of Space Explorers that opened in Moscow. Participants stressed the importance of space cooperation now that the space race was over. The conference theme was devoted to protecting Earth's ecology. (AP, Aug 9/94)August 10: NASA announced that the French space agency, Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) was awarding the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon management team the CNES Medal in recognition of their achievements. Seven team members from NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, and the CNES project office received the awards.Launched August 10, 1992, TOPEX/Poseidon continued to study the topography of the oceans. (NASA Release 94-132)August 11: NASA announced the appointment of Earle K. Huckins III as Cassini Program Director in the Office of Space Science. An international program, Cassini was designed to explore the planet Saturn, its rings and moons, and the surrounding environment. Scheduled for launch on a Titan IV Centaur in October 1997, the Cassini spacecraft was to swing by Venus, the Earth, and Jupiter before being inserted into orbit around Saturn in June 2004. Cassini was projected to orbit Saturn for four years. (NASA Media Advisory Aug 11/94)	* An article criticized of the ways in which NASA spent more than half the funds allocated to it on unproductive matters that had not advanced the design of the Space Station. The article alleged that at least 24 months of delays resulting from congressional budget-trimming and frequent redesigns cost $1.6 billion, a "hefty extra layer of management" cost $1.1 billion; a discarded propulsion and guidance unit cost $900 million, a failed data management system cost $500 million, and other redesigns and deletions cost $600 million. Since the appointment of Daniel Goldin as Administrator, many of the problems had been fixed, but if technical glitches and congressional meddling recurred, the program could again be in trouble. (Bus Wk, Aug 15/94)	* Scientist John Bradley of MVA Inc. in Norcross, Georgia, said in a report in the journal Science that ancient space dust particles, composed of a black glassy substance embedded with metal, that zipped into Earth's atmosphere might be older than the solar system. Some of these tiny dust grains appeared to be similar to one of the major raw materials of the universe, interstellar dust grains, known as GEMS (glass with embedded metal and sulfides). Scientists collected GEMS, which they believed were left from a passing comet's wake, from a NASA U-2 airplane several miles above Earth. The GEMS were rare--only one or two were collected per hour of U-2 flight time--but showed signs of exposure to irradiation when studied under a transmission electron miscroscope. (UP, Aug 11/94)August 12: NASA announced that its Galileo Spacecraft had begun a six-month process of radioing to Earth data taken during the collisions of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 at Jupiter in July. (NASA Release 94-133)	* NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, announced the award of a contract for information and communications support services for Ames to I-Net, Inc., Bethesda, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-bb (sic); duplicates number on contract announcement of August 3)	* NASA Kennedy Space Center spokesman Bruce Buckingham said that that NASA had worked out a plan that would allow NASA employees to have the Labor Day weekend off and still would permit the launching of Shuttle Discovery on September 9. (Fla Today, Aug 15/94)August 13: NASA researchers hoped that, among other things, Endeavour's comparison radar images from its second environmental voyage would enable them to peer through the mists of Rwanda to track the imperiled mountain gorilla. In the category of experiments, shortly after liftoff, the crew of Endeavour were scheduled to engage in mixing up a batch of special order concrete, which was to be allowed to harden during the 10-day voyage. After the flight, Master Builders Inc. of Cleveland, who had prepared the ingredients, were to test the concrete to determine the critical particle dispersion that ensured hardness for possible future construction on the moon or elsewhere. An experiment in earthquake forecasting also was planned. Another planned experiment was the dumping of oil and algae byproducts into the North Sea off Denmark to see if Endeavour's radar could detect them. The countdown for the flight began August 15. (AP, Aug 13/94; AP, Aug 15/94; UP, Aug 15/94; Reuters, Aug 15/94; NY Times, Aug 16/94; USA Today, Aug 16/94; AP, Aug 17/94; Reuters, Aug 17/94; NY Times, Aug 18/94; W Times, Aug 18/94; W Post, Aug 18/94; USA Today, Aug 18/94; AP, Aug 18/94; Reuters, Aug 18/94)August 14: The digital data representing the first direct image of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 slamming into Jupiter reached Earth from Galileo. The impact of the explosions was presumed to have created waves in the atmosphere, and these were being sought by the Infrared Telescope Facility that NASA operated atop Mauna Kea mountain in Hawaii. The explosions sent substantial amounts of helium hundreds of miles above the top of Jupiter, which was a surprise and which NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Satellite detected. (NY Times, Aug 16/94)	* In anticipation of spending cuts when the new fiscal year would begin October 1, NASA had begun to cut civil service and contractor positions at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) at Cape Canaveral. Although NASA was eliminating four times as many jobs as in the previous two years, KSC contractors were obliged to let 17 workers go for every government job eliminated. These cuts were taking place despite NASA's plan for eight Shuttle launches in the coming year. (O Sen Star, Aug 14/94)August 16: NASA announced that it had signed an agreement on biomedical research with the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NASA was to use its bioreactor technology to produce three-dimensional tissue cultures for laboratory research. The goal of the agreement was to engineer a human lymph node model for AIDS research and to extend this technology to a broad spectrum of tissues. (NASA Release 94-134; AvWk, Aug 22/94)	August 18: NASA announced that the flight of Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for September 1994, would include two firsts: atmospheric research using a laser, the Lidar In-Space Technology Experiment (LITE), and robotic processing of semiconductor materials. The mission would also feature the deployment and retrieval of a free-flying astronomical observer and the first untethered spacewalk by astronauts in more than 10 years. On August 31, NASA officials indicated there might be a delay in the contemplated September 9 launch because of problems with the craft's propulsion system. (NASA Release 94-135; AP, Aug 31/94; Reuters, Aug 31/94)	* The flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour was aborted 1.9 seconds before liftoff as a result of automatic engine shutdown caused by an overheated fuel pump. In consequence NASA officials stated that they were moving the launch of Endeavour to the first week of October because of the time it would take to refurbish the craft. (UP, Aug 18/94; AP, Aug 18/94; Reuters, Aug 18/94; NY Times, Aug 19/94; W Post, Aug 19/94; W Times, Aug 19/94; USA Today, Aug 19/94; AP, Aug 19/94; Fla Today, Aug 19/94; O Sen Star, Aug 19/94; NY Times, Aug 21/94; AvWk, Aug 22/94)	* Japan's new H-II rocket was aborted six seconds before liftoff when its main liquid fuel engine was ignited but the solid fuel booster rockets failed to ignite. Japan's National Space Development Agency said the problem appeared to be in a ground-control computer known as the countdown sequencer rather than in the rocket. On August 28 the H-II rocket was launched again. However, Japan's space agency said on August 31 that it was abandoning efforts to put into orbit an experimental satellite launched by the H-II rocket. (NY Times, Aug 19/94; O Sen Star, Aug 19/94; Reuters, Aug 28/94; NY Times, Aug 29/94; CSM, Sep 1/94)August 19: NASA announced that recent results from the Haystack Orbital Debris Radar measurements of orbital debris were good news for the International Space Station. The radar, which was operated for NASA by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, showed that the measured debris at low altitudes (250-400 miles) was below predicted levels. The improvement resulted in part from NASA's Orbital Debris Mitigation Program under which NASA informed other nations of the hazards resulting from third stage rocket explosions, which led Japan, China, and Russia to join NASA in modifying their launch vehicles and satellites. Other reasons were the decreased military space activities of Russia and the U.S. and the decrease in worldwide space launches. (NASA Release 94-136)	* Drucella Andersen, who served as head of public affairs for aeronautics at NASA, moved to the Federal Aviation Administration as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. (W Post, Aug 19/94)August 21: In discussing the training of two U.S. astronauts in Russia, William Saxe, NASA's representative in Moscow, was quoted as saying that when the astronauts arrived in February, they were refused maps or phone books of Star City, their training center, because these were considered top secret. However, the astronauts were not denied entrance to any of the buildings. The astronauts were not to begin training with Russian cosmonauts until the fall. (NY Times, Aug 21/94)	* In September a conference on space debris was scheduled to be held at Kent University's Unit for Space Sciences in Canterbury, England. Experts from space agencies around the world were to attend the three-day conference. Kent University had become a center of expertise in the study of space debris, having mounted experiments on the subject on several spacecraft. (Times of London, Aug 21/94)August 23: NASA announced the creation of the Office of Space Access and Technology at NASA Headquarters in Washington and the selection of John E. Mansfield as the new NASA Associate Administrator for the office. The merger of two previous offices: the Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology and the Office of Space Systems Development gave greater focus to the development of advanced space technologies and future space launch systems. The changes were to take effect September 6. (NASA Release 94-137; Defense Daily, Aug 24/94)August 24: NASA announced its selection of 15 organizations to receive a total of $20 million to help develop applications and technologies as part of NASA's efforts to provide public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. The remote sensing database applications would make the information more accessible to a wider audience than in the past. (NASA Release 94-138)	* NASA announced the successful completion of the first and largest of eight mirrors for the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The mirror was scheduled to be a part of the AXAF telescope which was to be launched in 1998. (NASA Release 94-139)	* NASA announced the discovery in the southern constellation Scorpius of an unusually bright X-ray source by an instrument aboard NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory. It remained to be determined whether the new source was a black hole, a pulsar, or some new object, according to B. Alan Harmon of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 94-140)	* NASA announced the members of the mid-1995 Space Shuttle mission that was scheduled to carry a NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite. The satellite was intended to provide for telecommunications needs essential to the success of Space Shuttle and low-Earth orbit spacecraft missions. The Space Shuttle was to be commanded by Terence T. Henricks. (NASA Release 94-141)	* Bryan O'Connor, overseer of Shuttle operations at NASA headquarters, said that NASA expected to receive shortly a Russian-built Androgynous Peripheral Docking Assembly that would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russia's Mir Space Station. A damaged tube delayed delivery of the docking component. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 25/94)	* A report by the NASA Advisory Council Task Force on the Shuttle-Mir Rendezvous and Docking Missions criticized the lack of one person being in charge of the Shuttle-Mir phase one (1995-97) project. Accordingly, NASA was moving to remedy the situation and make the Space Station program structure similar to the existing Space Shuttle program structure. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 25/94)August 25: NASA announced that astronaut Franklin Chang-Diaz would be payload commander for the Space Shuttle mission scheduled for early 1996 in which the Tethered Satellite System (TSS) would be flown for the second time. Because of the preparation time required for this mission designed to orbit the TSS at the end of a 13-mile-long tether to test techniques for managing aircraft at great distances and to study the electrodynamic effects of moving a conductive tether through the Earth's magnetic field, the selection was made early. (NASA Release 94-142)	* NASA announced that it, a team of U.S. aircraft and engine manufacturers, and the Russian aircraft firm, Tupolev Design Bureau, planned to use a Russian Tu-144 supersonic transport as a flying testbed for conducting flight research on high-speed enabling technologies. Included in the U.S. team were Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, Rockwell International, General Electric, and Pratt and Whitney. (NASA Release 94-143; Antelope Valley Press, Sep 1/94)	* NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, announced the selection of Loral Space Information Systems of League City, Texas, to provide support services for JSC's Safety, Reliability, and Quality Assurance Office. (NASA Release C94-cc)	* At Rockwell International's Science Center in Thousand Oaks, California, scientists such as Maribeth Hunt were finding ways to transfer environmentally oriented space science to uses on Earth. For example, Hunt was packaging a spaceship's laser-powered, toxic-gas analyzer into something the size of a duffel bag that earthly health officials could use to catch industrial polluters. (LA Times, Aug 25/94)August 27: An Air Force Titan 4 rocket was launched successfully from Cape Canaveral Air Station and deployed "in the desired orbit." The classified satellite was thought to have an electronic eavesdropping platform capable of tapping into military and civilian communications. (Reuters, Aug 27/94; W Post, Aug 28/94)	* At Russia's request, the Federal Aviation Administration was about to launch a sweeping inspection of Russia's airlines and air safety controls. The review resulted from three serious air crashes in Russia during the year and dire warnings of the dangers of Russian air travel. (W Post, Aug 27/94)	* Donna Shirley, director of NASA's newly formed Office of Mars Exploration at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasenda, California, discussed NASA's plans to send up to 28 orbiters, landers, and rovers to Mars within the next decade. Glenn Cunningham, program manager for NASA's Mars Global Surveyer, was quoted in connection with keeping the program within cost limits and the November 1996 scheduled launched of the Mars Global Surveyor aboard a Delta 2 rocket. (Fla Today, Aug 27/94)August 29: After an unsuccessful attempt to link with the Mir Space Station, an unmanned Progress M-24 Russian cargo craft was scheduled to try again on August 30. A Russian spokesman said the docking mechanism of the Progress appeared too sensitive for the Mir's vibrations. The attempt of Progress to dock August 30 again was unsuccessful. However, on September 1 a Russian cosmonaut successfully docked the unmanned supply ship. (AP, Aug 29/94; Reuters, Aug 29/94; C Trib, Aug 31/94; UP, Sep 2/94; NY Times, Sep 3/94; W Post, Sep 3/94; W Times, Sep 3/94; P Inq, Sep 4/94)	* Itar-Tass news agency reported that Russia had launched the Kosmos-2290 military satellite from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. (W Times, Aug 30/94)	* Robert Schock, deputy associate director of the energy program at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, California, said that the same fuel that powered Space Shuttles could propel fuel-efficient, environmentally friendly cars of the future. The laboratory had a $1 million grant to analyze hydrogen applications particularly in the transportation field. (UP, Aug 29/94)	* The Paris-based Euroconsult organization assessed world space markets through the year 2004. The European think tank studied U.S., Asian, and European space and communications companies, agencies, and analysts. It concluded that new communication programs would result in a $95 billion to $115 billion global market for satellites, ground stations, and launch services during the period and that U.S. industry was increasing its share of that market. (AvWk, Aug 29/94)August 30: Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, and Lockheed Corporation of Calabasas, California, reached agreement to merge and create the world's largest space and defense company. The agreement remained to be approved by shareholders and regulators. According to Lockheed chairman Daniel M. Tellep the merger would result in "significant reduction of costs to the government." Biographic data on Norman R. Augustine, chairman and chief executive of Martin Marietta and president-designate of Lockheed Martin Corporation, were included. (W Post, Aug 30/94; CSM, Sep 1/94; W Post, Sep 4/94; U.S. News and World Report, Sep 12/94)August 31: NASA's John C. Stennis Space Center (SSC), Hancock County, Mississippi, announced the award of a contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company, Titusville, Florida, to provide propulsion and technical services at SSC. (NASA Release C94-dd)	* NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the award of a contract for logistics services to Pioneer Contract Services, Inc., Houston. (NASA Release C94-ee)August: An article described in words and photographs the "CAN DO" project of students in Charleston County, South Carolina, which flew on the Space Ship Endeavour. The students' scientific package consisted of four cameras and 261 test tubes filled with samples of all kinds, that NASA technicans placed in a Get Away Special (GAS) canister that NASA made available for educational, government, and research use. Students decided, using weather and orbital data, what earth features to photograph with the CAN DO camera assembly, which they called GEOCAM. The students set up their control center for GEOCAM at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston, and using headphones, were able to commuicate with each other and with the Johnson Space Center in Houston. The results of the photographs and experiments were integrated into their courses of study. (National Geographic, Aug 94)	* NASA's budget situation and the impact of its congressionally mandated budget cutting on contractors were discussed. Spending on the Space Station was cut significantly, but because most of NASA's budget was tied to long-term space projects downsizing trends were slow to affect contractors. A table was given of the 20 major NASA contractors in fiscal year 1993, including the parent company, the subsidiary, the parent's location, and the amount of the contract. NASA was working on reducing the time required to select contractors and improving the internal procurement process. (Government Executive, Aug 94)SEPTEMBERSeptember 1: NASA announced that it had reached agreement with the Boeing Company on the key elements of the prime contract for the International Space Station. The agreement dealt with the scope of work, program schedule, cost ceiling, and fee arrangements as well as establishing contractual terms for the contract to be signed before year's end. (NASA Release 94-144)September 2: NASA announced the names of the crew for the Space Shuttle mission to rendezvous and dock with the Russian Space Station Mir in October 1995. The mission commander was designated as Kenneth D. Cameron. (NASA Release 94-145)September 3: Before setting the final date for the launch of Space Shuttle Discovery, NASA engineers were studying the results of tests conducted on Space Shuttle Endeavour's main engine that shut down 1.9 seconds before takeoff, aborting the launch. (AP, Sep 3/94; W Times, Sep 4/94; B Sun, Sep 4/94; W Post, Sep 4/94; Fla Today, Sep 4/94)September 5: In a wide-ranging interview, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin reviewed his tenure to date and focused on prospects for civil space flight. Goldin proposed that while private industry would use the low orbiting costs offered by a new single-stage-to-orbit vehicle to profit from commercial space applications, governments would cooperate on building a space infrastructure to support robotic and human exploration. He believed that countries could cooperate in space infrastructure while maintaining competition in space ventures such as the development of a launch vehicle. (AvWk, Sep 5/94)	* The projected testing of the SAFER (Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue) device during an Extravehicular Activity (EVA) by the astronauts in the September Discovery flight was discussed at some length. SAFER was developed by engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center and was designed to stabilize an astronaut, allowing the astronaut to fly back to safety should the astronaut drift too far from a structure during an untethered EVA. The 83-pound SAFER was intended to be attached to the bottom of an astronaut's spacesuit. Other objectives of the Discovery flight were to orbit the Langley Research Center's LITE (Lidar In-space Technology Experiment) payload, a laser-observation of the Earth, and to release and retrieve the Goddard Space Flight Center's Spartan 201 solar-wind research satellite. (AvWk, Sep 5/94; H Post, Sep 5/94; H Chron, Sep 6/94)September 6: The countdown began for the launch of Shuttle Discovery on September 9. (AP, Sep 6/94; UP, Sep 6/94; Reuters, Sep 6/94; W Post, Sep 7/94; USA Today, Sep 7/94; AP, Sep 7/94; UP, Sep 7/94; NY Times, Sep 9/94; USA Today, Sep 9/94; W Post, Sep 9/94; W Times, Sep 9/94; CSM, Sep 9/94; Daily Press, Sep 9/94; Virginian-Pilot, Sep 9/94)September 7: NASA announced that its Magellan probe on September 6 began a unique experiment designed to return data about the upper atmosphere of Venus and the behavior of a spacecraft entering it. This would mark the beginning of Magellan's final activities because it was expected to burn up in the atmosphere of Venus by October 14. (NASA Release 94-147)September 8: NASA announced that a new on-line system available over Internet was speeding up NASA's MidRange procurements. MidRange was a simplified procedure for procurements between $25,000 and $500,000; companies would have direct access to such procurement information through Internet. (NASA Release 94-148)	* NASA announced the selection of an ancient flood plain on Mars as the landing site for the 1997 mission of Mars Pathfinder, one of the first in a new generation of small, low-cost aircraft. The Pathfinder was scheduled to arrive at Mars on July 4, 1997. (NASA Release 94-149)	* A feature article, including photographs, described the problems centering around adequate living room in space for astronauts in relation to the design of the Space Station. The main factor limiting space of the 28-by-14.5 foot habitat was the size of the Space Shuttle's cargo bay in which it would ride into orbit. (NY Times, Sep 8/94)	* New Mexico's senators, Democrat Jeff Bingaman and Republican Pete Domenici, sent a letter urging NASA to keep two data facilities at the White Sands Space Network Complex northeast of Las Cruces. A $5 million building planned for NASA data operations remained empty in Las Cruces because NASA had decided to shift activities to West Virginia, according to NASA officials. However, NASA's inspector general said NASA could save $39 million through fiscal year 2000 and nearly $97 million thereafter if data operations connected with the Earth Observing System remained at White Sands instead of being moved to Fairmont, West Virginia. According to a September 5 syndicated column by Jack Anderson, Senator Robert Byrd engineered the change in location. (Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 9/94; Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 10/94; Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 12/94; Times-West Virginian, Sep 15/94)September 9: Space Shuttle Discovery was launched, and the six astronauts began a series of experiments. These included testing the first space-based optical "radar" to probe clouds and aerosols in the atmosphere; carrying the first automated factory in which a robot, not an astronaut, did the work; and later in the week testing SAFER, a new self-rescue rocket-powered backpack. Also being tested was the Shuttle's manipulator arm to measure the effect of Discovery's thruster plumes, which might pose a problem ultimately in docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. The astronauts experienced some difficulties with a high-speed data recorder that would not work and a communications glitch related to the analysis of steering jet exhaust plumes. The astronauts successfully conducted extensive environmental monitoring using the LIDAR space-based radar--in this connection, NASA warned that looking at Discovery through a large telescope might result in eye damage. On September 13, Discovery released the Spartan (Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy) satellite to study the solar wind, the streams of charged particles hurtling from the sun through the solar system at 1.5 million mph. The Spartan was scheduled to be picked up again by Discovery on September 15, but the capture of the satellite would be complicated by the failure of Discovery's radar system, which meant that Spartan could not be tracked. Meanwhile, NASA added another day to Discovery's mission to allow more laser-beam and jet-exhaust experiments to be conducted. On September 15, the astronauts recaptured Spartan on schedule and the radar operated, facilitating the operation. On September 16 two of the astronauts took spacewalks without a tether, testing SAFER in space for the first time. They took turns during a 6.5 hour outing and were limited to staying with 25 feet of the Shuttle so that they could be retrieved if SAFER failed. Bad weather prevented the Shuttle landing on September 19; it ultimately was diverted to Edwards Air Force Base, California, where it landed September 20. (H Chron, Sep 10/94; USA Today, Sep 12/94; H Post, Sep 12/94; H Chron, Sep 12/94; CSM, Sep 13/94; USA Today, Sep 13/94; P Inq, Sep 13/94; AP, Sep 13/94; W Post, Sep 14/94; P Inq, Sep 14/94; C Trib, Sep 14/94; UP, Sep 14/94; Reuters, Sep 14/94; NY Times, Sep 15/94; USA Today, Sep 15/94; P Inq, Sep 15/94; W Times, Sep 15/94; UP, Sep 15/94; Reuters, Sep 15/94; W Post, Sep 16/94; NY Times, Sep 16/94; USA Today, Sep 16/94; B Sun, Sep 16/94; W Times, Sep 16/94; CSM, Sep 16/94; AP, Sep 16/94; UP, Sep 18/94; Reuters, Sep 18/94; USA Today, Sep 19/94; AP, Sep 19/94; UP, Sep 19/94; Reuters, Sep 19/94; W Post, Sep 20/94; NY Times, Sep 20/94; B Sun, Sep 20/94; P Inq, Sep 20/94; USA Today, Sep 20/94; AP, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; LA Times, Sep 21/94; W Post, Sep 21/94; W Times, Sep 21/94; P Inq, Sep 21/94; B Sun, Sep 21/94; H Post, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)	* NASA announced the award of a contract to the industry team of GE Aircraft Engines and United Technologies' Pratt and Whitney for work on the propulsion component technologies for a 21st century High-Speed Civil Transport. (NASA Release 94-150)September 11: With aid from NASA, the University of Florida Medical School created a microcomputer, more than 14 years in the making, which enabled physicians to communicate via satellite or telephone. The computer held the latest information from 12 medical reference books and more than 1,000 medical journals and was updated quarterly. Both an electronic library and a record-keeping system were provided to doctors. System 2000 was originally designed to help ailing crew members on distant space stations diagnose their own illnesses. NASA's director of aerospace medicine and occupational health, Dr. Earl Ferguson, expected the use of telecommunications in health care delivery to "totally revolutionize the way we practice medicine." (Fla Today, Sep 11/94)	* NASA was scheduled to conduct a completely computerized conference, beginning September 12 and lasting through September 30, dealing with flight control projects involving an F-15 research aircraft. Some 200 pages of text and graphics were to be presented on a computer network. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Sep 11/94)September 12: NASA announced that its prime contractor for Space Shuttle orbiters, Rockwell Aerospace, on September 11 received the Russian-built docking mechanism, the Androgynous Peripheral Docking Assembly (APDA). This mechanism would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to join the orbiting Russian Mir Space Station in June 1995. Work was scheduled to begin immediately at Rockwell's Space Systems Division to assemble the APDA with the Rockwell-built docking system hardware. (NASA Release 94-151)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited the Johnson Space Center in Houston as his first stop on a fall tour of all NASA facilities. In a tough speech to all employees, he said he wanted more innovation and less bureaucracy. He stressed that in a time of tight government budgets, "every single person is going to have to justify their activity--all the time." In emphasizing the need to improve business practices, he cited the NASA worker-to-manager ratio on some projects as 2-to-1, whereas 12-to-1 was the private sector goal. (H Post, Sep 13/94; H Post, Sep 14/94)September 13: Two Russian cosmonauts stepped outside Space Station Mir in order to reposition solar panels outside the Station. They were expected to spend five hours outside, and the repositioning of the panels should facilitate the visit of U.S. Shuttle Atlantis in 1995. (AP, Sep 13/94)September 14: NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science Wesley T. Huntress announced two new science missions, both aboard small, relatively inexpensive spacecraft. The first, the Transitional Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE), would observe the sun to study the connection between its magnetic fields and the heating of the sun's corona. TRACE, scheduled for launch in 1997, would have Alan Title of the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, California, as the principal investigator. The second spacecraft, the Wide-Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE), scheduled for launch in 1998 to study the evolution of galaxies, would be headed by Perry B. Hacking of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. The two missions were part of NASA's Small Explorer Program for highly focused science missions. Small Explorer spacecraft weigh approximately 500 pounds, and the missions were expected to cost approximately $50 million for design, development, and operations through the first 30 days in orbit. (NASA Release 94-152)September 15: NASA announced that it had begun resurfacing the runway at the Kennedy Space Center, which would improve the wear on Shuttle tires and potentially lead to an expansion of the Return to Launch Site landing crosswind flight rule beyond the present constraint of 15 knots. (NASA Release 94-153)	* An August 17 letter by David Margolis, associate deputy attorney general, confirmed that the FBI's Office of Professional Responsibility was investigating allegations concerning the Justice Department's "investigative and prosecutive functions" in the Houston-based Operation Lightning Strike involving NASA and its contractors. (UP, Sep 15/94; H Chron, Sep 15/94; H Post, Sep 15/94)	* The Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, Inc. held a legislative conference in Washington, D.C., at which NASA had the largest government career recruiting exhibit of any agency. NASA's Associate Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs, Yvonne B. Freeman, said that NASA was now aggressively recruiting future black scientists as early as elementary school and paying for their training. Of the $740 million NASA spent on education each year, $70 million now went to historically black colleges and universities, up from $6 million two years previously. Representative Louis Stokes, Democrat from Ohio, who formerly criticized NASA for doing little to hire blacks or enter into contracts with black companies, said NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin had really made a difference in NASA's programs. Stokes's appropriations subcommittee was responsible for NASA funding. (Plain Dealer, Sep 16/94)September 16: Scientists said that the first spacecraft to fly over the sun's south pole--the Ulysses probe, a joint project of the European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA--reached the climax of a 3 billion-kilometer journey through space the week of September 12. As it did so, 80 of the project's 120 scientists met at ESA's research center in the Dutch town of Noordwijk to assess data gained during the four-year space odyssey. Ulysses' chief scientist Richard Marsden believed that the mission would give scientists greater insight into how the solar wind interfered with radio communications and electrical devices on Earth. (Reuters, Sep 16/94)September 19: NASA announced that high-speed information technologies it had developed could support physicians in remote locations on a new medical information superhighway by providing them instant access to information and treatment strategies for their patients. The new, integrated computing and telecommunications technologies developed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, were scheduled to be demonstrated to members of Congress and the Clinton Administration on September 20 by the National Information Infrastructure Testbed, a non-profit consortium of corporations, universities, and government agencies. (NASA Release 94-156)	* The matter of space science research--its cost and its usefulness--was discussed in a feature article. Such research developed more or less as an afterthought, but it had already proved valuable in such ways as making precise measurements of the thickness of clouds and dust to enable automated weather satellites. Assessing the legitimacy of the high costs involved was more difficult, but valuable scientific findings had resulted, such as changing ideas about how different levels of compression at the top and bottom of the lung affected the way the lung functioned and contradicting expectations about how the circulation of blood in the body worked. (Boston Globe, Sep 19/94)September 20: NASA announced that the 12-member panel investigating the failure of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)-13 meteorological satellite in August 1993 had concluded that the probable cause was a short circuit that prevented the solar array current from powering the spacecraft and recharging the batteries. The short circuit probably resulted from a 1.25 inch screw that extended too far below an aluminum plate and penetrated the insulation. The board made recommendations for future NOAA spacecraft; NASA supervised the design and construction of the weather satellites. (NASA Release 94-157; P Inq, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)	* NASA announced that the International Astronomical Union had approved the name Dactyl for the tiny moon discovered on August 28, 1993 in orbit around the asteroid Ida by NASA's Galileo mission. Dactyl was the first natural satellite of an asteroid ever discovered and photographed. The name derived from the Dactyli, a group of mythological beings who lived on Mount Ida, where the infant Zeus was hidden. (NASA Release, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; H Post, Sep 21/94)	* NASA announced the selection of General Sciences Corporation, Laurel, Maryland, for a contract to provide support services for two Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer science support teams, which were key instruments for NASA's Earth Observing System. (NASA Release C94-ff)September 21: NASA announced that it had selected the science team for the first spacecraft designed to rendezvous with an asteroid, the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) mission. The NEAR spacecraft was scheduled for launch in February 1996 aboard a Delta 2 rocket and should arrive in orbit around asteroid 433 Eros in early January 1999. It would survey Eros for a minimum of one year, at altitudes as close as 15 miles. The NEAR Science Payload would consist of six instruments: a multispectral imager system, a near-infrared spectrograph, an X-ray/gamma-ray spectrometer, a magnetometer, a laser altimeter, and the spacecraft's radio, which was sued also for gravity measurements. Members of the science team were assigned to each of these instruments. (NASA Release 94-159)	* NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had found a new quasar, a mere 600 million light years away in Earth's cosmic backyard, as opposed to other quasars that were billions of light years away. The discovery of a quasar in galaxy Cygnus A would give astronomers their first opportunity for detailed study of a quasar. (NASA Release 94-160)	* A German company set up a joint venture with China, called EurasSpace, to develop  state-of-the-art satellites. It expected to launch its first high-capacity data  transmission satellite, the Sinosat-1, in 1997 for the People's Bank of China. The satellite would be assembled and tested in China and boosted into orbit by a Chinese Long March rocket. (UP, Sep 21/94)September 22: Northrop Grumman Corporation announced that it would reduce its work force by 9,000 people, or nearly 20 percent, by the end of 1995. The reduction resulted from the shrinking U.S. military budget and the merger of the two corporation, Northrop and Grumman, in May 1994. The areas that would be hard hit by the layoffs were California and Long Island. (NY Times, Sep 23/94)September 24: A former NASA researcher and subcontractor at the Johnson Space Center, Jong-Hun Lee, was ordered deported as a suspected North Korean agent. The action followed a hearing at which he was not allowed to see all the evidence against him. (AP, Sep 24/94)September 26: NASA prepared to begin the countdown on September 27 for the scheduled September 30 launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour on its environmental mission. The Shuttle was launched on schedule on September 30. (Reuters, Sep 26/94; USA Today, Sep 27/94; AP, Sep 28/94; H Chron, Sep 30/94; USA Today, Sep 30/94; B Sun, Sep 30/94; Fla Today, Sep 30/94; AP, Sep 30/94; Reuters, Sep 30/94; W Post, Oct 1/94)September 28: NASA announced that more than a decade after affecting climate on a global scale, residual signs of a powerful El Nino were still visible from space. Oceanographers using data from the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite were tracking the remnant wave of the 1982-83 El Nino as it moved across the Northwest Pacific Ocean, where some scientists theorized it might still be affecting weather in the region. TOPEX/Poseidon, a joint program of NASA and the Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales, the French space agency, used a radar altimeter to precisely measure sea-surface height. The study was part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. Launched August 10, 1992, the satellite had completed two years of its three-year prime mission. (NASA Release 94-162; W Post, Oct 3/94)	* At a conference at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., officials of NASA and of Spacehab Inc., the Arlington, Virginia, company that built and leased the laboratories that fly in the Space Shuttle, described progress made in the more than 80 missions that had included research payloads. Other private and university researchers were encouraged to join in such projects. (UP, Sep 28/94)	* Two groups of astronomers, one centered at Indiana University and the other at Harvard University, announced, based on findings from the Hubble Space Telescope, that the universe was billions of years younger than previously estimated. The Indiana group said the universe could be as little as 7 billion years old whereas the Harvard group estimated the age of the universe at between 9 billion and 14 billion years. The Indiana study was published in the September 29 issue of Nature and the Harvard study in the current Astrophysical Journal. According to Stephen Maran, a senior astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Center and a spokesman for the American Astronomical Society, the findings should lead to further research to explain the discrepancy beween the oldest stars and the age of the universe. (LA Times, Sep 29/94)September 29: NASA announced that a press conference was being held at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., at which four astronomers would discuss the initial findings resulting from the Hubble Space Telescope and spectroscopic data concerning the spectacular July bombardment of Jupiter by comet P/Shoemaker-Levy 9. Two of the astronomers were affiliated with the Space Telescope Science Institute, which was operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., for NASA, under contract with the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Among questions to be discussed was the nature of the body that struck Jupiter: whether it was indeed a comet or an asteroid. (NASA Release 94-161; W Post, Sep 30/94; H Chron, Sep 30/94; H Post, Sep 30/94)	* The Hammer award, developed by Vice President Al Gore as part of the Clinton Administration's "reinventing" government, was presented to John Muratore, chief of the Johnson Space Center's Control Center Systems Division, and his staff. They were honored for their innovative approach to establishing a high-speed, high-data-rate computer system that would enable the new NASA Mission Control Center to control a space shuttle, the Russian Mir Space Station as well as the planned International Space Station. They developed a strategy linking smaller, less expensive computers within the nearly 200 flight control work stations. (H Chron, Sep 30/94)September 30: NASA announced that two companies had been recognized as minority contractor and subcontractor of the year for their outstanding contributions to the space program. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin named ERC, Inc., Tullahoma, Tennessee, as Minority Contractor of the Year and BST Systems, Inc., Plainfield, Connecticut, as Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 94-163)	* NASA announced assembly sequence refinements that incorporated the latest updates to plans for the International Space Station. The sequence incorporated early provisions for a centrifuge and allowed for the earlier construction of Russia's Solar Power Platform but did not affect existing major milestones. (NASA Release 94-164)	* NASA learned that instead of the anticipated $225 million cut in its Space Shuttle budget for 1995, Congress had cut an additional $141 million, for a total Shuttle budget cut of $366 million. President Clinton had signed the NASA 1995 spending bill, which allocated $3.18 billion for the Shuttle program out of a total NASA budget of $14.37 billion. The effects of the cuts on NASA operations remained to be determined. (Fla Today, Sep 30/94)	* Jean-Marc Artaud, program director for the Ariane-5 rocket for the French National Space Agency (CNES) in Guiana, discussed the launch that took place of a solid propellant booster that was part of the new generation rocket. The rocket was launched from a European Space Agency (ESA) center in the jungle of French Guiana on the northeast coast of South America in a test aimed at keeping the ESA in the lead in launching heavy satellites into the next century. (Reuters, Sep 30/94)OCTOBEROctober 1: The media continued to give extensive coverage to the flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour. One of the natural phenomena on which the radar photography concentrated was volcanoes. On October 1, it photographed Russia's Klyuchevsky Volcano on the Kamchatka Peninsula, which had erupted the previous day. Endeavour also scanned Hawaiian volcanoes and dormant Mt. Rainier and the Rwandan volcanoes where endangered gorillas lived. In addition, it sought traces of ancient river tributaries buried by the Sahara, forest fires and thunderstorms in various areas of the globe, and an earthquake that had occurred in Japan. Another goal was to map Earth's appearance in early autumn and note seasonal environmental changes between photographs taken in April and those in October. If the radar could determine small changes on Earth it could eventually be used to predict earthquakes or volcano eruptions. On October 6 German oceanographers dumped 106 gallons of diesel oil and 26 gallons of algae products into the North Sea to determine how well Endeavour's radar could detect oil slicks and differentiate them from algae. Workers on two oil-recovery ships started to clean up the mess as soon as Endeavour passed and expected to finish within two hours. To gather as much data as possible, the astronauts worked in two 12-hour shifts.	The failure of a Space Shuttle steering jet on October 5 forced NASA to suspend Endeavour's radar survey of Earth. The astronauts had been engaged most recently in hydrology studies of such regions as the rain forests of Brazil, the mountains of California, and the deserts of Australia. By using manual controls when the steering jet failed, the astronauts were able to trace both the oil and the algae. NASA ground personnel put together a computer program to bypass the sensor and restore use of the jets. NASA also added an 11th day to the mission to allow for more radar observations. On October 7 NASA scientist Henry Reichle said that the air pollution monitor on board Endeavour showed an increase in carbon monoxide above South America, southern Africa, across the Atlantic Ocean between the two continents, and north of Australia. On October 10 the astronauts began to stow scientific gear in preparation for a return on October 11. Bad weather in Florida on October 11 forced Endeavour to land at Edwards Air Force Base in California instead. (W Post, Oct 1/94; AP, Oct 1/94; LA Times, Oct 2/94; UP, Oct 2/94; AP, Oct 3/94; W Post, Oct 4/94; W Times, Oct 4/94; USA Today, Oct 4/94; AP, Oct 4/94; Reuters, Oct 4/94; UP, Oct 4/94; AP, Oct 5/94; Reuters, Oct 5/96; UPI, Oct 5/96; AP, Oct 6/94; UPI, Oct 6/94; Reuters, Oct 6/94; NY Times, Oct 7/94; H Post, Oct 7/94; H Chron, Oct 7/94; AP, Oct 7/94; NY Times, Oct 8/94; W Times, Oct 9/94; NY Times, Oct 9/94; W Times, Oct 10/94; NY Times, Oct 10/94; W Post, Oct 10/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 10/94; UPI, Oct 10/94; Reuters, Oct 10/94; NY Times, Oct 11/94; W Post, Oct 11/94; W Times, Oct 11/94; AP, Oct 11/94; Reuters, Oct 11/94; NY Times, Oct 12/94; W Post, Oct 12/94; W Times, Oct 12/94; C Trib, Oct 12/94; AP, Oct 12/94)October 2: A photograph was featured of the first node of NASA's international laboratory designed as part of the International Space Station. It was being manufactured by Boeing at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. (Fla Today, Oct 2/94)October 3: One of the results of the data produced by the U.S.-French TOPEX-Poseidon satellite, part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, was the mapping of ocean circulation, one of the least understood areas of climate research. Data had shown that the El Nino remnant wave was pushing the current northward off the coast of Japan, raising the temperature of the northwest Pacific. (W Post, Oct 3/94)	* An article analyzed the role played by lasers in advancing atmospheric science. Reference was made to the end of the last Space Shuttle flight when NASA was gathering data simultaneously from different altitudes over the same spot on Earth with three laser systems--one on Discovery and two on research aircraft. A fourth, ground-based Lidar (light detection and ranging) at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, also gathered data concurrently. This combination should significantly advance technology toward the goal of a permanent, automated Lidar satellite. The article provided scientific details of the flights undertaken and Discovery's operation of Lite, the Lidar In-space Technology Experiment. (AvWk, Oct 3/94)	* NASA announced the identification of nine proposals to begin cooperative agreement negotiations in NASA's Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP). AITP was established to focus industry's research and development efforts on dual-purpose aerospace technologies that showed potential for strong commercial applications that might also benefit NASA's programs. In addition to NASA funding, each project also would involve 50 percent or more in non-government cost-sharing. (NASA Release 94-165)October 4: A Russian Soyuz rocket was launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a German physicist. Its destination was the Mir Space Station where the crew would exchange places with existing Mir cosmonauts. The rocket docked with Mir on October 6. On October 12 the Interfax news agency reported that Mir was experiencing power supply problems because of the drain on its power cells from the presence of six astronauts during the change-over period. On October 28 the German astronaut was scheduled to break the record for the longest space flight by a West European. (UP, Oct 4/94; Reuters, Oct 4/94; AP, Oct 6/94; AFP, Oct 6/94; Reuters, Oct 6/94; NY Times, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 7/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 28/94)	* The New Zealand Antarctic Programme and the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) issued a joint statement saying that a hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic had reappeared and was wider than in 1993. NIWA scientist Tom Clarkson said that NASA data showed a rectangular-shaped area of very low ozone concentration covering Antarctica, compared with a slightly smaller triangular hole in 1993. In contrast to the NIWA statement, NASA announced on October 6 that a NASA instrument aboard a Russian satellite had detected a hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica with a surface area equal to the size of the North American continent. It added that that the ozone hole levels for 1994 were "nearly as large and as deep as the record lows from October 1993," according to preliminary data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (Reuters, Oct 4/94; NASA Release 94-167; USA Today, Oct 7/94; AP, Oct 7/94; NY Times, Oct 8/94)October 6: NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, and Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan, announced they had concluded a two-year cooperative agreement for the transfer of NASA-developed technology to improve the design and engineering of Ford vehicles. This was the first broad technology transfer process between NASA and any automotive manufacturer. (NASA Release 94-166; H Post, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 13/94)	* As an example of NASA's undertaking to transfer space technology to private industry a surgical instrument was cited. The device was an instrument designed to reduce the time required for surgeons to close sutures during abdominal endoscopic surgery. (Antelope Valley Press, Oct 6/94; Antelope Valley Daily News, Oct 17/94; Desert Wings, Oct 21/94)October 7: NASA ground controllers were to send final commands to the Magellan space probe on October 7 to send it crashing to its death in the atmosphere of Venus on October 11. The robot had been in a highly successful Venus orbit since 1990 but its solar panels were failing and its gyroscopes worn out. On October 12 NASA announced that Magellan was expected to burn up within two days. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, declared Magellan dead on October 12. However, Magellan lasted long enough to radio back telemetry showing how much rocket power would be required to offset the increasing atmospheric turbulence, which was useful data for future designers seeking to use the atmosphere of Mars for orbit purposes. (LA Times, Oct 6/94; AP, Oct 6/94; USA Today, Oct 7/94; C Trib, Oct 9/94; W Post, Oct 10/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 11/94; Reuters, Oct 11/94; W Times, Oct 12/94; LA Times, Oct 12/94; CSM, Oct 12/94; NASA Release 94-170; Fla Today, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 12/94; W Post, Oct 13/94; NY Times, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94)	* NASA announced that Russian cosmonauts on Mir had completed the first in a series of U.S. experiments using NASA's Space Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS). SAMS was activated October 4 to collect vibration data in preparation for future chemistry and physics experiments. (NASA Release 94-168)	* A feature article described three women engineers who worked at the Kennedy Space Center and were among the 120 finalists being interviewed by NASA's astronaut selection board for assignment as astronaut candidates. (Fla Today, Oct 7/94)October 8: Space Shuttle Columbia stopped at Huntsville en route to Rockwell International's facility at Palmdale, California, for scheduled maintenance. Thousands of people came to the airport to see the Shuttle. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 9/94)October 11: Boeing Company of Seattle, prime contractor for the International Space Station, submitted a proposal to NASA outlining work that would be performed under a final contract and the cost of each task. NASA was to review the proposal and then begin negotiations. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)	* On the occasion of the 25th anniversary of the first moonlanding mission, the Italian newspaper La Repubblica published an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin. In it he complimented Italy for its good space knowhow, saying Italians were magicians in the area of space communication. He also mentioned ways in which Italy was cooperating with NASA such as the Italian astronaut who was to help complete the testing of the tethered satellite system and the Italian Space Agency's work with NASA on the Cassini Space Mission. He pointed out that above all NASA counted on Italy for the construction of logistic pressurization modules and that this construction would give Italian firms a technological capacity that would have an impact on all Italian industries. (La Repubblica, Oct 11/94)October 12: NASA announced the naming of Italian scientist Umberto Guidoni to the Columbia Space Shuttle mission in early 1996. He would be involved with experiments dealing with the Tethered Satellite System, with which he had previous experience. (NASA Release 94-169)	* NASA announced the selection of Boeing Information Services Inc., Vienna, Virginia, to provide Information Resources Management Support at NASA Headquarters. (NASA Release C94-gg; Federal Computer Week, Oct 24/94)	* At a press briefing at the Kennedy Space Center, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Jeremiah Pearson said NASA was currently undertaking a review to gauge the Shuttle program's health after budget cutbacks and to identify possible additional savings. The review was scheduled to be completed in early January. Bryan O'Connor, Shuttle program director at NASA Headquarters, said 13 teams at NASA field centers across the country were examining jobs, procedures, and requirements to improve efficiency. However, he indicated that much of 1994's $141 million cut in the Shuttle program's operating budget could be made up with expected reimbursements and reassignment of funds. For example, Congress had suggested that the program use a $22 million reimbursement from Japan for Shuttle flights to that end. (Fla Today, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94; AvWk, Oct 17/94; AP, Oct 24/94)	* Bill Townsend, Deputy Associate Administrator for NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, was quoted as saying that with NASA starting the new fiscal year with a smaller budget, the Space Radar Laboratory might have mapped its last mountain range. Diane Evans, the radar's U.S. project scientist, indicated that the world was waiting to see what NASA would do with the Space Radar Laboratory, which to date had mapped only 5 percent of the Earth's surface, in comparison with the extensive coverage of the topography of Venus. (O Sen Star, Oct 12/94)October 14: More than 700 Space Shuttle support personnel at NASA's Kennedy Space Center had been on strike for 15 weeks in a labor dispute with contractor EG&G Corporation. The International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, the labor union representing the striking workers, said negotiations were deadlocked over an EG&G demand to limit health insurance benefits for its employees. NASA denied charges that safety had been compromised during the three Shuttle flights launched since the strike began July 5. On October 21 negotiators reached a tentative agreement in their meeting at the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service headquarters in Washington, D.C. The contract proposal covered health insurance, wages, and pensions. The contract remained to be approved by three EG&G subcontractors and then ratified by the striking union members. (Defense Daily, Oct 14/94; AP, Oct 21/94)October 16: The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) ordered NASA in 1991 to conduct a sitewide investigation of longstanding environmental problems across its 352-acre complex on the western border of Cleveland Hopkins International Airport. The problems included dumps containing spent rocket fuel and contamination of soil and water by mercury. To date there was little evidence of progress apart from much discussion of how the eventual cleanup would be done. (Plain Dealer, Oct 16/94)	* A critical article broke down the percentages NASA would devote to various programs during the 1995 fiscal year, out of the $14.4 billion approved by Congress. The following categories were listed: Space Shuttle, 25 percent; NASA bureaucracy, 15 percent; Space Station, 15 percent; Mission to Planet Earth, 9 percent; physics and astronomy, 8 percent; aeronautics, 6 percent; planetary exploration, 5 percent; advanced concepts and technology, 4 percent; mission communications, 3 percent; launch services, 2 percent; life and microgravity sciences, 2 percent; space communication and telecommunications, 1 percent; new construction, 1 percent; safety office, .5 percent; inspector general, .5 percent. Not included were wind tunnel operations. (O Sen Star, Oct 16/94)	* Another article in the same newspaper commended NASA for having learned the secret to getting along with Congress: humility equaled stability. NASA had done its homework prior to submitting its budget request and got almost everything it asked for. The writer gave most of the credit to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin whose mantra of "cheaper, better, faster" had forced NASA staff to wake up to reality. (O Sen Star, Oct 16/94)	* An example was given of the way in which NASA-sponsored research in aeronautics, in this case at the Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, had practical applications in daily life. The example involved a redesign of big rig trucks, based on Ed Saltzman's research, which made the trucks more fuel efficient. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Oct 16/94)October 17: NASA announced that its Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had provided new insights into how stars might have been formed billions of years ago in the early universe. A preliminary assessment of HST observations indicated that a pair of clusters in the Large Magellanic Cloud instead of containing fewer than 1,000 stars as earlier thought, contained nearly 10,000 stars. If this were true billions of years ago, it would have altered drastically the early history of the universe, according to Nino Panagia of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore and the European Space Agency. (NASA Release 94-171)	* NASA announced the establishment of a Phase One Program Office at the Johnsonn Space Center, Houston, to direct upcoming Shuttle flights to the Russian Mir Station. Tommy Holloway was appointed manager of the office. (NASA Release 94-172)	* The International Space Station was entering a decisive six-month period in which governments in the United States, Russia, Japan, Europe, and Canada were poised to sign the final industrial contracts and intergovernmental accords needed to build the facility. Barring unforeseen developments, the European Space Agency would be unable to commit itself to the Space Station before November 1995, when its member governments' ministers were scheduled to convene. Other remaining hurdles were the signing of the prime contract for Station hardware between NASA and the Boeing Company; the conclusion of a smaller contract between the Canadian Space Agency and Spar Aerospace; a final round of negotiations bringing Russia into full Station partnership; and an agreement among the partners on who would contribute what to the Station's upkeep and the apportioning of access to the Station's limited electricity and other resources. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)	* JoBea Way, a radar scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, came up with the idea for KidSat in November 1993 while working with scholarship students in NASA's Space Radar Laboratory program. KidSat was a project to establish a permanent orbiting research payload that only students could operate to broaden their educational horizons. Sally Ride, director of the California Space Institute at the University of California, San Diego, was backing the project, which would enlist help from NASA and other organizations such as the National Science Foundation and private charitable foundations. The aim would be to begin the first KidSat classroom lessons in the 1995-96 school year. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)	* Flight tests of new terminal automation software confirmed that airline traffic could be routed to arrive at a gate within 20 seconds or less of a scheduled time, while enabling fuel-efficient descents initiated at pilots' discretion. According to NASA researchers, when deployed at hub airports, the complete Center-Tracon Automation System (CTAS) would optimize the flow of aircraft and improve air traffic control productivity significantly. Recent evaluations dealt with the Descent Advisor portion of CTAS but other parts of CTAS provided air traffic controllers with the data they needed to ensure efficient and safe operations. The recent flight tests were performed under a joint research and development effort involving the Federal Aviation Administration, NASA's Ames and Langley Research Centers, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, several contractors, and United Airlines. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was the scheduled keynote speaker for an October 27-28 conference at Auburn University on the past, present, and future of the U.S. space program. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 17/94)	* NASA was expanding its efforts to make procurement information readily accessible on the Internet. In the procurement reform act signed by President Clinton the previous week, NASA was granted authority to test soliciting bids for mid-range procurement (from $25,000 to $500,000 annually) on the Internet. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)	* The crew of NASA's November Atlantis Shuttle mission were scheduled to test the feasibility of an unusual rendezvous procedure for the second docking with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. They would fly Atlantis on a "plus R bar" (the radius vector from the target's center of mass to the Earth's center) to rendezvous with and retrieve the Crista-Spas atmospheric research satellite on the ninth day of the planned 11-day mission. The new approach would save fuel and not require any braking. Crista-Spas was to be deployed from Atlantis's robot arm within about 20 hours of Atlantis's launch. (AvWk, Oct 17/94; SP News, Oct 24-30)	* The Clinton Administration authorized NASA to be an advocate for satellites in the evolving National Information Infrastructure/Global Information Infrastructure (NII/GII), the so-called information superhighway. The Administration wanted to ensure that industry--satellite builders and operators and telecommunications users--was intimately involved in formulating satellites' role in the NII/GII. Industry in turn wanted NASA to provide research and development on "pre-competitive technologies." (AvWk, Oct 17/94)	* NASA was scheduled to test fly Pratt & Whitney's new high-pressure oxidizer turbopump on only one of Discovery's three main engines in June 1995 before committing itself to the advanced design pump's use on all Space Shuttle engines. The new pump was intended to simplify Shuttle processing and increase the margin of safety. It was designed to fly 10 times before removal or replacement was required, compared with the single-flight ability of the current pump. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)	* NASA was consulting researchers in Canada, Europe, and Japan on how best to build on two successful Earth surveys by a Shuttle-borne set of complex, multifrequency radar instruments carried by the Space Radar Laboratory. NASA had asked the National Academy of Sciences to recommend the next step, such as the possibility of a reflight of the Laboratory. But a major objective was by international consultation to determine the potential for combining international efforts into a joint project to orbit a highly capable space radar system, according to William Townsend, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator in charge of the Office for the Mission to Planet Earth. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)October 18: A federal grand jury indicted Samuel Johnson, president of Nor-Cal Supply Company in San Leandro, California, in connection with the sale of faulty aerospace bolts to commercial airlines and government aviation agencies, including NASA. The charges resulted from a major investigation by the FBI and the Defense Criminal Investigative Service. (SF Chron, Oct 19/94)October 19: NASA announced that November 3 was the launch date for Space Shuttle Atlantis and its six-person crew on an 11-day mission. The launch date was predicated on successful launch of the Wind spacecraft on November 1 aboard a Delta rocket. (NASA Release 94-173; H Chron, Oct 20/94; USA Today, Oct 28/94)	* NASA announced that it had released the Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the Cassini mission to Saturn, which would be available for public review and comment over a 45-day period. Cassini was a cooperative scientific mission of the U.S. and European space agencies scheduled for launch in October 1997 for a seven-year robotic spacecraft journey to Saturn. (NASA Release 94-174)	* During a meeting in Moscow with U.S. Congressman James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking member of the House space subcommittee, Russian First Vice-Premier Oleg Soskovets said that the International Space Station Project Alpha would benefit Russia from an economic viewpoint. A contract to create an International Space Station had been signed earlier by Russia's M.V. Khrunichev Space Research Center and the U.S. Lockheed Corporation. During Russian President Boris Yeltsin's recent visit to the United States, he gave the project a high appraisal. Soskovets drew the attention of the U.S. congressional delegation to the financial estimates of the project and to the need to invite China to participate. Sensenbrenner said the main problem was to convince the European Union and Canada first of the need for other participants to meet their commitments in financing the project. Russian Space Agency chief Yuri Koptev told Itar-Tass that the United States had already sent 72 NASA specialists to Moscow and assigned more than "$17,000 million for the elaboration of the project and $14,000 million for the Station's operation for 10 years." In answer to a media question on October 18, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that when he met recently with Chinese officials, the matter of the Space Station never came up. In mid-November, in discussing the possible inclusion of Goldin in a visit to China and Japan by a U.S. science and technology delegation, Richard DalBello, assistant director for aeronautics and space in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said there would be no discussion during the trip of Chinese inclusion in the Space Station. (Itar-Tass, Oct 19/94; Defense Daily, Oct 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)	* The Analytic Sciences Corporation (TASC) signed a three-year cooperative agreement with NASA to make NASA's space and Earth science data available to elementary school students and their teachers over the Internet. TASC was scheduled to work with the staff at Franconia Elementary School in Fairfax County, Virginia, to design and develop software allowing kindergarten through 6th grade students to access NASA's vast remote sensing weather data. Fritz Hasler, manager of the project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, said that the project should not only help students learn about the weather but also improve their knowledge of the information highway. (PR Newswire, Oct 19/94)October 20: Some of U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment would not reach Russian Space Station Mir until May even though he himself was scheduled to reach Mir on March 14. The equipment was all to have preceded him but Russia had experienced problems with some of its space cargo flights. The result would be that there would be fewer blood, saliva, and urine samples returned to Earth and some work would be started later because of lack of test equipment. Jim Nise, NASA manager of Mir-Space Shuttle programs at Johnson Space Center, was doing his best to expedite matters and Thagard was philosophical about the situation. In November NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the American Astronautical Society of the delay, indicating there was a problem getting Thagard's gear for experiments through Russian customs. (H Post, Oct 20/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94; Birmingham Post-Herald, Nov 30/94)	* Free-lance journalist Alcestis Oberg maintained that following the November elections NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin planned to cut jobs at Johnson Space Center drastically. According to the article, Goldin hoped to reduce the Space Shuttle operations work force by 50 percent in five years. A worst-case scenario involved a cut of 30 percent in 1995. (H Post, Oct 20/94)	* NASA announced that it would continue to study how the Earth's environment was changing and how human beings affected that change during the upcoming flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis. This, the third flight of the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) was part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. Also during the mission astronauts would deploy and retrieve a free-flying satellite designed to study the middle and lower thermospheres and would perform various experiments covering life sciences research and microgravity processing. The flight, commanded by Donald R. McMonagle, was scheduled for launch on November 3. (NASA Release 94-175)	* The Department of Energy (DOE) unveiled "a revolutionary 21st century" lighting system that used a bulb of sulfur bombarded by microwaves to produce bright illumination resembling sunlight--and did so at a fraction of the cost of many conventional systems. The prototype lamp was invented by a Rockville, Maryland, start-up company called Fusion Lighting Inc. and developed under contract to DOE. NASA had a two-year contract with the company to develop lights for growing plants in space. (W Post, Oct 21/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin presented Congressman Louis Stokes with the National Association of Small Disadvantaged Businesses Meritorious Award "for his outstanding contributions in the performance of contracts at the NASA Lewis Research Center and turning NASA Lewis Research Center around." (Call and Post, Oct 20/94)	* In a speech to aerospace executives at the South Bay Association of Chambers of Commerce, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that "survival of the fittest," the new motto at NASA's contract office, should also be the rule at aerospace companies. He asserted that defense and space companies must follow NASA's lead in streamlining operations and delivering results for the public. (Daily Breeze, Oct 21/94)October 21: The publication of former astronaut Jim Lovell's new book, Lost Moon: The Perilous Voyage of Apollo 13, led to an article recounting the Apollo 13 flight 24 years previously. He stated his belief that NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin should do more to use NASA's past successes to show how NASA had progressed since. (W Times, Oct 21/94)	* NASA announced that it had selected 412 small business research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts up to $70,000 to perform a six-month feasibility study under its 1994 Small Business Innovation Research Program. Successful completion of Phase I would make companies eligible to compete in 1995 for two-year contracts in the amount of $600,000. (NASA Release 94-176; Huntsville News, Oct 26/94)October 22: An article described awards of the National Science Foundation (NSF) to historically black colleges and universities and institutions serving Latinos and Native Americans. Specific reference was made to Clark-Atlanta University in Georgia, which had built a multimillion-dollar science research facility, doubled its science faculty, increased the number of students in science and mathematics, and attracted large federal grants, including funds from NASA. As a result of its efforts, Clark-Atlanta was now a finalist for one of six $25 million NSF grants. (C Trib, Oct 22/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and astronaut James D. Halsell gave a talk at California State University, Los Angeles (CSLA). Both men stressed the importance of education and discussed NASA's forthcoming projects. The talk ended with congratulations to CSLA electrical engineering professor Helen Boussalis, who won a $3.8 million grant for her project to design and build a model space segmented telescope. (University Times, Oct 27/94)	* Although the November 3 mission of Space Shuttle Atlantis would be devoted primarily to the study of Earth's ozone layer, it would also entail a study of mammalian development in space, based on research on ten pregnant laboratory rats and their twin offsprings. The countdown for the launch was to begin on October 31. (Fla Today, Oct 22/94; AP, Oct 31/94; Tass, Nov 1/94)October 23: The research of engineers at NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, was featured, together with its applications to industry. Specifically, pistons were discussed and the benefits of making them from carbon instead of aluminum. NASA had "working agreements" with Ford, General Motors, lawn mower engine maker Briggs & Stratton Inc., and engine maker K&B Manufacturing Company, that would allow them to use Langley piston technology if they should decide to make the pistons. (Daily Press, Oct 23/94)	* NASA was among the agencies making presentations at the briefing on women's health sponsored by the Public Health Service and the Congressional Caucus on Women's issues. Public Health Service officials predicted that high-contrast digital detectors would be capable in the next one or two years of finding breast cancers at early stages when they were still too small to be detected by today's radiology equipment. NASA and the National Cancer Institute were funding research that should produce the new detectors. (W Times, Oct 23/94)October 24: NASA was pressuring the European Space Agency (ESA) to allow U.S. personnel greater access to European industry, laboratories, and reviews in order to provide additional assurance that the U.S./European Cassini mission to Saturn would succeed. The mission was of great importance to NASA and it felt that ESA's contribution to Cassini was not being coordinated fully with NASA. The pressure was creating sharp controversy among Europeans who did not want such extensive U.S. access although NASA proposals included greater European access to U.S. facilities. NASA managers raised the issue with their European counterparts behind the scenes at the International Astronautical Federation conference taking place in Jerusalem. NASA pressure resulted from NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's instruction to NASA Cassini managers that they must assume responsibility for quality control not just for the orbiter but the whole mission, including the Martin Marietta Titan-4 booster and the ESA probe. (AvWk, Oct 24/94)	* The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) was pushing ahead with certification of predictive wind shear systems. Robert Passman, FAA associate program manager for airborne wind shear research, said he believed airborne predictive systems worked, based on observing one on a NASA aircraft in Orlando, Florida, in 1993. He noted that the alarms from such a system correlated well with ground-based Terminal Doppler Weather Radar detection of microbursts. (AvWk, Oct 24/94)	* NASA announced that its geologists were using radar images and photographs taken during Endeavour's recent Space Shuttle mission to study possible new lava flows from Mount Klyuchevsky on Russia's Kamchatka peninsula. The daily Shuttle tracking of the eruption provided the most detailed documentation of such an eruption ever obtained from orbit. (NASA Release 94-179)	* The U.S. Energy Department decided to stop funding work on plutonium powered Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators (RTGs) after 1966. The decision caused concern among scientists and engineers at NASA and the Energy and Defense departments that America's space nuclear power programs might be ended, making it more difficult to conduct missions to the outer planets such as the planned Pluto Fast Flyby. To date the Energy Department and its contractors had designed, built, fueled, and tested every RTG earmarked for NASA and Defense Department spacecraft. RTGs, which converted heat from decaying plutonium into electricity, were considered essential for missions to the most distant planets in the solar system where solar panels were unable to produce enough power. (SP News, Oct 24-30/94)	* The previous week NASA had released documents laying the ground rules for what was certain to be a heated competition among U.S. aerospace contractors. Final documents were scheduled to be released in mid-November. NASA's need was for a revolutionary rocket to replace the Space Shuttle, a Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV). It was to be a cooperative project between NASA and industry, with industry participating in the funding of the RLV. The goal was an operational single-stage-to-orbit rocket that would replace the Space Shuttle in 2010 or 2012. (SP News, Oct 24-30/94)	* Anser Inc., a public service research institute, announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs, formerly director of Space Station Freedom at NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C., as manager, aerospace business development. Kohers served more than 30 years with NASA in various capacities. (PR Newswire, Oct 24/94)	* NASA created or saved an estimated 5,300 direct and indirect jobs in the U.S. economy in the preceding 18 months because of technology transfer programs at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Of these, some 1,170 were in Alabama, according to Harry Craft Jr., manager of the MSFC Technology Transfer Office, 1,078 in Pennsylvania, and 430 in Tennessee. Most of the companies helped by the Office were small businesses. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 24/94)October 25: Observations from Space Shuttles and other vehicles revealed a clearly visible line stretching for hundreds of miles across the Pacific Ocean. The dark green line, from one to several miles wide, was attributed by scientists to an abundance of microscopic plants that thrived where cold, nutrient-rich water from polar seas met warm equatorial currents. New observations of the interaction between these two currents were made from the NOAA-11 weather satellite and NASA's P-3 research aircraft flying 500 feet above the water. (NY Times, Oct 25/94; AP, Oct 31/94)	* An obituary of Myron S. Malkin described him as the physicist who was the first director of the Space Shuttle program from 1973 to 1980. He served as a consultant to NASA and was in the control room for the Shuttle's first flight in April 1981. (AP, Oct 25/94; NY Times, Oct 26/94)	* NASA was scheduled to open a new facility, the Global Hydrology and Climate Center, in Cummings Research Park West in Huntsville, Alabama, October 27. The focus of the Center's $15 million annual program was to study Earth's water cycle and the ways in which it affected climate. Research would involve collection and analysis of rainfall, lightning, and temperature data on a global scale, according to Center director Ron Greenwood. The Center was to house 42 scientists from Marshall Space Flight Center, 59 from the Universities Space Research Association, and 46 faculty, staff, and students from the University of Alabama in Huntsville. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was present to open the Center, which was to operate in cooperation with the other institutions mentioned and to concentrate on studying water vapor. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 25/94; Htsvl Tms, Oct 27/94)	* In a press release, Jim Waterman, Boeing Space Station manufacturing manager, said that Boeing had built 18,700 pounds of hardware to date for the International Space Station and was on schedule to complete almost 50,000 pounds of hardware within the next year. Using the manufacturing facility at Marshall Space Flight Center originally built for fabricating Saturn rocket stages, it had made a good start on three pressurized modules for the Station as well as hatches and experiment racks. (Aerospace Daily, Oct 26/94)	* Victor Blagov, deputy head of Russian space missions, said that the six cosmonauts on the aging Mir Space Station would have to ration electricity for several months after the craft's solar batteries were unexpectedly drained. Problems first appeared on October 11 after a powerful piece of electrical equipment suddenly sprang to life, shutting down part of the Station and running down four of the six batteries. Four other solar batteries could not be put aboard Mir until the middle of 1995. (Reuters, Oct 25/94)October 26: An article criticized NASA for abandoning its big space plans and instead engaging in some rather abstruse scientific studies as a result of its Mission to Planet Earth. (W Post, Oct 26/94)	* NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had taken an important step toward determining the age and size of the universe. They had been able to calculate with considerable precision the distance to a remote galaxy, M100, in the Virgo cluster of galaxies. This measurement established the distance to the cluster as 56 million light-years (with an uncertainty of +/- 6 million light-years). The research results, which were to be further refined, were being published in the October 27 issue of Nature. The overall conclusion was that the universe was only 8 billion to 12 billion years old. (NASA Release 94-180; Reuters, Oct 26/94; NY Times, Oct 27/94; W Post, Oct 27/94; USA Today, Oct 27/94; W Times, Oct 27/94; H Post, Oct 27/94; C Trib, Oct 27/94; Bakersfield Californian, Oct 27/94; CSM, Oct 28/94; W Times, Oct 29/94; Time, Nov 7/94; U.S. News and World Report, Nov 7/94)	* Wilbur Trafton, NASA's Space Station program director, who was in Houston to attend the Space Exploration 94 conference sponsored by the NASA Alumni League, said several Chinese officials attending a gathering of aerospace professionals in Huntsville, Alabama, asked informally about joining the U.S.-led International Space Station program. They were urged to pursue their goal through diplomatic channels. (H Chron, Oct 27/94; H Post, Oct 27/94; W Times, Oct 27/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited Huntsville and the Marshall Space Flight Center but declined to endorse Representative Bud Cramer, Democrat, saying it was not appropriate for him to get into partisan politics. Goldin did, however, give Cramer credit for his help in saving the Space Station and he announced that a new generation launch vehicle would be developed at Marshall. (Huntsville News, Oct 28/94)		* Senator Howell Heflin, Democrat from Alabama, told a space conference at Auburn University that he owed his life to the space program. He referred to angioplasty, a pacemaker, and a steel artery expansion device, all of which were based on space-related research. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and several Auburn graduate astronauts also took part in the program. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)	* In a speech to the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the Marshall Space Flight Center's top priority was safe Space Shuttle propulsion. The second priority was the Center's share in the Space Station program and the third priority was the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility, and X-ray telescope scheduled to be launched in the late 1990s. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)October 28: NASA scientist David R. Proctor, a defendant in the NASA sting operation, wrote a letter to Attorney General Janet Reno on October 8, giving details of his 1993 encounter with FBI agents and his nine weeks as their informant. Proctor claimed he had been accused of crimes he did not commit and asked that his indictment be halted while Reno examined his complaint. (H Post, Oct 28/94)	* NASA announced the creation of an Office of Policy and Plans at NASA headquarters, with Alan Ladwig as Associate Administrator. Previously, Ladwig had been a senior space policy analyst in private industry. (NASA Release 94-181)October 30: Prior to each Shuttle launch, NASA was obliged to remove the alligators that nested in the ditches along the causeway leading to the launch site. NASA had requested permission to fill in the ditches in order to solve the problem. (O Sen Star, Oct 30/94)	* NASA's Kennedy Space Center obtained an Andros robot to increase the safety of its workforce and save time and money. The robot could perform such tasks as deflating Space Shuttle tires and checking for bombs, which would be dangerous for humans. (Fla Today, Oct 30/94)	* NASA's Wind spacecraft, built by Martin Marietta Astro Space in East Windsor, New Jersey, was scheduled to be launched November 1 or 2, weather permitting. The spacecraft was to study the solar wind, its origin, three-dimensional features, and interaction with the Earth over a two-to-three-year period. Specifically, the principal goal of the mission was to measure the mass, momentum, and energy of the solar wind that somehow was transferred into the space environment around the Earth. The spacecraft was launched successfully November 1. (Star-Ledger, Oct 30/94; Goldsboro News-Argus, Nov 1/94; NY Times, Nov 2/94; W Post, Nov 2/94; CSM, Nov 2/94; H Chron, Nov 2/94; USA Today, Nov 2/94)	* A retrospective article looked at the role that NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California had played in the past, beginning with its establishment in 1947. It asserted that although now Dryden was used only for Space Shuttle landings when bad weather prevented the Shuttle from landing in Florida, it still managed to keep some 1,000 government and civilian employees busy. (Antelope Valley Press, Oct 30/94)October 31: NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, announced the award of a contract to Rockwell International Corporation, Downey, California, to continue providing Shuttle Orbiter logistics operations requirements. (NASA Release C94-hh)	* The work of NASA's Ames Technology Commercialization Center in Sunnyvale, California, was commended in an article. Since its establishment, the year-old Center had created 13 companies that were waiting for financing from joint venture companies or private sources for projects relating to space work. (San Jose Business Journal, Oct 31/94)October: A lengthy article under the heading: "NASA's Research and Development Enhances Life on Earth," described NASA's ongoing environmental research. Among the specific programs covered, together with the functions of each, were: the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, the U.S.-French TOPEX-Poseidon Oceanographic Spacecraft, Weather Satellites, Geostationary Satellites, Polar-Orbiting Satellites, the Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit, the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science, the Stratospheric Aerosol and Gas Experiment, and the Lidar (Light Detection and Ranging) In-Space Technology Experiment. (Bay Runner, Oct 94)NOVEMBERNovember 1: NASA announced the appointment of astronaut Ronald M. Sega as Director of Operations, Russia in charge of NASA operational activities at Star City, Russia, near Moscow. His assignment was to support training and preparations of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center, Star City. (NASA Release 94-182)	* Kenneth Iliff, NASA Dryden Flight Research Center's first chief scientist, was featured. He developed a mathematical methodology used by nearly all the free world's flight test organizations to study flight dynamics, performance, and aerothermodynamics. (Antelope Valley Press, Nov 1/94)November 2: NASA announced that the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES)-8 had successfully completed basic engineering testing and was beginning to provide more precise data for improved weather forecasting. The older GOES-7 was to be shifted further west to cover storms approaching from the Pacific. (NASA Release N94-77; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 9/94)	* In order to carry out a complex docking experiment that involved detaching the Soyuz spacecraft from Mir and then redocking using automatic systems, the three cosmonauts aboard the Russian Space Station would remain in space an additional day. The operation was carried out successfully on November 2. On November 4, the German scientist and two cosmonauts returned to Earth. (Reuters, Nov 2/94; Phoenix Gazette, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; UP, Nov 4/94)	* NASA's Hubble Space Telescope took new images of the planet Uranus that revealed the planet's rings, at least five of the inner moons, and bright clouds and a high altitude haze above the planet's south pole. (NASA Release N94-78)November 3: Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)	* Jeffrey E. Carr, a spokesman at NASA's Johnson Space Center, confirmed that NASA had ordered a safety investigation of a medical experiment scheduled for spaceflight in 1995 after an astronaut collapsed and required emergency treatment during a test of a chemical used in the research. It was later revealed that the incident occurred to Bonnie J. Dunbar, while in Houston for training in October; a review board was to examine the incident. (AP, Nov 3/94; H Post, Nov 4/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94)	* NASA announced that astronauts John E. Blaha and Shannon W. Lucid had been selected to train for the second of at least four scheduled astronaut stays aboard Russian Space Station Mir. The two were to begin training in Star City, Russia, in February 1995. (NASA Release 94-183)	* NASA announced that the fifth annual technology conference and exposition, Technology 2004, would be held November 8-10 at the Washington Convention Center, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-184)November 6: The joint Air Force-NASA space plane program, which involved NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, ended September 30. It was replaced by a program that focused on the plane's engine rather than the entire plane. Engineers at Langley had conducted space plane engine research for 35 years under the Hypersonic Systems Technology Program and were attempting to solve the most challenging problem: how to propel the space plane into space. Currently they were testing a scramjet (supersonic combustion ramjet). In addition to Langley, engineers were working on the space plane at NASA centers in Ohio, California, and Mississippi, and at Wright Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio. (Daily Press, Nov 6/94)November 7: An article about technology transfer, in discussing progress made in this regard, mentioned that NASA had ordered that technology transfer be an integral part of every employee's job. It also indicated that NASA's Small Business Technology Transfer awards were judged as "balanced and fair." (AvWk, Nov 7/94)	* NASA, together with the U.S. Department of Energy, the U.S. Department of Defense Information Systems Agency, AT&T, and Foxworth & Dinkins, a Washington, D.C.-based marketing firm, sponsored a three-day conference at Clark-Atlanta University November 7-9 that brought representatives of the 117 historically black colleges and universities to explore the opportunities for minority students in science and mathematics. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was one of the conference speakers. (Atlanta Business Chronicle, Nov 11-17/94)	* NASA was scheduled to deliver in late October for Clinton Administration review a comprehensive plan for the United States to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV). Proposals were contemplated that would be funded by business with NASA providing the needed technologies, for two RLVs: the X-34 for small payloads and the X-33 single-stage-to-orbit that could lead to a replacement of the Shuttle. The goal was, eventually, to replace expendable launch vehicles (ELVs). With a declining budget NASA's future depended on cheap space transportation and thus far there was little evidence that such RLVs were likely in the near future. In late November it was reported that Boeing Company and McDonnell Douglas Corporation would announce on November 29 that they were joining to compete for initial contracts to build a next-generation Space Shuttle based on reusable rockets. McDonnell Douglas had led in the development of single-stage-to-orbit launch systems and Boeing was a major integrator of complex programs. (AvWk, Nov 7/94; WSJ, Nov 29/94; Reuters, Nov 29/94; AP, Nov 29/94; LA Times, Nov 30/94; USA Today, Nov 30/94; H Post, Nov 30/94; Antelope Valley Press, Dec 1/94; SP News, Dec 5-11/94; CSM, Dec 6/94)	* NASA was evaluating 28 proposals for innovative, low-cost planetary science missions and was expected to make selections by late January 1995. (AvWk, Nov 7/94)	* NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and a consortium led by Texas Instruments' Metallurgical Materials Division were trying to use advanced aerospace materials to develop a demonstrator automobile engine significantly lighter and more efficient than the ones in present use. They planned to use high-temperature, high-strength materials developed for the defunct National Aerospace Plane. NASA would provide funding under its Aerospace Industry Technology Program. (AvWk, Nov 7/94)	* Seven European nations--Britain, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, and Sweden--planned to combine their aeronautics agencies to create the Association of European Research Establishments (AEREA). The goal would be to streamline development, eliminate duplication, improve efficiency, and lay the groundwork for a unified European technology base. The seven agencies had a combined workforce of 19,930, including 8,695 scientists, engineers, and technicians. AEREA was designed in part to counter a "U.S. technology threat." (AvWk, Nov 7/94)	* The European Transonic Windtunnel (ETW), which was about to open, posed a challenge to the United States and to NASA. The project was funded by Britain, France, Germany, and the Netherlands and was one of the most advanced aeronautical research facilities in the world. U.S. officials had used the ETW as an example of why NASA should build at least two new tunnels to help U.S. companies compete with European rivals. ETW officials said the new tunnel was already booked through mid-1996. (AvWk, Nov 7/94)	* The Wide Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) spacecraft was designed to use recent advances in large format infrared technology to answer some key questions concerning the formation of stars. The project--the fifth in a series of NASA Small Explorer program missions--was being designed to observe starburst galaxies about 500 times fainter than those recorded at 25 microns by the Infrared Astronomical Satellite in 1983. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory worked with the Space Dynamics Laboratory at Utah State University to build the cryogenically cooled infrared telescope. The three-axis spacecraft, which would be provided by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center--would be the same design Goddard developed for the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite, a Small Explorer mission planned for 1995. The WIRE spacecraft was to be launched on an Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL, which was scheduled to be air-dropped from an L-1011 carrier aircraft. (AvWk, Nov 7/94)November 8: Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers mapped the previously unseen face of Titan, Saturn's largest moon, and discovered a surface feature that was the size of Australia. Peter Smith of the University of Arizona presented the findings of his team at the annual meeting of the Division of Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society. (NY Times, Nov 8/94; O Sen Star, Nov 27/94)	* NASA announced the appointments of astronauts Kevin P. Chilton and William F. Readdy to command the third and fourth Space Shuttle/Mir docking missions respectively. The missions were scheduled for March and July 1996. (NASA Release 94-185)November 9: NASA announced that aerospace industry engineers were finding NASA's Remote Access Wind Tunnel (RAWT) at the Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, was saving them time and money in testing a model of a next-generation supersonic transport. The RAWT was equipped with a computer and video camera that allowed them to send real-time test data to engineers at aerospace companies nationwide. (NASA Release 94-186)November 10: NASA announced that the Ulysses spacecraft, the first probe to explore the sun's environment at high altitudes, had completed a pass on November 5 over the southern solar pole, ending the first phase of its primary mission. Members of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, reported the development including the fact that Ulysses found a uniform magnetic field at the sun rather than any magnetic poles. In the sun's polar regions, the solar wind was found to be flowing at a very high velocity of about 750 kilometers per second, nearly double the speed of the solar wind at lower latitudes. (NASA Release 94-187; LA Times, Dec 4/94; UPI, Dec 5/94)November 11: Following what NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin described as two successful days of talks with Russian Space Agency officials about the International Space Station, Goldin said the Station was still on track despite problems with Russia's Mir orbital laboratory. Goldin said the United States was paying Russia more than $300 million to place its astronauts aboard Mir over the next two years. The Russian segment of the Station was to be run by the mission control center in Kaliningrad near Moscow. Joint training was already being condcted at the Russian and American control centers. The Russian newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda said that the United States put the cost of the Space Station at $20 billion and added that it was not known what the cost would be to Russia or how the cost would be funded. The current situation in Russia was particularly difficult and Russia would need to rely on its own efforts and could not count on funds from abroad. (Itar-Tass, Nov 11/94; Moscow Tribune, Nov 12/94; Izvestiya, Nov 12/94; Krasnaya Zvezda, Nov 15/94)November 12: A feature article described the Voyager spacecraft and the work of Paul Schenk, who had been a college summer intern at NASA'S Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California and was now with the Lunar and Planetary Institute (LPI) in Houston. Schenk became fascinated with Voyager and its images. With his colleagues, Daniel G. Wilson and Robert D. Morris of LPI and Jeffrey M. Moore of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, he created stereo views of various bodies in the outer solar system using images provided by Voyager. (Science News, Nov 12/94)November 13: NASA was learning to "fly leaner" as a result of a shrinking budget. Examples given were that launches now were no longer scheduled on weekends when overtime would need to be paid and if the weather were bad, liftoff was called off before fueling, saving $400,000 in tanking costs. More than 1,400 Shuttle-processing jobs had been eliminated at the Kennedy Space Center in the previous three years and various Shuttle improvements had been deferred. (W Times, Nov 13/94)	* A feature article described the newly opened simulated space mission inside the Brownsburg, Indiana, Challenger Learning Center. It was one of 26 such centers across the country opened by the Challenger Center for Space Science Education. The program was founded by families of the Challenger crew. (Indianapolis Star, Nov 13/94)	* Space Shuttle Endeavour passed over four U.S. sites--forests in Michigan and North Carolina, waterways in Oklahoma, and desert lands in California--twice a day on its flight, allowing much data to be collected. Such data were now being studied as regarded Michigan's Upper Peninsula and specifically, the Hiawatha National Forest. They would provide insights as to how forests were affected by timber-cutting, development, and global warming. (Kalamazoo Gazette, Nov 13/94; Grand Rapids Press, Nov 14/94)November 15: Although the November 8 elections gave control of Congress to the Republicans, major changes in funding for the space program were not expected. This was the case despite the fact that Newt Gingrich, Republican from Georgia, who was expected to be the next Speaker of the House of Representatives, was an outspoken space advocate as was Representative Robert Walker, Republican from Pennsylvania and ranking Republican on the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee. NASA was already making plans to sell the Space Station program to the 11 freshman Senators and approximately 85 new House members who were to take office in January. (SP News, Nov 14-20/94)	* NASA announced that two teams of astronomers, working independently with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, had ruled out the possibility that red dwarf stars consituted the invisible matter, called dark matter, believed to account for more than 90 percent of the mass of the universe. The results increased the mystery of the missing mass because whatever dark matter was, its gravitational pull ultimately would determine whether the universe would expand forever or would someday collapse. Bruce H. Margon, an astrophysicist at the University of Washington at Seattle, in discussing the mystery of the missing matter, said "It's a fairly embarrassing situation to admit that we can't find 90 percent of the universe." Various theories had been proposed by physicists, such as that neutrinos, electrically neutral subatomic particles produced prolifically in the Big Bang, had mass, or that the value of the cosmological constant, a concept invented by Albert Einstein, was low, helping to account for the difference between the observed density of matter and the critical density. (NASA Release 94-188; Reuters, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 16/94; H Chron, Nov 16/94; C Trib, Nov 16/94; CSM, Nov 17/94; AvWk, Nov 21/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94)	* NASA announced that a new satellite, the NOAA-J, a joint project of NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the U.S. Air Force, was scheduled to be launched on December 4 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The new satellite would circle the Earth every 102 minutes, passing over the North and South Poles on each orbit. The satellite would collect meteorological data and transmit them directly to users around the world to enhance local weather analysis and forecasting. (NASA Release 94-189)	* NASA announced the signing of a collaborative agreement of the chief executive officers of the nation's 28 largest aerospace contractors, NASA, and the U.S. Department of Education in a plan to improve the nation's mathematics, science, and technology education goals. The agreement was in furtherance of President Clinton's Goals 2000: Educate America Act, which he signed March 31, 1994. (NASA Release 94-190)	* NASA announced the selection of Orbital Sciences Corporation, Dulles, Virginia, as a contractor to provide launch services to deploy Ultralight-class payloads into their required orbits. (NASA Release C94-ii; Htsvl Tms, Dec 5/94)	* A feature article, accompanied by photographs of Mount Rainier and of the newly exploding Russian volcano taken from the radar images brought back by Space Shuttle Endeavour, commended the extraordinary quality of NASA's Spaceborne Imaging Radar. It discussed the process by which more than 500 sites were reviewed and gave particular attention to efforts to further define ancient Ubar, buried beneath desert sand. (Newsday, Nov 15/94)November 16: NASA announced the resignation of Jeremiah W. Pearson as Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight and the appointment of Wayne Littles as new Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 94-191; AP, Nov 16/94; H Post, Nov 17/94; W Post, Nov 18/94; NY Times, Nov 21/94; AvWk, Nov 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)	* NASA announced that 166 small, high technology firms located in 31 states had been selected for Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. Funding for Phase II contracts could be up to $600,000 for a two-year performance period. (NASA Release 94-192)	* NASA announced the near completion of a $115 million restoration of a unique NASA wind tunnel located at Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, which began operating nearly 50 years ago. (NASA Release 94-193)	* NASA announced the selection of Scientific Applications International Corporation, of San Diego, California, for a contract to provide occupational safety, industrial hygiene, and environmental services to support NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release C94-jj)	* Richard DalBello, assistant director for space programs in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that NASA's competion for a reusable rocket to replace the Space Shuttle was on hold while White House budget officials mulled over the technical, financial, and political prospects for the program. The White House Office of Management and Budget must sign off on the NASA plan before NASA officials invited the U.S. aerospace industry to submit competing designs for the rocket. Most U.S. aerospace firms already had competing blueprints for a reusable rocket. (SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)	* Space, Inc., a Clear Lake company, and its vice president Leonard N. Jackson, pleaded guilty in a federal undercover probe of fraud among NASA contractors and employees. (H Chron, Nov 16/94)November 17: Russia again postponed the launch of the Spektr research module, scheduled to rendezvous with Space Station Mir in December. Itar-Tass news agency reported that the launch had been postponed until May 1995. (Itar-Tass, Nov 17/94)	* The Russian President made an edict in mid-November establishing the state's first experimental space center at Plesetsk. The edict divided the Plesetsk facility, with one part being retained by the strategic missile forces and the other transferred to Russia's military space forces without, however, increasing logistical support, staffing, or pay. In contrast to Baikonur, for which Russia annually paid Kazakhstan $116 million, the Plesetsk Space Center would give Russia its own launching site. From the Soviet era Plesetsk had nine launchpads and was the top secret site for launching more than half of all satellites. However, a critical state of electricity supply to industrial enterprises in Arkhangelsk Oblast had occurred, resulting from the payments crisis, which threatened a cut-off of electricity to Plesetsk and to Severodvinsk, where atomic submarines were built. (Izvestiya, Nov 17/94)November 18: NASA announced the selection of ten organizations to receive a total of $6.8 million to help develop applications and technologies as part of NASA's efforts to stimulate public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. (NASA Release 94-194)	* NASA announced the names of the remaining members of the second U.S. Microgravity Laboratory mission scheduled for the fall of 1995 aboard Space Shuttle Columbia. (NASA Release 94-195)November 18: The celebration for the return of Space Shuttle Columbia to Palmdale, California for modifications and inspections was also the occasion for celebrating the return to work of some 200 laid-off Rockwell Corporation employees. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Nov 19/94)November 19: France's national space agency CNES launched a public relations campaign featuring its astronauts in order to improve strained relations between CNES and the inhabitants of French Guiana on South America's northeast coast, where the Ariane rocket series was launched. The Guiana space center gave France independent launch capacity for civilian and military satellites. (Reuters, Nov 19/94)November 20: Kevin Zahnle, a research scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, was quoted concerning the large amount of information gathered by spacecraft Galileo about Jupiter that would be lost because of the crippling of Galileo's communications capabilities. Nevertheless, much remained to be learned from the data already transmitted, as was seen at the recent meeting of the Planetary Sciences Division of the American Astronomical Society held in Bethesda, Maryland. (Contra Costa Times, Nov 20/94)November 21: In connection with the November 21 field hearing in Spokane, Washington, of the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments, the media featured articles on tests performed on 131 prison inmates in Oregon and Washington from 1963 to 1971. The tests were sponsored by the Atomic Energy Commission in order to help determine how much radiation U.S. astronauts could safely bear during spaceflights. The testicles of inmate volunteers were irradiated in return for a small stipend. Classified documents dealing with the project were only made available recently. (W Post, Nov 20/94; USA Today, Nov 21/94; AP, Dec 5/94)	* U.S. firms such as Martin Marietta and Lockheed and the U.S. Air Force were interested in learning from the Moscow-based Design Bureau of Transport Machinery (DBTM) ways in which the United States could modernize its aging launch site structure. DBTM was working with Martin Marietta in evaluating upgrades to the company's Atlas launch sites. Lockheed was interested in Russian automated launch pad technology for its propose single-stage-to-orbit vehicle. And the U.S. Air Force was impressed by the simplicity and operability of Russia's Zenith prelaunch process: "There is no need for human presence on the launch pad as the booster is automatically erected, connected, and launched." According to DBTM managers, the highly automated techniques used at the Baikonur Cosmodrome Zenith launch site enabled two of the powerful boosters to be launched from the same pad within five hours. Robert Ford, Martin Marietta Astronautics' manager of Russian programs, said his firm was looking at seven potential jobs for DBTM on the Atlas launch pads, ranging from introducing higher levels of automation to controlling burn-off effects after each liftoff. In the future Martin Marietta might also have DBTM look at its Titan launching system as well. In other Russian-related activity, Martin Marietta was moving ahead on its evaluation of two Russian enginers for use on an upgraded Atlas. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)	* The retrieval of the German Crista-Spas satellite by Atlantis during its recent mission proved the validity of the rendezvous approach that NASA now planned to use for all dockings with Russia's Mir Space Station. Technical details were given of the "plus R bar" approach. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)	* During a visit to Cape Canaveral with his crewmates, Russian cosmonaut Vladimir Titov familiarized himself with the Spacehab module that was scheduled to be carried on his Shuttle flight in February 1995. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)	* Disagreements continued to exist between the United States and Russia over the Salyut FGB "space tug" with regard both to the tug's price and the cost of launching it, which Russia wanted the United States to pay. Khrunichev Machine Building Enterprise was in the early stage of working on the tug. An agreement was worked out on November 10 about the medical certification process for joint flights, under which each country would accept the medical certification of the other's space flight personnel until prelaunch examinations were performed 30-45 days in advance of Russian Soyuz flights and 10 days in advance of U.S. Shuttle flights. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)	* Rockwell Aerospace planned to deliver the Orbiter Docking System to NASA on November 21. To achieve a system that would enable a U.S. Shuttle to dock with Space Station Mir, Rockwell Space Systems Division integrated a Russian-built docking mechanism into the system. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)	* A feature article on Carl Sagan described his various accomplishments and mentioned his fascination with stargazing and his help to NASA in designing robotic missions, which he had been doing since the late 1950s. (AP, Nov 21/94)	* A Russian television program, "Science Today," commented on the roles of the Russian Energiya-Buran and the U.S. Space Shuttle systems in reducing the costs of placing payloads in space. In this connection the program promoted the potential of the Russian-Ukrainian project "Maks" based on an existing aircraft, the Mriya. The Russian Maks program was commended by G. Le. Lozino-Lozinskiy, general designer of the "Molniya" and British Aerospace agreed it was necessary to begin building winged transport systems with the Maks and presented the Maks system to the European Space Agency. (FBIS-Sov, Nov 29/94)November 22: NASA announced the signing of a contract with the Paton Welding Institute in Kiev, Ukraine, to develop a plan for flying a space welding tool aboard the Space Shuttle in October 1997. The Ukrainian Universal Hand Tool was an electron beam welding device developed at the Institute and used by Salyut 7 cosmonauts in 1984 and 1986 in the first electron beam welding in space experiments. (NASA Release 94-196)	* One of NASA's high-altitude, remote-controlled, Perseus research aircraft crashed, severely damaging the plane. NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center operated the craft, which was used to collect data from the upper reaches of the atmosphere--it could fly up to an altitude of 90,000 feet. (Antelope Valley Press, Nov 23/94; H Chron, Dec 5/94; LA Times, Dec 5/94)November 23: NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, announced the award of a life sciences support services contract to Dynamac Corporation, Rockville, Maryland. The contract supported Kennedy's Biomedical Operations and Research Office and the Payload Management and Operations Directorate in program management support for life sciences activities. The work included processing medical, biomedical, and biological flight experiments for launch and landing in addition to continuing research on NASA's Controlled Ecological Life Support System, a bioregenerative concept for long-term space travel. In addition, Dynamac would be responsible for environmental and ecological monitoring of Kennedy's premises, located on a national wildlife refuge. (NASA Release C94-kk)	* In a report by the House Government Operations Committee it concluded that NASA's sloppy management had resulted in some $14 billion of NASA equipment--including computers and construction equipment--ending up in the hands of contractors. Moreover, NASA had failed to curb unallowable contract costs. Furthermore, NASA's recordkeeping was so bad that it was almost impossible to edit NASA's books. In addition, Committee chairman John Conyers, Democrat from Michigan, said NASA's "planning is so unrealistic that budgets are hopelessly optimistic." A report in another context concerning Houston's Johnson Space Center, dealt with equipment failures and human errors resulting from carelessness or stupidity. (Tampa Tribune, Nov 24/94; O Sen Star, Nov 24/94; H Post, Nov 30/94)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the appointment of Christopher C. Kraft, former Director of the Johnson Space Center, to form and lead an external independent team to review data from the Space Shuttle Functional Workforce Review and make recommendation to Goldin for implementation. Kraft's team would be charged with evaluating the current process and procedures for Space Shuttle operations at the Johnson, Kennedy, Marshall, and Stennis Space Centers and related contractor activities in order to recommend a better operating structure. Initial efforts would focus on Kennedy operations. In addition to the Space Shuttle program, the team would review related Space Station activities. (NASA Release 94-197; SP News, Dec 5-11/94)	* NASA officials at Kennedy Space Center released their annual economic impact statement in terms of the effect of the Center on Brevard County. Despite budget cuts, the 1994 impact on the economy was $1.18 billion in comparison to $1.32 billion in 1992; the total workforce (including contractors, civil service, and construction) was 16,500 in 1994 in contrast with 18,700 in 1992. The review of NASA operations should result in more job cuts, which would occur in early 1995. (Fla Today, Nov 24/94)November 26: Russian television on the "Aerospace Salon" program discussed various Russian space flights. The correspondent said that much was known about Salyut flights 1, 6, and 7 but nothing had been publicized about Salyut 2, 3, and 5 missions. It developed that the flight engineers for these missions were military cosmonauts and that they involved Almaz orbital reconnaissance stations. The Almaz hulls were launched as Salyuts, the first unsuccessfully in 1973 and two more in 1974 and 1976. A cosmonaut who flew on one of these, V.V. Gorbatko, was quoted as saying that the initial intention was to arm the Almaz station but the one on which he flew had reconnaissance equipment only. (FBIS-Sov, Nov 30/94)November 28: The United States and Ukraine signed a five-year civil space agreement the week of November 21, which established direct cooperation between NASA and the Ukrainian National Space Agency and created the legal basis for bilateral scientific cooperation. The agreement, which provided for cooperation in such fields as remote sensing, telecommunications, biomedical sciences and biotechnology, and space research and technology, was described as "almost exactly the same" as the 1992 agreement with Russia. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)	* A scale model of Boeing's High Speed Commercial Transport was undergoing testing in the supersonic wind tunnel at NASA's Ames Research Center. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)	* NASA and contractor engineers were studying a number of existing engine designs as they tried to lower the propulsion technology risk for private development of a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) in the early 2000s. Operability rather than performance would be the key to any RLV engine. According to Len Worlund, director of the Advanced Transportation Technology Office at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to get reusability, NASA and its partners were working to build components that better withstood repeated firings. They were also trying to lower the high turbine temperatures that had saddled the Shuttle's engines with crack-prone cooling shields that required frequent repairs. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)	* Stanford research associate Stephen Morris said that Stanford had successfully designed, built, and flown a model of a supersonic "wing" that should ultimately be able to cut drastically the time needed to reach Tokyo or London from the United States. NASA and Stanford studies indicated that an oblique flying wing with a 400-foot wingspan could carry 400 passengers from Los Angeles to Tokyo in seven hours instead of the 10 hours now required. (UP, Nov 28/94)November 29: After 12 years of work, Orion Network Systems, a Rockville, Maryland, firm, launched its first satellite. Orion was the first company to apply in 1982 to the Federal Communications Commission to provide international satellite communications. Orion won FCC approval in 1987 and Intelsat approval in 1989 on condition that it not harm any existing Intelsat business. Orion formed a consortium, Orion Atlantic, which included British Aerospace, which built the satellite, and Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, which provided the Atlas rocket. (W Post, Nov 30/94)	* NASA and Loma Linda University in California announced that NASA planned to use the University's Proton Treatment Center to find ways to protect astronauts in space. The University had the nation's only hospital-based proton treatment center for cancer. The program did not involve experiments on human subjects. (NASA Release N94-83; Sun, Nov 30/94)November 30: China successfully launched a new telecommunications satellite, the Dongfanghong III, using a Long March 3A rocket from the Xichang base in Sichuan province, southwestern China. (AFP, Nov 30/94; Xinhua news agency, Nov 30/94)	* NASA announced a series of education telecasts for the 1994-95 school year featuring the following: the recent collision of comet Shoemaker-Levy, unique research in microgravity, the Earth's changing environment, and the diverse role of lasers in NASA technologies. (NASA Release 94-198)	* A laudatory assessment was given of NASA's Technology Transfer program with specific reference to the Marshall Space Flight Center. According to Harry Craft, Jr., Technology Transfer office manager, the program had three elements: Industrial Outreach, Space Act Cooperative Agreements, and Dual Use Programs. Each was intended to increase cooperation between government and industry. In the Industrial Outreach area, industries came to NASA with problems they needed to resolve, requiring less than 40 hours work. For more complex problems, Space Act Cooperative Agreements were used. The Dual Use Program was a technology reinvestment program in which both government and industry contributed funds and technology to benefit both parties. (Huntsville News, Nov 30/94)November: A feature article commemorated the rendezvous on July 17, 1975 of the Soviet Space Ship Soyuz and the U.S. Apollo. The occasion was also used to discuss the new policy of Russian-U.S. cooperation in space and the forthcoming plan for Space Shuttle Atlantis to rendezvous with Russian Space Station Mir in 1995. (Sky, Nov 94)	* A lengthy article on the Clinton Administration's science and technology policy dealt with these two fields and the President's goals in their regard. The government spent more than half of its research and development money on developing usable technologies. The remainder was divided almost evenly between applied research and basic research. However, the availability of funding was a serious problem. Funding increased significantly during the Cold War but scientific disasters such as the failure of a nuclear reactor at the Three Mile Island electric power plant and the explosion of the Challenger Space Shuttle eroded public support and federal funding. The accomplishments of the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) in consolidating the two weather satellite systems of the Defense Department and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric administration as well as the NSTC's initiative in coordinating space launch policy among NASA and the Defense, Commerce, and Transportation departments were commended. (Government Executive, Nov 94)	* The fact that each year a Space Shuttle liftoff was seen as more unremarkable than the preceding year testified to the small and particular miracles of engineering, mechanics, and electronics that made each mission fly. The process of mating the orbiter to an enormous external fuel tank and two solid rocket boosters, constituting the Shuttle, was described in some detail as well as the fueling of the Shuttle. (Destination Discovery, Nov 94)	* A discussion of enthusiastic hobbyist rocketeers involved in model and high-power rocketry contrasted this with NASA's programs and bore the title, "Tired: NASA; Wired: Amateurs." (Wired, Nov 94)DECEMBERDecember 1: Possible evidence of a new planetary system only 52 light-years away arising from observation of a star named Beta Pictoris was published in Nature. Harold F. Levinson and colleagues at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio showed how a system of planets and comets could account for the phenomena seen near the star. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope enabled some of these new discoveries. Planet hunter Charles M. Telesco at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama said of Levinson's work, "Whenever you can put a body of evidence into a coherent picture like that, everybody feels much better." (CSM, Dec 1/94; H Post, Dec 1/94)	* NASA named John C. Lynn to head the new office of Chief Information Officer within the Office of the Administrator at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-199)	* Western Europe's 70th Ariane rocket sent a U.S. PanAmSat communications satellite worth more than $150 million plunging into the Atlantic Ocean off French Guiana after its third stage malfunctioned. This was the second Ariane rocket failure in 1994 and the seventh since Western Europe began launching the Ariane series in 1979. (Reuters, Dec 1/94)	* The group of scientists from Phillips Rocket Laboratory investigating the disappearance of the Mars Observer more than one year ago concluded the probable cause of the accident. Phillips aeronautical engineer and project manager said the likely cause was failure of a small pyro valve that allowed propellants to mix. This in turn could cause the rupture of a tube and result in the Observer tumbling out of control. (Antelope Valley Press, Dec 1/94)December 2: David R. Proctor, a NASA engineer, pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy, three counts of bribery, one count of violating federal procurement regulations, and one count of accepting a gratuity in a case involving Operation Lightning Strike. The case resulted from his actions in relation to an FBI agent posing as a corrupt businessman seeking a NASA contract. (H Chron, Dec 3/94; H Post, Dec 3/94; AP, Dec 3/94)	* Johnson Space Center denied one of its largest prime contractors, Martin Marietta Services of Cherry Hill, New Jersey, an "award fee" or profit on its contract for the six-month period ending March 31, 1994. The action resulted from a much more stringent contract compliance policy by NASA and the fact that the contractor did not control its labor costs under the terms of the contract. (H Chron, Dec 3/94)		* Eleven District of Columbia students from Ballou Senior High School and Johnson Junior High School took part in a week-long NASA Space Camp in Huntsville, Alabama. They all earned certificates, wings, and a space outfit as well as one college credit from the University of Alabama. (Washington Afro-American, Dec 3/94; W Times, Dec 5/94)December 4: Astronaut Frank Culbertson, charged with helping to arrange the series of Shuttle missions to Russian Space Station Mir, discussed some of the frustrations of working with the Russians and the American need for patience and flexibility, given the linguistic, cultural, and economic differences between the two countries. Culbertson indicated that the initial Russian response to U.S. requests was "No" and that, for example, the Russians had withheld key information about the explosive charges, which were developed for a military program, that were involved in the Russian latching mechanism that would enable U.S. Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Mir. Another problem was the delay in getting U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment to Mir. A longer range hitch entailed the Russian guidance and propulsion module being built for the U.S. International Space Station. So far the Russians had received a U.S. commitment of $25 million for the component but it appeared they wanted up to $245 million. When Thagard was interviewed about U.S.-Russian space work, he said that it would seem that thus far the two had managed to make their cooperation work. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)	* The proposed merger of Martin Marietta Corporation and Lockheed Corporation was analyzed. The result would be not only the world's largest defense company but also, according to the writer, "the most politically powerful" because of its lobbying clout. The new firm would excel particularly in missiles and jets. The proposal caused numerous rumors of other merger efforts by defense firms. (O Sen Star, Dec 4/94; W Post, Dec 6/94)	* NASA's attempts to streamline its management of space programs and cut costs were highlighted with details of personnel cuts and commendation of the efforts of Jeremiah Pearson who had served as associate administrator for space flight. An example of Shuttle and Space Station mergers was the Johnson Space Center's new $250 million Mission Control Center. The Center could handle Shuttle missions, activities aboard the Mir, and the new International Space Station simultaneously. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)December 5: New Republican House Speaker Newt Gingrich indicated in an interview that he favored a NASA confined to research and development, with remaining functions contracted out to the private sector as far as possible. His overriding mission for NASA was drastically reducing the cost of getting into space. Gingrich praised NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's efforts to reshape NASA but considered the agency still to be "a people-heavy, obsolescent bureaucracy." (AvWk, Dec 5/94)	* Jack Mansfield, who was named in September 1994 as NASA Associate Administrator for Space Access and Technology, discussed his position and the Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV) program in an interview. Previously he served as a Republican staff member on the Senate Armed Services Committee but he did not consider this past affiliation a problem because NASA deserved and got strong bipartisan support. With regard to the RLV program, Mansfield said that in the past NASA had been able to solve all technical problems but not always all operability problems, such as high cost--this was where the use of a RLV came in. (SP News, Dec 5-11/94)	* According to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, NASA received 28 outstanding proposals from universities, the aerospace industry, and government laboratories for smaller, less expensive planetary science missions under its new Discovery program. By January 1995 NASA was to select a few to pursue seriously with the expectation that one or two would be developed and launched by the period 1999-2001. NASA set forth specific funding limitations and wanted models of streamlined management of such projects while demanding high quality. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)	* Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) was making components and expected to integrate the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) by early June 1995. NEAR was the second mission approved in NASA's Discovery program but would be the first to be launched. To make a scheduled January 1999 encounter with 433 Eros--a silicate rock asteroid--NEAR would need to be launched within a two-week period beginning February 17, 1996. It would be launched on a Delta 2 and would swing by Earth in 1998 so that its plane could be changed to match that of Eros. The spacecraft would carry four instruments: a visible imager, an X-ray/gamma-ray spectrometer, a near infrared spectrograph, and a magnetometer. In entrusting to APL its first planetary science mission to be developed outside the agency, NASA turned to a laboratory experienced in rapid, inexpensive space programs. APL was responsible for three other proposals that NASA was considering under the Discovery program. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)	* Mars Pathfinder, the first of NASA's Discovery missions, was beginning construction in preparation for launch in two years' time. Anthony J. Spear, project manager for the Mars Pathfinder project at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, said fabrication of the cruise portion's structure had begun; final assembly of the spacecraft was to begin in June 1995. Testing of various kinds would follow with the spacecraft being shipped to Cape Canaveral for launch by early September 1996. The primary goal was an engineering demonstration of a low-cost Martian landing system. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)	* Lockheed said it could arrange private financing for a low-cost, reusable launch vehicle (RLV) if the U.S. government would give it all the Space Shuttle and Titan business for at least five years. In return, Lockheed estimated that the government would get $2 billion a year savings. To make such a RLV, Lockheed would call on Rocketdyne for propulsion, Rohr Corporation for high temperature structures, and Martin Marietta-Denver for tanks for liquid oxygen and hydrogen. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)	* The French national space agency CNES proposed for government approval developing a series of small spacecraft to broaden science mission opportunities at lower cost. If approved in 1995, France would invite other European countries or the United States to participate. According to Pierre Contreras, head of the System Engineering Division at the CNES Toulouse Space Center, satellites weighing about 500 kilograms were contemplated. The first flight would be a radar altimeter spacecraft designed as a follow-on to the NASA/CNES TOPEX/Poseidon sea surface topography mission currently underway. The chairman of the European Space Agency's (ESA) Space Science Advisory Committee, Lodewijk Woltjer, said that all ESA members "like the idea of small missions because of their low costs, but for most of ESA's objectives small satellites are too small." (AvWk, Dec 5/94)December 6: After three years of testing by NASA's Langley, Virginia research center, the airline industry, industry suppliers, and the Federal Aviation Administration, a new device was approved to alert pilots of wind shear danger. Called the Bendix RDR-4B, it was made by Allied Signal Inc. in Morristown, New Jersey and was being installed by various commercial airlines. The device complements ground-based wind-shear detection systems, known as Terminal Doppler Weather Radars, being installed at 47 major U.S. airports. (W Times, Dec 6/94)	* NASA announced that astronomers using its Hubble Space Telescope had obtained the clearest views yet of distant galaxies that existed when the universe was a fraction of its current age. Hubble findings suggested that elliptical galaxies developed quickly into their present shapes. However, spiral galaxies in large clusters evolved over a much longer period. (NASA Release 94-201; Reuters, Dec 6/94; NY Times, Dec 7/94; W Post, Dec 7/94; W Times, Dec 7/94; H Chron, Dec 7/94; USA Today, Dec 7/94; CSM, Dec 7/94; H Post, Dec 7/94; Newsweek, Dec 19/94)	* NASA announced that it had selected eight projects that could lead to new private sector applications of space-based and airborne sensing technologies. Named Earth Observations Commercial Applications (EOCAP) '94, the projects represented the fourth cycle in a continuing program designed to increase use of NASA-developed technology for gathering and analyzing valuable data about Earth and ocean resources through remote satellite or aircraft observations. (NASA Release 94-203)	* The $20 million docking ring, known as the Androgynous Peripheral Docking System, which would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir in 1995, arrived from Russia after it had been tested in Russia, in California, and in orbit. NASA managers expressed confidence in the ring although they could not read the Russian plaque on it. (O Sen Star, Dec 7/94; Fla Today, Dec 7/94)	* NASA scientists would like to send an unmanned spacecraft to look for ice inside craters on Mercury, the solar system's hottest planet with temperatures reaching 800 degrees at its equator. However, inside the craters at Mercury's poles the temperatures were 235 below zero and scientists conceived that life might exist. Robert M. Nelson of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena discussed JPL's proposal for a mission to Mercury, named Hermes, which NASA was considering. The discussion occurred at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union. (AP, Dec 6/94)December 7: NASA was preparing to move to a new Mission Control room in 1995 for the first time since 1965. Of particular concern was the new world of computer linkage that was challenging security-minded planners. The planners feared various security problems related to computers including sabotage, computer viruses, software imperfections, and confidentiality of data. (H Post, Dec 7/94)	* Scientists of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which managed the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon oceanography satellite, had been studying data it developed. The findings from two years of monitoring the oceans, which were to be announced at the fall meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, indicated that the average sea level had risen about 0.12 inches a year from December 1992 to September 1994. Such a rise was an indicator of global change and supported theories than an increase in "greenhouse" gases was causing long-term global warming. (Pasadena Star News, Dec 7/94)	* An interview was published with retired Princeton physicist Freeman Dayson in which he strongly criticized NASA. He advocated that NASA be dismantled like AT&T, feeling it was overly expensive and inefficent. Instead, science should be done by individuals following their own curiosity and creativity. (CSM, Dec 7/94)	* NASA announced that scientists at its Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, were observing rare gamma ray flashes above thunderstorms at a rate six times that of previous observations. Steve Goodman of Marshall's Space Sciences Laboratory said the observations were being made by the Burst and Transient Source Experiment aboard NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, which was recently modified by ground commands to be more sensitive to such events. NASA planned to bring together investigators from the fields of space and atmospheric physics to study the newly discovered events. (NASA Release 94-204; AP, Dec 7/94)December 8: NASA announced the names of 19 new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. The 1995 group consisted of 10 pilots and nine mission specialists, including six civilians and 13 military officers, all chosen from among 2,962 applicants. International candidates were also to be included and these names would be announced later. (NASA Release 94-205)	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin made a state-of-the-agency address to all staff members in which he stressed that NASA intended to become less costly and quicker during the next four years, ending with as many as 4,000 fewer workers. Kennedy Space Center Deputy Director Gene Thomas, who answered questions after the televised address, said it would be a year of "significant change." (O Sen Star, Dec 9/94)	* Construction was getting underway on the Space Station project according to John Winch, Boeing Defense and Space Group manager in charge of building the habitation and laboratory models for the Station. Boeing workers were about to go on a three-shift, five-day week to expedite the program. (Fla Today, Dec 8/94)December 9: NASA announced the appointment of Larry DeLucas, a former Space Shuttle payload specialist and an expert in protein crystallography, as acting senior scientist for the Space Station. (NASA Release 94-206; Phillips Business Information, Dec 14/94)	* NASA announced that students in the United States would be able to see and talk to scientists in Antarctica during unique educational broadcasts from the South Pole beginning December 13. (NASA Release 94-207)	* Kathryn Hire, who worked at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) for Lockheed Space Operations Company, became the first KSC worker to be selected as a future astronaut. (O Sen Star, Dec 9/94)December 10: When Tropical Storm Gordon blew through Florida in November, a tugboat pulling NASA's $50 million external fuel tank for Shuttle Atlantis lost power and was rescued by a tanker. The tanker could claim salvage rights from NASA or claim the tank, and NASA had no insurance to cover law suits on the fuel tank. (O Sen Star, Dec 10/94)December 11: NASA determined it was cheaper to tear down the giant hammerhead crane originally built for the Apollo moon landing program rather than to refurbish it. Therefore, the crane was in the process of being dismantled at the Kennedy Space Center launch pad. (Fla Today, Dec 11/94)December 12: NASA announced the members of the crew of the Space Shuttle mission for the fall of 1995 under the command of Brian Duffy. A Japanese National Space Development Agency specialist was included and one of the mission objectives was to retrieve a science satellite scheduled to be launched by a Japanese H-2 rocket in early 1995. The Shuttle would also retrieve another science satellite, the Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy (SPARTAN). In addition, two spacewalks would be conducted. (NASA Release 94-208)	* NASA announced the development and testing of a new integrated flight and propulsion control system to help pilots land under difficult conditions. Aerospace engineers at NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, were developing the digital fly-by-wire control system to reduce a pilot's workload and help stabilize landing aircraft. NASA was testing the new system in the Vertical/Short Takeoff and Landing (V/STOL) Systems Research Aircraft (VSRA) to improve takeoff and landing capabilities for V/STOL aircraft in reduced visibility. The VSRA was a modified version of the U.S. Marine Corps' AV-8B Harrier jet fighter, which could take off and land vertically. (NASA Release 94-209)	* NASA announced the death of Stuart Allen Roosa, one of six Apollo astronauts to fly solo around the moon. (NASA Release 94-210; UPI, Dec 13/94; O Sen Star, Dec 13/94; Fla Today, Dec 13/94)	* NASA announced the release of EOSDIS Version O to users in the Earth Observing System (EOS) community. The release was NASA's first step in developing a nationwide, globally available data system that would provide a variety of users with information needed to make informed decisions about how humans could control their environment. Ultimately, EOSDIS would serve several functions such as controlling EOS spacecraft, relaying raw data to the data processing centers, and through its Distributed Active Archive Centers (to be located at eight sites around the country) serving as a fountainhead of information. (Unnumbered NASA Release)	* France planned on its next manned mission to Russian Space Station Mir in January 1996 to use an advanced Aerospatiale system called Alice 2 to improve knowledge of fluid behavior in microgravity conditions for use in materials processing. (AvWk, Dec 12/94)	* A feature article gave high praise to the achievements of the Hubble Space Telescope quoting John N. Bahrall, professor of natural science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton University, as saying "Hubble is bowling us over every day with what it does." A number of Hubble's discoveries were outlined, including data on the age of the universe, the Big Bang theory, and the size of the universe. (P Inq, Dec 12/94)December 13: John F. Kennedy Space Center Director Robert L. Crippen announced he would leave NASA January 21 after more than 25 years with the Agency. Crippen indicated in a press conference that NASA budget slashing had made him uncomfortable and concerned about the safety of Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 94-211; C Trib, Dec 13/94; O Sen Star, Dec 13/94; Fla Today, Dec 13/94; H Post, Dec 14/94; CSM, Dec 14/94; Fla Today, Dec 14/94)	* NASA announced it had begun planning for a new multidisciplinary life and microgravity sciences Spacelab research mission to be flown on Space Shuttle Columbia in mid-1996. (NASA Release 94-212)December 14: Students and teachers at Alvin High School in Texas, with the assistance of a neighboring community college and members of the Consortium for Aerospace Technology Education (CATE), were building their own space center similar to that at the Control Center Complex of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC). Frank Hughes, chief of the Flight Training Division at JSC, initiated the CATE program, which integrated cooperation from industry (Rockwell) with that of community colleges and universities. (H Chron, Dec 14/94)	* NASA and Russian Space Shuttle mission managers met at Johnson Space Center and announced that they were targeting a launch date between June 8 and June 10 for Shuttle Atlantis and its five-astronaut, two-cosmonaut crew. This represented a postponement of the original blast-off date of May 24 and resulted from a delay from February to May 1995 in the launch of a Russian Spektr science module. The launch of Atlantis was scheduled to be followed three days later by a docking with Russian Space Station Mir. (Fla Today, Dec 15/94; H Chron, Dec 17/94)	* NASA announced the establishment of a joint government research program that might result in developing plants that could withstand drought, unseasonable temperatures, soil salinity, and other adverse growth conditions. The program, called the Research Network on Plant Sensory Systems, was supported by NASA and the National Science Foundation. The program also was selected as NASA's ninth Specialized Center of Research and Training. (NASA Release 94-213)	* Representative Robert Walker, Republican from Pennsylvania, who was scheduled to chair the House Science Committee in the new Congress, said he felt that Space Station appropriatations by Congress were safe. He indicated he wanted to explore ways of linking NASA facilities with universities and international partnerships as well as tax incentives for space business development, all of which he saw as ways of saving space funds. (AP, Dec 14/94; Gannett News Service, Dec 14/94; H Chron, Dec 15/94; Congressional Quarterly's Congressional Monitor, Dec 15/94; Fla Today, Dec 15/94)	* The deed to NASA's Computer Complex in Slidell, Louisiana was transferred to the city of Slidell at a ceremony attended by NASA Acting Deputy Administrator General John R. Dafley among others. For more than 30 years, the Slidell complex had provided support for the Space Shuttle external tank program as well as other Office of Space Flight administrative and program activities. However, these functions recently were moved to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. Various plans were underway for ways in which the Slidell facilities could be used. (Sentry News, Dec 15/94)December 15: NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin named Jay F. Honeycutt as Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center upon the departure of Robert L. Crippen on January 21, 1995. (NASA Release 94-214; AP, Dec 15/94; Fla Today, Dec 16/94; O Sen Star, Dec 16/94; H Chron, Dec 16/94; H Post, Dec 16/94; AP, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; Fla Today, Dec 18/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94)	* Findings about the moon resulting from the 71-day rendezvous of the military probe Clementine were reported at the recent American Geophysical Union meeting. It developed, according to geophysicist Maria Zuber of Johns Hopkins University and NASA's Goddard Spaceflight Center, that "Now we know that we don't understand the moon as well as we thought we did." Instead of no activity on the moon in the preceding 3 million years, there was volcanic activity as recent as 1 billion years ago. The crust was very variable and the moon had a crater large enough to span the continental United States as well as another fresh-looking crater created by an impact recorded by 12th century monks. (LA Times, Dec 15/94)	* A solid-fuel booster for Ariane-5, the new rocket designed to keep Western Europe in the lead in launching heavy satellites into the 21st century, was tested successfully in the jungles of French Guiana, according to Jean-March Artaud, Ariane-5 program director for the CNES French national space agency in Guiana. (Reuters, Dec 16/94)	* A leak of toxic rocket propellant on an Air Force Titan 4 rocket forced the postponement of the rocket's launch to December 20. (Fla Today, Dec 17/94; Fla Today, Dec 18/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94)December 16: NASA announced the selection of Boeing Information Systems, Inc., Vienna, Virginia, for a contract to provide information resources and management support services to NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release C94-ll)	* A Youth Science Symposium, "Your Place in Space," drew 400 middle school students to the California Museum of Science and Industry. Randii Wessen, a science systems engineer with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, was an instructor in one of the space-age exercises. Other students launched rockets and learned the fundamentals of comets and rockets. (LA Times, Dec 16/94)	* NASA officials indicated that details of scientific evidence supporting the theory that man-made chlorine was causing the ozone hole above Antarctica would be released on December 19. The evidence was based on three years of data from NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). UARS instruments had found chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) used in electronics and refrigeration systems in the stratosphere. The stratospheric ozone layer was responsible for protecting people, animals, and plants from too much ultraviolet sunlight. (Reuters, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; NASA Release 94-215; UP, Dec 19/94; Reuters, Dec 19/94; LA Times, Dec 20/94; NY Times, Dec 20/94; W Post, Dec 20/94; W Times, Dec 20/94; USA Today, Dec 20/94; WSJ, Dec 20/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94; H Chron, Dec 20/94; H Post, Dec 20/94; C Trib, Dec 20/94; AP, Dec 20/94)	* One of the six ball-screw housings, the $95 million Russian docking system shock absorber, failed its test and the Russian builder wished to replace all six. This might delay the June 8, 1995 launch of Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir. (O Sen Star, Dec 15/94)December 16: U.S. Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a number of cooperation agreements in Moscow. The agreements included one to conduct joint space research to gather data on the Earth's atmosphere and to cooperate on the International Space Station. According to Yuriy Koptev, director of the Russian Space Agency, the agreement with NASA concerning the Earth's atmosphere provided for U.S. instruments for measuring the ozone layer and atmospheric components to be installed on Russian Meteor-3 satellites scheduled to be launched in 1996 and 1999. Agreement was also reached on a joint program of biologicial experiments under which two Russian Bion satellites with U.S. equipment were to be launched. Gore and Chernomyrdin also signed a customs agreement providing for duty-free clearance of goods shipped to Russia for cooperation in space, which would remove barriers causing delays in the Space Station program.	 Also among the agreements was one concerning space medical research. In that connection, Arnauld Nicogossian, NASA's Washington-based chief medical officer, said the space agencies of the two countries planned to spend about three months working out details. NASA proposed to offer $500,000 in equipment, materials, and money to enable the Russians to establish a Space Biomedical Center for Training and Research near the Moscow State University and Russia's Institute of Biomedical Problems. Russia would be expected to contribute a similar amount. The U.S. counterpart to the Russian training and research center would be at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston, where officials planned to establish a similar alliance of university and commercial medical research institutions. (Reuters, Dec 16/94; UP, Dec 16/94; Interfax news agency, Dec 16/94 quoted in BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, Dec 19/94; Phillips Business Information, Dec 19/94; Phillips Business Information, Dec 22/94; H Chron, Dec 23/94)	* NASA was preparing three rendezvous with Russian Space Station Mir to launch the new cooperative effort between Washington and Moscow. In the first, scheduled for February 1995, Shuttle Discovery would simulate docking with Mir but not in fact touch it. In June 1995, Shuttle Atlantis would actually dock with Mir and remain together for four days, ultimately taking aboard U.S. astronaut Norm Thagard who would have joined Mir in March. In October 1995 Atlantis would be outfitted with an Orbiter Docking System that would be installed on the Space Station to facilitate future rendezvous. (AFP, Dec 16/94)	* Larry DeLucas, recently appointed chief scientist of the NASA Space Station project, said the Station provided the next step for businesses such as pharmaceutical companies that were trying to develop new and improved products such as high quality crystals, uninhibited by the Earth's gravitational environment. (Phillips Business Information, Dec 22/94)December 17: An audit report by NASA's inspector general, which was still in draft, noted that NASA could have saved almost $6 million in business travel costs in 1993 by flying available commercial flights instead of using NASA aircraft. As a result, NASA planned to rewrite rules for the use of its planes, according to Laurie Boeder, associate NASA administrator for public affairs. Jack Anderson's column contained a critical account of NASA travel concentrating on NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's use of NASA aircraft in the six-month period from October 1, 1992 through March 31, 1993, which reportedly cost taxpayers $514,000 more than if he had flown a commercial airline. (Fla Today, Dec 17/94; W Post, Dec 19/94)December 19: A NASA delegation led by Mike O'Brien from NASA's External Affairs Division in Washington was in Moscow to present to Russian officials the draft of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) concerning the International Space Station. The MOU detailed services to be provided by Station partners and the percentage of Station resources--power, water, storage space--each would receive. Bill Shepherd, deputy program manager for NASA's Station program, was optimistic about Russian response to the MOU and also optimistic about NASA's purchase of the 20-ton FGB navigation and propulsion tug (the first Station component to be sent up) from Lockheed-Khrunichev. (Phillips Business Information, Dec 19/94)December 20: A feature article described some of the findings of spacecraft Ulysses, which used Jupiter's gravity to enter an orbit perpendicular to those of the planets and for the preceding four months had been studying the sun's polar regions. These were hitherto unexplored areas, and Ulysses mapped the sun's magnetic field and its cosmic rays, providing a wealth of data about solar dynamics. Ulysses was launched from a Space Shuttle in October 1990. (NY Times, Dec 20/94)	* NASA spokesman George Diller said that as a result of an engine leak discovered in California, NASA had decided to check the welds on all engine nozzles of Shuttle Discovery. This fact, combined with the decision to replace one of Discovery's auxiliary power units, might result in a delay of the scheduled February 2, 1995 launch of Discovery. (O Sen Star, Dec 20/94)	* NASA announced the highlights of its 1994 activities and provided a chronology of major space events. Of particular note were the flight of a Russian cosmonaut aboard a U.S. spacecraft for the first time and a spectacular cosmic collision that occurred on Jupiter. However, it was the work of the refurbished Hubble Space Telescope that dominated NASA news in 1994. Among Hubble results were the following: evidence of a massive black hole in the center of a galaxy 50 million light-years away, supporting Einstein's theory of relativity; observations of huge pancake-shaped disks of dust, raw material for planet formation, swirling around half the stars in the Orion Nebula; confirmation of a critical prediction of the Big Bang theory that helium should be widespread in the early universe; and significant progress in determining the age of the universe--between 8 and 12 billion years--and its size. (NASA Release 94-216; UPI, Dec 22/94)	* NASA unveiled its new Mission Control center in Houston with a flight simulation that pretended to rendezvous a Space Shuttle with a satellite. The demonstration went well and provided an opportunity to identify additional equipment needed, such as more display facility. The new center should be directing the Shuttle in orbit by the summer of 1995. (Federal Computer Week, Dec 20/94; H Post, Dec 21/94)December 21: NASA announced the completion of the second of two shipments of solar panel modules, marking delivery of the first U.S. Space Station flight hardware for NASA's cooperative space endeavors with Russia. The shipments each consisted of 45 solar panel modules developed for the Mir cooperative solar array project, an effort that brought together NASA's advanced photovoltaic technology with Russia's proven structures and mechanisms. Eighty-four of the modules were scheduled to be integrated with Russian-made frames in 42 hinged parts. The completed array would be returned to the United States to be taken to Mir on the Space Shuttle Atlantis mission scheduled for October 1995. (NASA Release 94-217; Phillips Business Information, Dec 22/94)	* NASA announced the award of a supplemental agreement to Martin Marietta Astro Space of the Martin Marietta Corporation East Windsor, New Jersey. The agreement provided for two additional advanced meteorological satellite spacecraft through the Televisision Infrared Observation Satellite project contract at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-mm)December 22: NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, Wesley T. Huntress Jr., announced the selection of a scientific investigation that included the development of a new camera for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). NASA was scheduled to work with Holland Ford of Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, to develop a new camera, called Hubble Advanced Camera for Exploration. The new camera would be installed on the HST by Shuttle astronauts during the third servicing mission scheduled for November 1999. (NASA Release C94-oo)	* NASA announced the preliminary findings of the investigating team at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, California. The findings indicated that a faulty vertical gyro was responsible for the accident November 22 that resulted in severe damage to a Perseus remotely piloted research aircraft. (NASA Release 94-218)	* Charles Bigot, chairman of Arianespace, told a news conference that the company hoped to resume launches of Ariane missiles in two months' time. Following the failure of the December 1 launch, which sent an American PanAmsat-3 communications satellite to the bottom of the Atlantic, 21 corrective measures had been taken. French-based Arianespace had captured more that 60 percent of the world's satellite launch market and had orders to launch 37 satellites. (Reuters, Dec 22/94)December 28: NASA announced that its scientists now believed that it was the sulfur-rich atmosphere created in the aftermath of an immense asteroid collision with Earth 65 million years ago that brought about a global freeze and the demise of the dinosaurs. According to planetary geologist Adriana C. Ocampo and atmospheric scientist Kevin H. Baines, both of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory's Earth and Space Sciences Division, Pasadena, California, the impact of this asteroid hit a geologically unique, sulfur-rich region of the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico. They estimated that the impact kicked up billions of tons of sulfur and other materials and was between 10,000 to 50,000 times more powerful than the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 impact on Jupiter the preceding July. Persistent clouds generated by this impact caused temperatures to plunge globally to near freezing. These environmental changes lasted for a decade, causing half of the species on Earth to become extinct. (NASA Release 94-219)December: A feature article, accompanied by extensive photographs, discussed the capabilities of the radar systems carried by Space Shuttle Endeavour and the new perspective they provided of the Earth's environment. (Scientific American, Dec 94)





TABLE 4. SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND HUMAN SPACE FLIGHTS, 1994														
Launch Date (GMT), Spacecraft Name, COSPAR Designation, Launch VehicleMission Objectives, Spacecraft DataApogee and Perigee (km), Period (min), Inclination to Equator ()RemarksJan. 8  Soyuz TM-18Jan. 25 Clementine 4A Titan IIObjective: To test in space 23 advanced technologies for high-tech, lightweight missile defense.Spacecraft: A deep space probe consisting of newly developed hardware, such as lightweight imaging sensors, all developed since 1990.409,886.0801.06,158.863.8Crew consisted of Viktor Afanasyev, Yuri Usachev, and Valery Polyakov. Docked with Mir Space Station Jan. 10.  Afanasyev and Usachev landed    in the TM-18 spacecraft on Jul. 9, 1994.  Polyakov remained aboard  Mir in the attempt to establish a new record for endurance in space.Flight time: 182 days, 27 min.Conceived, built, and launched in 22 months, the satellite, whose position changed over the course of the year, also provided 1.8 million images of the surface of the moon.Feb. 3 Space Shuttle Discovery (STS-60) 6AObjective: To deploy and retrieve a free-flying  disk designed to generate new semiconductor films for advanced electronics and provide the   second flight of a commercially developed research facility.Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter carrying the Wake Shield Facility, a 12-foot-diameter, stainless steel disk, and SPACEHAB.386.0358.091.759.9Sixtieth flight of the STS.  Piloted by  Charles F. Bolden and Kenneth S. Reightler, Jr.  Mission specialists N. Jan Davis, PhD, Ronald M. Sega,   PhD, Franklin R. Chang-Diaz, PhD,  who also was payload commander, and Sergei Konstantinovich Krikalev (Russia), whose presence signified a new era in cooperation in space between the U.S. and Russia.  Launched from KSC at 7:10 a.m.,   EST.  Landed at KSC at 2:19 p.m., EST, Feb. 11.  Mission duration: 8 days, 7 hrs., 9 min.Feb. 7 Milstar 9A Taitan IVObjective: To begin a multi-channel, EHF/UHF satellite communications system providing survivable, enduring, and jam-resistant secure voice data communication for the Armed Forces and other users.Spacecraft: A communications satellite using extremely high-frequency radio and encription technology to prevent jamming.Not announced.Launch included first use of Titan IV with Centaur upper stage.  First Milstar satellite.  In orbit.Feb. 9 ODERACS 6B-6G Space ShuttleObjective: To improve the ability of ground-based radars to detect and track small debris objects.Spacecraft: Six spheres ranging in diameter from  two to six inches.Elements vary.Deployed from the orbiter's payload bay.  In orbit at end of FY but             ODERACS A & B (COSPAR designations 6B & 6C) decayed Oct. 2 & 4 respectively.Feb. 9 BREMSAT 6H Space Shuttle  DiscoveryObjective: To study various phenomena in space  including heat conductivity, the forces of   acceleration, and atomic forces.Spacecraft: The University of Bremen Satellite, built by that institution's Center of Applied Space Technology and Microgravity.Weight: 140 lbs. (63 kg.); length: 19" (480 mm).  320.0302.090.857.0Spring-ejected from its canister in the orbiter's bay.  In orbit.Feb. 19 Galaxy 1R 13A Delta IIObjective: To provide video communications.Sapcecraft: A geostationary communication satellite with 24 C-band transponders, owned by Hughes Communications, Inc. 37,300.02,933.0715.325.1Launched commercially by McDonnell Douglas.  In orbit.Mar. 9 Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-62) 15AObjective: To conduct dozens of experiments in such areas as materials processing, biotechnology, advanced technology, and environmental monitoring.Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter equiped with the U.S. Microgravity Payload-2, the Office of  Aeronautics and Space Technology-2, the Shuttle Solar Backscatter Ultraviolet instrument,  and other payloads.309.0296.090.439.0Sixty-first flight of the STS.  Piloted  by John H. Casper and Andrew M. Allen. Mission specialists Pierre J. Thuot, Charles D. Gemar, and   Marsha S. Ivins.  Launched from KSC at 8:53 a.m., EST.  Landed at      KSC 8:10 a.m., EST, Mar. 18.Mission duration: 13 days, 23 hrs., 17 min.Mar. 10 GPS 16A Delta IIObjective: To provide radio positioning and navigation, including position, velocity, and timing data to DoD and civilian users.Spacecraft: A Block II satellite in the NAVSTAR Global Positioning System.20,348.020,016.0718.055.0Twenty-fourth and final satellite in the GPS constellation.  In orbit.Mar. 10 SEDS-II 16B Delta IIObjective: To suspend a tether in space with a  minimum of swing and to determine the resistance of its braided polyethelene to  micrometeoroids, space debris, and atomic oxygen.Spacecraft: A 23-kilogram mini-satellite. 358.0344.091.332.3Ejected by the Delta's second stage using a spring-loaded device.  At 20 kilometers, the longest object ever placed in space.  Severed on Mar.  15, but the remaining 10-12 kms.  remained attached to the rocket's  second stage until it decayed May 8.Mar. 13 ARPASAT 17A TaurusObjective: To demonstrate a low-cost, classified space capability, validate advanced technologies, and assess the operational utility of direct user tasking and collection of payload data.Spacecraft: A 400-lb satellite developed by Ball Aerospace Corporation for the Advanced  Research Projects Agency of DoD.Not announced.Launched by the first Taurus standard small launch vehicle.  In a 290- nautical-mile, 105-degree-inclination  orbit.Mar. 13 STEP-TAOS 17B TaurusObjective: To demonstrate and validate state-of-  the-art spacecraft technologies to ensure autonomy and survivability in an operational space environment.Spacecraft: Space Test Program Experimental  Platform-Technology for Autonomous  Operational Survivability, also known as STEP-0.Not announced.Launched by the first Taurus standard small launch vehicle.  In a 290- nautical-mile, 105-degree-inclination orbit.Mar. 13 Not announced 17C-17JObjective: Not announced.Spacecraft: Not announced.Not announced.In orbit.Apr. 9 Space Shuttle   Endeavour (STS-59) 20AObjective: To gather Earth images from Space Radar Laboratory-1 to improve the understanding of our planet's carbon, water, and energy cycles and the effects humans have on them.Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter carrying SRL-1 and other payloads.218.0204.088.756.9Sixty-second flight of the STS.   Piloted by Sidney M. Guthierrez and Kevin P. Chilton.  Mission  specialists Jerome Apt, Michael R. Clifford, Linda M. Godwin (also   payload commander), and Thomas D. Jones.  Launched from KSC at 7:05 a.m., EDT.  Landed at EAFBat 12:54 p.m., EDT, on Apr. 20.Mission duration: 11 days, 5 hrs., 50 min.Apr. 13 GOES-8 22A Atlas IObjective: To provide more precise and timely weather observation and data on the  atmosphere.Sapcecraft: Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite-8 with three-axis stabilization to permit continous observation of Earth.35,805.035,773.01,436.20.2Satellite positioned at 90 degree   West Longitude during checkout, but   plans called for it to be moved to 75 degree West Longitude once it became operational.  In orbit.May 3 DSP 26A Titan IV Objective: To provide DoD with enhanced missile warming and surveillance capabilities.Spacecraft: The 17th Defense Support Program  satellite in geostationary orbit.Not announced.In orbit.May 9 MSTI-2 28A ScoutObjective: To provide ballistic missile launch detection and environmental/ecological monitoring.Spacecraft: Miniature Sensor Technology Integration-2 satellite with short-wave infrared sensors.433.0415.093.197.1Launched by the last Scout into  Sun-synchronous orbit.May 19 STEP-2 29A PegasusObjective: To evaluate unusual detection techniques for the DoD so as to separate adjacent, overlapping co-channel  communications transmitted at a low signal level.Spacecraft: Space Test Program Experimental Platform.817.0600.099.082.0In orbit.Jun. 24 UFO-3 35A Atlas IObjective: To provide UHF communications for DoD.Spacecraft: Third Ultra High Frequency Follow-on satellite built by Hughes Aircraft Company for  the Navy to replace the FLTSATCOM system.15,457.0383.0283.627.1First Asian launch conducted by Martin Marietta following its  purchase of the Atlas business from General Dynamics.  In orbit.  Became operational over the Atlantic Ocean  in October 1994.Jul. 1 Soyuz TM-19Crew consisted of yuri Malenchenko and Talgat A. Musabayev.  Docked Mir Space Station Jul. 3.  Both  Malenchenko and Musabayev returned to Earth with the Soyuz-TM  19 spacecraft, landing in Kazakhstan on Nov. 4, together with Ulf Merbold of Germany, who went up aboard Soyuz TM-20 on Oct. 3, 1994.  Merbold gathered biological samples on the effect of weightlessness on human body in the first of the two ESA missions to Mir to prepare for  the international Space Station.Flight time: 125 days, 22 hrs., 53  min.  Jul. 8 Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-65) 39AObjective: To conduct research into the behavior of materials and life in the nearly weightless environment of low Earth orbit.Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter equipped with the  International Microgravity Laboratory-2 and other payloads.304.0300.090.528.4Sixty-third flight of the STS.  Piloted by Roberet D. Cabana and James D. Halsell, Jr.  Mission specialists Richard J. Hieb (also payload  commander), Carl E. Walz, Leroy Chiao, PhD, and Donald A. Thomas, PhD.  Payload specialist Chiaki Nato-Mukai, MD, PHD (Japan).  Launched from KSC at 12:43 p.m., EDT.  Landed at KSC on Jul. 23  following a record duration flight of   14 days, 17 hrs., 55 min.Aug. 3 APEX 46A PegasusObjective: To test the impact of radiation in the Van Allen belt on two target instruments.Spacecraft: Advanced Photovoltaic Experiment, a test spacecraft carrying three diagnostic instruments.2,538.0362.0114.970.0Pegasus launch vehicle carried by a B-52 bomber that took off from EAFB.  In orbit.Aug. 3 DBS-2 47A Atlas IIAObjective: To provide commercial television service to the 48 continguous states in the  United States.  Increase channel capacity from DBS-1 (alone) to 150 channels.Spacecraft: Geostationary communications  satellite owned by DirecTV and United States Satellite Broadcasting.  Named Direct Broadcast Satellite-2 or DIRECTV-2.39,445.0196.0703.426.9Launched commercially by Martin Marietta.  In orbit.Aug. 27 USA 105 54A Titan IVObjective: Classified DoD mission.Spacecraft: Not announced.Not announced.In orbit along with 54B, about which no information is available.Aug. 29 DMSP F-12 57A Atlas EObjective: To provide specialized meteorological data in support of DoD operations, including  cloud coverage, wind speed, and precipitation.Spacecraft: Defense Metorological Satellite  Program Satellite F-12 (indicating the 12th  satellite in Block 5D) with eight sensors to measure ocean surface wind speed, areas and intensity of precipitation, cloud water content, land surface moisture, and space environmental data.856.0838.0101.998.9In orbit.Aug. 29 Not announced 57B-57EObjective: Not announced.Spacecraft: Not announced.Elements vary.In orbit.Sep. 9 Space Shuttle  Discovery (STS-64) 59AObjective: To perform atmospheric research using   a laser, conduct robotic processing of semi- conductor materials, deploy and retrieve a free- flying astronomical sub-satellite, and perform the first untethered spacewalk by astronomers in  over ten years.Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter equipped with LIDAR In-Space Technology Experiment, the Robot Operated Processing System, Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool, and Simplified Aid for EVA (Extra Vehicular Activity) Rescue, among other items.269.0259.089.556.9Sixty-fourth flight of the STS.  Piloted by Richard N. Richards and L. Blaine  Hammond, Jr.  Mission specialists J. M. Linenger, MD, PhD, Susan J. Helms, Carl J. Meade, and Mark C. Lee.  Launched at 6:23 p.m.,EDT,  and landed at 5:13 EDT, at EAFB on Sep. 20.Mission duration: 10 days, 22 hrs.,  50 min.Sep. 13 SPARTAN-201 59B Space Shuttle DiscoveryObjective: To explain how the solar wind is generated by the sun.Spacecraft: Shuttle Pointed Autonomous  Research Tool-201, a battery-powered sub- satellite equipped with a pointing system and recorder for capturing data about the acceleration and velocity of the solar wind plus aspects of the sun's corona.50 minutes  behind DiscoveryReleased from Discovery's payload  bay and recovered on Sep. 15.Sep. 30 Sapce Shuttle Endeavour (STS-68) 62A Oct. 3 Soyuz TM-20Objective: To refly the Space Radar Laboratory  and provide scientists with detailed information to help distinguish between human-induced  environmental changes and other natural forms  of change.Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter equipped with Space Radar Laboratory-2, Get Away Special experiments, and a number of in-cabin payloads.  226.0213.088.957.0Sixty-fifth flight of STS.  Piloted by Michael A. Baker and Terrence D. Wilcutt.  Commander and Mission   Specialist Thomas D. Jones.  Mission specialists Steven L. Smith, Daniel  W. Bursch, and Peter J. K. Wisoff. Launched (after an initial abort on  Aug. 18) at 7:16 a.m., EDT, from Cape Canaveral.  Landed at EAFB on Oct. 11.Crew consisted of Aleksandr Viktorenko, Telena Kondakova, and Ulf Merbold (USA).  Soyuz TM-19 returned to Earth on Nov. 4, with   Yuri Malenchenko, Talgat Musabayev, and Ulf Merbold.  Valery Polyakov remained aboard Mir.Oct. 6 Intelsat 703 64A Atlas IIASObjective: To provide television and telephone  service for N. Pacific region.35,803.035,755.01,436.00.04Nov. 1 Wind 71A Delta IIObjective: To measure solar wind plasma and magnetic field.Variable parameters.Part of GGS/ISTP program.Nov. 3 Space Shuttle  Atlantis (STS-66) 73A Objective: To collect temperature and solar  energy data for NASA and NOAA.310.0296.091.057.0Deployed Atlas-3, SSBUV, and CRISTA-SPAS-1 payloads.Nov. 29 Orion 79A Atlas IIAObjective: To provide television service.36,022.035,621.01,438.030.0German spacecraft.Dec. 22 DSP-17 (USA-107) 84A Titan IVObjective: To provide early warning missile launch detection.Geosynchronous.Exact parametersnot available.Dec. 30 NOAA-14 (NOAA-J before orbit) 89A Atlas EObjective: To measure weather data, such as  atmospheric temperature and moisture.