Eight-engine static test of Saturn SA-T2 of 29.9 seconds’ duration successful at Marshall Space Flight Center.
NASA and the Argentine Comision Nacional de Investigaciones Espaciales signed a memorandum of understanding for a cooperative space science research program using sounding rockets.
Announced that the largest quartz lens ever ground had been completed by Bausch & Lomb for use in NASA’s optical solar simulation system at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The lens is 36 inches in diameter, 6 inches thick at the center, and weighs 350 pounds.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that construction was underway on the first large space simulator in the United States capable of testing full-scale spacecraft of the Ranger and Mariner classes with the three primary space effects—solar radiation, cold space heat sink, and a high vacuum equivalent to about one part in a billion (1:1,000,000,000) of the atmospheric pressure on the Earth.
Reuters reported that the United States pays about $140 per hour for use of the Jodrell Bank Observatory in England, while the U.S.S.R. pays nothing. Sir Bernard Lovell explained that “the Americans occupy the telescope for long periods, where the Russians scarcely use it.”
President Eisenhower in his state of the Union address to Congress reviewed U.S. progress in space exploration, stating, “These achievements unquestionably make us pre-eminent in space exploration for the betterment of mankind.”
NASA informed Marshall Space Flight Center that management of the Agena B vehicle system would be retained at Marshall Space Flight Center.
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory reported that Earth is a slightly irregular ellipsoid according to new calculations.
Mercury-Redstone 6 was static tested for 30 seconds at Marshall Space Flight Center to ensure satisfactory operation of the turbopump assembly.
NASA Aerobee-Hi successfully reached 96 miles above Wallops Station in test of behavior of liquid hydrogen in zero gravity for Lewis Research Center hydrogen propulsion development.
World altitude record for aircraft of 113,891 feet (34,714 meters) flown by G. Mussolov in Soviet E-66A.
Inhouse procurement policies and practices of NASA reviewed by headquarters and field personnel in conference at Lewis Research Center.
NASA directed Marshall Space Flight Center to enter contract negotiations with contractors for procurement of five operational Atlas-Centaur vehicles. These launchings were planned to begin in second quarter of 1964.
NASA Langley Research Center awarded contract to Marquardt Corp. to increase structural wind tunnel testing temperature from 600° to 2,000° F.
NASA Launch Operations Directorate announced establishment of Offices of Financial Management and of Procurement and Contracts to support NASA activities at Cape Canaveral, previously done by Marshall Space Flight Center.
Reported from Stowe, Vt., that unofficial American-Soviet discussions on cooperative space exploration were near agreement, and that internationalized status for space similar to that achieved by treaty for the continent of Antarctica was under consideration. Delegations included seven members of President Kennedy’s Science Advisory Committee and six members of the ruling body of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. The Stowe Conference was sponsored by the National Academy of Arts and Sciences of Boston, with costs defrayed by the Ford Foundation.
Dr. George N. Constan of Marshall Space Flight Center named as acting manager of the new NASA Saturn fabrication plant near New Orleans by Director von Braun of Marshall Space Flight Center.
NASA’s Incentive Awards Committee determined that Dr. Henry J. E. Reid, Director Emeritus of the Langley Research Center, would receive NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal.
Long duration static test of the S-I stage (SA-2 vehicle) occurred at Marshall Space Flight Center, for a period of 120 seconds.
NASA’s Space Task Group, charged with carrying out Project Mercury and other manned space flight programs, officially became a separate NASA field element.
House Science and Astronautics Committee released interim report on “Research and Development in Aeronautics,” which concluded that “the welfare of the Nation, in both its economic and security aspects, is dependent in no small degree on continuing aeronautical research of high caliber.”
Director of Marshall Space Flight Center directed that further engineering work on Saturn C-2 configuration would be discontinued, and that efforts would be applied to clarification of the Saturn C-3 and Nova concepts.
Draft text of program of the Soviet Communist Party to be presented to its 22d Congress in October was released in English by Tass, official Soviet press agency. This new program, the first proposed since the one submitted by Lenin and adopted in 1919, made no direct or indirect reference to space exploration. On the role of science, it stated: “The party will do everything to enhance the role of science in the building of Communist society, it will encourage research to discover new possibilities for the development of the productive forces, and the rapid and extensive application of the latest scientific and technical achievements, a decisive advancement in experimental work, including research directly at enterprises, and the efficient organization of scientific and technical information and of the whole system of studying and disseminating progressive Soviet and foreign methods. Science will itself in full measure become a productive force * * *.”
Scientists and engineers of Langley Research Center and the Space Task Group were guests of the Peninsula Chamber of Commerce honoring the 46 years of NACA and NASA on the Virginia Peninsula.
NASA revealed it had selected 12 women airplane pilots to undergo tests to determine space flight research capability.
Centaur vehicle C-l was tested and accepted by Marshall Space Flight Center.
In-house testing of Ranger I spacecraft completed at Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
First manned balloon launched from and landed back aboard a naval vessel, a Stratolab High test flight over U.S.S. Antietam in the Gulf of Mexico (6,000 feet).
Anniversary of the first flight of the USAF-USN-NASA X-15 powered with the XLR-99 engine (15 flights total to date). A $225 million research program under NASA management, test data indicated that X-15 would exceed its design limits by 100 percent in altitude and 17 percent in speed. The X-15 had already pushed near its design altitude limit of 250,000 feet (reached 217,000 feet October 11, 1961) and passed its maximum design speed of mach 6 (reached mach 6.04 November 9, 1961).
Two X-15 test pilots, USAF’s Maj. Robert M. White and NASA’s Joseph A. Walker, were jointly awarded the 1960 Iven C. Kincheloe Memorial Award as the Nation’s outstanding test pilots; award of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots September SO: NASA received an additional $10 million for salaries in a supplemental appropriation bill approved by Congress, enough to hire an additional 1,250 persons. During September: National Bureau of Standards and the Institutd Geofisico de Huancago of Peru initiated construction of the Jucamarca Observatory, a 6-million-watt pulse transmitter and a 22-acre antenna with 9,216 crossed dipoles mounted above a reflecting screen. Located 17 miles east of Lima, Peru, the Observatory will be used for ground-based exploration of the upper atmosphere and space.
Soviet press conference at Soviet Academy of Sciences in Moscow, at which Biochemist N. M. Sisakian announced that all six of Strelka’s pups, on exhibit, were developing normally: “Our research on these animals, just completed, has proved that no dangerous consequences to the functioning of their organs have stemmed from the space flight. This problem has an important bearing on our preparations for man’s orbiting.”
Dr. Henry J. E. Reid, senior staff associate and former Director of the Langley Research Center, retired after over four decades of Government service. He began as a junior engineer at Langley in April 1921, became Director in 1926, in which capacity he served for 34 years.
Navy-sponsored Hypersonic Propulsion Research Laboratory, for simulating flights at speeds up to mach 10, was opened at Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins University.
Construction of dynamic test stand for Saturn completed at Marshall Space Flight Center.
NASA awarded contract to Pratt & Whitney for development of space radiators and condensors for the Lewis Research Center.
Ambassador Adlai Stevenson introduced a resolution before the U.N.’s Political Committee for a U.N. space program guided by four considerations: (1) Application of the principles of international law to outer space and celestial bodies to ensure against sovereignty claims in space; (2) making the U.N. a clearinghouse for use of outer space, including information on satellite launchings and cooperation for peaceful use of outer space; (3) international cooperation on weather satellite information; (4) international cooperation on communications satellites. Ambassador Stevenson said: “There is a right way and a wrong way to get on with the business of space exploration. In our judgment, the wrong way is to allow the march of science to become a runaway race into the unknown. “The right way is to make it an ordered, peaceful and cooperative and constructive forward march under the aegis of the United Nations.”
Hypersonic wind tunnel at Douglas Aircraft became operational at El Segundo, reportedly the largest industry-owned tunnel in the United States (36 inches long, 6-inch diameter, capable of mach 10).
President-elect Kennedy announced that Jerome B. Wiesner of MIT would be special assistant to the President for science and technology.
Lewis Research Center scientists, G. B. Brown and E. E. Callighan, reported at 1961 International Conference on High Magnetic Fields at MIT, that NASA was constructing a magnetic shield of superconducting alloys for future manned spacecraft.
Preproposal conference on the contract for design, research, development, fabrication, and testing of the reactor-in-flight-test (Rift) vehicle was held at Marshall Space Flight Center. This vehicle would test-fly the Nerva nuclear engine now under development. Twenty-nine firms were invited to attend this preliminary conference at which they were furnished general information on the project. Interested firms would then have 30 days to file information on their capabilities and experience. Then a smaller number of firms would be invited to submit detailed bids. Purpose of the two-step evaluation was to enable firms not in a competitive position to avoid the expense of entering detailed proposals.
Dr. Arthur Rudolph was appointed Assistant Director of Systems Engineering in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight. Operating out of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. Rudolph would serve as liaison between vehicle development at Marshall and the manned space flight program at the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston.
Final test flight of USAF Atlas D traveled 5,000 miles to target down Atlantic Missile Range, representing 35 successes, 8 partials, and 6 failures in 49 test launchings for D model.
Ablation model test with electric arc attained 4,000° F. for 105 seconds at Langley Research Center, one of a series of tests begun in September 1960.
NASA Ames Research Center measured the intensity of radiation from the hot gas over the nose of a model flying through the air at 42,300 feet per second. This speed was in excess of parabolic atmospheric entry speed and the data are significant in relation to development of lunar spacecraft. The speed, 11,100 feet per second higher than maximum air speed obtained previously, was achieved by firing the model from a light-gas gun into a highspeed jet of air flowing in the opposite direction from a shock-driven wind tunnel.
First four U.S. Nike-Cajun rockets arrived in Norway for use in research program off Andoeya Island early next year.
Eberhardt Rechtin, of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, questioned the Soviet calculations on the rotation speed of the planet Venus and the astronomical unit, and suggested that the Soviet scientists may have been influenced by earlier MIT studies (1958). Completion of extensive radar studies of Venus by Jet Propulsion Laboratory Goldstone, he submitted, provided more accurate information. The differing figures as reported are— U.S.S.R (1961): 9 to 11 days’ rotation—A.U. 92,812,797 miles. Jet Propulsion Laboratory (1961): About 225 days’ rotation—A.U. 92,956,000 miles.
USAF announced expansion of gaseous physics research activities with the construction of a $636,000 laboratory at L. G. Hanscom Field, Bedford, Mass., as a part of the Cambridge Research Laboratory.
Last of second series of static firings of Saturn completed at Marshall Space Flight Center for 110 seconds, approximately full duration.
NASA announced that top speed of X-15 on Major White’s record flight was revised to 4,093 miles per hour (mach 6.04), reached at 95,800 feet. (White also held altitude record of 217,000	feet (41 miles), flown on October 11).
USAF completed Titan I research and development test flight program of 40 launches at the Atlantic Missile Range; of the 40 launches 4 had been failures.
Reported that ONR-supported radio observatory at Cal Tech’s Owens Valley, Calif., had expanded the radius of the observable universe 27 times (36 sextillion miles, the distance traveled by light at a speed of about 186,000 miles a second in 6 billion years).
Legislature of the State of Alabama considered investment of $3 million in establishing a Space Research Institute at Huntsville as a joint University of Alabama and Auburn University center.
DOD revised its patent policy on space research and development contracts in accordance with present NASA patent provisions, such provisions already having been written into space communications contracts (i.e., Government retains royalty-free exclusive title to patents developed under contract).
NASA announced consolidation of nuclear-electric propulsion program at Lewis Research Center by transfer of the Marshall Space Flight Center Research Projects Division under Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger to Lewis within 3 months.
Saturn H-l engine drop-tested into salt water at Cape Canaveral, then returned to Marshall Space Flight Center for inspecting, cleaning, and static firing.
NASA announced accelerated recruiting of qualified scientists and engineers at its field centers to fill anticipated manpower requirements in the expanded space exploration program. During 1960 NASA interviewed 3,000 persons on 100 college campuses.
New wind tunnel became operational at Ames Research Center, capable of research on reentry problems at speeds of mach 7.5, 10, and 15.
National Meteorite Symposium held at Arizona State University, Tempe, Ariz.
Senate Government Operations Subcommittee on National Policy Machinery released report on “Science Organization and the President’s Office.” This study recommended that a new Office of Science and Technology be created in the Executive Office of the President.
Dr. Sydney Chapman of the British Royal Observatory reported at Langley Research Center-National Research Founda-tion-Virginia Polytechnic Institute conference that evidence suggested existence of a third radiation belt surrounding the Earth—except for areas above the poles—at altitudes between 20,000	and 28,000 miles.
Saturn static firing of 44.17 seconds’ duration to test-fire detection system at engine position No. 2 was successful, the second SA-1 flight qualification test at Marshall Space Flight Center.
Meeting to examine the modification of C -IX] aircraft for carrying Saturn S-IV stages was held at NASA Langley Research Center.
NASA selected Pearl River site in southwestern Mississippi, 35 miles from the Michoud plant in New Orleans, for static test facility for Saturn and Nova-class vehicles, completed facility to operate under direction of Marshall Space Flight Center.
Tiny particle of matter from another galaxy hit upper atmosphere of the Earth over New Mexico at a speed close to that of light and split with great force. Resultant particle shower numbered between 20 and 40 billion pieces, according to scintillation counters at the Volcano Ranch Cosmic Ray Research Center near Albuquerque, N. Mex.
Charles J. Dolan named Associate Director of NASA’s Langley Research Center. He had been associated with the NASA Space Task Group since its formation at Langley in November 1958.
Celestial simulator” at Jet Propulsion Laboratory in final checkout, an “instant universe” chamber which can duplicate white light and infrared point sources of solar system bodies likely to be used for navigation and attitude control of spacecraft.
NAA delivered X-15 No. 2 with XLR-99 engine to NASA for the initiation of the NASA flight research program.
Soviet astronomers claimed to have discovered the presence of oxygen in the atmosphere of Venus. Dr. Brian Warner of the London Observatory correlated and reinterpreted spectrographic data gathered earlier by Soviet Astronomer Nikolai Kozyrev.
Radar tracking of planet Venus for 7 weeks by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists had proved “astronomical yardstick” of 93,498,125 miles as the distance between the Earth and the Sun (within 1,000 miles of error).
Wind tunnel testing of model of the first Saturn (SA-1) began at Arnold Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn.
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded contract to Douglas and Chance Vought to study launching manned exploratory expedition into lunar and interplanetary space from Earth orbits.
Paul F. Bikle set world glider altitude record of 46,267 feet in Schweizer 1-23-E sailplane, beating record of 42,100 feet set by W. S. Ivans in 1950. Bikle is Director of NASA Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif., which is conducting the X-15 flight research program.
NASA announced first success in immediate detection in real time of radar signals off planet Venus by Jet Propulsion Laboratory Goldstone, as part of 2-month research program.
Joint F A A - DOD--NASA “Commercial Supersonic Transport Aircraft Report,” prepared by a joint task force, said that the development of a commercial transport airplane to fly three times the speed of sound tmach 3) was feasible and could be developed by 1970-71.
In a speech at Naval Research Laboratory, Harold Brown, Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said Government labs would hereafter be the “primary means” for carrying out military weapon programs; that DOD would seek an increase in the number of supergrade scientific positions and would ask for the same top pay for scientists as NASA has; that labs would be given increased status in the chain of command; and that lab directors will be given funds they can spend for research without prior approval.
First U.S. showing of films of Vostok II space flight by Gherman Titov, before the Maryland Academy of Sciences in Baltimore, was canceled at the last minute by a Soviet Embassy official. Film had been shown to press correspondents in Moscow on October 9.
USAF Aerobee-Hi with Cambridge Research Laboratory payload designed to trap space dust, reached 101 miles over White Sands Missile Range.
NASA announced that a two-stage Saturn C-l will be used for the first 10 research and development flights.
