D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, addressed the Engineers, Scientists, and Architects Day meetmg, in which he said: “as a stimulus to our fervent interest in rocketry have been the realities of life in a world which is divided into two armed camps, one of which has the avowed intention of imposing its own way of life on free peoples everywhere. We are, in short, compelled to achieve and maintain leadership in space research and technology because our own fate as a free nation and, in fact, the fate of human civilization as we know it, wlli depend upon whether the spacecraft of the future are devoted to peaceflli purposes or to the destruction of the human race . . .”
nasa Flight Research Center released photographs of “lifting body” experimental wingless craft to test landing techniques in gliding from altitudes as high as 5,000 ft. The 24-ft.-by-13-ft. craft would begin testing early in 1963, first with truck to tow it aloft and later with airplane as towing vehicle. Made mostly of plywood, the 500-lb. craft suggests shape of missile nose cone cut in half lengthwise.
X-14A vtol aircraft was being used in research for lunar-landing maneuvers at nasa Ames Research Center, it was reported. X-14A pilot Fred J. Drinkwater, III, said that a “great similarity exists between the flight control system of our [plane] and that proposed for a lunar craft. This makes the X-14A a logical vehicle to investigate problem areas connected with the let-down and landing phases of the lunar mission.”
Announced that International Association Machinist workers and Lockheed Corp. had agreed to extend their contract indefinitely, thus averting threat of strike in this aerospace industry.
Series of full-scale wind-tunnel tests of vtol fan-in-wing model vehicle at nasa Ames Research Center for Army lift-fan flight research program. Part of General Electric (Cincinnati) research contract, model and test hardware were fabricated by nasa, while GE fabricated and tested propulsion systems including two lift fans, two diverter valves, and two YJ85 engines. Wind-tunnel tests proved acceptability of inlet temperature, control characteristics, transition capability, and aircraft stability.
nasa announced plans to attempt to launch 440-lb. Orbiting Solar Observatory (Oso) containing 13 experiments, within a week.
Balloonist Don Piccard set new altitude record in ascent of 17,000 ft. during two-hr. and two-min. balloon flight from Sioux City to Kennebec, Iowa.
usaf Atlas F missile was successfully fired more than 4,000 mi. from Cape Canaveral in test flight.
Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, nasa Office of Space Sciences, was appointed chairman of Joint Working Group of nasa Office of Space Sciences and Office of Manned Space Flight. Group would be responsible for (1) recommending detailed program of scientific exploration in future manned flights; (2) defining information desired from unmanned flights to support manned flights; and (3) establishing and maintaining close liaison with nasa field centers, other Government agencies, and universities in development of integrated scientific program for manned flight. Dr. Shoemaker had been employed by U.S. Geological Survey as Chief of Astrogeology Branch in Menlo Park, Calif.
The Rev. Theodore M. Hesburgh, President of the University of Notre Dame, speaking at the commencement exercises at mit, urged scientists to develop greater moral awareness and a greater use of science and technology “for the true service of mankind.” He told the science graduates: “You should be concerned, you should lead, but the beginning of significant human leadership involves a deep respect for the totality of man’s intellectual and moral heritage, an active cultivation of the wide areas of wisdom above and beyond your science and technology.”
President Kennedy nominated Dr. J. Herbert Holloman to the new post of Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology. Dr. Holloman was general manager of the General Engineering Laboratory of GE in Schenectady, N.Y.
Senate confirmed Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner as Director of the Office of Science and Technology.
Col. Daniel McKee, Project Gemini director in nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, reported as saying that two-man Gemini spacecraft might be used for the next four or five years, and describing it as “a reliable and flexible spacecraft which has a lot of potential for scientific investigations of space. If additional applications develop, it would be used for various purposes.” At present, primary goal of Project Gemini is one-week-long, two-man mission with testing of orbital rendezvous operation.
Third test flight of usn Polaris A-3 was partially successflli, the missile functioning properly until second stage went out of control near burnout and was destroyed by range safety officer.
nasa Agena B vehicle program would be transferred from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to nasa Lewis Research Center, Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., announced. Transfer included Atlas and Thor boosters used with Agena B upper stage. Dr. Seamans said the transfer, which would be completed within three months, would allow “Marshall to wholly concentrate its work on the vital Saturn vehicle development for the manned lunar landing program and for the large unmanned scientific payloads of the future. ... In addition, it concentrates at Lewis the two Atlas-based vehicles, Agena and Centaur, which are essential to nasa’s program of space sciences.” Centaur was transferred to Lewis in September.
U.S. Senate passed S. 2771 to establish a Commission on Science and Technology, which wollid coordinate Government research and development programs with those of business and industry and wollid establish coordinated systems of information storage and retrieval.
W. Randolph Lovelace II, of Lovelace Foundation for Medical Education and Research, told 200 space experts from 14 countries that scientists would have to volunteer for space flight teams. “It takes four years of college plus three years or more of further study to reach the doctor of philosophy level. It is a bit too much to ask our test pilots to undergo this further training.” He said that in projects such as two-man Gemini a scientist could make space flights in company of trained flier. Lovelace was addressing an international symposium on environmental problems of man in space, held in Paris.
Committee for International Year of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), meeting in London, approved worldwide research program to be conducted during 1964-65 period of minimum solar activity. Proposed program included multi-nation participation in such research areas as meteorology, geomagnetism, aurora, airglow, ionosphere, solar activity, cosmic rays, and aeronomy. Project was outgrowth of International Geophysical Year (igy), 1957-58, considered highly successful both in scientific results and in international cooperation.
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci appointed nasa's Director of Biotechnology and Human Research in the Office of Advanced Research and Technology. Dr. Konecci wlli be responsible for directing research and development of future life support systems, advanced systems to protect man in the space environment, and research to assure man’s performance capabllity in space. In announcing the appointment, Associate Administrator Seamans said: “Our success and progress in manned space flight in the next 10-20 years depend on the human research we do today. The human, man-machine and man-system requirements must be determined through research prior to the design of any manned system. The human capabilities and limitations will directly influence various subsystems of the space vehicle. It is therefore important that work in Biotechnology and Human Research be conducted at an accelerated rate, in order to have the necessary answers for the design of future aero-space vehicles.” The Life Sciences Research Group at Ames Research Center will have a major role in carrying out the programs of Dr. Konecci’s office, along with the other nasa centers and full utilization of the Nation’s military, research, and industrial resources and personnel. Dr. Konecci was Chief of the Life Sciences Section of the Missiles and Space Systems Division of Douglas Aircraft Co. and had previously served as a research scientist at the usaf School of Aviation Medicine and as Chief of Physiology and Technology in the usaf Directorate of Flight Safety before 1957.
nasa Ames Research Center announced its high-altitude radiationresearch balloon was flying at 135,000-ft. altitude over eastern Manitoba and that the balloon’s payload capsules containing two monkeys, four hamsters, and instrumentation would be released early August 12.
nasa Langley Research Center announced contract with SpaceGeneral Corp. for the development of an inflatable paraglider to measure micrometeroid flux in the lower regions of space up to 700,000	feet. Inflatable Micrometeroid Paraglider (imp) will test new sensor system consisting of alternate layers of mylar and aluminum and will determine suitability of inflatable re-entry paraglider.
usaf Cambridge Research Lab team, headed by Dr. Richard Dunn of the Sacramento Peak Observatory, successfully observed perfect total eclipse in Lae, New Guinea, making useful observations of the chromosphere (1,000- to 10,000-mile band of energy between sun’s visible surface and the corona) and the sun’s corona.
usaf Minuteman launched from silo at Cape Canaveral in successful test flight.
Third Saturn launch vehicle (SA-3) arrived at Cape Canaveral after 10-day trip by barge from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. Flight test was scheduled for November.
In address to the House of Representatives, Congressman Emilio Q. Daddario pointed to a need for a common patent policy for inventions arising out of research and development financed by Federal funds and cited President Kennedy’s statement at his press conference the day before.
Announced that Boeing had received $15,954,096 supplementary contract from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center for work leading to design, development, fabrication, and test of Saturn C-5 first stage (S-IC).
nasa announced selection of Republic Aviation Corp. as contractor for Project Fire, the flight re-entry research program. Contract would call for construction of two re-entry spacecraft to be flown in the second half of 1963 and re-enter the earth’s atmosphere at a speed of 25,000 mph.
Senate and House space committee conferences approved compromise legislative authorization for nasa in FY 1963 of $3,744,115,250. Bill provided $43,160,750 less than nasa requested. Nearly $1.3 billion was assigned to manned space flight, including the lunar program.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists reported that mariner ii Venus probe was disoriented on Sept. 8, by either a micrometeorite impact or a solar pressure wave, but that automatic devices onboard the craft had restored it to proper orientation.
usaf Titan II flown 5,000 miles down amr on third test flight.
National Science Foundation announced FY 1963 expenditures for Government-sponsored research and development would total $14.7 billion, 31% higher than last fiscal year. 95% of the estimated total would be spent by four agencies—nasa, DOD, AEC, HEW.
Two-month Project Firefly series of 27 upper atmosphere chemical releases was completed by usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories, ending four-point basic research program aimed at learning more about the ionosphere.
Subcommittee on construction of President Kennedy’s Missile Sites Labor Commission conducted closed hearing on recent 10-day work stoppage at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. Although electricians and other construction workers had returned to work, the basic labor dispute—union members’ stopping work on vital U.S. missile and space projects because of employment of nonunion members—remained to be settled.
Construction contract for Saturn umbilical tower (Launch Complex 34, Cape Canaveral) was awarded by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to Consolidated Steel and Ets-Hokin-Galvin. Cost of the 240-ft. steel tower was estimated at $504,900.
nasa Flight Research Center announced modifications to X-15 (No. 1) had been completed, the modifications providing window and camera in fuselage for Follow-On Program of high-altitude research. Camera with window would be used to study optical degradation resulting from observations through hypersonic boundary layers and shock waves. This project would begin in early 1963 and would include first five flights of the 35 flights planned in X-15 Follow-On-Program, a two-year program sponsored by nasa and usaf.
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, told Aircraft Industries Association Quality Control Committee in Houston that designs, procedures, and schedules in manned space flight program had to be flexible in order to absorb continual changes of rapidly advancing technology. Emphasizing importance of equipment malfunctions that occur during systems development or preflight preparations, Dr. Gilruth said: “In manned flight, we cannot afford to regard any of these equipment malfunctions as a ‘random’ failure. We must regard every malfunction and, in fact, every observed peculiarity in the behavior of a system, as an important warning of potential disaster. Only when the cause is thoroughly understood, and a change to eliminate it has been made, can we proceed with the flight program.... “Rapid corrective response to malfunctions throughout system development and preflight preparations is a critically important requirement of our programs if we are to meet schedules with hardware that is fit to fly. . . .”
usaf Nuclear Effects Research Laboratory dedicated at Kirtland afb, N.M. Lab was designed to simulate effects of nuclear explosions on ballistic missile systems; study effects of radiation on people and electronic systems; simulate magnetic and radiation effects of high-altitude nuclear explosions; and conceive radiation experiments for space probes.
First nasa balloon carrying bioscience payload of two rhesus monkeys and four hamsters traveled faster and higher than planned after launch from Goose Bay, Laborador, requiring alternate plan for early jettisoning to effect daylight recovery. Payload was recovered 45 miles north of Prince Albert in Saskatchewan, all animals reported dead upon recovery. Conducted by Ames Research Center Life Science Laboratory, experiment was designed to check primary cosmic radiation.
President Kennedy nominated Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner to be director of the Office of Science and Technology.
Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech reported on first direct detection of elastic waves 40 to 50 miles high that carry heat from the sun to its corona. Photographs made through Mount Wilson Observatory detected the energy transfer mechanism of waves which rose and fell at the rate of 1,000 mph and in five-minute periods.
nasa announced mariner ii would miss Venus by 20,900 mi. instead of the 9,000 mi. previously expected, but that the probe would still come “well within the region where the scientific planetary experiments are expected to be very effective.” The added distance was caused by midcourse correction maneuver on Sept. 4 increasing mariner ii’s velocity by 47 mph instead of the intended 45 mph. nasa scientists said telemetry data [from 'mariner ii indicated that (1) solar particle radiation appears to be sufficiently strong to distort solar magnetic fields; (2) some atmospheric gas was present in entire path of the probe; (3) density of small particles in deep space was at least 1,000 times less in interplanetary space than in the near vicinity of the earth.
University of Alabama Research Institute dedicated at Huntsville,
oso i, the Orbiting Solar Observatory launched March 7, completed 1,000 orbits; approximately 900 telemetry data tapes were acquired and forwarded to all experimenters.
Albert J. Evans, nasa Deputy Director of Aeronautical Research, told iata Public Relations Conference in Washington: “Our understanding of aerodynamics has reached the point where it appears certam that in time an efficient supersonic transport can be developed. . . . There is no question as to whether there wlli be a supersonic transport; the only question is whose. Right now part of my job is to see that the United States is the first to develop a commercially competitive supersonic transport. . . . “In the hypersonic region, the X-15 has given tremendous focus to our efforts. The X-15 has such capability that it wlli be used in furthering certain space research programs. Already we are making radiation measurements—piggy-back experiments along with the hypersonic research program. Our results with the X-15 have been so encouraging that I think we must soon look beyond the transport that goes to Mach 2 or 3, and begin laying the groundwork for the generation to follow. . . .”
dod released following statement: “Lockheed [Aircraft Corp.] stands alone in refusing to follow the course that the other members of the [aerospace] industry considered reasonable. . . . Should a strike take place at Lockheed, Department of Defense programs of critical urgency to the national defense would be affected. It is imperative in the national interest that the Department of Defense make necessary preparations to minimize to the greatest extent possible any loss of production that might follow a work stoppage. Responsible officials of the Department of Defense are therefore considering whether alternate means of production can be utllized so that work on these vital programs can go forward in the event of a stoppage at Lockheed.”
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced first static test of p&w liquid-hydrogen engine. In first firing of series, which was run in vacuum chamber to simulate space environment, RL-10 ran nine seconds and generated a rated 15,000 pounds of thrust.
India’s first satellite-tracking station had been opened at Uttar Pradesh State Observatory, Nainital, one of 12 such stations established by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory.
Australian National Observatory announced that it would install 40-inch telescope on top of Sidney Smith Mountain at Coona-barabran, New South Wales, one which would have three times the efficiency of its 74-inch telescope at Mount Stromlo near Canberra.
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of nasa’s Lewis Research Center, received the National Civil Service League's Career Service Award, one of 10 Government leaders so recognized.
Research Institute for Advanced Study of the Martin Company was awarded contracts by nasa, afosr, and one for basic research in nonlinear mathematics, an area relating to problems in space flight, long-range communications, and automation.
nasa announced Project Fire, a high-speed re-entry heat research program to obtain data on materials, heating rates, and radio signal attenuation on spacecraft re-entering the atmosphere at speeds of about 24,500 mph. Information from the program would provide technology for manned and unmanned re-entry from lunar missions. Under management of Langley Research Center, Project Fire would use Atlas D boosters and the re-entry velocity package would be powered by Antares solid-fuel motor (3rd stage of the Scout).
Ryan project engineer Willis F. Everest was slightly injured in crash of Ryan Flexwing aircraft undergoing flight-test research at Langley Research Center (LaRc). 40-ft.-wingspan aircraft based on the Rogallo concept had completed aerodynamic tests in Langley Research Center’s full-scale wind tunnel and was to be flight tested by LaRc and the Army Transportation Research and Engineering Command.
nasa established the nasa Launch Operations Center at Cape Canaveral, with Dr. Kurt H. Debus as Director. Reporting to the Director of Manned Space Flight at nasa Hq., the new Center would serve all nasa projects launched from Cape Canaveral, absorbing Marshall Space Flight Center’s Launch Operations Directorate. Similarly at Point Mugu, Calif., the nasa Test Support Office was redesignated the nasa Pacific Launch Operations Office, with Cdr. Simon J. Burttschell as Acting Director.
Last usaf B-52 strategic bomber, produced by the Boeing Company, left final assembly area at Wichita, Kansas. The B-52H model was the 744th in the series since the first B-52 came from Boeing plant on November 29, 1951. With numerous improvements throughout its production, B-52 had eight versions—from B-52A to B-52H (speed of 650 mph and unrefueled range of 12,500 miles). Models G and H were capable of carrying Hound Dog 500-mile-range missile and Skybolt 1,000-mile-range missile.
British scientists protested U.S. plans to explode “rainbow” bombs 500 miles above the Pacific test area (called “rainbow” bombs because high-altitude nuclear explosions light up the sky thousands of miles away). Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Radio Observatory, Martin Ryle, radio-astronomer, and Sir Mark Oliphant, Australian nuclear physicist, all protested the “probable” distortion of the Van Allen radiation belt by the forthcoming U.S. tests.
Third balloon in radiation-experiment series conducted by Ames Research Center was launched from Goose Bay, Labrador. In two hours, the balloon had carried its payload of two monkeys, four hamsters, and instruments to an altitude of 85,000 feet, where it was to catch prevailing winds and drift westward across Canada.	...	.
Last of 4 solid-fuel Areas rockets fired at White Sands in nasa Langley Research Center photographic study of deployment characteristics of 15-ft.-diameter parachute for use in measuring atmospheric winds at altitudes from 100,000 to 240,000 ft. Other 40-mi.-high Areas shots were on June 30, July 2, and July 5,
Editorial on tactical fighter (tfx) program, contract for which was awarded to General Dynamics and Grumman Aircraft by dod, appeared in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “. . . Underlying the whole tfx concept is one of the solid, basic technical explorations by the researchers of the old National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (naca) that did so much to keep this country the international leader in supersonic aircraft development. Without the fundamental research into the variable sweep wing and the detailed development of this K‘ iple by the Langley research laboratory group headed by Stack, the current tfx concepts of both final competitors would have been impossible. . . . The full story of the Langley contribution to the tfx program should be hammered home as an example of how these research and development investments eventually pay substantial dividends. . . .”
mariner ii interplanetary probe reported data showing that interplanetary space was free of cosmic dust and debris found in vicinity of earth, Dr. Wlliiam H. Pickering, director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, told press interviewers. “On this basis, one has to think of the earth as moving in its own cloud of dust,” Dr. Pickering added.
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s selection of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. to establish method of assessing hazard potential of operational nuclear vehicle (Saturn C-5/Nerva) was reported. Three-phase study would include: (1) study of influence of impact delay time on hazard magnitude at impact in case of flight failure; (2) study of effect of vehicle trajectory on flight hazards; and (3) study to produce integrated hazards evaluation technique.
Establishment of nasa Industrial Applications Advisory Committee announced, with Earl P. Stevenson (former president and chairman of the board of Arthur D. Little, Inc.) as chairman. The committee wollid assist in transferring new scientific knowledge from nasa’s research and development programs to industry.
nasa supplemental appropriation for FY 1962 was approved by the House and the Senate. It carried $82,500,000 for research and development and $71,000,000 for construction and facilities at Cape Canaveral.
Nova iaunch facilities study contract was awarded to Martin-Marietta Corp., Denver, by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The study assumes Nova will be launched from Cape Canaveral.
nasa Ames Research Center reported that a number of beetles had survived the 25-mile-high balloon flight in which the monkey and hamster passengers in the bioscience payload perished because of a failure in the life-support system supplying oxygen and heat.
Sudden drop in voltage on mariner ii Venus probe was reported by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists, jpl turned off the probe’s four interplanetary experiments to conserve on-board power for experiments in the vicinity of Venus. Discounting any probabllity of the solar cells being affected by radiation, experts indicated the problem could have come from faulty voltage regulators.
Cosmonaut Nikolayev, by 10:00 PM Moscow time, had orbited the earth 40 times and had passed the million-mile mark in vostok iii. At this time, his companion Cosmonaut Popovich in vostok iv completed 24 orbits of the earth and logged 621,000 miles of space flight. Sohio Research Center calculated the two spacecraft were separated by 1,793 mi. at about 8:00 PM est.
In address to Loyola University in Los Angeles, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) said: “For the first time in history, scientific and engineering knowledge gives man a realistic means of world wide attack on the age-old problems of hunger, poverty, and disease . . . Now science has opened the way to space. “There is every reason to be grateful for this new knowledge and power. But some have gone too far. Instead of merely accepting and using the fruits of scientific discovery, they have made a religion of science. This, in essence, is what has happened under Communism—and it has turned out to be the most false, deceptive, and cruel religion the world has ever known. It means that men and women are treated the way a biologist treats plants and animals. It is power without principle . . .” June 17-August 10: Space Science Summer Study, sponsored by National Academy of Sciences Office of Space Sciences (funded by nasa grant), held at State University of Iowa, Dr. James Van Allen as chairman. Scientists represented nasa, dod, aec, nsf, private industry, and research organizations. Review of nasa’s space science program was contained in a detailed nas report released January 1963.
In Voice of America broadcast, Dr. Christian J. Lambertsen of the University of Pennsylvania said that there is an increasing recognition of the role man can play in space exploration because “there are aspects of exploration which no machine yet conceived can carry out.” He pointed out that “the only computer capable of all functions such as remembering, recognizing, learning, thinking, reasoning, judging, integrating, reacting, communicating, and logically altering a previously programmed sequence of events is man himself.” He then reviewed the medicophysio-logical factors to be overcome for manned space flight, and he warned that “even the practicability of truly extended flight outside the earth’s atmosphere is not yet assured.”
nasa research pilot Glenn W. Stinnett and Stanford physiologist Dr. Terence A. Rogers emerged from 7-day confinement in a simulated lunar spacecraft. Unique study by Ames Research Center involved performance of continuous and realistic professional tasks while under confined space flight conditions.
Special hand tools for use in zero-gravity conditions were tested by personnel of the Manned Spacecraft and the Marshall Space Flight Centers. Experiments were conducted in simulated space environment to try out non-torque hand tools drawn from a number of industrial sources.
Aerobee 150A launched from Wallops Station with 271-lb. payload boosted to 97-mile altitude; carried camera to study behavior of liquid hydrogen under conditions of symmetrical heating and zero gravity. Lewis Research Center payload was recovered 25 minutes after liftoff.
Second altitude record attempt in two days by X-15 was scrubbed just before drop from B-52, caused by failure of inertial guidance system.
Announced that U.S.S.R. Ministry of Communications had already issued postage stamp honoring double space flight of vostok iii and iv.
Dr. Eberhard Rees, Deputy Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was quoted as stating that Soviet dual-flights vostok iii and iv came “six months to a year” earlier than he had expected.
ias awarded its Flight Test Engineering Fellowship to Raymond P. Boyden, Director of Engineering, U.S. Army Hq., St. Louis. Gene J. Matranga of nasa’s Flight Research Center and Maj. James C. Wayne (usaf) were named runnerups. All will attend Princeton’s Aeronautical Engineering Department.
Soviet delegate Platon D. Morozov demanded that U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space reach agreement on legal aspects of space exploration before considering scientific and technical program, at opening meeting of Committee’s autumn 1962 session. Morozov argued that U.S. high-altitude nuclear test in July had caused atmospheric radiation that imperiled the lives of Soviet cosmonauts; he also commented that international space cooperation would be possible only “in a disarmed world.” When U.S. delegate Francis T. P. Plimpton said he hoped Mr. Morozov was not trying to “block progress” on technical issues, Morozov said U.S.S.R. had accepted “in principle” the recommendations of the scientific and technical committee and later added that his Government would not make agreement on international technical cooperation dependent upon acceptance of Soviet views on legal issues. Committee finally agreed to consider the two subcommittee reports jointly. Subcommittee on international space law had met in Geneva last summer but had failed to reach agreement.
usaf Titan II icbm launched from amr on a planned 5,000-mi. test flight, the missile falling short of its target but achieving most of its test objectives;.
Czech scientist Adeneck Dobrichovsky, writing in a Prague technical journal, said the U.S.S.R. would launch a four-man space observatory for two-month orbit in 1965-66.
U.S.S.R., U.S., and 13 other countries proposed that U.N. General Assembly call for urgent efforts to break deadlock over legal problems of space exploration. Compromise resolution was submitted for consideration in General Assembly’s Political Committee, which was debating report of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
National Science Foundation reported that Congress had appropriated $10.8 billion for research and development in FY 62, which included $3 billion for research, $6.7 billion for development, $1 billion for facilities, and $100 million for information. nasa spent $1.4 billion, the dod $6.2 billion.
Panel of the Federal Council for Science and Technology, headed by Allen V. Astin, submitted report to White House. Report said that Federal laboratories are in imminent danger of losing their best scientists and engineers because present salary scales are not competitive. In a memorandum to Federal department and agency heads, President Kennedy stated that the Administration’s proposal for pay increases met one of the recommendations of the panel’s report: “With the increasing importance of science and technology in developing our mllitary defense, in achieving our foreign policy objectives, and in sustaining the health and welfare of every citizen, the Federal Government must attract and retain its share of talented scientists and engineers at all levels.”
nasa Ames Research Center announced construction of four space research facilities, totaling more than $14 million, had been authorized for FY 1963: biosciences laboratory, guidance facility, radiative heat system for Mass Transfer Facility, and helium tunnel. Bioscience laboratory would be used for studies in genetics, radiobiology, immunology, and environmental physiology, and detection of extraterrestrial life. Guidance facility, consisting of three-man capsule with systems and equipment, combined analog and digital computer, and rotating centrifuge to drive capsule, would be used to obtain data on integrated design of guidance, stabilization, control, and crew support systems in advanced manned spacecraft. Radiative heat system would permit Ames scientists to investigate re-entry heating of spacecraft from lunar or planetary missions. Sections of complete heat shields wlli be tested at the facility. Mach 50 helium tunnel would be used to complement the existing Ames hypersonic free-flight facility, which used gun-launched models to obtain 50 times speed of sound.
Rift (Reactor-in-Flight-Test) bidders conference held at Marshall Space Flight Center.
An estimated 7,000 persons visited the opening of the Space Museum at the nasa Marshall Space Flight Center.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, stated in press interview that the recently-created radiation belt had not altered plans for Project Mercury manned flight MA-8. “We don’t have enough data on this. We are looking at this thing, but until we have looked at it a lot more completely, I would not like to see us change our. plans.”
Congressman George Meader (Mich.) introduced H.R. 13130, bill to establish a Commission on Research and Development. The new bill was a “perfected” version of his earlier bill. He called attention to S. 2771, the bill which had passed the Senate, and urged that “speedy action be taken on the legislation.”
Maj. Gen. O. J. Ritland (usaf), formerly Commander of afsc’s Space Systems Division, was named Deputy to the Commander, afsc, for Manned Space Flight. Gen. Ritland would be in charge of liaison with and usaf support of nasa’s manned space flight program.
Issue of ars’ Astronautics contained series of articles by nasa Langley Research Center scientists and others, reviewing LaRC research program on manned space-station technology since early 1960.
In address at Ohio State University, General Curtis E. LeMay (usaf) said: “It is in the fields of science and technology that the greatest explosion of problems is occurring. We are in the midst of an age of technological change that will make the industrial revolution seem dull indeed. The problems associated with technical change are producing opportunities in greater abundance than ever before. Opportunity is not only knocking at the door, it is beating gongs all around the house.... “In science and technology, there is no ceiling. We are going into space. This will be man’s greatest adventure—not only for the men who crew the ships and make the journey, but for the people on the ground who support the effort.... “The free world faces a grave threat. In rapidfire fashion, new discoveries and developments are being made almost daily that prevent us from relaxing our vigilance. Our future is directly dependent on having an educated and informed people who are in tune with the world tempo and alert to the myriad applications and possibilities in all fields of human endeavor ... .”
Soviet Cosmonauts Nikolayev (vostok iii) and Popovich (vostok iv) continued to orbit the earth, their flight paths reported by Sohio Research Center as ranging from 1,382 mi. to 1,793 mi. apart. Radio Moscow reported the cosmonauts were maintaining radio contact with earth and between themselves. By 4:10 PM Moscow time vostok iii completed 52 orbits; vostok iv, 36 orbits. Soviet government remained silent on plans to land the pair. Cosmonaut Popovich, orbiting the earth in vostok iv, passed the mlliion-mile mark shortly after retiring, about 9:00 PM Moscow time.
nasa awarded contract to Kollsman Instrument Division for 38inch-diameter primary mirror in the space telescope to be used in the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao).
usaf-nasa 30-member ad hoc committee established to plan a “joint hypersonic research program for the next couple of years.” The committee would consider two primary missions for the Aerospace Plane (asp), or hypersonic aircraft: (1) vehicle system to provide earth-to-orbit-and-return capability; and (2) earth aircraft capable of 5,000-mi. unrefueled flight, asp would be follow-on program to X-15 research aircraft program.
Report by Dr. James R. Killian, Jr., released by the National Civil Service League, stated that the U.S. Government is “unusually desperate” for more and better scientists and engineers. Education is not keeping pace “with the growing size of our national commitments in science and technology” and Government is being outbid by industries and even some universities for scarce talent. Greatest need, said the former scientific adviser to President Eisenhower and now President of mit, is for scientists and engineers “with managerial ability.” “Already there is a dangerous weakening of supervising technical leadership.”
Velery Lutsky, Soviet astronomer of the Moscow Planetarium, said in English-language Radio Moscow broadcast to North America, that the flight of aurora 7 made it “more urgent” that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. cooperate in space exploration.
Reported that Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory was establishing a mid western network of 16 observing stations with four automatic cameras to photograph the night sky to locate meteorites quickly after they fall. Located in 7 midwestem states, the stations will scan a total possible recovery area of two and one half billion acres.
White House Reorganization Plan No. 2 became effective, establishing the Office of Science and Technology in the Executive Office of the President. Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner was appointed Director, retaining duties of the special assistant to the President for science and technology and receiving certain functions transferred from the National Science Foundation.
Langley afb celebrated its 45th anniversary with the tac Thunderbird team, a band concert, displays of aircraft and missiles, and displays of nasa’s Langley Research Center highlighting the “open house” day.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists disclosed they were conducting radar exploration of Venus. Data obtained by the experiment, continuing from October 1 for about three months, would be compared with those obtained by mariner ii spacecraft when it flies in vicinity of Venus.
National Geographic Society and Lowell Observatory announced preparation of an atlas, “A Photographic Study of the Brighter Planets,” containing “the most detailed and revealing pictures obtained since telescopes were perfected especially for observing the planets rather than the distant stars.”
nasa and Indiana University jointly announced experimental center for industrial applications of aerospace research would be established at Indiana Univ., with initial nasa funding of $150,000. Project would involve the university’s business professors, biologists, geologists, physicists, and others, working with research and development people of industry and nasa.
nasa announced $240,000 grant to Smithsonian Astro-physical Observatory for setting up 16-station “prairie network” with automatic cameras to photograph bright meteors over seven midwestern states and to enable prompt recovery of meteorites. Project would enable scientists to study chemical and organic structures of meteorites before contamination on the surface of the earth.
nasa Langley Research Center (LaRc) announced plans to build a cyclotron laboratory on 1,300 acres of usAF-owned land, a former Bomarc missile site, halfway between LaRc and Williamsburg, Va. The laboratory will include two accelerators to generate electrons and protons of the energies spacecraft will encounter on deep space flights.
nas Committee on Atmospheric Sciences submitted three-volume report on “The Atmospheric Sciences, 1961-70” to Dr. Jerome Wiesner, Special Assistant for Science and Technology to the President. Prepared under Dr. Sverre Petterssen of the University of Chicago and Dr. C. Gordon Little of the National Bureau of Standards, the report recommended: (1) a tripled funding of scientific research in the atmospheric sciences over the next 10 years; (2) university output of doctorates in the atmospheric sciences be increased by a factor of at least four or five; (3) universities must broaden and strengthen their programs to become national centers of academic and scientific excellence; and (4) Government research agencies must develop more rigorous research and educational programs.
Army Signal Research and Development Laboratory at Fort Monmouth announced development of a super-powered laser with a peak power of more than 3 million watts. The laser (light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation) is 300 times as powerful as lasers in general laboratory use. It has potential in the fields of communications, range-finding, space vehicle guidance and special-purpose illumination.
Radio signals from Johannesburg, South Africa, activated four observation instruments on the mariner ii space probe. Transmitted data would be evaluated by Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (jpl).
Univ. of Illinois radiotelescope at Vermilion River Observatory was dedicated. The radiotelescope, world’s largest, included 400' x 600' x 65' parabolic reflector. Prof. George W. Swenson, Jr., Univ. of Illinois project engineer for the observatory, said radiotelescope’s first job wollid be to map Milky Way. The $871,650 telescope was financed mainly with grants from Office of Naval Research (onr), with supplemental grants from National Science Foundation (nsf) and Univ. of Illinois. _	_
nasa approved Saturn C-5 development program and authorized nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to direct its development.
(1) communications satellites; (2) weather satellites; (3) coordination of tracking and data reception on scientific satellites; (4) international search and rescue operations to recover space crews who have returned to earth outside the planned recovery areas; (5) mapping the earth’s magnetic field and exchange of information on space medicine; (6) joint agreement on problems of international law as related to space exploration, beyond those points already agreed to in the U.N., especially the prohibition of space experiments that would inhibit the space experiments of other nations. Premier Khrushchev warned, however, that space cooperation would “depend to some extent on the settlement of the disarmament problem,” since much military hardware and techniques were used in peaceful space exploration vehicles.
At meeting of the National Academy of Sciences at Austin, Texas, President Frederick Seitz said that other nations should bear a larger share of space exploration efforts. This would help solve “a big problem for us today—whether the attention being given to aero-space in America is draining too much manpower from the other sciences.”
Army Pershing missile successfully fired on longest test flight to date—400 miles—from amr.
nasa Ames Research Center established Space Sciences Div. to be headed by Dr. Charles P. Sonett. New division will conduct research in the areas of geophysics, interplanetary and planetary physics, planetary sciences, astronomy, and astrophysics.
S-IV stage for Saturn space vehicle arrived at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., after 23-day journey from Douglas Missiles and Space Systems Div., Santa Monica, Calif. First Saturn stage to be shipped by water from West Coast manufacturing site, the S-IV would be mated with other Saturn stages in dynamic test tower at Marshall, for series of bending and vibration tests. Its external configuration, weight, and other characteristics were same as S-IV flight units.
Hartley A. Soul<5 of nasa’s Langley Research Center retired after 34 years’ service at Langley. Soul6 was instrumental in the establishment of what is now the nasa Flight Research Center at Edwards, California, and directed the research on the X-l (which in October 1947 first broke the speed of sound) and the X-15. More recently he was nasa Project Director for the multimillion-dollar PVoject Mercury worldwide tracking and ground instrumentation system.
In regular press conference, President Kennedy announced that he had asked his Science Advisory Committee, in cooperation with the Federal Council for Science and Technology, to report “as quickly as possible on the specific measures that can be taken within and without the Government to develop the necessary and well-qualified scientists and engineers and technicians to meet our society’s complex needs—government, educational and industrial.” He prefaced his announcement with a review of the declining number of scientists and engineers educated in the United States since 1951.
In address to ars lunar meeting in Cleveland, Dr. James A. Van Allen said that protons of the inner radiation belt could be a serious hazard for extended manned space flight, and that nuclear detonations might be capable of cleaning out these inner belt protons, perhaps for a prolonged period, for making manned orbits about 300-mi.-high above the earth. Van Allen said that the recent shot over Johnston Island was far too small and too low to have such an effect.
Polaris A-2 missile, modified to carry guidance system for advanced A-3 model, was launched on successful 1,500-mi. test flight from Cape Canaveral.
Scientists at Jodrell Bank Experimental Station announced they had measured part of Milky Way’s magnetic field, marking first time positive evidence had been obtained of the field’s existence. Milky Way’s magnetic field measured 25 mlliionths of a gauss (earth surface’s magnetic field measures about half a gauss). Led by Dr. Rodney D. Davies, research team had spent 20,000 hours over past four years on the experiment, involving radiotelescopic measurement of light from a star cluster 1,000 light years away.
Army Nike-Zeus test flight from Point Mugu, Calif., a partial success in that “missile accepted and correctly executed control commands transmitted from a ground gllidance center,” although third stage did not fire.
nasa radiation-research balloon released biological payload near Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, after 130,500-ft.-high, 51-hour flight from Goose Bay, Labrador. Two monkeys survived the flight in good condition, but four hamsters could not survive the day-long recovery operation in the Canadian wilderness; fate of the flour beetles was not yet known. The animals and insects were flown to the University of California at Berkeley for scientific study. This was the second in a series of four balloon experiments conducted by nasa Ames Research Center.
dod announced that it was consolidating all military basic research overseas. The first step would be the opening of a Defense Research Office in Rio de Janiero, Brazil, on July 1, 1962, to coordinate the military basic research program throughout Latin America, nsf and nih would open offices in the same building for their independent programs, with all efforts coordinated by the State Department.	_
Tass reported that Soviet astronomers of the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory discovered molecular oxygen in the outer atmosphere of Venus, using 157.6-in. solar telescope and a special spectograph. Also reported were indications of the presence of nitrogen.
Fourth official anniversary of nasa, charged by the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to organize and conduct U.S. space exploration for peaceful purposes. No new agency of the Executive Branch of the Federal Government was created by the transfer of so many units and programs of other departments or agencies as nasa.
Electricians began to return to work at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsvllie, Ala., after a ten-day walkout. Estimated 70% of total construction work-force, including workers of other trades who had refused to cross electricians’ picket lines, had returned to work. Hearing on the strike by President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission was scheduled for August 27.
President Kennedy sent to Congress a reorganization plan that would establish an Office of Science and Technology within the White House staff. Its director would advise and assist the President on (1) major science policies and programs in the Federal government; (2) assessment of scientific and technical developments for effect on national policies; (3) review, integration, and coordination of major Federal science activities; (4) ensuring “good and close relations” with Nation’s scientists and engineers. President said this would leave the National Science Foundation free to concentrate on fostering basic research and science education.
An S-IV stage for the two-stage Saturn began three-week, 3,500-mi. trip via barge from Douglas Aircraft Co. in Santa Monica, Calif., to nasa Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Ala., for dynamic testing.
Soviet scientist A. Prokhorov, writing in Soviet labor organization’s publication Trud, stated that study of structure of living organisms would provide great opportunities for their utilization in space exploration. He stated that the “general reliability of modern automation systems is less than the reliability of each of their components taken individually. Living organisms, on the other hand, having developed over millions of years, are much more reliable than their component organs.”
President Kennedy toured nasa’s Manned Space Center, after speaking at Rice University, Houston, where he said: “. . . Man, in his quest for knowledge and progress, is determined and cannot be deterred. The exploration of space will go ahead, whether we join in it or not, and it is one of the great adventures of all time, and no nation which expects to be the leader of other nations can expect to stay behind in this race for space. “Those who came before us made certain that this country rode the first waves of the industrial revolutions, the first waves of modem invention, and the first wave of nuclear power, and this generation does not intend to founder in the backwash of the coming age of space. “We mean to be a part of it. We mean to lead it, for the eyes of the world now look into space, to the moon and to the planets beyond, and we have vowed that we shall not see it governed by a hostile flag of conquest, but by a banner of freedom and peace. “We have vowed that we shall not see space filled with weapons of mass destruction, but with instruments of knowledge and understanding. “Yet the vows of this Nation can only be fulfilled if we in this Nation are first, and, therefore, we intend to be first. In short, our leadership in science and in industry, our hopes for peace and security, our obligations to ourselves as well as others, all require us to make this effort, to solve these mysteries, to solve them for the good of all men, and to become the world’s leading spacefaring nation. “We sail on this new sea because there is new knowledge to be gained, and new rights to be won, and they must be won and used for the progress of all people. For space science, like nuclear science and all technology, has no conscience of its own. “Whether it wlli become a force for good or lli depends on man, and only if the United States occupies a position of preeminence can we help decide whether this new ocean wlli be a sea of peace or a new, terrifying theater of war. “I do not say that we should or wlli go unprotected against the hostile misuse of space any more than we go unprotected against the hostile land or sea, but I do say that space can be explored and mastered without feeding the fires of war, without repeating the mistakes that man has made in extending his writ around this globe of ours. “There is no strife, no prejudice, no national conflict in outer space as yet. Its hazards are hostile to us all. Its conquest deserves the best of all mankind, and its opportunity for peaceful cooperation may never come again......... “We choose to go to the moon ... in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard, because that goal wlli serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills, because that challenge is one that we are willing to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone, and one which we intend to win, and the others, too. “It is for these reasons that I regard the decision last year to shift our efforts in space from low to high gear as among the most important decisions that wlli be made during my incumbency in the office of the Presidency. . . . “We have had our failures, but so have others, even if they do not admit them. And they may be less public. “To be sure, we are behind, and will be behind for some time in manned space flight. But we do not intend to stay behind. In this decade we shall make up and move ahead. . . .” September 12: nasa announced it would launch a special satellite before the end of the year to “obtain information on possible effects of radiation on future statellites and to give the world’s scientific community additional data on the artificial environment created by the [radiation] belt.” The 100-lb. satellite would be launched from Cape Canaveral into an elliptical orbit ranging from about 170-mi. perigee to 10,350-mi. apogee.
General Mills launched balloon, trailing 315-ft.-long reflectorized polyethelene tube in test to improve long-range communications, from GM’s research center at New Brighton, Minn. The cylinder, 23 ft. in diameter, was designed as a relay device to receive commercial TV signals from wkbt-tv, La Crosse, Wise., and relay them 260 mi. to usaf base, Wadena, Minn.
nasa announced signing of $215,502,744 contract with Chrysler Corp. for production of Saturn S-I stages. Chrysler would deliver the 21 units (instead of 20 as originally planned) between early 1964 and late 1966, beginning with the S-I for Saturn SA-9. nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, with development responsibility for Saturn, would fabricate boosters for first eight vehicles. Chrysler would build the S-I stages at nasa Michoud Operations plant near New Orleans.
usaf prepared proposed FY 1964 budget requesting $23.5 billion, including funds for construction of eight RS-70 reconnaissance bombers and for expanded development of space weapons. Also considered in budget preparation was long-range proposal to use nasa’s Gemini two-man spacecraft as a stepping stone toward developing military manned space flight capability.
In the Third International Space Science Symposium sponsored by cospar, Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists W. K. Victor and Robertson Stevens reported that radar soundings of Venus suggest that its surface material and roughness are comparable to that of the earth. Radar probes of Venus have demonstrated that uhf signals can be used for space communications over distances of 50-75 mlliion miles.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa’s Director of Manned Space Flight, testified before a subcommittee of the House Science and Astronautics Committee on the very large and complex manned space flight program. The most important step in space capability in 1961, he said, “was not that of awarding particular contracts or making technical decisions, but rather Mr. Webb’s carefully planned reorganization of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.” Speaking of future launch sites for the Advanced Saturn vehicle as the workhorse of the manned lunar program, he said: “. . . it shows our plans for an entirely new concept of launching our large space vehicles. Instead of literally assembling or building the launch vehicles on the pads as we do at present, this arrangement would permit assembly and test at a location remote from the launch pads and under cover, protected from weather. It wlli be possible to have vertical transfer of the entirely assembled vehicle to the launch pad in a tested condition. This arrangement should offer many advantages in order to permit better and more thorough checkout, and to assure more rapid launching and efficient utilization of each pad. For the extremely tight schedules that wlli be required for launch operations in support of orbital rendezvous, this rapid launch capabllity is highly desirable.”
Speaking before mit School of Industrial Management, nasa Manned Space Flight Director D. Brainerd Holmes said: “The major national problem today is not a lack of technological or economic resources. It is a lack of trained and courageous minded men. For this reason, the integration of our human, economic, and technological resources is basically a manpower problem. We need a special kind of man. “This kind of man not only combines general and scientific training and general management with technical experience, but he has the true courage of his convictions. Above all, he must be tireless and devoted and not give in to compromisers and obstructionists. Technical people may not necessarily be the best managers, but in this age of technology if you do not have the technical answers jmu cannot make good decisions. This is the vital point I want to stress to you today. . . . “We need group research, group engineering, and group science. But we also badly need individual creativity. In short, we need to utilize effectively all of our available capabilities, regardless of the channels they take. We must integrate group and individual efforts.”
Secretary of Labor Arthur Goldberg, in telegram message, told unions involved in strike at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center it was “imperative” that union members “return to work immediately and remain at work.”
Article in Komsomolskaya Pravda stated that one of mariner ii’s main missions was to learn temperatures of Venutian atmosphere and surface but that Soviet radioastronomers already had answered these questions. Experiments by Pulkovo Observatory determined that Venutian surface was between 300° C and 400° C, and Venutian atmosphere was within limits of 0° C to 100° C and therefore, that Venus should be defined as a “red hot planet.”
General Electric announced that control system for first Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (oao) had successfully completed its first simulated space flight test.
Soviet scientist N. Varvarov was reported to have stated U.S.S.R. program to orbit one-man spacecraft had been completed with flights of vostok iii and vostok iv. During October: In letter report to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden disclosed problems in the Centaur launch vehicle program: Atlas-Centaur capability to carry heavy payloads under severe wind conditions must be studied in greater detail; quality of fabrication must be improved to reach desired level of quality control; guidance system requires further development to achieve necessary accuracy and reliability; tank fabrication requires better welding techniques; Atlas-Centaur inflight separation requires further analysis; nose cone and insulation panels must be further tested to prove their aerodynamic-load resistance. Report said about $100 million would be spent on Centaur in FY 1963 to accelerate development, nasa Lewis Research Center would study use of Centaur in combination with Titan II, Saturn C-l, and Saturn C-lB boosters.
S-I stage of Saturn C-l space vehicle was static-fired for full duration at full thrust (1.5 mlliion lbs.) for first time, at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Previous full-duration firings had attained 1.3 mlliion-lb. thrust.
Plans of a non-profit Washington Planetarium and Space Center Corp. were reported at the National Capital Planning Commission by Father Francis J. Heyden, S.J., of Georgetown University Observatory. They called for the construction of a $1.5 million, 85-foot-diameter dome on Daingerfield Island, south of the Washington National Airport. The planetarium would “provide the public with a much needed space education facility” and would be operated by the National Park Service.
In press conference following MA-8, D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, said: “This was a highly successful flight, magnificently performed. It proved there is no substitute for sound engineering and thorough training.” Walter C. Williams, msc Director of Mercury Operations, said that “so far as I am concerned, the mission was perfect.” He added that the next Mercury mission would be a 24-hour flight in early 1963.
Dr. Bernard Lubarsky of nasa’s Lewis Research Center named one of Ten Outstanding Young Men in the Federal Government for 1961 to receive Arthur S. Flemming Awards.
25-ft. space environmental simulator used for the first time at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, in beginning of 3-week test of Mariner spacecraft designed for a Venus probe.
Space-age religion must be an “open undogmatic religion which itself reaches out for undiscovered truth,” Rabbi Sheldon H. Blank, professor at the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, said in Williamsburg, Va. If space exploration discovers rational people living on other planets, religious people on earth “wlli have to abandon parochialism and reach for a God who is less comfortably near than we have wanted to believe.”
Dr. Lawrence E. Lamb, chief of Clinical Sciences Div. of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, predicted before the Second InterstateTScientific^Assembly:bf D.'C. and Virginia Physicians that manned space exploration would yield a wealth of information for practicing physicians during the next ten years.
nasa Ames Research Center said that its high-altitude, radiationresearch balloon with cargo of four hamsters and two monkeys had been lost in a storm over Manitoba. The balloon was last seen nearing the end of its 1,900-mi. flight as it entered a storm over God’s Lake, in northeastern Manitoba. This was the third in Ames’ series of balloon flights and the first loss of payload.
nasa announced Col. George M. Knauf (usaf), Deputy Director of Space Medicine in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, has retired from usaf and accepted appointment to same position as a civllian. Dr. Knauf was responsible for much of development and organization of Project Mercury medical recovery support operation.
Drew Pearson repeated rumors previously published in Ms column that 5 Soviet cosmonauts may have been killed in manned space flight attempts.
nasa Flight Research Center announced it had received A-5A (A3J) aircraft from usn for use in its supersonic transport research. The “Vigilante” would be used primarily in study of problems in terminal area of air-traffic control operations. Working closely with faa officials, frc engineers would plan and conduct supersonic flights of Vigilante on assigned Federal airways and into high-air-traffic-density areas; the flights would provide basis for formulation of control plans necessary for safe operation of future commercial supersonic aircraft.
H. Julian Allen, Assistant Director of nasa Ames Research Center, proposed at NASA-University conference in Chicago that interplanetary spacecraft be cone-shaped and that they enter the atmosphere point-end-first. The originator of concept for returning orbital spacecraft blunt-end-first, Allen stated: “Blunt vehicles are desirable when you are dealing with speeds of the sub-orbital range up to speeds required to escape the effects of the earth’s gravity. But when entry speeds exceed this range, as they probably wlli on return to the earth from trips to other planets, radiation heating drives you away from very blunt bodies, such as the Mercury capsule, to bodies with conical noses. . . . Our concepts of aerodynamic flow, in short, must change as the velocities with which we are dealing increase. . . .”
U.S. District Judge Clarence W. Allgood ordered striking electricians back to work at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. President of the afl-cio International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Gordon Freeman, also directed the workers to return to their jobs.
afsc announced that Colonel Charles E. “Chuck” Yeager (usaf), first man to fly faster than the speed of sound (X-l, October 14, 1947), was named Commandant of usaf Aerospace Research Pilot School at afftc, Edwards afb, Calif.
usaf Minuteman icbm launched from silo at Cape Canaveral in 3,600-mile test flight.
New York Times reported a 300-ft.-diameter radiotelescope at National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va., had recently detected in one day as many radio signals from Jupiter as smaller instruments have recorded in a month. Source of Jupiter’s long-wave radio signals was still unresolved.
Dr. Robert M. Petrie, Director of Dominion Astro-physical Observatory in Victoria, B.C., told aaas in Philadelphia that the Milky Way Galaxy appears to be expanding. Dr. Petrie’s 20-year study of 600 “B” stars (hottest and brightest stars in the galaxy) produced evidence that our sun and all other stars are moving away from the galactic center.
usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories reported its 150-ft. radiotelescope at Sagamore Hill Observatory, Hamilton, Mass., would be ready for operation in early 1963. Telescope would be among three largest radio telescopes in U.S., the others being one operated by Stanford Univ. at Palo Alto, Calif., and one by nrl at Chesapeake Beach, Md.
The World’s Fair Corp. announced it was developing plans for a unified space exploration exhibit called “Aerospace Island,” as part of the U.S. exhibit in the 1964-65 World’s Fair.
In speech to National Conference on Application of Electrical Insulation, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) pointed to the lessons of history: “. . . Our boldest predictions do not keep very far ahead of technical developments. “A second lesson is that the advance of scientific and engineering knowledge is most effectively achieved through joint effort. The growth of military airpower has owed much to the scientific and industrial community .... I think we can predict the same mutual benefits in space exploration . . .”
An estimated 23,000 visitors toured Marshall Space Flight Center during the “Family Day” observance of msfc’s second birthday.
Army Pershing missile destroyed in test flight from Cape Canaveral when second stage became erratic, the second failure in last three launchings after 13 straight successes.
Preparations for Operation Harp (High Altitude Research Project) announced by Dr. D. L. Mordell, Faculty of Engineering Dean at Canada’s McGill University. In the McGill-initiated project, McGill’s 66-in., 470-lb. Martlet missiles would be fired to approximately 200-mi. altitude from two 16-in., 140-ton guns provided by U.S. Navy. With the first launching in October from Barbados, B.W.I., McGill would become the first university to conduct its own space research program. At least 6 firings would be made before Christmas. Also involved in Harp were U.S. Army, which transported naval guns from Hampton Roads, Va., to Barbados; Florida State University meteorologists; and usn weather-observation aircraft.
Five nasa scientists, led by Ozro M. Coverington of gsfc, arrived in Australia to inspect proposed sites for new tracking stations.
House voted approval of plan to create a White House Office of Science and Technology to coordinate Federal research and development programs now approaching expenditures of $12 blliion per year.
In speech to the ars Capital Section, Rear Adm. J. P. Monroe (usn) stated that the Navy had an interest in space exploration and operations as essential as its need for aircraft was in the past. He pointed out that dod’s responsibility for developing a military capability in space was not inconsistent with the nation’s peaceful objectives.
