nasa announced signing of $456.6 million contract for Project Gemini spacecraft with McDonnell Aircraft Corp. Development of the two-man spacecraft began at McDonnell in December 1961 under preliminary letter contract. Contract called for 13 flightrated spacecraft, 12 of which would be used for space flight and one for ground testing. McDonnell would provide other services and equipment under the contract, including two mission simulator trainers, a docking simulator trainer, five boilerplate spacecraft, and three “static articles”—spacecraft for ground test evaluation in vibration and impact tests, (nasa Release 63-66; msc Release 63-71)
Dr. Henry J. E. Reid, who was Director of naca’s Langley Research Center for 34 years prior to his retirement, was named “Elder Statesman of Aviation” by the National Aeronautic Association. (Langley Release)
Robert Hotz wrote in Aviation Week and Space Technology “It is an inevitable historic trend that as new technology is transformed from the spectacular experimental stage to reliable operational use, peripheral public interest lags almost in proportion to the increase in technical significance. For example, the world press could write about little else for months after Charles Lindbergh made the first solo transatlantic aircraft flight from New York to Paris just 36 years ago this month. Last year more than two million people followed his trail across the transatlantic airway—most of them in jet transports taking about one-fourth the time of Lindbergh’s flight. Yet only a few obscure statistical paragraphs in the daily press recorded this tremendously significant perspective on the trail Lindbergh blazed. “And so it is likely to be wTith manned space flight, as it passes from the experimental flight-test phase into reliable operational {>erformance. . . . [MA-9] is less exciting than the first breath-ess attempt of man simply to survive short-duration space flight. But it is the type of foundation on which future capability can be built solidly. . . . “Mercury must go down in history as one of the most successful technical programs this nation has ever had. . . .” (Av. Wk., 5/20/63,21)
Sen. Albert Gore (D.-Tenn.) wrote in the New York Times Magazine about space law and the Dryden-Blagonravov agreements: “This agreement, though limited in nature, is significant if for no other reason than that it indicates there are some areas in which our two countries have found it possible to cooperate in outer space development. If successfully implemented it can, perhaps, lead to other and broader agreements. The Dryden-Blagonravov agreement relates to scientific and technical matters. It was achieved despite political differences. Similarly, agreement should be possible on some legal questions if we can isolate those questions from political considerations. “Perhaps if we can build on these small areas of agreement an escalation of the arms race into outer space can be avoided. It is conceivable that science and technology, so often in history energized by the threat or event of war, may, through space research and development, pave the way for removal of the barriers erected by hate, fear, and suspicion.” {NTT Magazine, 11/10/63, 23 ff)
dod announced Army Corps of Engineers, New England Div., would provide design and construction assistance to nasa on proposed Electronics Research Center in Boston area. (dod Release 366-63)
usaf Minuteman icbm traveled more than 4,000 mi. down amr in “flawless” test flight, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/24/63; M<&R 1/28/63, 11)
nasa Flight Research Center announced award of $128,675 to Comcor, Inc., for service and maintenance of computer system used to simulate flights of X-15 aircraft. Computer system is capable of providing actual X-15 performance and stability conditions that may be expected in flight, (frc Release 3-63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert R. Gil-ruth announced revision of management responsibilities, dividing operational from developmental activities within msc projects. Walter C.. Williams, Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and Flight Operations, would develop mission plans and rules, crew training, ground support and mission control complexes, and would manage all msc flight operations; concurrently, Williams would be Director of Flight Operations in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, with complete mission authority during flight tests of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo. James C. Elms, Deputy Director for Development and Programs, would manage all msc manned space flight projects, including total project planning, and would plan, organize, and direct msc administrative and technical support activities, (msc Release 63-88)
Catalytic Construction Co. of Philadelphia was selected by nasa for negotiations of contract to build, install, and test synchrocyclotron and related equipment and services for Space Radiation Effects Laboratory, to be built in Newport News, Va., under nasa Langley Research Center management. Expected to be completed in mid-1965, laboratory would be used for simulating high-energy corpuscular radiation encountered in proposed nasa space flights, and studies would include effects of radiation on spacecraft materials and components as well as means of shielding against radiation, (nasa Release 63-30)
nasa announced appointment of Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn) as Director of Launch Vehicles in Office of Manned Space Flight, effective about April 1. Capt. Freitag, since 1959 Director of Astronautics in Navy’s Bureau of Weapons and a recipient of Legion of Merit for work in ballistic missile programs, would replace Milton Rosen, who would become senior scientist on staff of nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Defense Affairs, Adm. W. F. Boone (usn, Ret.), (nasa Release 63-38)
U.K.’s newest commercial jet aircraft, the bac 111, crashed in a field in southern England during a test flight, killing all seven crewmen. The British Aircraft Corp.’s twin-jet, 74-passenger 111 was planned as a replacement for the prop-jet Viscount, bringing jet service on short-haul routes. Prior to the crash, the aircraft had had some 80 hours of flight test. (NTT, 10/23/63, 66)
Astronomers at Mt. Wilson and Palomar Observatories reported they had observed what they believed were five brightest objects in the universe. Joint research by astronomer groups at Mt. Wilson and Palomar, as well as Cal Tech’s Radio Observatory in Owens Valley, Calif.; Jodrell Bank Observatory in England; and astronomers in Australia, was presented in Cal Tech report, which said knowledge gained about the five objects may make possible optical study of objects nearly 10 or 12 billion light years away—the edge of the visible universe, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/17/63)	_
Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center, announced he had formally accepted on nasa’s behalf custody of 110 acres of Government land at Oyster Point, Newport News, Va., for use as site of Space Radiation Effects Laboratory being established by nasa. (Langley Release)
S-l stage for Saturn SA-5 launch vehicle arrived at Cape Canaveral, having left nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., by barge Aug. 10. (Av. Wk., 8/26/63, 33)
Eight U.S. scientists issued statement supporting U.S. program to land men on moon and countering recent criticism that instruments would be more valuable than men in lunar exploration. “This criticism raises important issues which underlie the United States space effort.” Statement cited “overwhelming” Congressional approval of President Kennedy’s proposal for a manned lunar landing within this decade, presented on May 25, 1961. “Was this support tendered for scientific reasons primarily, or was it motivated by a broader concern with national interests and national goals?” Project Apollo cannot be assessed on scientific merits alone, but even if it could be, “situations are bound to arise in which the human performance is indispensible.” Furthermore, “the momentum and significance of the lunar program are derived from its place in long-range United States plans for exploration of the solar system,” at heart of which is role to be played by man. The eight scientists were: Dr. W. Maurice Ewing, Director of Lamont Geological Observatory; Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of nasa Goddard Institute for Space Studies; Dr. Joshua Lederberg, Chairman of Genetics Dept., Stanford Univ. School of Medicine; Dr. Willard F. Libby, Director of ucla Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics; Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald of ucia Institute; Dr. Lyman Spitzer, Jr., Director of Prinpeton Univ. Observatory; Dr. Harold C. Urey, Prof, of Chemistry, Univ. of Calif.; and Dr. James A. Van Allen, Chairman of State Univ. of Iowa Physics Dept. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/27/63,1,13)
Senate passed nasa authorization bill (H.R. 7500) providing $5,511,520,400 in FY 1964, a restoration of $307,801,000 cut by House action Aug. 1. Senate bill would authorize $4,225,275,000 for research and development; $539,185,000 for administrative operations; and $747,060,400 for construction of facilities. Senate adopted amendment to bar, under certain circumstances, any authorized funds for r&d for exclusive benefit of any person providing satellite communication services (other than Government agency) and amendment requiring that, in addition to study of location for Electronic Research Center, there would be written notice to Administrator that study committee had no objection to selected location. Bill wTas ordered to House-Senate conference committee. (CR, 8/9/63, 13877-889, 13893-912)
Willis B. Foster became Director of new Manned Space Science Div. of nasa’s Office of Space Science and Applications. Formerly Deputy Assistant Director for Research in dod’s Directorate of Defense Research and Engineering, Mr. Foster would direct liaison and scientific support of the manned space flight program, including the criteria and selection of scientist-astronauts and scientific r&d in support of manned space flight, (nasa Release 63-242)
Three-year tektite research program described in Journal of Geophysical Research by G. S. Hawkins of Boston Univ., Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, and Harvard College Observatory. On the basis of extensive data obtained in their research, combined with previously known data on tektites, the researchers concluded that tektites originated from terrestrial impacts bv meteorites. (Joum. of Geophys Research, 2/1/63, in msfc ST ID, 3/11/63, 5-6)
nasa announced selection of Genisco, Inc., to negotiate development, fabrication, and assembly contract lor man-carrying motion generator for research into guidance and psycho-physiological problems of space flight. Motion generator would be major component of nasa Ames Research Center’s Space Guidance Research Facility, expected to be operational in about two years, (nasa Release 63-146; Ames Release 63-26) iJu!/y2: jpl spokesman said tests showed deterioration of washer could have caused short circuit and overheating in ranger v lunar probe, which failed to generate power after launch Oct. 18, 1962, and passed within 450 mi. of moon Oct. 21. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/63)
nasa Langley Research Center announced selection of E. W. Muller, Contractor, Inc., of Newport News for preparing the site for nasa Space Radiation Effects Laboratory, Newport News, Va. (Langley Release)
Reported that one example of space flight experience vitally benefiting other Government projects was adoption of Mercury spacecraft and landing maneuveis to the escape and survival projection system for F-lll (tfx) tactical fighter aircraft. In emergency escape from F-lll, entire two-man crew compartment and section of aircraft’s wings are separated from aircraft; drogue parachute then deploys and pulls out large Mercury-type parachute which lowers compartment to a landing. Like Mercury spacecraft, ejected compartment contains environmental life-support system and necessary survival equipment. (Cook, Wash. Daily News, 9/2/(53)	_	...
Invention of retrometer, device relaying light beam over which voice messages are transmitted, by nasa Langley Research Center scientist N. E. Thomas was reported in Newport News Times-Herald. (Newport News Times-Herald, 6/14/63)
At aas meeting in Washington, Dr. G. E. Moreton described photographs of H-Alpha rays showing that solar flares produce shock waves which depress the sun’s surface. The photographs were taken last Sept. 20 at Lockheed Solar Observatory, Burbank, Calif. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/28/63)
Soviet news agency Tass reported radioastronomers at Pulkovo Observatory had discovered radiation belt around planet Jupiter. (upi, Wash. Dally News, 5/15/63) Addressing tbe Forum, nasa Administrator James E. Webb reviewed early history of U.S. development in aeronautics, noting U.S. was far behind m aircraft development in 1915, when naca was formed: “The wisdom of its [naca’s] establishment was amply demonstrated over the ensuing years, and led ultimately to United States supremacy in civil and military aviation . . . .” He noted U.S. was behind in 1957 when U.S.S.R. orbited sputnik i, then cited formation of nasa in 1958 and President Kennedy’s recommendation in 1961 of accelerated program “to give the nation a clearly leading role in the conquest of space. “I review this history because it is necessary occasionally to remind ourselves of the past if we are to have a clear view of the Sresent. With a warning clearly sounded in space, the nation etermined, for the first time, that it would seize the opportunities offered by man’s new ability to explore space, and that it would not be content merely with catching up with somebody else. Instead we set our sights on the most challenging goal within our reach, which could be achieved within a time scale competitive with the ability of others to do the same, and determined that we would explore the moon with men within this decade. “Nothing in recent history suggests that we have reason now to change our course .... “Those who view the lunar program simply as a propaganda effort fail to grasp that not only our prestige, but our capacity for constructive international leadership, our economic and military capacity for technological improvement, depend upon our ability to achieve acknowledged superiority in science and technology, and to use this capability in our own behalf and that of our allies . . . .” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Director of nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, described nasa research in supersonic transport and in v/stol aircraft and said: “Aeronautical and space research serves as a sharp cutting edge to advance man’s knowledge in practically every technology which is fundamental to transportation devices. Although it is impossible to predict quantitatively the impact on transportation of current aeronautical and space research, past experience has shown that we may predict with confidence that it will be considerable . . . .” (Text) Najeeb E. Halaby, faa Administrator, said on May 16 that “there are areas—such as in pure research—where it is impossible for private industry to bear the full economic burden. For example, clearly it is up to the Government to play a role in the development of a supersonic transport, if this Nation is to provide such an aircraft .... “I believe the government should act only in areas where the people ‘cannot so well do for themselves’ even in this increasingly complex and technical world, and that we who are charged with making decisions affecting the public must be convinced beyond any reasonable doubt that there is a need for the Federal Government to conduct the activity at all . . . .” (Text)
Testifying before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Edmond C. Buckley, Director of nasa Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, described basic support job that tracking and data acquisition provide to nasa’s flight projects, indicated major additional resources required, and concluded that “the success of the [space flight] mission depends on our ability to communicate, to receive telemetered data, to track, and to command.” (Testimony)
Both Houses cleared for the President the Independent Offices Appropriations bill (H.R. 8747), including $5.1 billion nasa appropriation for FY 1964 ($612,000,000 less than requested). Of this amount, $3,926,000,000 was for research and development; $680,000,000 for construction of facilities; and $494,000,000 for administrative operations. House agreed to Senate amendments (unresolved in conference committee report): Amendment 82 provided that a joint venture to land a man on the moon may not be undertaken with any other nation without the consent of the Congress; Amendment 84 provided that no part of nasa’s appropriation could be transferred to any other Government agency for research without approval of the Bureau of the Budget, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. II/2Q2; (JR, 12/10/63, 22788-95)
nasa Ames Research Center selected three companies for negotiation of contracts to study solar probe project—General Electric Co. Missile and Space Div., Martin-Marietta Co., and Philco Corp. Each contract would call for four-month study providing “information in depth for the procurement of any future Solar Probe spacecraft, should the program become fully authorized.” (Ames Release 63-19)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, said problem of communications blackout during manned spacecraft re-entry may be solved by spraying water from the spacecraft as it re-enters the earth’s atmosphere. Kelley told NASA-Industry Program Plans Conference that experiments conducted at nasa Langley Research Center had found that water suppressed ionized plasma, which creates shield around re-entering spacecraft and blocks radio communications. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/13/63, A6)
Lewis Research Center tested a newly developed seal for liquid fluorine pumps. This seal eliminates the explosion inherent in previous seals for liquid fluorine transfer systems. (Lewis Chronology, 10)
Editorial in Indianapolis News stated: “The national interest, as well as the furtherance of Indiana’s economic well-being, would be served by the location ih this State of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s projected electronics research center. “. . . Indiana can offer transportation advantages, availability of trained young scientists, a favorable labor climate, coordination with established private industry, good living conditions and ample space for expansion. “Purdue and Notre Dame provide outstanding examples of what should be a top-priority site for installation of the $50 million facility proposed by nasa . . . .” (Ind. News, in (JR, 12/10/63, A7511)
First child bom to space traveler—Tanya Titov, daughter of Maj. Gherman Titov (vostok ii orbital space flight) and wife Tamara. (AP, NYT. 9/25/63, 8)	_
Quoting President Kennedy’s Inaugural Address, in which he said, “Let both sides seek to invoke the wonders of science instead of its terrors. Together let us explore the stars . . .,” New York Times editorial stated: “When the President spoke these words, there was far more reason to think his idea an impractical one than there is today. Of course there are difficult problems still in the way of serious Soviet-American cooperation on a manned space flight. But the financial, political and scientific advantages to both sides of a joining of forces in this area would be so great that every opportunity should be seized to explore this possibility with the Soviet Government. Moscow’s feelers in this direction should be followed up, not rebuffed out of hand . . . .” {NYT, 9/19/63, 26)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, nasa Director of Electronics and Control, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology: “As a result of our review and study on the implementation of electronics responsibilities for future space missions, in our FY 64 Budget we are requesting Congressional approval for initial funding of $5M to establish a new Electronics Research Center to be located in the Greater Boston Area. Our long range plans call for an installation buildup over a period of six to seven years yielding a staff of approximately 2,000 personnel, of whom 600-700 would be professionals, and a plant value of approximately $50M. “The rate of Center growth will be gradual and represents an investment in the future of space flight, analogous to the investment made in the older research centers many years ago which is paying off so handsomely today. This rate of growth together with up-grading of Center personnel by continued graduate education after they are on-board is expected to allow us to meet our staffing requirements with little or no impact on scientific and engineering manpower as projected during this growth period. “The nasa considered many potential sites throughout the country for location of the Electronics Research Center. On balance, the overall university-industrial strength and capability in electronics and guidance research in the Greater Boston Area resulted in its selection as the location for the Center. This area, noted for its past and current heavy concentration on electronic research, both in industry and universities, provides a compatible, 741-623 O—64--0 stimulating environment for growth of nasa capabilities in this important area of technology. “The Center will have the principal function of conducting and directing research and component technique investigations in the related fields of communications, data processing, guidance, instrumentation, and control. It will be staffed and equipped to perform original -work and to work closely with industries and universities with common interests. For example, component test facilities will be provided for evaluation of industrially developed experimental components. The Center will serve to focus the increasing nasa out-of-house efforts in the burgeoning area of electronic technology. Most important, it will provide a regenerative path for the early exploitation of advanced techniques of developments for space flight, whatever their source.” (Testimony)
Cumberland Plateau Seismological Observatory, near McMinnville, Tenn., was dedicated. Observatory was last of four U.S. observatories designed to measure earth movements as small as one-millionth of an inch and built to specifications set by 1958 nuclear testban conference in Geneva. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/14/63)
Completion of M-2 lifting body’s successful wind-tunnel testing and analysis was announced by nasa Ames Research Center. A wingless, maneuverable spacecraft capable of orbiting the earth and landing like an airplane, the M-2 lifting body was now ready for full-9cale flight research. (Ames Release 63-7)
Dr. Otto Struve, prominent U.S. astronomer and former Director of National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., died at 66 in Berkeley, Calif. (Chicago Trib., 4/10/63)
Addressing International Northwest Aviation Council in Edmonton, Alberta, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Educational Programs and Services James V. Bernardo said: “The destinies of all nations are inextricably entwined with aeronautics and space exploration. Aviation—or perhaps more appropriately, aerospace activities—will continue, on an ever-increasing scale, to have profound effects upon the lives of all people. “The frontiers of science and technology are limitless. The years ahead will bring about not only tremendous changes, but also an increased and unquenchable thirst for knowledge of the unknown beyond our earthly atmosphere. These years ahead will also witness, I’m sure, another great revolution in education, one which will give us a continuity and sequence in science and mathematics, from the kindergarten through the college graduate school. As the revolution takes place, great care must be exercised by the architects of the curriculum that we achieve a necessary balance. We must teach our young people—since the future lies with them—the physical sciences so that they can achieve our national goals in science and engineering. But we must also teach them the humanities so that they can use these achievements for man’s betterment. The two great branches of learning must be blended into the best possible educational program.” (Text)
Speaking in Tampa, Fla., at a ceremony celebrating the 50th anniversary of the first scheduled air service in the U.S., President Kennedy contrasted the first air service between Tampa and neighboring St. Petersburg with today’s jet travel. Looking ahead, he said that “within our sight, if not yet within our grasp, is the day when men will routinely fly through space at 25 times the speed of sound.” As soon as 1975, the President predicted, “metroplanes” would take off from the center of one city and land in the center of another, while supersonic jet transports would be crossing the oceans at 1,400 mph. And beyond that would be “hypersonic transports” flying at mach 6 to 8. (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/18/63)	_
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center, said in Kansas City that there was no conflict between science and religion. “Science stands to better understand creation. Religion stands to better understand the creator. Science seeks to harness the forces of nature around us; religion and ethics seek to harness the forces of nature within us.” (Kansas City Times, 11/15/63)
nasa Ames Research Center announced award of contract to Westinghouse Electric Corp. Astronuclear Laboratory to study potential physiological radiation damage in space. One-year study would “attempt to understand the basic phenomena of biological response to cosmic radiation, and to develop the means of preserving man’s well-being and insure his survival during long periods of exploration in deep space. . . .” (Ames Release OS-22 ; nasa Release 63-107)
National Airlines President L. B. Maytag, Jr., told National Aerospace Education Council in Miami Beach that mach 2 commercial airliner would be far more economical and utilitarian than mach 3, usable only in transoceanic flight because of altitude requirements. Mach 2 aircraft could make transcontinental U.S. flights faster than mach 3 aircraft, which would have to cruise at 12-mi. altitude in order to prevent sonic boom damage. Mach 2 could be built of aluminum, but mach 3 airliner would have to be built of titanium and steel, Maytag said, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/11/63) July 10: Camera equipped with special synchronization system making it capable of taking 8 million pictures per sec. was reported in Washington Star. Synchronization system was devised by Pvt. 1/C R. Carey of Army Engineer Research and Development Laboratory, Ft. Belvoir, Va. (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/10/63)
Final parcel of giant 6,000-acre Plum Brook site near Sandusky, Ohio, was transferred from Army to nana jurisdiction, nasa Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, operates the Plum Brook Station. (Lewis Chronology, 2)
License granted by the Atomic Energy Commission for operation of low pressure, low power (100 kw) Mock Up Reactor to Plum Brook Station of nasa Lewis Research Center. The mtur would be used to determine the effects of experiments on the radiation flux in the core of its high-power twin, the Plum Brook 60-megawatt reactor. Also, experiments requiring low-level nuclear bombardment would be run in the mur. (Lewis Chronology, 3)
President Kennedy released report by special panel of President’s Science Advisory Committee, report concluding that exchange of scientific information “is an inseparable part of research and development .... [Scientists should] snare many of the burdens that have traditionally been'carried on by the professional documentalist .... Science can ultimately cope with the information expansion only if enough of its most gifted practitioners will compact, review and interpret the lit741-623 0—64-6 erature both for their own use and for the benefit of more specialized scientists . . . .” In releasing the report, President Kennedy said: “Strong science and teclmology is a national necessity, and adequate communication is a prerequisite for strong science and technology.” (nyt Co., Atlanta Journal <£■ Constitution, 2/17/63)
Four airmen ended simulated 30-day space flight mission inside a space cabin at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, San Antonio, Tex. The airmen breathed pure oxygen at simulated altitude of 27,500 ft. in preparation for future manned space flights. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/17/63)
Results of industrial survey made bv Univ. of Denver Research Institute under nasa contract were released, survey based on questionnaires of 988 companies. Results indicated: (1) transfers of technology from Government-sponsored research and development to private industries was the most important contribution of space-related programs to civilian sector of nation’s economy; (2) space related r&d stimulates both basic and applied r&d of improved materials, processes, and techniques, as well as new test and laboratory equipment ; (3) space-related r*d output contributed to cost reduction in both commercial manufacturing and fabrication methods; (4) institutional and economic barriers exist and must be surmounted in the transfer process; (5) time lag exists between development of new or improved technology whether through industrial or Government-sponsored research and its ultimate utilization, nasa Office of Technology Utilization would use this information to determine ways of accelerating transfer of nasa’s technological advances to civilian/industrial community, (nasa Release 63-197: Text)
In addendum to speech delivered last Dec. 30, Dr. James A. Van Allen retracted his criticism of President’s Scientific Advisory Committee concerning radiation effects of U.S. high-altitude nuclear test in July. Dr. Van Allen said his criticism should have been directed toward joint nasa-aec-dod committee headed by Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, President’s special assistant for science and technology and also chairman of President’s Science Advisory Committee. Addendum appeared in published version of speech in bulletin of St. Louis Citizen’s Committee for Nuclear Information. ( nytns, Chattanooga Times, 2/14/63) During February: Four men spent 14 days in slow-rotation room simulating slowly-rotating space station, in NASA-sponsored experiment at Navy’s School of Aviation Medicine, Pensacola, Fla. “No serious disturbance of a psychological or physiological nature was encountered,” and no change was found in conceptual reasoning, physical performance, perception, and sensory ability. No important changes in blood pressure, respiration, or pulse rate were observed during the experiment. (Av. Wk., 3/4/63, 59)
Gov. Nelson Rockefeller was preparing his proposal for establishment of New York science and technology institution, it was reported. Proposed state institution would offer both undergraduate and graduate study in science and technology. Rockefeller and state university trustees were expected to appoint committee of educators and scientists to develop detailed plans. (Orlando Sentinel, 1/5/63)
nasa Langley Research Center announced selection of the Boeing Co.’s Transport Div. and the Lockheed-Califomia Co. to negotiate two nine-month study contracts. Studies would evaluate four concepts of supersonic commercial transport investigated by nasa Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center and would provide information on feasibility of these four concepts through engineering investigations. Their evaluations would provide basis for and serve as guide to nasa’s future supersonic transport research programs. ( nasa Release 63-7; Langley Release)
Warren Rayle, Lewis Research Center engineer, described work he is doing m watching for “ball” lightning, a phenomenon occurring during thunderstorms and appearing as a round, glowing object which may move slowly or hang in the air. Lewis scientists engaged in research with plasma propulsion devices think ball lightning may be much like the plasmas they work with in the laboratory, (lrc Release 63-31, Lewis Chronology, 4)
Andrew G. Swanson, scientist at nasa Langley Research Center, was one of 45 outstanding young executives awarded an Alfred P. Sloan fellowship in executive development at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Award was announced by Dean Howard W. Johnson of mit’s School of Industrial Management. (Langley Release)
Department of Commerce asked the National Inventors Council, previously concerned with routing the ideas of independent inventors to dod, to broaden its activities and advise the Commerce Department on all steps the Federal government can take to spur invention and application of inventions. Dr. J. Herbert Holloman, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology, said application of new ideas was the biggest problem: “There is immense resistance to new methods. Innovation often comes from an invader—from a foreigner to a company, an industry or a country. For example, polymers came from the chemical industry to the textile industry. Fluorescent lighting came from Europe. The transistor was not developed by a radio-tube manufacturer.” (Jones, NTT, 10/11/63, 53)
Wind-tunnel studies to evaluate aerodynamic drag and jet engine mass air-flow characteristics with 3/10-scale model of free-flight lunar landing test vehicle were begun at nasa Langley Research Center. Model was built at nasa Flight Research Center. Data from Langley tests would be supplied to Bell Aerosystems Co., building two full-scale lunar landing research vehicles under contract from Flight Research Center. (Av. Wk., 4/22/63, 77)
. . . it is my view that the difficulty here is . . . one of organizing research about research, of developing more adequate insights into cost-benefit relationships, of illuminating our value analysis so that we can with greater confidence strike a balance between being first in high energy accelerators and being first in education and in decent living and job opportunity. I do not think that Government alone can reach these answers, but perhaps Government can—and indeed I believe it must—be as proportionately lavish in stimulating this kind of intellectual inquiiy as it has been in endowing science and technology .. . .” (Text, CR, 9/30/63, A6108-09)
nasa Ames Research Center announced laboratory synthesis of Adenosine Triphosphate (atp) molecule, universal medium of energy exchange in earth’s life-forms, atp was most complex molecule yet produced in a laboratory, according to Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma of Ames Exobiology Div., who performed the experiment by shining ultraviolet light on nine combinations of chemical mixtures. Dr. Ponnamperuma said the nine different mixtures may have resembled composition of earth’s oceans at the dawn of life four billion years ago. “Such experiments are lending significant support to the theory that biological molecules, which are the prerequisites of life, could have appeared by the interaction of forces and materials which existed on the earth before life did.” Collaborating in the atp synthesis were Dr. Carl Sagan of Smithsonian Astrophysical Laboratory, on the theoretical level, and Ruth Mariner of Ames. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/18/63)	_
Interplanetary space simulation was achieved in a 6-ft.-wide, lO-ft.-high-space tank at the nasa Lewis Research Center. This included solar simulation and vacuum of 10~13 torr. (Lewis Chronology, 3)
dod announced study of emergency re-entry from manned space flight was being conducted by Armour Research Foundation under direction of afsc Flight Dynamics Laboratory. Armour study would be based on theoretical re-entry vehicle with crew of three or less, performing in low earth orbits, re-entries, and short duration missions. Armour would provide afsc Flight Dynamics Laboratory with design criteria and drawings for controllable emergency escape systems enabling the vehicle to land in relatively small area, (dod Release 441-63)
First anniversary of first tandem manned space flight, which began Aug. 12, 1962, when vostok rv piloted by Lt. Col. Pavel R. Popovich was launched into nearly same orbit as that of vostok iii piloted by Maj. Andrian C. Nikolayev, launched into orbit less than 24 hrs. earlier. At one point the two spacecraft were within 6.5 km. (4 mi.) of each other, according to Soviet newspaper Pravda. Upon landing Aug. 15, Maj. Nikolayev in vostok in had completed 64 earth orbits, 1,645,000 mi.; and 95 hrs., 25 min. flying time. Colonel Popovich in vostok rv had completed 48 earth orbits; 1,242,000 mi.; and 70 hrs., 29 min. flying time.
nasa-dod agreement on Manned Orbital Research and Development System (mords) was signed, which required aacb to coordinate ail study contracts. (Joint nasa-dod Release)
Second anniversary of Titov’s orbital space flight in vostok ii; Pravda using occasion to announce the cosmonaut and his wife were expecting the birth of a baby, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 8/7/63)
Sen. Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.) said in St. Louis that dod’s cancellation of Dyna Soar (X-20) manned space flight project probably would accelerate production of Gemini capsule by McDonnell Aircraft Corp. of St. Louis, thus benefiting employment and economy of St. Louis. (St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 12/11/63)
Selection of Republic Aviation Corp. for negotiation of Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory (Aoso) contract announced by nasa. Under $5.5 million contract, Republic would complete Phase I of Aoso development, including detail design, systems engineering, reliability assessment, limited hardware development of critical systems and components, and trade-off analysis, (nasa Release 63-147)
Feasibility of operating large numbers of ion engines together was established when Lewis Research Center successfuly operated an array of nine ion engines under simulated space conditions, (use Chronology)
Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.) addressed the Columbian Women of George Washington Univ., Washington, D.C.: “From . . . space research and exploration will come knowledge—knowledge about the universe and its physical laws; knowledge about the earth on which we live; and knowledge about life itself. “The space program will stretch the abilities and minds of our people for years to come. It will provide a continuing, long-term stimulant to our economy. The magnitude of the task will test the resources and cooperative will of all major elements of our society. Still, space exploration, and manned space flight in particular, offers the United States the opportunity for unparalleled progress in the future. “Ultimately, within this century, the sum of all our efforts will give us the equipment, the knowledge and the skill to utilize space as we now utilize the seas and the air. “This then is our motive—our objective. To develop superior competence in space which will be available for any national purpose which may be required, whether it be for the peaceful use of space for the benefit of all mankind or to keep the peace. . . .” {CR, 1/24/63, A230-32)
nasa requested industry proposals for design and construction of a “prototype six-month life support system for four men”—a 2,600-cu.-ft. cabin in which four-man crews would make simulated space flights lasting six months. Proposals were due at nasa Langley Research Center by Feb. 26. (upi, Wash Post, 2/7/63, A13)
Langley Research Center issued invitations to bid to 39 contractors for construction of the laboratory building of the nasa Space Radiation Effects Laboratory at Newport News, Va. With cost of the laboratory building estimated at $3 million, this is the last major contract to be awarded for the $12.3 million facility. (uaRc Release)
Newly created nasa Management Advisory Committee on Manned Space Flight visited nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Chairman of committee was Dr. Marvin J. Kelley, retired President and Board Chairman of Bell Telephone Laboratories; other members were Dr. Hendrick W. Bode, James McCormack, Dr. Hector R. Skifter, and Dr. Arthur E. Raymond. (Huntsville Times, 4/4/63)
In an article in Pravda, V. Golobachev reported that U.S.S.R. was filing with the Federation Aeronautique International claiming new records for the tandem space flight of Cosmonauts Valery Bykovsky and Valentina Tereshkova June 14r-19,1963. U.S.S.R. was claiming eight new records for the tandem flight: for vostok v (Bykovsky), duration of orbital flight, 119 hours; distance, 3,326,000 km. (2,063,377 mi.) ; these represented four new records, since they were records not only for orbital flight but for any type of flight. For vostok vi (Tereshkova), four records claimed for women in orbital flight: duration, 71 hrs.; height, 231 km. (144 mi.); distance, 1,971,000 km. (1,224,720 mi.); maximum weight orbited, 4,713 kg. (10,390 lbs.). Total maximum thrust for each flight was listed as 600,000 kg. (1,322,760 lbs.).	(Pravda, 10/4/63, afss-t Trans.)
nasa plans for new Electronics Research Center in the Greater Boston Area were outlined by Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, in his address before Engineering Societies of New England, Boston: “. . . The principal function of this research center will consist of research and component technological development in the related fields of communications, data processing, guidance, instrumentation, control, and energy conversion. It will be staffed and equipped to perform original work and applied research as well as evaluation of industry and university efforts. It will sponsor nasa research and development efforts in these areas with industries and universities and act as a focal point for nasa research in these related fields . . . .” (Text)
Near-operational Army Pershing missile launched from tracked-launcher at Cape Canaveral and hit target 130 miles down amr, its first complete test flight success. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/26/63, A3)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, the President’s Scientific Adviser, testified before House Science and Astronautics subcommittee on the Federal role in science and technology. He indicated that the tremendous surge in development of military weapon systems that had been the principal cause of the 15-to-20 per cent increase in the Federal science and technology budget each year for the last several years would level off. Now the effort would shift from military systems to bringing technology “to bear on serving the collective needs of our people.” He was concerned lest without the defense motive the Nation slip back into indifference toward support of science, particularly the basic research that provided the new ideas for further advances. He also said that he not only supported the U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative lunar landing proposal but that he had often commended the idea to the President. (NYT, 10/17/63; Space Bios. Daily, 10/17/63, 98)
Henry F. Auter, Chief of Electrical Systems Engineering Branch of Test Div., nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, appointed Deputy Manager of msfc Mississippi Test Operations. (Huntsville Times, 6/15/63) Jwne 16-19: Flight of vostok vi with Lt. Valentina V. Tereshkova, first woman in space, conducted by U.S.S.R. Launched from Baikonur, vostok vi completed 48 earth orbits in 70 hrs. 50 min.; initial orbital path was 141-mi. apogee, 112-mi. perigee, 88.3-min. period. Shortly after entering orbit, Tass reported, Lt. Tereshkova established radio communications with Lt. Col. Bykovsky in vostok v; the two cosmonauts then radioed joint message to Premier Khrushchev. Tass stated flight of vostok vi was being made “to continue the study of the effect of various space-flight factors on the human organism, including a comparative analysis of the impact of these factors on the organisms of a man and a woman; to carry out new medical-biological research and to further improve and perfect the systems of piloted spaceships in conditions of simultaneous flight.” During initial orbit vostok v and vi came within about five km. (three mi.) of each other, apparently closest distance achieved. Cosmonaut Tereshkova, whom Tass described as having never piloted an aircraft, landed bv parachute in Kazakhstan. After she and Cosmonaut Bykovsky landed, Tass issued statement on flight results: “New valuable data have been obtained about the influence of different factors of a space flight of long duration on the organisms of man and woman. Rich factual material necessary for further perfection of the systems of piloted space ships has been obtained.” (Tass, Izvestia, 6/18/63, 1, afss-t Trans.; NYT, 6/17/63-6/20/63, Iff) Jwne 16: Results of six-year experimental study of 25 generations of mice exposed to large radiation doses were reported in New York Times. Conducted by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, study disclosed large doses of radiation over long period of time have an “amazingly small” effect on mice: no evidence of malformations was found, and there appeared “to be no threat to genetic extinction of the species.” (Plumb, NYT, 6/16/63)
nasa announced launch responsibility for Agena and Centaur space vehicle programs had been transferred from nasa Launch Operations Center to nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Field Project Branch at Cape Canaveral. Launches would be conducted under technical direction of Ageiia and Centaur project managers, nasa Lewis Research Center. Transfer would permit log to concentrate on manned space flight and associated launch vehicles, including Saturn series developed under management of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Overall project responsibility for Agena and Centaur programs had been assigned to nasa Lewis Research Center in December and October, respectively. (nasa Release 63-19)
nasa Langley Research Center announced contract awarded to Basic Construction Co. for building to house synchrocyclotron of nasa’s Space Radiation Effects Laboratory at Oyster Point, Newport News, Va. (LaRc Release)
Atomic Energy Commission awarded full-power license to operate the 60 megawatt Plum Brook research reactor to the Plum Brook Station of nasa Lewis Research Center, (lrc Release 63-3, Lewis Chronology, 1)
At news conference on the phenomena of pneumatic tire hydroplaning, at nasa Hq., Walter B. Home and Robert C. Dreher of nasa Langley Research Center described results of experiments conducted with automobiles traveling on wet roads. On highway curve where maximum safe speed is posted as 45 mph, automobile with tire pressure of 25 psi did not reach hydroplaning speed until about 52 mph; automobile with tire pressure of 16 psi attained hydroplaning speed at 40 mph and swung out of control. Mr. Home said: “In this country, most, automobiles use tire inflation pressures between 16 and 30 pounds per square inch. This is a hydroplaning speed between 42 miles an hour and 55 miles an hour. “This hydroplaning speed range is well within the higher legal speed limits on roads in this country. Therefore, automobiles are real susceptible to hydroplaning.” He exploded the popular notion that reducing tire pressure makes driving on wet roads safer. “About the only place where it does any good to reduce the tire pressure is when you are driving on sand and you want to get higher flotation.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/17/63; nasa Fact Sheet; nasa News Conf. Transcript; nasa TN D-2056)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. were reported to have a draft of a resolution on legal aspects of space exploration and to be circulating it for comment to other members of the 28-nation U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space prior to formal submission. It was announced on Nov. 8 that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had reached general agreement. (Brewer, NYT, 11/17/63, 34)
Results of Research Institute of America’s survey of more than 1,400 businessmen on U.S. goals and national policy, published in General Electric Forum, revealed 21% considered present expenditure on space fully warranted, 41% considered it probably fully warranted, 27%—probably not, and 11%—not warranted. Other replies: To “In years immediately ahead, what should be level of space expenditure, in relation to gnp?” 6% said “sharply higher than present expenditures, 16%—a little higher, 38%—remain at about the present ratio, 24%—a little lower, and 16%—sharply lower. To “Assuming that national policy in the immediate future corresponds to your answer above, do you believe that the U.S. will exceed the Russians in space achievements by 1970?” 38% said probably will exceed the Russians, 44%—will approximately equal them, and 18%—probably will not equal them. Asked to identify a statement closest reflecting their opinion on what space policy should be, 66% checked the statement, “Our prime objective should be to sustain a prudent and orderly program of scientific progress in space achievements with little regard for who leads in this or that particular aspect of space technology.” Asked about the military role in the U.S. space program, 16% replied it should be greater, 67%—about the same, and 17%— smaller. (GE Forum, July-Sept. 63,31-39)
nasa announced selection of Lear Siegler to negotiate contract for design study of “psychophysical information acquisition processing and control system” (Piapacs). Proposed system, mounted in pilot’s garment and headgear, would replace present system of sensors attached to pilot and would permit continuous acquisition of psychological and physical data, nasa pilots would test system in flights of aircraft including F-104, Jet Star, and X-15, at nasa Flight Research Center, (nasa Release 63-139; frc Release 13-63)
Tracking and data acquisition operations ceased for oso i (Orbiting Solar Observatory), launched March 7, 1962. (gsfc Historian, 8/14/63)	_	.
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuing requests for proposals for vacuum chamber to generate space environmental conditions for use in thermochemical tests. Chamber would permit msc engineers to study function of propellant equipment, heat rejection, and energy collecting devices during long periods of space flight, (msc Release 63-144)
An article in Aviation Week, by George Alexander, summarized the important advances in the Atlas test program: (1) 0.032-in. airframe, basically a stainless steel balloon relying on gas pressure for rigidity; (2) contaminant control in liquid oxygen systems; (3) early exploration of problems in staging: timing, hardware clearances, shifting center of gravity, flight control response and adaptability; and (4) handling of liquid oxygen to reduce geysering by using last-moment slug-filling to load the tanks. Of 87 research and development Atlas vehicles, 10 were classified as failures and 18 as partial successes. (SID, 5/20/63, 9; Av. Wk., 2/25/63)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center employee Dave M. McGlathery became third Negro registered at Univ. of Alabama, first at Huntsville Extension Center. (Smith, NYT, 6/14/63, 16)
The ratio of nasa scientists and engineers to NASA-contractor scientists and engineers should be 1 to 4 by early 1964. It was 1in Jan. 1960,1:3 in Jan. 1963. (Space Bus. Daily, 11/18/63, 265)
General B. A. Schriever (afsc) said in address to seminar participants at National Science Fair, Albuquerque: “The most challenging scientific enterprise we have today is the exploration of space. There are several reasons why this new region is of great importance to us. First of all, it is an unknown and unexplored medium, which is certain to contain many surprises. Second, it is a tempting region for a nation that is bent on aggression. Soviet leaders have shown a keen awareness of both the psychological and military aspects of space exploration. They have boasted repeatedly that they could use their space technology for aggressive purposes. We cannot afford to leave our space frontier unguarded. “Space exploration is also important for another reason. It greatly stimulates the advance of science by serving as a natural focus for intensive research in virtually every area of science and technology .... “Today’s methods of taking scientific measurements are far more accurate than those of the past, and they are improving all the time. For example, a year and a half ago we were able to measure speeds on our Holloman sled track to an accuracy of about one part in 40,000. Today that accuracy has been increased to about one part in 150,000 . . . .” (Text)
Gov. Frank Clement of Tennessee signed bill authorizing construction of $2 million Tennessee Space Research Institute on site donated by usaf near Arnold Engineering Development Center, Tullahoma. Institute would be operated by Univ. of Tennessee. Mission of institute would be “to offer graduate level courses in aerospace science and engineering while carrying on research in these fields for both Government and industry.” {Nashville Tennessean, 3/16/63; Nashville Banner, in CR, 3/18/63, A1479)
nasa report released on Project Mercury flight MA-8 (Oct. 3,1962), in which Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., said: “I was also impressed with the fact that . . . [under the different lighting conditions that prevailed, the separated sustainer stage] was almost black in appearance, rather than the shiny silvery vehicle that Astronauts Glenn and Carpenter had seen at this time and that I had observed on the launching pad .... “At about 10 minutes 30 seconds, I went back to flying-by-wire, low, and tracked the sustainer as it traversed down through the window, and it was a thrill to realize the delicate touch that it is possible to have with fly-by-wire, low. . . . The control system was so effective that it just amounted to a light touch and maybe a few pulses in either axis to get the response I wanted. I could point the spacecraft at anything I wanted to. I could see the sustainer and track it, but I do not believe the relative motion problem would be so easy to solve that I would be able to steam along and join up with it. Although the relative velocity was on tne order of 20 to 30 feet per second, it was enough to cause a problem, particularly at a time when one is becoming acclimated to a new environment. These problems would be difficult to solve by one’s own trajectory analysis, since there were no systems aboard to aid the pilot in solving the problem. I think that when we build up to the rendezvous technique, one will need more time than that just at the point of insertion to effect this rendezvous, even with proper training. The use of time while orbiting in space is only earth relative, therefore if a rendezvous is not hurried, the task should be relatively simple .... “A smog-appearing layer was evident during the fourth pass while I was in drifting flight on the night side, almost at 32° South latitude. I would say that this layer represented about a quarter of the field of view out of the window, and this surprised me .... Seeing the stars below the glowing layer was probably the biggest surprise I had during the flight . . . .” (nasa SP-12, Results of 3rd U.S. Manned Orbital Space Flight, 49-55)
nasa awarded a $236,520 grant to the Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz., to provide a building for processing, storage, and research of lunar and planetary photography. This would assist Lowell Observatory in fulfilling the request of the International Astronomical Union in August 1961 that Lowell establish a Western Hemisphere repository of lunar and planetary research materials corresponding to the Eastern Hemisphere center at Meudon, France, (nasa Release 63-235)
Astronomers at McMath Hulbert Observatory of the Univ. of Michigan and at the U.S. Naval Observatory reported the first signs of a new 11-yr. solar cycle. Indications of a new cycle were the appearance of sun spots well above the sun’s equator and the reversed magnetic polarity of the disturbance. (Science Service, NTT, 11/18/63, 15)
Winners of nasa Certificates of Outstanding Achievement at 12th annual Tidewater Science Congress, Norfolk, Va., were announced by Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center. Awards were made to high school students for their exhibits in six fields of science and were in addition to regular Tidewater Science Congress prizes. Mr. Thompson said this marked beginning of annual nasa awards program in conjunction with Tidewater Science Congress and at regiohal fairs in four states. (Langley Release)
Dr. Walter C. Williams, Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and Flight Operations, msc, was named NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Operations. He would supervise manned space flight operations at msc, msfc, and loc. During manned space flight missions he would have full authority and responsibility for conduct of the flights. His appointment would become effective Nov. 1, 1963. (nasa Release 63-237)
Sen. E. L. Bartlett (D.-Alaska) introduced in Senate a bill (S. 2038) to establish a Congressional Office of Science and Technology (cost) to advise and assist members and committees of the Congress on matters relating to science and technology. Bill was referred to Senate Committee on Rules and Administration. (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/125)
First meeting of nasa-usaf board to coordinate joint participation in Project Gemini. Board included nasa Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans and usaf Assistant Secretary Brockway McMillan as co-chairmen; Maj. Gen. O. J. Ritland; dod special assistant for space, L. L. Kavanau; nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes; and nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Defense, Adm. W. F. Boone. {M&R, 2/18/63, 9) February 8: Hawker Aircraft, Ltd., P-1127 jet fighter completed vertical take-off and landing test aboard aircraft carrier Ark Royal. Spokesman for the British company said P-1127 was first aircraft other than helicopter to achieve this feat. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/9/63; Rational Observer, 2/11/63)
In a speech at the 1963 Corporate Leadership Dinner, Detroit, Michigan, Robert W. Samoff, Chairman of the Board of nbc, said: “Within the past quarter century alone, scientific research has more than doubled the inventory of human knowledge. “The simple fact that we have shortened the distance between research and product development has itself altered and enriched American life immeasurably, and has created a potential for raising the living standards of people eveiy where .... “Historically, man’s adaptation to new circumstances has proceeded by fits and starts, aided by a generous allotment of time in which to accomplish massive transformation. But now science and technology are pumping a new form of quick-change fuel into the lifestream of civilization, and the time is past when we might count upon years of grace in which to alter concepts and methods to suit a differing environment. Today the unprecedented rate of change we experience—and can anticipate— is a fact unique in human experience, calling for more rapid and drastic accommodations than have ever before been required.” (Text)
The Chemistry and Energy Conversion Division at the Lewis Research Center began a major study of the feasibility of using thin-film solar cells for space power applications. (Lewis Chronology, 11)
Morton J. Stoller, Director of nasa Office of Applications, was awarded nasa Medal for Outstanding Leadership, nasa Admin-38 istrator James E. Webb, in making the award, commended Stoller for his “outstanding and dynamic leadership in planning, developing and directing a complex scientific organization whose notable achievements have significantly contributed to the preeminent position of this country in the space sciences, the development of space technology, and the practical application of such research and development.” (nasa Release 63-20)
nasa ordered its major manned space flight program contractors to freeze all new hirings and not replace any persons lost through normal attrition. Expected to save millions of dollars, the temporary action was taken while nasa was reassessing its budget programing for the current fiscal year, based on an expected appropriation of only $5.1 billion. (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/6/63)	....	.
Army Transportation Corps loaned 20 sea-going barges to nasa for use in space vehicle development program. Barges would be used initially for transporting supplies from Marshall Space Flight Center to Mississippi Test Operations; later, they would be fitted with liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen tanks to store the propellants for fueling Saturn S-IC static-test boosters. (Marshall Star, 3/6/63,1)
James J. Haggerty, Jr., writing in Army-Navy-Air Force Journal and Register, said: “The excitement and enthusiasm which characterized the early years of space research is dimming. The barrage of criticism leveled at the Administration for its lunar landing program has taken a severe toll and brought forth a budget which will move the manned moon shot back at least two years and there seems to be a general lack of concern over this abrogation of a stated national goal .... “Space exploration may soon run into its first real barrier, which might be termed the ‘megabuck barrier.’ In the fantastic missions being considered for the next decade, there are myriad technical problems, the solutions of which will require a supreme effort on the part of the scientific and technological community. Yet none of tnese problems appears impossible of solution. The real stumbling block may be money .... “Perhaps tnere will be some great breakthrough—or a series of them—which will bring a dramatic reduction in the costs of space flight. But at the moment, with no such breakthrough on the horizon, the megabuck barrier appears more formidable than the speed of light. (A-N-AF Journ. <& Reg., 12/7/63, 14)
nasa and faa announced they were completing plans for joint study of supersonic transport operation, the study providing data for both (1) design and operation of a supersonic transport compatible with an evolving air traffic control system; and (2) definition of requirements for air traffic control system to handle supersonic commercial air transports. Study would be based on four different sst concepts evolved by nasa Ames and Langley Re: search Centers and on simulation of air traffic environments of today and of the 1970’s. The research would use flight simulation facilities of Langley Research Center and air traffic simulation facilities of faa National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center; it was scheduled to run through 1964. (nasa Release 63-53: faa Release #28)
Arnold W. Frutkin, nasa Director of International Programs, outlined progress in nasa international programs before Third European Space Flight Symposium, Stuttgart, and said: “I believe that the essential meaning of this brief review of our own programs is that international pooling of efforts in the space field can be highly successful if it is rigidly directed to solid scientific and technical objectives of mutual interest, requiring significant rather than token contributions by both sides and thoughtful planning. Perhaps even more important is the clear evidence that these successes engender growing interest and greatly expand the basis for succeeding cooperative enterprises. “We are quite aware of our great indebtedness to European science and technology. We believe that the freest possible association of our respective programs, where they complement and support each other, is the soundest way to proceed if we are to continue to benefit in this way and if we are to reciprocate generously. I believe that in the long run cooperation between nasa for the United States and esro and eldo for Europe affords the best means to expand the hard core of cooperation in space research, and that such collaboration will have the greatest potential for further extension to forward-looking nations everywhere in the world . . . .” (Text)
Lewis Research Center engineers reported on studies involving simulated micrometeoroid penetration of future spacecraft. Using specially-built .22 caliber rifles that fire at velocities up to 10 times the speed of normal bullets, engineers were puncturing different types of fuel tanks to duplicate what might happen in space to a spacecraft struck by a micrometeoroid. (lrc Release 63-42, Lewis Chronology, 5)
Saturn project engineers James B. Bramlet and Robert E. Lindstrom, of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center Saturn Systems Office, said at aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting in Dallas that nasa heavy launch vehicle programs are on tight schedules but are “within the bounds of our capabilities .... [and can meet requirement for a] manned lunar landing in this decade.” (Huntsville Times, 4/23/63)
Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center, was awarded honorary Doctor of Science degree by College of WTilliam and Mary. On previous day, he was awarded honorary Doctor of Science degree by Univ. of Michigan. (lorc Release, 6/10/63)
dod announced two single-engine Cessna 180 airplanes of usn Arctic Research Laboratory made deepest known light-plane penetration of Arctic Ocean Basin when they landed May 24 at North Pole. From May 21 to June 2, nine sites were occupied on pack ice so that scientists could collect scientific data on gravity and on ice conditions. ( dod Release 814—63)
Titan II launch from amr on Nov. 1, 1963, testing the effectiveness of new damping devices installed to reduce surges of propellant and oxidizer that created vibration levels unacceptable to Project Gemini manned space flight, was termed successful by Space Business Daily. Vibration level had dropped to a level acceptable to nasa, although usaf wanted further tests to confirm reliability. (Space Bus. Daily, 11/14/63, 251)
In an address to the Press and Union League Club of San Francisco, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said that the two basic policy questions repeatedly raised concerning the U.S. space program were: (1)	“Is exploration of the moon an objective of sufficient value to our drive for space leadership to warrant a total investment of as much as $20 billion in this decade, and in the next fiscal year at a rate that requires two-thirds of our [nasa] space budget?” (2)	“Is the pace at which we are proceeding and the rate of expenditure which is required to explore the moon by 1970, necessary to insure eventual pre-eminence in space, and reasonable in the light of our other pressing national needs?” In speaking to these questions, Mr. Webb traced the evolution of the U.S. space program and the determination of the national objectives in space after the strategic surprise of sputnik i. He ' discussed the central considerations of world leadership in science and technology, and the role of space exploration and exploitation in national affairs. He reviewed progress to date and the urgent requirement for full public understanding of the meaning and purpose of space exploration. (Text)
nasa $600,000 grant for “research in aerospace physical sciences” at Univ. of Alabama Research Institute, Huntsville, was announced by Univ. president, Dr. Frank A. Rose. (Huntsville Times, 3/5/63)
Army Corps of Engineers awarded $1,701,368 contract to C&B Construction Co., Memphis, for' construction of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s components test facility at Huntsville, Ala. (dod Release 1569-63)
Opening of Technical University of Berlin’s Institute for Elements of Space Travel was attended by Prof. Eugen Saenger, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Prof. Hermann Oberth, and other dignitaries of West Berlin and Univ. of Berlin. Prof. Saenger, former head of Research Institute for Physics of Jet Propulsion at Stuttgart, has been nominated as director of the new institute. (Bild [Hamburg], 1/8/63, in msfc SIN, 3/63, 5)
nasa Space Vehicle Review Board met at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, board being composed of 28 members representing Marshall, Manned Spacecraft Center, and Launch Operations Center. (Marshall Star. 1/23/63,3)
D-558-II Skyrocket dedicated in ceremony at Antelope Valley College, Lancaster, Calif., where it would be on permanent display. Designed and built by Douglas Aircraft Co. with cooperation of usn and naca, research aircraft was first to fly twice speed of sound (mach 2.01, on Nov. 20, 1953). Antelope’s Skyrocket was third model; first two were on display at Smithsonian Institution and Claremont, Calif., Air Museum, respectively. (Dedication Program)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) spoke on the House floor of the series of meetings with leading scientists that had been conducted by the Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development of the House Subcommittee on Science and Astronautics. “I cannot overemphasize the work of the Daddario Subcommittee in the effect it will have on the future progress of the United States, progress not only in science but also in the proper relationship of science and technology to our entire society. The members of the subcommittee are assuming a very weighty responsibility because, I believe, results of the subcommittee work will set the framework for science and technology in relation to the overall resources that we have to guide ourselves in the difficult years that lie ahead of us.” (CR, 11/7/63,20332)
nasa announced Langley Research Center had requested industry proposals for studying manned obital research laboratory systems capable of sustaining a four-man crew in space for one year, (nasa Release 63-81; Langley Release)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Scientific Advisory to the President, testified before Monopoly Subcommittee of Senate Small Business Committee on the need for flexibility in Government patent policy. “The Department of Defense feels strongly among other things that the performance of its mission requires the ability to assure the contractor at the time of contracting that he will retain commercial rights to his ideas, in order to assure the unrestrained participation by the most competent elements of American industry in the defense programs .... The central question ... is whether the terms of the contract will encourage tbe contractor to apply his full teclmical background and experience to the Government. These considerations also apply to contracts of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The national interest requires greater uniformity between dod and nasa patent practices since they are drawing on the services of the same sector of industrial research and development competence. “. . .1 feel that a reasonable basis for framing a government-wide patent policy can be found. It seems important for the Government to move in the direction of a more consistent policy that will eliminate the unhealthy confusion and instabilities that attend the present situation. Such a policy should provide for the Government to retain title in the range of circumstances that I listed earlier; but it is necessary to recognize that, because of the problems of the type that concern the Department of Defense and nasa, any policy, to be realistic, should enable industry to retain exclusive rights in certain circumstances .... The nature of the work involved, the commercial background of the contractor, and the extent to which the contractor would be expected to work the invention in the public interest would be significant factors in permitting contractors to retain exclusive commercial rights . . . .” (CR, 3/21/63, 4378)
According to results of survey by National Industrial Conference Board, about two per cent of U.S. working population and nearly one third of its scientists and engineers are engaged in research and development. Survey also showed total rad spending, including both private industry and Government, is more than $17 billion per year. In 1960, more than one half of overall financing came from Federal government. Defense, atomic energy, and space projects accounted for 57% of all resources devoted to rad in 1960. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/19/63)
Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D.-Ark.), Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, stated on the Senate floor that he favored space exploration but considered the present large space budgets “an unwarranted diversion of resources from the Nation’s most pressing needs.” He favored President Kennedy’s proposal for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar exploration for two reasons: “First, it would greatly reduce the costs of space exploration, releasing funds for important domestic programs, such as education, employment, urban renewal, and conservation of resources; second, it would further reduce world tensions by opening up a significant new area of Soviet-American cooperation.” (CR. 10/2/63, 17598)
nasa Director of Aeronautical Research Programs Charles H. Zimmerman resigned to accept position with Army Material Command’s research and development directorate. Since June 1962, Zimmerman directed nasa’s aeronautical research programs including X-15, V/Stol research, and supersonic transport study. (Av. Wk.. 9/2/63,24)
Scientists and engineers from major nasa centers convened at Lewis Research Center to discuss future manned planetary missions, (lrc Release 63-30, Lewis Chronology, 4)
At banquet of “Lectures in Aerospace Medicine,” School of Aerospace Medicine, San Antonio, Southwest Research Institute president Martin Goland said: “Our age is one of quickening technology, of economic opportunity accompanied by sharpened domestic and international competition, of changing social patterns and political structures. In the kaleidoscope of this environment, a major source of strength will be on the side of the nation which is creative and productive; the nation whose people are capable of exploiting for sound purposes the seemingly inexhaustible potential of science and technology. “Within this framework, it seems clear that we must view our space program as more than an assembly of scientific goals and technical objectives. So considerable is our intellectual and material investment in space that we cannot judiciously ignore its by-products, the opportunity to transfer knowledge and capabilities from space technology to other portions of our national effort. Each one of us must act as a catalyst in this diffusion of ideas . . . .” (Text)
Walter C. Williams and J. C. Elms assumed duties as deputy directors of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, under M6C Director, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth. Williams, formerly msc Associate Director, became Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and Flight Operations; concurrently he was named Director of Flight Operations in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight. Elms was appointed msc Deputy Director for Development and Programs, with primary management responsibility for spacecraft development. (MSC Roundup, 11/28/62, 1)
Request for proposals to provide services and materials necessary for operating and maintaining X-15 “High Range” issued by nasa Flight Research Center. Range consisted of terminal station at Edwards afb and two up-range stations at Beatty and Ely, Nev. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/22/63,280)
In wake of rumors that nasa was planning three-day manned space flight for August, nasa affirmed its announced plan to end Project Mercury with MA-9 flight in April unless unforeseen problems arise in that flight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/30/63)
Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, said in address before faculty and student body of Vanderbilt Univ., Nashville, that for the U.S. space program, “1962 was an active and successful year .... iiiv mull 1 mV ana Varied acco*npiiSmiicn.iS Oi A »oiuu like to stress three that have very far-reaching significance. “First, we demonstrated beyond any shadow of doubt that the United States has the capability for manned travel and manned exploration of the solar system .... “Second, ... we completed the difficult round of decisions on how to get to the moon .... “Third, in the past year we more clearly defined the long-range goals of our space program .... Our long-range goals [are] to make America the leading spacefaring nation and to achieve pre-eminence in all major aspects of space science and space exploration . . . .” (Text)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of nasa Lewis Research Center, told Chicago press conference that trouble in Centaur launch vehicle had been corrected. Centaur was proceeding at Lewis under highest national priority (DX) and would be developed on schedule to launch Surveyor lunar spacecraft and Mariner interplanetary spacecraft in 1965. Dr. Silverstein pointed out new testing philosophy for Centaur called for more extensive and qualitative ground test before flights. (Chicago Sun-Times, 1/10/63; Chicago Daily News, 1/10/63)
President’s Award for Distinguished Civilian Service presented to: Dr. Alain C. Enthoven, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis; David D. Thomas, Director of faa Air Traffic Service; and Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory. (Av. Wk., 6/10/ 63,36) Jv/ne 12: Friends and associates of the late Dr. Edward R. Sharp, former director of Lewis, dedicated the Edward R. Sharp Medical Library at Southwest Community Hospital, Berea, Ohio. (lrc Release 63-39, Lewis Chronology, 5) Jwne 13: Responding to former President Eisenhower’s criticism of U.S. manned lunar program, Senator Edmondson (D.-Okla.) said on floor of the Senate: “We stand in the position of leader for the free world as we battle for superiority in this challenging field. We cannot afford to do less than we are now doing. “The national goals set by the President of the United States and ably administered by the distinguished James E. Webb deserve the united support of Americans, for it is this program which assures this country preeminence in space.” Rep. Charles H. Wilson (D.-Calif.) said on floor of the House: “Surely the critics of this program do not wish our country to be left behind in the space race ? . . . “In our own day and age, brave men are still exploring uncharted oceans. I have no doubt that these journeys, too, will be well justified and that once again in time the expense will be repaid many times over. “I suggest we study history a little more fully to prepare ourselves for the future. I regret that General Eisenhower will be pictured to our great grandchildren in future textbooks as being shortsighted and narrowminded . . . .” (OR, 6/13/63, 10168, 10248)
Senate debate of H.R. 7500, nasa authorization bill for FY 1964, continued. Sen. Stephen Young (D.-Ohio) said: “The argument has been made that it is unwise to spend billions of dollars to explore outer space when we have so many unsolved problems remaining here on earth. In my judgment, however, and I am sure most of my colleagues agree, elimination of expenditures for space exploration would not necessarily result in the transfer of those funds to other forms of research. Moreover, an investigation of the funding of all forms of Federal research reveals that no real conflict exists between space exploration and research in other fields. “In fact, this investigation provides persuasive evidence that, rather than interfering with other forms of research, our space effort has stimulated a more favorable climate for research in general, so that progress is being made simultaneously in a great many areas totally unrelated to space . . . .” (CR, 8/8/63, 13751)
Next Soviet space flight would be “spectacular” and “more complicated,” four Soviet cosmonauts indicated in Evening Moscow interview. The cosmonauts—Yuri Gagarin, Gherman Titov, Andrian Nikolayev, and Pavel Popovich—said U.S.S.R. was busily preparing for a forthcoming space launching, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/12/63)
Senate and House passed H.R. 7500, bill to authorize nasa appropriations for FY 1964. Senate and House both adopted the conference committee’s bill authorizing $5,350,820,400 total; of which $4,119,575,000 was for research and development, $713,060,400 for construction of facilities, and $518,185,000 for administrative operations. (CR, 8/28/63,15298-303,15268-270)
First stage of Saturn SA-5 vehicle was static-fired in 142.-sec. test at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Eight-engine cluster was fired at full thrust of 1.5 million lbs. (Huntsville Times, 3/14/63)
nasa was about to enter the prolonged-flight phase of its bioscience program, according to Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences. He cited negotiations now underway with GE to provide six 1,000-lb. recoverable biosatellites. These would be used for such flights as three-to-five day flights to study effects of weightlessness and radiation on plants and animals; 21-day orbital flights to study effects of weightlessness and absence of earth’s rotation on biological rhythms in plants and animals; and 14-to-30 day flights by small monkeys to study effects of prolonged weightlessness on the cardiovascular system, central nervous system, and general physiology and behavior. All studies would have importance for prolonged manned space flight. (Macomber, San Diego Union, 10/12/63)
Ground-breaking ceremony for new astrophysics and space research laboratory in Chicago, part of Enrico Fermi Institute for Nuclear Studies, Univ. of Chicago announced. {Chic. Trib., 4/28/63)
jpl awarded contract to Motorola, Inc., for fabrication and system integration of receiving subsystems operating at S-band frequencies in the Deep Space and Manned Space Flight tracking networks. Contract was follow-on to present contract awarded March 1962 under which Motorola designed and fabricated modules for S-band receiving subsystems for Deep Space Network. The additional equipment was for the nasa Unified S-Band System, in which receiving equipment for both networks are identical except for slight difference in operating frequency. Unified S-Band System allows all communications functions between ground stations and spacecraft to be accomplished at single frequency; provides more efficient power transfer between ground station’s directive antennas; and reduces by hundreds of times the galactic noise received on uhf frequencies, (nasa Release 63-284)
Nike-Cajun sounding rpcket launched at Wallops Island, Va., to 46.5-mi. altitude, ejecting ozone about 10 sec. after trajectory peak. Objects of the nasa Lewis Research Center experiment were to: test excited oxygen theory of sodium airglow; detect concentration of atomic hydrogen in the atmosphere; measure altitude of sodium and hydroxyl airglow layers; and test a new technique for studying atmospheric chemical releases with rocket-borne photometers. (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching)
U.S. Army’s Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully performed inflight maneuvers in test flight at White Sands Missile Range. Missile was launched from underground cell, (dod Release 55763)
Researchers at the nasa Lewis Research Center ran a giant cryomagnet producing a field of 50,000 gauss over a one-foot-diameter test section. Although this was probably the largest magnetic field ever produced over such a volume, the cryomagnet would be enlarged from two to twelve coils with an ultimate design goal of 200,000 gauss. (Lewis Chronology, 2)
nasa Lewis Research Center awarded a $48,131,315 contract to Aerojet-General Corp. for redefinition of Snap-8 (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) development program. Snap-8 is designed to provide 35 kilowatts of on-board electric power to future spacecraft. (Lewis Chronology, 8)
Testifyingbefore the House Select Committee on Government Research, Dr. Vannevar Bush said: “The spectacular success of applied research during the war led to a fallacy entertained by many. It is that any problem can be solved by gathering enough scientists and giving them enough money .... It is folly to thus proceed. The great scientific steps forward originate in the minds of gifted scientists, not in the minds of promoters. The best way to proceed is to be sure that really inspired scientists have what they need to work with, and leave them alone. “If the country pours enough money into research, it will inevitably support the trivial and the mediocre. The supply of scientific manpower is not unlimited. “In any broad program of research the keyword in regard to any one aspect of the program is ‘relevance.’ It is a good word to have in mind in examining any research program. Competent directors of research know what it means. Probably ‘conducive to progress toward the main object of a program’ is as good a definition as any. Just finding out something new is not by itself sufficient justification for research. It needs to mean something when we find it. “When scientific programs are judged by popular acclaim we inevitably have over-emphasis on the spectacular. That is just what we have today. The deeply important scientific advances moving today are not easy to understand. If they were they would have been accomplished long ago. Outstanding scientific progress, which will most affect the lives and health of our children, is not grasped by many.” Objecting to the practice of the government and the armed forces of utilizing universities in the management of secret programs, Bush said: “It should never be forgotten that the main task of the universities is to educate men. The country will need skilled professional men in the future as much as it will need new knowledge. As we now go we are not meeting this challenge sufficiently. Every research program placed in a university should be so ordered that its product is not only new knowledge but skilled educated men.” (Text)
With launching and recovery of 120-ft. balloon, Balloon Research Center at Palestine, Tex., completed its cosmic-ray study project. Today’s balloon floated to more than 10,000-ft. altitude to collect cosmic-ray data, (upi, NYT, 9/3/63,4)
First Block II flight configuration of Saturn I space vehicle, SA-5, was static-fired for 33 sec. at Marshall Space Flight Center, developing full 1.5 million lbs. of thrust. All objectives of the firing were met. (Marshall Star, 3/6/63,1)
Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, stated his conviction that a belt of comets never seen from earth lies near the path of the planet Pluto. It was this comet belt, he though, that accounted for the disturbances in the orbit of the planet Neptune. Pluto had sometimes been credited with this effect, but Dr. Whipple said that Pluto could scarcely weigh as much as the earth, while the objects producing such an effect would have to weigh ten times as much as the earth. (Science Service, NYT, 11 /14/63,3)
rca Board Chairman David Samoff, addressing American Friends of the Hebrew University in New York, predicted vast scientific and technological developments in the years ahead that “are so fundamental that they will alter the very structure of society and compel each of us to readjust some of our traditional concepts .... “Modem man—especially the would-be leader in society—has to be a culturally integrated individual, familiar with the sciences as well as the humanities. There cannot be two isolated cultures for the simple reason that there is only one society in which to live .... “I would propose that scientific and cultural education begin with the earliest school years and extend without interruption through college and into the professional schools. Specifically, courses in the social sciences and humanities should be related to the physical sciences. It seems to me highly desirable that science itself should be studied as a social phenomenon because of the great impact it has upon society .... “. . . scientific realities of tomorrow will surpass our vision of today. The great challenge before all of us is to make sure that the new knowledge and new instrumentalities shall be used constructively and not destructively. The powers of science and technology are neither good nor evil in themselves. Their capacity for good or evil lies in the use we make of them . . . .” (Text, OR, 12/4/63, 22087-89) December £: Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, announced that revised testimony refuted the earlier contention that 25 per cent of U.S. scientific manpower would be working on space programs by 1970: “I challenged the accuracy of that forecast. The next day the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee began hearings on nasa’s relations with universities .... “The best estimates are that 6 or 7 per cent—at most 10 per cent—might be involved. That is a long way from being an excessive drain on scientific brainpower.” (upi, NTT, 12/3/63, 47)	.	.
Moscow Pravda announced Yevgeny Alexandrov, head of research laboratory in Moscow Mining Institute, had discovered a new law of physics which corrects the laws of Sir Isaac Newton. Newspaper did not indicate which laws of Newton were corrected nor how they were corrected, but it said: “Up to now, mechanisms and machines of an impact nature [presumably mining equipment such as pneumatic drills] quickly went out of commission. Now their life will not only be extended immeasurably but also their power will increase many times over. “Innumerable examples can be given,” the newspaper said, but did not offer any. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/14/63, A3)
Columbia Univ. School of Journalism announced $131,000 award from nasa to evaluate nasa’s dissemination of space news and to study problems and competence of news media in reporting and interpreting space news, to determine whether better ways can be found to improve public understanding of space sciences and space exploration. Study would take 3 years, with comparable funds expected for the second and third years. Commenting on the grant, Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said: “It seems a strange expenditure, especially when we are desperately trying to maintain their budget . . . .” Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “It sounds like the agency is carrying out the Space Act by trying to find ways of better interpreting to the public the great technological developments in space.” Unnamed nasa spokesman said the grant was “a legitimate study fulfilling our Congressional mandate to keep the public informed.” (Toth, NY T, 7/13/63,21)
nasa announced selection of Boeing Co. and Douglas Aircraft Co. for final negotiations leading to manned orbital research laboratory study contracts, nasa Langley Research Center would negotiate definitive three-month study contracts with the two companies. (nasa Release 63-120; Langley Release)
Army Corps of Engineers announced start of construction of world’s largest structure, the Vertical Assembly Building for Saturn V launch vehicle, vab is being built on Merritt Island, adjacent to Cape Canaveral, Fla. As design and construction agent for nasa’s manned space flight facilities, Corps was managing construction contracts in Merritt Island for nasa Launch Operations Center, (dod Release 1141-63)
nasa awarded contract for designing and fabricating advanced four-man, six-month, life-support system to General Dynamics Corp.’s Astronautics Div. (gd/a). 18-month contract called for research, design, fabrication, testing, and delivery to nasa Langley Research Center of fully operating prototype life-support system for space flights, (nasa Release 63-126; Langley Release) Jwne 5: usaf conducted successful test-firing of “second generation” Minuteman icbm from Cape Canaveral, its re-entry vehicle impacting target area near Ascension Island, (dod Release 820-63)
Senators Warren G. Magnuson and Henry M. Jackson announced three nasa study contracts awarded to Boeing Co.: $199,920 contract to continue studying methods of recovering Saturn first-stage rocket boosters for reuse; $106,000 award to continue studying large clustered solid-propellant rocket motors; and $84,108 contract to study vehicle-integrated rocket powerplant with air augmentations. Contracts were let by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. (7/l 1/63)
First meeting of nasa Advisory Committee on Biotechnology and Human Research held at Ames Research Center. {Av. Wk., 5/6/63,103)
Speaking at Boston College Seminar, Franklyn W. Phillips, Director of nasa’s North Eastern Office, said: “At the request of the Congress, nasa is conducting additional studies on a need for an Electronics Center, the nature of the Center, and its geographical location. The results of these three studies will be presented to Mr. Webb, who after making nasa’s decision on the location of the Center will forward these reports to the House and Senate Space Committees for their consideration on or about the first or February. These Committees have 45 days in which to take action on nasa’s report. If they take favorable action or for that matter if they take no action in the 45 days after submittal of the report, nasa can proceed with its plans. On the other hand, should these committees take negative action of any kind, it would force a further reconsideration of the proposal. “The proposed Electronics Research Center will employ approximately 2,000 people of which six to seven hundred would be scientists and engineers. Estimates of the investment to be made in constructing the Center amount to 56 million dollars. When the Center is fully operative, it wTill have an annual operating budget of $20 to $30 million, and will be expected to disburse considerably more than that through a contract research and development program with industry and universities.” (Text) December 17: First successful flight of the C-141 Starlighter took place at Dobbins afb, Ga. Featuring four fan-jet engines, the plane can cross any ocean nonstop at speeds of more than 500 mph. (AFSC Operational Highlights, 13)
In a ceremony coincident with nasa’s fifth anniversary, Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa’s Langley Research Center, presented a model of a Mercury space capsule to the new municipal aerospace park in Hampton, Va. (Newport News (Va.) Times-Herald, 10/1/63,13)
Soviet news agency Tass announced launching of cosmos xiii (apogee: 209 mi.; perigee: 127 mi.; inclination to equator: 64° 58'; period: 89.77 min.). Tags stated that all systems were functioning and that onboard equipment was “intended for continuing outer space research in conformity with the program announced . . . March 16, 1962,” but gave no payload weight or specific mission details. In an interview in Guinea, Cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Pavel Popovich said that the Soviets plan more tandem manned orbital flights. In response to questions, they said that women sometimes have “physical superiority over men.” cosmos xiii was launched after 89 days of no announced Soviet space flight activity, longest period of space inactivity to date. ( upi, Wash. Post, 3/23/63, A8; Av. Wk, 3/25/63, 26; Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/22/63,1, afss-t Trans.)
nasa Flight Research Center announced award of $1.325-million contract to Lockheed-Georgia Co. to purchase Lockheed Jet-Star aircraft. Aircraft would be used for research investigation of aircraft flying qualities, automatic and manual control systems, pilot instrument displays, and pilot training, with special emphasis on supersonic transport research, (frc Release 2-63)
. . . Government’s part in the research and development business has now reached the point where it commands attention because of its sheer size and propensity for growth. From here on, we will have to be more choosy in what we do, and better prepared to supply answers to questions about marginal costs and benefits. The budget this year for research and development is a husky $15 billion. Its growth potential dwarfs anything else in the budget. Someone has figured out that the doubling time for research and development as a fraction of national income is only 7 years, and that if this continued for 30 years research and development would rise to one-half of the national income.
More than 150,000 visitors visited nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, more than 50,000 visits recorded by persons on business. Biggest single attraction was Space Orientation Center, drawing about 83,000 visits during the year. (Marshall Star, 1/22/64, 1)
U.N. General Assembly’s Political Committee approved draft resolution and declaration on international cooperation in space sciences and law. The resolution endorsed recommendations by U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, which called for proposals on exchange of scientific information, consideration of agreements on legal principles “governing the activities of the states in the exploration and use of outer space," and other steps toward cooperation. The declaration was an endorsement of legal principles drafted jointly by U.S. and U.S.S.R. representatives last month. Provisions of the nine-point draft included statements that celestial bodies should be regarded as free territories not subject to national sovereignty; exploration of space should be for the benefit of all men of all nations; and all nations engaged in space exploration should observe international law. With adoption of the two drafts, the Political Committee concluded its present consideration of space exploration. (Lubasch, NTT, 12/6/63,1 & 17)
nasa Ames Research Center was assigned direction of future Pioneer space probes, first of which would be launched in 1964. Newly created Space Sciences Div. would direct scientific aspects of the project. (San Jose News, 1/1/63)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Director of the White House Office of Science and Technology, appeared before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee to request restoration of $245,000 that the House had cut from his office’s $1,025,000 budget request. If the cut were not restored, he said, he would have to cut back his 29-member staff just as the one-year-old organization was beginning to “realize some of the potential foreseen for it as a new innovation in the Federal science structure.” (NYT, 10/15/63, 25)
nasa’s Flight Research Center, faa, and U.S. Navy announced completion of a series of test flights simulating the supersonic transport aircraft (sst) flying in the air traffic control network. A Navy A5A jet aircraft was used to simulate the sot because its thrust-to-weight ratio enabled it to simulate closely the performance of the sst up to 50,000 ft. Some 21 flights were made into Los Angeles along Federal airways, starting from level flight at 50,000 ft. and mach 1.7, then decelerating to mach 1.4 and descending, dropping below the speed of sound before reaching 30,000 ft., and flying at 340 mph at 20,000 ft., not much faster tban present-day jet transports. Flight controllers reported no problems with descent and landing, although takeoff and climb did present more problems because of the high performance of the aircraft, (frc Release 31-63)
D. Brainerd Holmes announced his resignation as nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, effective some time next autumn. Holmes had joined nasa autumn of 1961, would return to industry “within the period of two years which was understood to constitute his obligation for government service at the time of his appointment.” (nasa Release 63-133)
Editorial in the Washington Sunday Star commented on U.S.S.R.’s latest space feat, the launching of the maneuverable spacecraft polet i: “Russia’s newest venture in space has come at exactly the right time. Although not so intended, it pulls the rug from under those among us—such as economizing Congressmen and excessively zealous scientists like Linus Pauling—who have been clamoring for an end to our country’s program to place Americans on the moon by 1970. “These people, with much naivete (to use a polite word), have attached an extravagant degree of importance to Premier Khrushchev’s recent remarks vaguely suggesting that he may be withdrawing the Soviets from the lunar race .... their latest space shot plainly, and disturbingly, indicates that they are well ahead of us with the kind of rendezvous capability that is essential to efforts to place men on the moon and bring them back safely .... “Clearly, we must run this race as swiftly as we possibly can.” {OR, 11/4/63, A6869) November S: Reviewing the U.S. manned lunar landing program, John Finney of the New York Times concluded that the race to the moon had always been a one-sided one, that there was no evidence that the Russians were building the large rocket that would be necessary for such a venture, that they were rather proceeding on a building-block program in space tnat eventually would lead to a lunar landing, but not as a special, high-priority project. This, Finney said, was also the approach of the U.S. until May 1961. “Then, in the wake of the Bay of Pigs fiasco and the first Soviet manned space flight, the Kennedy Administration ordered an abrupt change in course.” The original justification was that U.S. prestige was at stake. As time went on and budget resistance developed in Congress, the Administration argument shifted to one of attaining “a position of preeminence” in space. Also the potential military benefits were emphasized more and more. Finally, the President’s proposal for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar program seemed to undercut all preceding positions. To Mr. Finney, all this added up to the certainty that the U.S. would continue its program for a manned lunar landing “but it will be pursued with less competitive zeal and at a more leisurely pace.” (Finney, NYT, 11/3/63, 5E)
In address at dedication of General H. H. Arnold advanced range instrumentation ship (aris), Cape Canaveral, General B. A. Schriever (usaf) said: “Instrumentation is a key element of technology in the Space Age. It plays a crucial role in the rapid progress of our research and development efforts, through the provision of more complete and accurate information on test results. As a result, far fewer tests are required than was formerly the case . . . .” Comparing the 2,500 test firings of V-2 to the less than 50 of Thor irbm, he said: “Better instrumentation is a major factor in this dramatic reduction.” He recalled General Arnold’s foresight “demonstrated as far back as 1917,” when he and Charles Kettering worked on development of “The Bug” pilotless guided airplane—in many ways “25 years ahead of its time . . . .” “Throughout his career ‘Hap’ Arnold was a pioneer of new ideas . . . .” In 1938 he predicted development of variable-wing aircraft. In 1944 he organized Army Air Forces Scientific Advisory Group, under Dr. Theodore von Karman, charging these scientists to “‘think about supersonic speed airplanes, airplanes that would move and operate without crews, improvements in bombs . . .; communications systems . . . television, weather, medical research; atomic energy, and any other phase of aviation which might affect the development and employment of the air power to come ....’” (Text, afsc Release 35-R-36)
nasa’s Langley Research Center asked 36 companies for proposals on Project Scanner, a spacecraft that would establish the radiation characteristics of the Earth’s horizon and develop horizonscanning techniques. Program would involve two flight models complete with re-entry heat shield, plus one backup. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/29/63,165)
Two flight tests of M-2 wingless lifting body conducted by nasa Flight Research Center, with Milton O. Thompson as test pilot. Towed to 13,000-ft. altitude by C-47 aircraft, M-2 glided each time to landing on Rogers Dry Lake bed in a few seconds over three minutes. These were sixth and seventh air-tow flight-tests of M-2 in series to investigate man’s ability to control M-2 during low-speed operations, particularly during landing phase. ( frc Release 17-63; M&R, 9/9/63,14)
Attempt to launch series of three Hopi-Dart wind research vehicles from nasa Wallops Station was canceled when first vehicle failed to perform properly. Tests, to gather wind-flow data at altitudes approaching 60 mi. for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, would be rescheduled after analysis of cause of rocket’s malfunction. (Wallops Release 63-21)
President Kennedy appointed Robert M. White to succeed Francis W. Reichelderfer as Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau. White was president of Travelers Research Center, Inc., an independent nonprofit organization engaged in rad in environmental and mathematical sciences. (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/30/63)
Soviet Ambassador to U.N., Nikolai T. Fedorenko, announced Soviets had broken off private talks with U.S. on uses of space and would submit its own declaration on space exploration to the Legal Subcommittee of the Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. (NYT, 4/17/63,1; Wash. Post, 4/17/63)
Summary article entitled “Ames Hypervelocity Free-flight Research’’ by Alvin Seiff in Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering reviewed shock-tube wind tunnel and light-gas gun experiments at Ames Research Center. Model speeds up to 41,000 fps and at air densities from 0.0002-0.16 times that at sea level have been achieved. {A&AE, 12/63,16-23)
Reorganization at nasa Ames Research Center was put into effect by Director Smith J. DeFrance, designed to accommodate new Pioneer spacecraft program assigned to Ames. In addition to other changes, two new Assistant Directors were appointed: Assistant Director for Development, Mr. Robert M. Crane; and Assistant Director for Research and Development Analysis and Planning, Dr. Alfred J. Eggers. (Ames Memo For Staff, 1/31/63)
General Thomas S. Power (usaf) , CinC of Strategic Air Command, predicted at aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting that ‘‘space potentially offers unique military advantages, and we must anticipate that some nation or nations will endeavor to exploit such advantages to help them attain their political objectives .... We may find that, eventually, the only really surviv-able command and control structure would be one employing a maneuverable command post in space.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/24/63)
usaf announced Minuteman icbm was flown on 3,000-mi. research and development flight from Cape Canaveral, the launch conducted by an all-usAFcrew, (dod Release 247-62)
Kaj Aa. Strand, former Chairman of Northwestern Univ. Astronomy Dept., succeeded retiring Gerald M. Clemence as Scientific Director of U.S. Naval Observatory. (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/27/63)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wemher von Braun announced reorganization of msfc, designed to strengthen the Center’s dual function of performing in-house r&d and monitoring industrial contracts. In Office of the Director, Deputy Director Dr. Eberhard Rees was designated Deputy Director-Technical, and Deputy Director H. H. Gorman, Deputy Director-Administrative. Hans Maus was designated Director of newly formed executive staff replacing msfc Central Planning Office. In second major group, msfc’s nine technical divisions were formed in new Research and Development Operations, with Hermann Weidner as Director. Third major group was new Industrial Operations, comprised of msfc elements concerned with work performed bv industrial contractors, and headed by Robert Young. (Marshall Star, 9/4/63,1, 3; N.O. Times-Pic., 9/1/63)
usaf announced series of 27 upper atmosphere chemical releases (Project Firefly III), completed in mid-December, had “ended a four-point basic research program aimed at learning more about the ionosphere.” Information gathered during tests, which were made at Eglin Gulf Test Range, would eventually aid pilots of X-20 vehicle. ( dod Release 70-63)
