Western Union announced it had completed a microwave system for the next lunar spacecraft’s communications with earth. The system was in test operation, linking Goldstone Tracking Station with Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 164 mi. away. For the next lunar probe, gs well as subsequent lunar and planetary probes, data obtained by the spacecraft would be sent through Goldstone to JPL for computer analysis; commands to the spacecraft would be sent from jpl through Goldstone to the probe. (Wash. Post, 4/21/64)
At his Washington press conference, President Johnson announced successful development of an advanced, long-range reconnaissance aircraft to be employed by Strategic Air Command: “This system employs the new SR—71 aircraft and provides a long-range, advanced strategic reconnaissance plane for military use capable of worldwide reconnaissance for military operations. “The Joint Chiefs of Staff, when reviewing the RS—70, emphasized the importance of the strategic reconnaissance mission. The SR-71 aircraft reconnaissance system is the most advanced in the world. “The aircraft will fly at more than three times the speed of sound. It will operate at altitudes in excess of 80,000 feet. It will use the most advanced observation equipment of all kinds in the world. “The aircraft will provide the strategic forces of the United States with an outstanding long-range reconnaissance capability. The system will be used during periods of military hostilities and in other situations in which the United States military forces may be confronting foreign military forces. “The SR—71 uses the same J—58 engine as the experimental interceptor previously announced, but it is substantially heavier and it has a longer range. “The considerably heavier gross weight permits it to accommodate the multiple reconnaissance sensors needed by the Strategic Air Command to accomplish the strategic reconnaissance mission in a military environment. “This billion-dollar program was initiated in February, 1963. The first operational aircraft will begin flight-testing in early 1965, and deployment of production units to the Strategic Air Command will begin shortly thereafter. “Appropriate members of Congress have been kept fully informed on the nature of, and the progress in, this aircraft program. “Further information on this major advanced aircraft system will be released from time to time at the appropriate military secret classification levels.” (Transcript, NYT, 7/25/64, 6)
Speaking on the floor of the House, Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) pointed out: “In our preoccupation with our national space program, we often overlook the fact that aeronautical research and development is a very important and productive part of the whole NASA program. . . . “I should point out that the technology that has evolved from the X-15 program has made possible the creation of the A-ll and the RS-71, hypersonic aircraft in the 2,000-mile-an-hour range, which offer great potential to our Air Force as versatile, high-flying reconnaissance vehicles. NASA, with the X-15, is contributing significantly to the supersonic transport program through new materials, construction techniques, guidance and control systems, and aerodynamic designs that are available now because the naca had the foresight and determination to undertake the X—15 program in 1954, in association with the Air Force and the Navy. “In 1959, the first flight was made. Since then, the X—15 pilots have rocketed out into near space, where 99 percent of the earth’s atmosphere is below them, have reached speeds 6 times the speed of sound that have made the plane glow red hot. “Now, an advanced X—15 is ready to reach for new heights and even greater speeds. Our investment in the X-15 program and our confidence in the men and pilots who have made it so successful, have paid off handsomely for the individual taxpayer and for the country. Our world leadership and prestige in aeronautics have been enhanced manifold by the X-15. It has played an indispensable role in making sure that America’s place in the search for new knowledge of flight will never be less than it is now.” (CR, 8/20/64,20046)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced contracts for construction of facilities at lrc’s Plum Brook Station: $1,160,000 contract to Roediger Construction, Inc., and $1,386,000 contract to Mosser Construction Co. (lrc Release 64-100)
Three contracts were awarded by NASA Lewis Research Center to Hughes Aircraft Co. The first contract, totaling $1,151,370, was a 12-mo. continuation of a previous contract for research and development of a contact ion engine using cesium as a propellant. The other two contracts were also follow-on efforts: a contract for $202,915 provided for fabrication of porous alloy and solid sintered ionizers; a contract for $243,061 covered tests and evaluation of physical, electrical, and cesium ionization properties of porous ionizers and evaluation of the electrical properties of solid sintered ionizer material, (lrc Release 64-114)
Membership on the NASA Policy Planning Board, established November 1, was formally designated, with Langley Research Center Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson as Chairman and NASA General Counsel Walter D. Sohier as Vice Chairman. (NASA Circ. 317)
“Astrometric” telescope of the U.S. Naval Observatory went into operation at Flagstaff, Ariz. The telescope featured world’s largest known telescopic mirror, 61 inches in diameter, ground from huge block of synthetic quartz. New telescope would be used chiefly to measure distances to nearby stars that are too faint for such study by other existing telescopes, thus exploring previously unknown regions of the universe. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/25/64,14)
Vladimir Kotelnikov, member of Soviet Academy of Sciences, proposed one-year radio search of the universe for signals from extraterrestrial civilizations, according to Tass. He proposed that network of antennas be assigned to “listen to” specific target points in space. The antennas would be connected to a central multichannel receiver. U.S. radioastronomers at National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W.	Va., had conducted similar experiment in 1960 (Project Ozma) without detecting messages. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/18/64)
Philip Donely, Chief of Flight Mechanics and Technology Div., NASA Langley Research Center, received 1964 Laura Taber Barbour Air Safety Award of the Flight Safety Foundation. Citation said that Donely’s “diverse and unique contributions to air safety during his service of over 30 years with the NACA and NASA have made him an internationally recognized authority in the areas of aircraft loads, operating problems, and airworthiness requirements. . . . The counsel he has given to industry, operators, and government agencies on matters such as airworthiness aspects of new aircraft, assessment of design criteria, and airworthiness problems related to aircraft accidents has contributed significantly to the development and operation of safe aircraft.” (nasa Release 64-92)
Soviet astronomer Nikolai Barabashov said Kharkov Univ. observatory ultraviolet photographs might show surface of Venus. Tass quoted Barabashov as saying a large dark spot appeared on the planet in pictures taken before dawn, and he believed this indicated a clearing in the clouds normally covering Venus. “The position of the spot on the disk warrants the assumption that we have here a glimpse of a part of the surface of Venus, the closest neighbor of the earth.” He added that further studies and analyses would be made. (AP, Houston Post, 9/12/64)
Rep. Harold M. Ryan (D.-Mich.) said on House floor that if NASA’s proposed electronics research center were located in Michigan it “would provide a stimulus to the heartland of America, and bring into geographical balance the national capability in the field closely related with the electronic industry. “It is important that the resources of our part of the country be taken into consideration and the fact recognized that they are not presently being used to their fullest capacity. . . .” (CR, 1/15/64, 434-35)
Dr. Winston E. Kock, Director of NASA Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, Mass., announced that Dr. Lester C. Van Atta and Dr. W. Crawford Dunlap would head two of the Center’s major operations. Dr. Van Atta would direct research in electromagnetics, including microwave and optical research. Dr. Dunlap would direct research in component technology, including solid state and materials and qualifications standards. (NASA Release 64-317)
NASA announced Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, assumed the role of acting director of Project Gemini. George M. Low, former Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight at Hq. and since February 1964 Deputy Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, had served as acting director of Gemini since last November. (NASA Release 64-247)
The Hermann Oberth Award, presented annually by the Alabama chapter of AIAA, was awarded posthumously to Hugh M. Taylor, former special assistant to the Chief of the Guidance and Control Division, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Taylor, who had worked at Redstone Arsenal since 1951, was killed in a plane crash July 9 near Newport, Tenn. {Marshall Star, 11/11/64, 1, and 11/25/64, 1)
NASA’s Lewis Research Center announced that it was testing a gas bearing, designed as a research tool, in a vacuum simulating space environment above 100 miles. Suspended from the top of a 60-ft.-long, 15-ft.-dia. tank, the bearing would provide complete freedom of motion to any payload attached to the bearing. A suspended payload would have three-axis mobility with a 10° swing in both pitch and yaw. The bearing, designed to carry an average 350-lb. payload, would enable scientists to evaluate low-thrust systems for attitude control or stationkeeping in on-the-ground tests, (lrc Release 64-105)
NASA extended until Dec. 31, 1966, its contract with the California Institute of Technology for research and development programs conducted at the Government-owned Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Work that would be performed included research and development in lunar and interplanetary programs, aeronautics, development and operation of deep space tracking facilities, providing NASA with technical advice, scientific studies, rad reports of investigations, rad providing supervision of related work given to contractors. Requirements from NASA would be issued in the form of written Task Orders, and the cost of this contract would be determined by the sum of these task orders. In addition, the two parties would negotiate each fiscal year for a fixed fee for the management of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. (NASA Release 64-320)
New research project would study feasibility and design concept of advanced hypersonic ramjet engine, NASA announced. The work would extend ramjet propulsion technology which NASA and NACA had been developing for more than 15 years. To be conducted under direction of Langley Research Center, the project was being organized to determine potential of the ramjet as a propulsion system for hypersonic flight. Project would use hydrogen as fuel, (nasa Release 64-158)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said at University of Cincinnati: “We have reached a state where we can do a lot more things [in space exploration] them we may be allowed to do. . . . “The work of my office is to develop the concepts. I can only say what can be done. It may never be approved. . . . “The scientist and engineer cannot answer what is next. He can only answer by outlining the options which science will permit as the next Btep. “What is in fact done next must be determined by an assessment of the scientific, social, economical and political implications of these options. . . .” (Text)
Results of Soviet biological experiments reported to cospar meeting. Discussing fruit fly experiments in space [see May 8], report said fruit flies mated in space apparently normally, but when the eggs hatched in the laboratory after the flight there was excess number of females. Furthermore, report said, average weight of male fruit flies was lower than of flies bred in the laboratory. Soviets disclosed that Cosmonaut V.	Bykovsky had conducted fixed biological experiments during his five-day vostok v space flight, killing specimens to stop their development at various intervals. In {mother biological experiment, Soviets reported that normal cell division in spores of Tradescantia plant was upset in space environment, with rearrangements of plant chromosomes as well as development of freak cells. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/17/64)
NASA announced Franklyn W. Phillips would be Assistant Director for Administrative Operations at NASA’s new Electronics Research Center, Cambridge, Mass., effective Sept. 1. A veteran NACA-NASA executive, Phillips had been serving as Director of NASA Northeastern Office, which would Se absorbed within the new Center. As Assistant Director, Phillips would be responsible for administrative matters, including procurement, personnel affairs, management analysis, administrative support, and technical information. (NASA Release 64-218)
MSC Public Affairs Officer Paul Haney said it was doubtful that there would be a manned space flight this year. The two-man Project Gemini flight (GT—3) had previously been planned for late 1964. However, lightning damage at Cape Kennedy where Titan II launch vehicle was being prepared for GT—2 unmanned flight would cause minimum delay of three weeks in GT-2, Haney said. Length of time GT—3 would be delayed would depend upon how long GT—2 would be delayed. (upi, NYT, 8/25/64; Maloney, Houston Post, 8/25/64)
NASA Director of Personnel, Robert J. Lacklen, who had been with NASA since its inception, resigned to accept a position with the Richardson Foundation of Greensboro, N.C, Mr. Lacklen would head a Personnel Research Institute which would conduct research in personnel selection and appraisal. Mr. Grove Webster was named Acting Director of Personnel, (nasa Ann. 64-300)
A basic principle in bearing technology, discovered by NASA Lewis Research Center engineers, was hailed in 53rd Annual Report of the Fafnir Bearing Co. as “carrying bearing technology a step beyond conventional upset forgings.” The underlying principle was first reported by the lrc engineers in 1957; now the principle was developed into a manufacturing process. Walter T. Olson, assistant director of Lewis, said this was one instance where results from exploratory research had been adapted to production techniques, an important aim of NASA. (lrc Release 64-76)
NASA announced $1 million facilities grant to Texas a&m Univ., which would build an activation analysis laboratory for use in its space-related research program for remote analysis of materials through nuclear activation, (nasa Release 64-102)
X—15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Milton 0. Thompson in flight to test and measure heating effect of atmospheric friction on certain aircraft structural components. Aircraft reached altitude of 81,000 ft. and traveled at 3,511 mph (mach 5.32) in the 7-min. flight near NASA Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif, (nasa X—15 Proj. Off.; CR, 8/20/64, 20046)
NASA announced grant of $1,125,000 to Univ. of Illinois to finance construction of research laboratory facilities as wing to university’s Coordinated Science Laboratory. To be called Aerospace Research Center, the facilities were to be for investigations of ionosphere properties, propulsion, molecular densities, rendezvous problems, and plasma physics, (nasa Release 64-169)
nasa announced selection of Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to supply liquid hydrogen to nasa Mississippi Test Operations and Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn launch vehicle test program. Contract called for supply of up to 30 tons of liquid hydrogen per day by no later than mid-1965, would be renewable annually through December 1970. (nasa Release 64-10)
Giving his Sunday blessing to the public, Pope Paul VI referred to the successful U.S. RANGER Vii lunar flight: “We also would unite ourselves in the admiration of all for a happening that concerns the life of all humanity and that shows how far the man of science and technology has prbgressed. . . .” (AP, Houston Post, 8/3/64)
Thomas L. McGrath, director of R&D Dept, of Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce, said in Christian Science Monitor interview that NASA’s electronic research center would be a stimulus to Boston area economy. When the center is completed in 1969, he said, a “conservative” estimate would be $250 million contribution to income of the area. “The center will pull in a lot of capable people, and it’s impossible to say what they’ll add to the income of the area. Also one good research discovery coming out of the center might be worth millions to industry.” (Russell, CSM, 2/10/64)
Titan II icbm was launched on successful usaf test flight down the Atlantic Missile Range. This was the 33rd and final R&D firing of the Titan II. (upi, Wash. Post, 4/10/64; Witkin, NYT, 4/12/64,31)
NASA announced that its Office of Technology Utilization had issued Technical Briefs describing two instruments for measuring the rates of human respiration and heartbeat. The devices were a pneumotachometer (Tech Brief 64-10259) which would measure respiration rates per minute on a breath-to-breath basis and a cardiometer (Tech Brief 64-10258) which would compute the heartbeat rate from the wave-form output of an electrocardiograph (eicg) and visually display the data in beats per minute. Both were developed in connection with NASA’s manned space flight program. (NASA Release 64-311) A NASA technology utilization report described the effects of extremely low temperatures on structural metals. Based on studies at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, the report outlined some of NASA’s experience with various metallic materials and their capabilities at cryogenic temperatures. (nasa Release 64-325) NASA Tech Brief 64-10006 described a speed-sensing device to help power crane operators judge payload movements more precisely. Visual and audible signals would be produced in the crane cab to indicate the rate of load movement. The device would eliminate the necessity of a relay man to transmit hand signals to the crane operator, (nasa Release 64-300)
nasa Flight Research Center awarded a $1.2 million contract to the Norair Div. of the Northrop Corp. of Hawthorne, Calif., for the design and construction of two full-scale lifting body research vehicles. The two research vehicles (the M-2 and HL-10) were to be used initially by NASA for full-scale wind tunnel testing and for free flight tests as manned subsonic gliders, (frc Release 14-64)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Douglas Aircraft Co. for S-IVB stage mockup to be used with Saturn V launch vehicle simulator at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Expected to cost about $5 million, the mockup would be used in study of prelaunch, launch, and orbital checkout of third stage. (NASA Release 64-123)
Analyzing the U.S. aerospace industry Richard Rutter said in New York Times: “There have been some reductions in employment here and there and some production cut-backs. On the whole, however, the aerospace-defense industry remains not only very healthy but still growing. . . . “Change, of course, has been the hallmark of the aerospace industry almost since its very beginning. This characteristic continues. At present, for instance, there is some shift in production and procurement from aircraft and missiles to space vehicles and related space projects. This is not yet a sharp trend, but it may be indicative of the industry’s future course. . . .” (Rutter, NYT, 8/16/64, FI)
Conference on New Technology at Lewis Research Center was opened by LRC Director Dr. Abe Silverstein: “The vehicles and spacecraft launched from Florida are the visible results of our nation’s space effort. Less evident is the body of technology that makes these and future flights possible. Almost half of NASA’s 30,000 employees are among those creating this technology.” Attending the two-day conference were some 350 representatives of industry; area development groups; universities; Federal, state, and local government; labor; banking; and nasa Hq. and Centers. (Lewis News, 6/6/64,1)
Employment in aerospace industry during the past year reflected overall downward trend, according to Aviation Week survey. Exceptions to the general trend were McDonnell Aircraft Co. and Douglas Aircraft Co., the former mainly due to work on Gemini spacecraft and F—4 Phantom II aircraft and the latter due to increased work for Saturn launch vehicle program and commercial programs. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 20)
NASA and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had begun operating “Prairie Network” in midwestern U.S., a network of 16 automatic camera stations to photograph falling meteors and aid in tracking and recovering meteorites, NASA announced. Photographic measurements would assist scientists in determining how much mass is lost by bodies during atmospheric entry and in calculating origin of meteors. (NASA Release 64-106)
NASA announced it would negotiate one-year cost-plus-incentive-fee contract with General Electric Co., Computer Dept., for continuation of engineering services at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s computation laboratory, (nasa Release 64-31)
Rep. James C. Cleveland (R.-N.H.), member of House Select Committee on Government Research, wrote in Washington World magazine: “Fourteen to fifteen billion dollars of the taxpayer’s money is going into R&D this year. The figure was only $2 billion 10 years ago. “More than 30 different departments, bureaus, and agencies of the Federal Government conduct research or have it conducted for them, often in the same fields. . . . “A breakdown of Federal research and development spending shows that five organizations account for 90 percent of it. These are the Department of Defense, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the National Science Foundation. About 70 percent of these funds support military research and development. About 10 percent of the total funds is channeled to colleges and universities. . . .” (CR, 2/4/64, A563)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He mentioned that NASA’s Advanced Research and Technology program encompassed more than 2,000 separate tasks and projects, and highlighted a few areas for illustration. “. . . Considerable effort is concentrated on commercial supersonic transports, a subject of nasa research for many years. Various aircraft configurations embodying widely differing design features have resulted from this research. All of these designs appear promising, particularly with regard to supersonic performance. In September 1963, at the Langley Research Center, the results of preliminary design studies and of related NASA in-house research programs were presented to all interested government agencies and major aircraft manufacturers. In general, it was concluded that a supersonic transport for airline use is technically feasibly. It was stressed, however, that additional research will be required in order to raise the level of technology to the point where a supersonic transport can be designed which is economically attractive to the airlines. . . .” (Testimony)
First of two main experiment units for Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) was delivered to NASA by Univ. of Wisconsin. Designed and built by Cook Electric Co. under contract to the university, the experiment consisted of clustered 16-in. nebular photometer telescope, four 8-in. stellar photometer telescopes, and two scanning spectrometers. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 55)
NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Dr. Eugene B. Konecci said in keynote address, Fifth Annual Conference on Human Factors in Electronics, in San Diego: “There is a great need today for simplification through a more fundamental understanding of phenomena we take for granted. Mathematical theories to aid in simplification and a better understanding of the cosmos around us are needed. Specifically in Electronics we need to re-examine our traditional complex circuitry and the logic behind it, so we can make even more rapid strides in solid state physics and electronics without imposing old circuit theory and wiring diagrams on new active elements.' In 50 years an electron tube as we know it will be an archaic museum piece. “The greatest need in Human Factors research is a better understanding of man, his capabilities and limitations. The study of human brain mechanisms promises the greatest rewards to science and technology and in turn to the betterment of mankind. We need more cross fertilization between neuro- and psycho-physiologists and electronic engineers, through a new educational tool ‘Systems Engineering’ that includes the human element. . . .” (Text)
In a speech before a briefing conference on contracting for research and development sponsored by the Federal Bar Association and the Bureau of National Affairs, General Bernard Schriever, AFSC, stated that in his opinion “when understanding is fostered and encouraged among the various sectors of national life, such as industry, the professions, the scientific community, and government, then rapid progress can be made toward national objectives.” He cited the usaf ballistic missile program as an example of this principle at work and stated that the long-range usaf planning study (Project Forecast) set up in 1963 attempted also to put this principle to work, by employing broad participation by all the services, several Government agencies, and personnel from universities, corporations, and non-profit organizations. ( afsc Release 47—R-91)
B. K. Heusinger of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center said in Astronautics & Aeronautics article about present arid future improvements in Saturn launch vehicle propulsion: “First and foremost, the Saturn-I testing program has already made possible an additional payload capability of approximately 4300 lb. without major redesign efforts. A substantial portion of this gain has come from altered operational and procedural techniques developed during the normal course of static and flight testing. The impact of major redesigns will not be felt, as a result of the lead times involved, until the first of the Satum-IB vehicles. . . .”	(A&A, 8/64,/ 20-25) During August: J. S. Butz, Jr., said in Air Force and Space Digest article on the future of aviation: “Aeronautics in the 1970s and 1980s promises to eclipse anything of the past in both scope and the performance of individual aircraft. Although missile and space systems will continue to furnish strong competition for national support, aviation activity in the decades ahead will be much more extensive and important than it is today. . . . “The revolutionary effect of the new technology on future aircraft can be best illustrated by discussing two key areas. One is propulsion. The other is materials. Light, more powerful engines, and lighter, stronger structures always have been key design objectives. This is still true. . . .” He quoted Dr. Alexander H, Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development: “‘It is possible today to begin the development of lightweight gas-turbine engines with a thrust-to-weight ratio of better than 10 to 1.’ Dr. Flax points out that installed thrust-to-weight ratios apparently can rise to higher than 20 to 1 on the second generation of future engines. “Ten years ago such a statement would have got him laughed out of most scientific and engineering meetings. A few people may still argue that the estimate is high. But the main argument now is over how best to achieve this truly stunning performance rather than over the possibility of achieving it.” He detailed some of the r&d areas with great potential for future aircraft, then said: “Technical evidence abounds to prove that an aeronautical revolution is at hand and that the first step in that revolution can have great economic importance. It clearly is time for more resolute action. Britain and France, and possibly the Soviet Union, have approximately the same opportunity as the US to capitalize on what is known now. In western Europe, at least, engine and materials technology is well advanced. . . .” (AF Mag., 8/64)
U.S. Senate passed H.R. 10456, authorizing $5,246,293,250 budget for NASA in FY 1965. Included in this amount was $52,482,750 restored by Senate Space Committee from the $110,189,500 reduction made by the House. The hill would authorize $4,354,150,000 for research and development; $262,880,500 for construction of facilities; and $629,262,750 for administrative operations. Bill was passed by voice vote, was reintroduced two days later for record vote (see June 24).	(CR, 6/22/64, 14069-78)
In address to the Wayne State University College of Engineering Honors Convocation in Detroit, Mich., Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said: “In the manned space flight program, we have tried to profit from t)he experience of the past. We are creating this very great capability in advance of the formulation of many of the specific operational requirements, which inevitably will emerge when it becomes clear what can be done. There are many elements to this capability. It includes trained people, a base of industry throughout the United States, ground facilities, launch vehicles, spacecraft, operational experience, and the ability to manage large research and development efforts. All of these things will enable the United States to undertake whatever exploration of space the national interest may require. “In the three years since 1961, the manned space flight effort has built up at a rapid rate until there are now 250,000 persons at work throughout the country—more than 90 percent in private industry—and their numbers will increase to 300,000 when we reach the peak activity of the presently approved programs next year. About 15 percent of these are scientists and engineers. The program has become a major element in the economic life of the country. Prime contractors assign work to subcontractors, who in turn engage second and third-tier subcontractors. “As the program progresses, we are now beginning to realize some of the benefits. Whereas six years ago we were extremely limited in the power available to place objects in space, we are now approaching a period when we will have the rockets available to do things beyond those being used in present programs. “The time is approaching when we must give more thought to the exploitation of the capabilities provided through these efforts. To avoid the pitfall into which we have fallen in the past, we must plan for the future even while we press vigorously to accomplish present programs.” (Text)
Results of decompression experiments with mice in atmospheres of helium-oxygen, nitrogen-oxygen, and argon-oxygen were reported in Missiles and Rockets. Performed by group at Purdue Research Facility, experiments showed mice survived decompression markedly longer in helium-oxygen atmosphere than in air. In one experiment, eight mice decompressed in helium-oxygen atmosphere survived an average of 6.1min. longer than six mice decompressed in air. Extrapolation of these results might indicate desirability of helium-oxygen atmospheres in spacecraft for prolonged manned flights; the extra minutes of survival would provide safety margin, in case of accidental decompression, for crew to take necessary emergency measures. (M&R, 8/3/64, 32)
Michael I. Yarymovych, Director of NASA Manned Earth Orbital Mission Studies, said before Canaveral Council of Technical Studies, Cape Kennedy, that NASA was coordinating fully with dod in exploring four different types of orbital systems: Extended Apollo, Apollo Orbital Research Laboratory (aorl), Medium Orbital Research Laboratory (morl), and Large Orbital Research Laboratory (lorl). The first three concepts were designed to be orbited by Saturn IB; lorl, by Saturn V.	Yarymovych said that it was “becoming increasingly clear that the Extended Apollo is an essential element of an expanding Earth orbital program. ... “In the initial stages, it would be used as a laboratory and later it could be converted to a logistics system.” aorl, morl, and lorl were in competition with each other, he said, and a decision would have to be made among them. USAF’s Gemini B/Manned Orbiting Laboratory was being studied as possible integral element of Orbital Research Laboratory program. (M&R, 4/27/64, 16)
At annual meeting of National Academy of Sciences, in Washington, Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, President of Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, was elected to a second four-year term as Treasurer. Also at the meeting, NAS elected 35 new members on the basis of distinguished and continuing achievements in original research, among them: George Howard Herbig, astronomer and assistant director of Lick Observatory; and Clark Blanchard Millikan, professor of aeronautics and director of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory. Election of six distinguished foreign scientists also was announced, among them: Marcel Gilles Josef Minnaert, Professor Emeritus at the Univ. of Utrecht and co-inventer of the stellar curve of growth, one of the most significant developments in modern astronomy; and Maurice Roy, Directeur General de l’Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales and currently President of the International Committee on Space Research ( cospar ). ( nas-nrs Releases)
Lt. Gen. James H. Doolittle (usafr) was awarded the Pennsylvania Military College Engineering Centennial Medal. In his acceptance speech, General Doolittle spoke on usaf Project Forecast report, which considered “national policy, technological opportunities, and capability” in its 10-year predictions. Based on the technological opportunities evaluated (including materials, propulsion, aerodynamic development, special weapons, and guidance), there would be eight important possible technical advances: Advanced Manned Precision Strike System (ampss), very accurate icbm’s, very precise air-to-ground missiles, a Vtol fighter, a Vtol light transport, a large cargo aircraft (cx—x), Mobile Air Defense, and a hypersonic mach 6 reconnaissance aircraft. General Doolittle concluded: “. . . our national security and our national welfare, in future, will depend very largely on military technology and, of course, as always, on the spirit and will of out citizens. Our Nation must become and remain superior in science and technology. We must have more and better scientists and engineers. This is one of the very important challenges to Pennsylvania Military College and to all of the other fine educational institutions of our land. . . .” (Text, CR, 8/31/64, 20404-06)
Boeing announced that Dr. George M. Knauf, for the past three years deputy director of space medicine in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, would join the company as chief of bioastronautics. He would manage groups working on life support rad protection, engineering psychology, rad program support. (Seattle Post-Intelligence, 12/18/64)
Linde Division of Union Carbide has “grown” a new solid-state laser material for use by scientists in laser research at the Marshall Space Flight Center Astrionics Laboratory. The new material was yttrium aluminum garnet doped with neodymium. It supported solid-state continuous-wave laser action, with common tap water as the only coolant. Toughness of the garnet was comparable to that of ruby laser rods. {Marshall Star, 11/18/64, 2)
In article from Houston, upi reported on first manned space flight in Project Gemini (GT-3), quoting “informed sources” as saying: “We cannot possibly make it this year. It will be early 1965.” NASA’s officially announced planning date was in last quarter of 1964. (upi, L.A. Times, 8/2/64)
NASA Langley Research Center issued requests for proposals for the conceptual and preliminary design of a hypersonic ramjet research engine to be used in the Hypersonic Ramjet Experiment Project announced by NASA last June. Since the project would ultimately include flight research with the engine mounted on the X-15 No. 2 aircraft, the guidelines included a weight limitation of 800 lbs. for the final research engine, including necessary flight-test instrumentation and dimensions compatible with mounting the engine near the lower aft fuselage of the X-15. (LaRC Release)
NASA announced Langley Research Center would conduct tests with Boeing 707 air transport prototype to find ways to lower landing and takeoff distances required for large jet transports. NASA pilots and engineers would study performance and handling characteristics of the aircraft in three-month program. (NASA Release 64^100)
A new division was formed within the NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology. The new Programs and Resources Division of oart would be headed by Merrill H. Mead who came to Hq. from the Ames Research Center. Dr. R. L. Bisplinghoff, Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said the new division was created to “improve the program planning capability and provide common objectives toward which all of the elements of the office can be directed. ” (NASA Release 64—132)
Dr. Nancy Roman, Chief of NASA Astronomy programs, told Space Business Daily that her office had a program under consideration for a 50-55-in. telescopic mirror manned orbiting observatory which might orbit in the mid-1970’s. Although she emphasized that all plans were in the “thinking stage,” Dr. Roman said the 50—55-in. configuration would provide another interim link between the unmanned Orbiting Astronomical Observatory series and the manned 100-in. configuration being considered for launching in 15 to 20 years. “The 50-55-in. interim configuration should be such,” she said, “that it could be used either manned or unmanned. But it will have as its principal objective the proving of man’s ability as an orbiting astronomer.” (SBD, 11/30/64, 132)
nasa announced selection of 23 scientific and technological experiments to be flown aboard Gemini spacecraft, selected by NASA Manned Space Flight Experiments Board from almost 100 proposals made by scientists and engineers in NASA, dod, and the scientific community at large. 13 of the experiments—eight scientific and five technological— were sponsored by nasa; ten experiments, all technological, were sponsored by dod. (nasa Release 64-78)
In his Economic Report to the Congress, President Lyndon B. Johnson reviewed progress toward economic goals and presented his programs for “achieving our national economic potential.” On transportation and technology, he said that the “. . . Federal Government provides major support for the research and development which underlie our striking technological advances. In the past much of our research and development has been connected with national defense. Now, as military outlays level off, we face:
Discovery of relatively cool region inside three-million-degree solar corona was announced at cospar meeting by Dr. Armin Deutsch of Mt. Wilson and Palomar Observatories and Dr. Guglielmo Righini, Director of Astrophysical Observatory at Arcetri, Italy. The corona clouds were believed to contain ionized calcium at relatively cool 20,000 degrees. They were discovered in analyzing spectrogram taken while the two astronomers were in DC—8 “flying observatory” during solar eclipse last July. (Reuters, Houston Post, 5/19/64)
usaf space medicine team, in paper delivered to seminar at Brooks afb, reported on experiment with 12 volunteers committed to “absolute bed rest” for four weeks, in attempt to simulate conditions of extended space flight. After the period, subjects showed marked increase in tendency toward fainting, but when protected with antigravity suits this tendency nearly disappeared. Heartbeat rates were faster in stand-up test after the bedrest them in similar test before it. High gravity loads in centrifuge did not adversely affect the subjects after their long rest. The volunteers lost about one-fifth of a gallon of their total blood volume, and increase in calcium loss was apparent, but was not considered hazardous. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/21/64)
NASA announced establishment of new research program with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. to develop advanced technology for large nuclear and chemical rockets. The program would continue certain research begun under Project Rift (Reactor-In-Flight Test), principally insulation development, cryogenic testing, structural development, application of Rift technology to Saturn stages, and documentation of pertinent technology for future use. NASA had committed an initial $500,000 letter contract to the program; cost of seven-month period was expected to be about $1.5 million. (NASA Release 64-57)
NASA Flight Research Center announced award of $82,000 contract to General Electric Co. for study of flight instrumentation for use on a research ramjet to be carried on the X—15A—2 aircraft. Major portion of the instrumentation would be thrust/drag measuring device and appropriate sensors to measure net thrust or drag transmitted to the X-15 aircraft from the ramjet. Design of this device also would provide capability to jettison the ramjet from the aircraft, (frc Release 21-64)
Harold Goldstein, Assistant Commissioner of U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, discussed changes in the labor force at symposium in New York. “We now have about 1.2 million engineers and scientists. Their numbers may rise to somewhere in the neighborhood of 2 million by 1970. “There productivity is also rising rapidly. New inventions can be made faster, because as science and technology have progressed the techniques available for analyzing a problem, the knowledge of scientific principles that can be brought to bear, the different types of hardware that are readily available to be adapted in a new invention are increasing at a geometric rate.” (Lissner, NYT, 4/26/64,85)
nasa Ames Research Center announced that the Carl N. Swenson Co., San Jose, Calif., had been awarded a $992,000 contract to construct a reinforced-concrete vacuum chamber and Structural Dynamics Laboratory at ARC. The space chamber would be in the form of a ten-story, 30-million-lb., hollow concrete pentagonal tower with walls three feet thick, would accomodate full-scale segments or smaller-scale models of rockets and spacecraft, and could be evacuated to a pressure of ten millimeters of mercury, (arc Release 64-31)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said in Gatlinburg, Tenn., speech to nasa-aec—usaf symposium on radiation protection that “not too far in the future huge nuclear-propelled spacecraft will take crews of men on long voyages deep into space. . . . “The problems of man-made radiation connected with these space ships will prove far more challenging in the long run than those of the natural radiation in space. . . .”	(NYT, 10/13/64, 18)
First manned Gemini space flight (GT-3) was scheduled for late December, msc public affairs official Ben Gillespie told reporters at weekly press briefing. (Maloney, Houston Post, 6/23/64)
NASA Technology Utilization Division and the Food and Drug Administration reported that preliminary experiments by fda’s Dr. Jacqueline Ver-rett indicated that a piezo-electric transducer invented at NASA Ames Research Center could, for the first time, monitor the heartbeat of a chick embryo quickly, continuously, quantitatively, and without egg damage. Instrument was invented to measure impact of micrometeoroid dust in space by Ames’ Vernon L. Rogallo, who suggested its potential in chick embryo research. Through its Technology Utilization program, NASA informed fda of the innovation. FDA had been conducting research during past four years using chick embryo technique, correlated with animal tests, to study effects of drugs, pesticides, and food additives. (NASA Release 64-76)
Republican six-man study group headed by former Secretary of Defense Neil H. McElroy released report charging that Kennedy-Johnson Administration had neglected research and development of new weapon systems. In reply to the charges, dod issued statement saying it was “pursuing a vigorous and effective research and development program designed to keep this nation the strongest in the world ...” and citing more than 200 major new projects initiated since 1961. (AP, NYT, 10/20/64)
faa began sonic-boom study program at Oklahoma City, Okla., generating sonic booms at the levels predicted for supersonic transport operations to determine public acceptability of these levels. Data acquired from the 26-week program would be used in planning and design of U.S. supersonic transport, faa conducted the program with cooperation of usaf and nasa; usaf provided F-104 aircraft to generate the booms and NASA researchers provided ground instrumentation to measure booms and boom effect. (FAA Release 64-3)
Based on reports circulated at recent cospar meeting, Missiles and Rockets said that U.S.S.R. probably would not attempt another manned space flight for about a year but that flight probably would be an orbital rendezvous mission. (M&R, 6/22/64, 33)
NASA selected 14 firms for negotiation of contracts to provide engineering, fabrication, and institutional support services to six laboratories and three offices of the Marshall Space Flight Center. Work would be in support of the Saturn/Apollo launch vehicle program with cost estimated at $68 million for one year, (nasa Release 64-322)
Dr. Robert L. Sproull, Director of DOD Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), speaking at the dedication of the Xerox Corporation’s new research and development laboratory in Rochester, N.Y., cautioned that the “spillover” from the Federal Government’s own development programs would in the future be less beneficial to industry than it had in the past. Dr. Sproull explained that this would come about because of increased efficiency in Federal research programs and “good management will focus funds and attention ever more precisely on the specific mission and that mission is not the stimulation of American industry.” Dr. Sproull offered two suggestions to fill the gap created by the disappearance of Federal “spillover”: (1) that a governmental extension service be set up to channel the university-scientific effort into businesses unable to provide their own basic research; (2) that there be more encouragement of industry-research institutes such as the one maintained by the textile industry at Princeton, N.J. (Frost, NYT, 11/13/64, 47)
NASA announced Flight Research Center’s selection of Norair Div., Northrop Corp., for design and fabrication of two “lifting body” research gliders. The fixed-price contract was expected to amount to about $1 million. The research gliders would be used by FRC in studying problems of piloting advanced spacecraft during landing, (frc Release 7-64; NASA Release 64-93)
George M. Low, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, was named Deputy Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, replacing James C. Elms. Low would assume his new duties in February, would continue present position until May 1. Low joined NACA Lewis Research Center in 1949, became Chief of Manned Space Flight Programs upon formation of NASA in October 1958. (nasa Release 64-13)
NASA announced frc had issued requests for proposals for construction of two low-speed lifting-body gliders. NASA would furnish the selected contractor with information obtained in research with M—2 concept at Ames Research Center and the HL-10 lifting-body at Langley Research Center. Both vehicles would undergo thorough testing in Ames wind tunnel, then be tested in Bight at FRC. (nasa Release 64-41)
Speaking at commencement exercises at New Mexico State University, University Park, N. Mex., Dr. George Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, noted that the NASA program for manned space flight has recorded 16 successes in 16 attempts. He explained this record: “A rather simple formula has contributed to the success to date. We fly a spacecraft, manned or unmanned, only after a comprehensive set of ground and flight tests has been completed and every deviation from expected performance has been explained. We are continuing to follow that policy.” (Text)
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, in paper delivered at iaf in Warsaw, examined man’s possible roles in space flight. As a transmitter, receiver, or control mechanism, he said, man’s capacity and speed are limited as compared with a machine’s. Boredom, he said, makes man ineffective “in tasks that call for long periods of relative inactivity.” However, he said, man “is the only available computer which can solve problems by logical induction, although unfortunately he cannot keep emotions out of this thought process. He can make sense of fragmentary information.” (nasa Release 64-229)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., Assistant Director of Ames Research Center, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. In the newly created position, Dr. Eggers would work closely with staff members in planning NASA’s advanced and supporting research programs. Specialist in problems of hypersonic and space flight research, Dr. Eggers made many contributions to theories of hypersonic aerodynamics and atmospheric entry problems of motion and heating. Among his past awards were Arthur S. Flemming Award in 1956 and Sylvanus Albert Reed Award (1962) of the ias. (NASA Release 64-110; NASA Announcement 64-95)
NASA announced that Francis J. Sullivan had been appointed Acting Director of the Electronics and Control Div., Office of Advanced Research and Technology. The position formerly was held by Dr. Albert J. Kelley, who became Deputy Director of the Electronics Research Center, Cambridge, Mass, (nasa Announcement 64-274)
afsc announced its Research and Technology Div. had completed tests on most effective method of heating high-pressure air to simulate aerodynamic conditions of earth’s atmosphere. Wind-tunnel arc air heater produced direct power current of 5.1 megawatts [previous high was 4.2 megawatts]. During the 5.1-meg a watt run, 3.85 megawatts were contained in the gas, representing higher efficiency than had been predicted. New designs based on the test would extend the probable lifetime of a projected 50-megawatt heater to be used in electrogas-dynamic facility being built at Wright-Patterson afb. Both afsc’s Arnold Engineering Development Center and NASA Ames Research Center would use data from the test program for their work with similar heaters, (afsc Release 42-R-119)
First four divisions of NASA Lewis Research Center had completed moving into new Development Engineering Building, lrc announced. Occupancy of the building by lrc units temporarily housed in a Cleveland shopping center would be completed by end of summer. (lrc Release 64-58)
Three persons were killed and eight injured when small missile exploded during preparations for test-firing from an airplane at Tyndall afb, Fla. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/19/64) containing hollow glass and plastic spheres in plastic honeycomb matrix to provide structural strength. Lunar Landing Research Facility and lunar mission simulators also were among the featured attractions. In conjunction with the inspection was the LaRc Open House on May 23. (Program; NASA Release 64-99; arc, larc, lrc Releases; AP, 5/18/64) nasa Administrator James E. Webb remarked on May 18: “Years ago, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, one of NASA’s ancestors, annually conducted field inspection trips so that the nation’s leaders in aviation could have a first-hand look at the progress in research made by the scientists and engineers of naca. “Today, we are gathered for a first-hand look at advanced research and technology not only in aeronautics, but also in the new realm of space. “It is most fitting that the revival of the annual field inspection trip takes place first at the Langley Research Center, for Langley was the first research center of the original naca, and is today, as it was in 1917, working at the frontiers of scientific and technical knowledge. . . . “It is important to remember that nasa is not an operating agency, in the sense that the Weather Bureau and the Air Force are. Rather, NASA’s role is much closer to that of the naca, a research and development organization. . . .” (Text)
Orbital tanker study by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. for NASA Marshall Space Flight Center was discussed in Aviation Week & Space Technology. Tanker would be unmanned and would be used to transfer propellants to other unmanned or to manned spacecraft in earth orbit. Concepts in which orbital refueling capability was underscored were future manned planetary flights and potential reusable lunar transport ferries. (Av. Wk., 8/10/64, 55-57)
NASA Flight Research Center requested bids for construction of a high-temperature heat facility at Edwards, Calif. The completed facility would include enough test area to permit heat load testing of actual aircraft of the size of the XB—70 and the proposed supersonic transport. It could produce temperatures up to 3,000° F on small isolated areas of the test aircraft; large areas could be heated up to 600° F. The contract would be administered by the U.S. Army Engineers, (frc Release 33-64)
Library of Congress had distributed to 30 large city and state libraries copies of Braille translations of books on space exploration. These information aids for the blind had been published by Library of Congress under a NASA grant. (Las Cruces Sun-News, 7/5/64)	.
Reviewing the worth of scientific results gained in the first years of U.S. space exploration, Fortune magazine said: “. . . new knowledge is a dukedom whose great wealth and resources cannot even begin to be estimated or exhausted. Already the new knowledge acquired in space exceeds by far the value of funds so far spent. For knowledge, more than guns and butter, is the true power of modem states.” (nasa FY 1965 Auth. Hearings, Part 1,3)
Sh. P. Darchiya, an astronomer from the Pulkovo Observatory, succeeded in photographing details of the lunar surface on the unexposed side of the lunar disk, i.e., under conditions of earthlight. Astronomers had previously recorded the luminescence of individual details of the lunar surface on the unexposed side of the lunar disk, but according to A. A. Mikhailov, Director of the Observatory, this phenomenon had never been confirmed by instrument observation. (Izvestia, 6/3/64, 4, atss-t Trans.)
nasa announced granting 28 waivers of U.S. commercial rights to inventions resulting from work performed under nasa contracts, bringing total of nasa’s patent waivers to 74. Under policy “designed to encourage prompt public and industrial benefit from the scientific byproducts of its research and development activities,” NASA granted the patent rights to 12 companies, one university, one research organization, and two individuals (jointly). NASA retained royalty-free license for any governmental use of the inventions. (NASA Release 64-52)
NASA released to industry its first technology utilization report, entitled “An Improved Precision Height Gage.” NASA Ames Research Center developed the report. (NASA SP-5001)
NASA announced appointment of Ray Hooker, Chief of Research Models and Facilities Div. at Langley Research Center, as nasa’s Senior Scientific Representative in Australia. Hooker would replace Edwin P. Hartman, first nIsa Senior Scientific Representative in Australia, now completing his second two-year term. Hooker would leave in June for Melbourne, where his primary function would be liaison with the Ministry of Supply of the Commonwealth of Australia, the cooperating agency which builds, staffs, and operates NASA facilities there. (NASA Release 64-85)
NASA announced modifications to X-15 No. 1 rocket-powered aircraft that would enable it to carry on scientific experiments above much of the earth’s atmosphere were being made at NASA Flight Research Center. The aircraft would have new inertial guidance system, originally designed by Minneapolis Honeywell Regulator Co. for the usaf X-20, and streamlined compartments for experiments at each wing tip. One compartment would contain device to collect micrometeoroids and extraterrestrial dust and special spectrometer to measure radiation and polarization of daytime sky-light; other pod would contain densitron to measure air densities at high altitudes, (nasa Release 64-184; frc Release 19-64)
Open House at Langley Research Center, in conjunction with field inspection during the past week, featured specially prepared exhibits and other items of interest for citizens of Virginia and nearby areas. (NASA Release 64^-99; NASA Announcement 64-89)
U.S. manned space flight plans were outlined in Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) article with Col. G. Terent’yev byline. Saying that the U.S. was “not leaving a stone unturned in trying to outstrip the Soviets in the conquest of space with manned space vehicles,” the writer gave particular attention to Gemini and Apollo plans, then went on to claim that U.S. policy “in the conquest of space is far from a peaceful one; it has a clearly evident military (more accurately, aggressive) nature.” (KrasnayaZvezda, 3/26/64,3, ATSS-TTrans.)
NASA announced preliminary negotiations had begun to lease Convair 990 jet transport, with option to buy, from Convair Div. of General Dynamics Corp. The aircraft would be based at NASA Ames Research Center. Stripped of passenger accommodations, the aircraft would be used as a flying laboratory for research in aeronautical technology and the space sciences, (nasa Release 64-269)
Committee for the Preservation of Cambridge Industry, made up of representatives from each of the 94 industrial firms that would be disclocated by location of NASA Electronics Research Center on Kendall Square site, announced it would wage a legal battle to prevent NASA’s obtaining the site. Committee said implementation of NASA’s plan would “disrupt the jobs of 4,000 employees within this area,” contended it would cost some of the industries $200,000 to $400,000 to relocate although maximum renewal funds available for business relocation were only $25,000. (Lewis, Boston Globe, 9/23/64)
Nobel Prize in Physics awarded to Dr. Charles H. Townes (mit) and two Soviet physicists, Aleksandr M. Prokhorov and Nikolai G. Basov, for research in quantum electronics leading to production of oscillators and amplifiers for lasers. Dr. Townes was Chairman of NASA Manned Space Flight Advisory Committee. (NYT, 10/30/64, 1)
Interviewed in Boston Globe, Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control Section of NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, said nasa planned a gradual buildup of personnel for the proposed electronics research center to a maximum of 2,100 in 1969. Year-by-year buildup: 1964, 50; 1965, 250; 1966, 550; 1967, 1,000; 1968, 1,600; and 1969, 2,100. Nucleus of the center’s staff would be electronics task force currently operating in Washington. (White, Boston Globe, 2/3/(A)
West Germany’s vertical take-off aircraft successfully passed the speed of sound in a test flight. The two-jet VJ101 achieved its vertical rise by tilting its jets downward and then went into forward flight by swinging them up to a horizontal position. The plane was being developed by the West German firms of Boelkow, Heinkel, and Messerschmitt. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/31/64)
Moscow Radio quoted Cosmonauts Andrian Nikol’ayev and Pavel Popovich as saying their “standbys” were ready for space flight and that their scientists were “planning new experiments in space exploration.” (Wash. Post, 8/14/64)
Speculation that U.S.S.R. timed their three-man voskhod i space flight “to take the edge off the Chinese atomic demonstration which is expected very soon” was offered by Max Lerner in New York Post. (Lemer, N.Y. Post, 10/14/64)
Herbert Friedman of Naval Research Laboratory reported to cospar a new picture of space cosmic rays, based on results of experiments with rocket-borne x-ray telescope. New results showed that less than one per cent of all cosmic rays could be produced in intergalaotic space. Therefore, Friedman said, all cosmic rays would appear to come from exploding stars. He said these findings showed that there were too many x-rays to support theory that x-rays are produced by cosmic rays’ colliding with starlight, and too few x-rays to support theory that they come from the near-collision of electrons and protons (formed by neutron’s disintegration in so-called “hot universe” theory). Further experiments were planned to gather more evidence. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/18/64)
NASA Lewis Research Center issued requests for proposals for initial construction of 500-ft. drop tower for producing zero gravity environments. The facility would be largest of its kind in the U.S., would be able to provide weightlessness for periods up to 10 sec. (lrc Release 64r-12)
Judge Charles Fairhurst issued temporary restraining order preventing Cambridge City Council from voting on application for $663,000 in Federal funds for survey and planning the proposed area for NASA Electronics Research Center. Judge Fairhurst granted the order after six Cambridge firms requested declaratory decree that Kendall Sq. “cannot and does not legally qualify as a valid subject for an urban renewal project.” (Boston Globe, 10/8/64)
Thomas M. Canning, chief of Hypersonic Free-Flight Branch of NASA Ames Research Center, described aerodynamic shape being studied for spacecraft of the future, at Conference on the Role of Simulation in Space Technology, vpi, Blacksburg, Va. Canning said laboratory tests were being made of high-angle (wing-shaped craft) as possible optimum design for manned spacecraft entering atmosphere at speeds ranging from 50,000-55,000 fps returning from interplanetary journeys. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/19/64)
usaf launched Titan II on successful test flight from Cape Kennedy. The nose cone, carrying malfunction detection instrumentation to be used in Project Gemini manned space flights, impacted 5,000 mi. down the Atlantic Missile Range. (AP, NYT, 3/24/64; M&R, 3/30/64, !6)
In the President’s proposed budget for FY 1965, dod expenditures were estimated at $51.2 billion, of which $5.5 was for research and development (including military space expenditure). Requested budgets for operation of ranges: $231 million for amr, $159 million for pmr, and $93 million for wsmr. (NYT, 1/22/64, 21, 22; M&R, 2/3/64, 9)
Brig. Gen. Benjamin G. Holzman (usaf, Ret.) was sworn in by Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, as consultant to NASA for planning and administration of its advanced research and technology program. General Holzman would work on staff organization and formation of a program for NASA Electronics Research Center, (nasa Release 64-271)
nasa Flight Research Center completed the first series of flight tests of the Bell Aerosystems Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv). Program officials observed that the llrv could simulate many nonaerodynamic space-flight maneuvers in addition to the lunar landing for which it was primarily designed and asked for a full year of experimentation with the craft. (M&R, 12/14/64,10)
usaf Captains Albert R. Crews and Richard E. Lawyer emerged from twoweek stay in simulated-space cabin at GE Space Technology Center, Valley Forge, Pa. Officials said test showed that man can perform more tasks in extended space flight than previously supposed. (Wash. Post, 9/2/64)
New York State Atomic Research and Development Authority signed contract with General Electric Co.’s Aerospace and Defense Service Engineering Dept, for continued operation of Malta Test Station, which New York recently acquired from Federal Government through competitive bidding. Station has been operated by GE for Federal Government since its establishment in 1945, when facilities were installed there to duplicate German V-2 facilities at Peenemiinde. New York Authority would operate the station’s expanded test and research facilities in continued support of industrial contractors of Federal defense, space, and atomic energy programs. (CR, 2/19/64, 2011—12)
nasa Electronics Research Center was formally activated in Cambridge, Mass., and Dr. Winston E. Kock took the oath of office as Director. Electronics Research Task Group from NASA Hq. and NASA North Eastern Office in Cambridge were absorbed in the new Center to form initial nucleus of 80 personnel. Design and construction of the facility would begin late this year and be completed in four or five years, (nasa Release 64-219; NASA Announcement 64-189; NASA Circulars 320, 321)
NASA granted Dr. George Wharton, Ohio State Univ. scientist, nearly $70,000 for a three-year research program to determine the least amount of water necessary to sustain earth life. {Wash. Daily News, 6/18/64)
In testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., discussed NASA’s relationship with jpl : “. . . [A] major contracting advance is taking place in our operating relationships with the California Institute of Technology . . . [which] manages the NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory under contract. Originally, the Laboratory and the contract for its operation were transferred to nasa from the Army in 1959. As the functions of the Laboratory have expanded and changed, we have modified the nasa/cit relationships to meet the current needs of the program. The present contract expires at the end of this year, and we have carefully negotiated its extension under terms more applicable to current agency requirements. A comprehensive review has been made of the operating experience gained since the inception of the nasa/cit/jpl relationship. As a result of this study, improved operating procedures in both the technical and administrative aspects have been developed and implemented. In addition to reflecting clauses which implement the above improvements in management, the new arrangements include three major departures from earlier agreements: “First, the earlier contracts were based on a principle of mutually requiring CIt/jpl concurrence before NASA directions would be carried out. This often resulted in lengthy ‘negotiations’ of assigned tasks. The new contract restricts the principle of mutuality to the broad terms of the operating relationship, but clearly gives NASA the unilateral right to issue task orders, require reports, and take other administrative actions as desired. “Second, a separate facilities contract is also being negotiated which will provide the government a more direct control over the planning, construction, and utilization of the facilities at jpl. “Third, a new principle is provided for determining crr’s fee for the operation of the Laboratory. The new contract contains a schedule which sets the upper and lower limits of the fee on the basis of the dollar volume of work which NASA places with cit/jpl. The exact fee within these limits, will be determined by how well cit/jpl performs in the management of the Laboratory.” (Testimony)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved authorization of $5,246,293,250 in the next fiscal year for NASA. This figure would be $52,482,750 more than was voted by the House, but still $57,706,750 less than the budget requests. The Senate Committee’s recommendations included restoration of budget cuts by the House from the unmanned Surveyor program, the Orbiting Geophysical Observatory program, and funds for tracking network operations. (Wash. Post, 6/3/64; Av. Wk., 6/15/64,30)	*
Major improvements in performance of supersonic transport shapes had come from aerodynamic refinements at NASA Langley Research Center, nasa announced. Applied to the wing design of supersonic transport concept known as “Scat 15,” the refinements achieved much better flight characteristics and more than 15 per cent increase in range. The improved concept—Scat 15F—was now regarded more favorably in comparison with the two established concepts, Scat 16 and 17. (nasa Release 64-120)
Navy dedicated 61-inch astrometric reflector telescope at Naval Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz. Its quartz primary mirror was largest quartz reflecting surface manufactured to date. It would be used primarily to study white dwarf, red dwarf, and sub-dwarf stars. (Wash. Post, 6/18/64)
Research in use of laser radar to map air turbulence in the skies was described by Drs. Ronald T. H. Collis and Myron G. H. Ligida of Aero-physicS Laboratory at Stanford Research Institute. The laser equipment would be installed in aircraft. Dr. Collis and Dr. Ligida reported their research in Nature. (NYT, 8/7/64,8)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced seven researchers had won awards for four inventions, the awards totaling $1,400 under provisions of the Government Employees Incentive Awards Act. Winners were: S. Stephen Papell, $500 for low viscosity magnetic fluid obtained by collodial suspension of magnetic particles; Paul D. Reader and Harold R. Kaufman, $500 for electrostatic ion engine with permanent magnetic circuit; Robert J. Branstetter and Allen J. Metzler, $300 for black-body furnace; John R. Jack and Paul F. Brinich, $100 for improved heat exchangers for electrothermal rockets. ( lrc Release 64-38)
NASA awarded $100,000 contract to North Carolina Science and Technology Research Center for establishment of experimental program for transfer of technology developed in U.S. space effort to civilian industry. Other participants in the program would be Univ. of North Carolina, Duke Univ., North Carolina State College, and Research Triangle Institute. (NASA Release 64-124)
nasa Langley Research Center awarded two contracts for construction on Vehicle Antenna Test Facility to aid in solving spacecraft communications problems: $1,265,505 contract to Nat Harrison Associates for construction of the building, and $280,630 contract to B. F. Goodrich Sponge Products Div. for design and installation of anechoic chambers for the facility. (LaRC Release)
Soviet Academician Anatoli Blagonravov, chief Soviet delegate to cospar meeting in Florence, indicated to newsmen in press conference that the next major Soviet space flight might be a year away: “We are trying to open a way to the nearest planet. It will take a long time.” Asked if this meant that no launch was planned for the present, he replied: “We are preparing projects. The preparation might take a year.” (Levin, AP, 5/9/64)
NASA announced award by Langley Research Center of $2.5 million contract to Boeing Co. for dynamic flight simulation work for the supersonic transport program. The Boeing 707 prototype would be modified by installation of major control and computer equipment to permit complete simulation of a wide variety of supersonic transport types. (nasa Release 64-286)
The lowest altitude at which demarcation line between air space and outer space should be assigned is 100 km. (60 mi.), according to Norman Sissenwine, usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories scientist and cochairman of U.S. Committee on the Extension of the Standard Atmosphere. Sissenwine’s definition had been requested by Hyman, Hayman, and Harris law firm, which was attempting legislative interpretation for the International Astronautical Federation and the International Institute of Space Law. Sissenwine acknowledged that ultimately the line must be drawn arbitrarily, explained considerations favoring 100 km.: “Aerodynamic forces on most of the ballistic re-entry, lifting re-entry, and boost-glide orbital aerospace vehicles can generally be neglected at altitudes above 100 km. (This may vary from 80 to 120 km, depending upon the vehicle concept, but I believe 100 km is a good nominal altitude to use.) . . .” He pointed out that atmosphere’s basic composition begins to change near 100 km, “Specifically it has been determined that disassociation of molecular oxygen into atomic oxygen should be depicted at an altitude of 90 km in the Standard Atmosphere. . . Another consideration was that relationships of temperature and pressure fields to wind fields are generally constant to nearly 100 km. This is also true for speed of sound, coefficient of viscosity, kinematic viscosity, and thermal conductivity. Finally, he pointed out that meteors entering the atmosphere generally disintegrate below 120-km. altitude, and most meteor trails formed in atmospheric entry are observed below 100 km. (oar Release 1-64-4)
NASA Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock announced appointment of James T. Dennison as Director of Technology Utilization, erc. Dennison joined NASA in May 1963 as a consultant and had been serving as acting director of Technology Utilization Div., NASA Hq. Appointment was effective Nov. 1. (nasa Release 64-244)
Museum of Modern Art in New York opened exhibition titled “20th Century Engineering,” which featured 195 spectacular and dramatic structures combining beauty with utility. NASA Langley Research Center wind-tunnel was represented among the dams, antennas, observatories, skyscrapers, and other structures. (Huxtable, NYT, 6/30/64, 29)
NASA Lewis Research Center was investigating several techniques for producing flexible, thin-film solar cells. One of the techniques being investigated was sputtering, which required absolutely clean atmosphere and a low pressure of inert gas. Sputtering apparatus in which controls were fully automated—rigidly controlling pressure, temperature, and voltage in relation to each other—had been built at Lewis. With this equipment, researchers were attempting to increase efficiency of thin-film cells to that of silicon cells, (lrc Release 64-28)
nasa announced $300,000 contract award to Wayne State University to establish program to accelerate industrial application of aerospace-related technology. Organized under Wayne State’s Center for Applications of Science and Technology, the program would receive and would process technical information through NASA; evaluate applicability of the information to prospective industrial users; and train applications engineers to match needs of specific industries with specific innovations or new knowledge, (nasa Release 64-23)
NASA selected Genisco, Inc., to develop, fabricate, and assemble motion generator for research into guidance and psycho-physiological problems of manned space flight. The fixed-price contract was expected to be valued between $6 million and $6.5 million. Genisco had been selected last July for contract negotiations for the motion generator, major component of advanced space navigation simulator at NASA Ames Research Center; however, “during the negotiations a better understanding of the design problems was reached and it was determined that numerous changes were desirable.” NASA then directed Ames to request revised proposals from the five bidders. When the companies submitted new proposals in January, Genisco again received highest technical rating and proposed the lowest fixed fee. (nasa Release 64-35)
NASA purchased hingeless rotor helicopter, the XH—5 IN Research Vehicle, from Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for use in flight research at LaRC. The cost would be $556,158. It would be used as a flying laboratory to assess the loads and flying qualities problems that are likely to be encountered by operational aircraft of the hingeless rotor type. (NASA Release 64-147; LaRC Release)
Glide parachute achieved glide ratio of up to 2:1 in wind-tunnel tests at NASA Ames Research Center, it was reported. Northrop Ventura, the parachute developer, was proposing it to NASA for later phases of Project Gemini, (arc; M&R, 4/6/64,25)
Douglas Aircraft Co. Missile and Space Systems Div. received nine-month study contract from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to study methods of uprating Saturn IB space vehicle and S-IVB Saturn stage. (Av. Wk., 8/31/64, 23)
B. K. 0. Lundberg, Director General of the Aeronautical Research Institute of Sweden, predicted at Aviation/Space Writers Association in Miami that more than 15,000 passengers would be killed each year by the year 1990 unless aviation safety was improved. Deploring the aviation industry’s emphasis on supersonic transport development (“we are now apparently on the verge of plunging ourselves into a supersonic adventure”) , he stressed that the “No. 1 challenge to aviation and the aeronautical scientists” was aviation safety, and urged the world to adopt “new, radical and long-term aviation safety policy.” (Morrow, NYT, 5/31/ 64,78)
NASA announced appointment of Jennings Pemble Field, Jr., as Director of Gemini Program Control in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight. In this position Field would be responsible for Gemini program costs and budget. Field was an executive of imc Industries, Inc.; from 1954 to 1963 he was with Bendix Corp., and from 1940 to 1954 he was a commissioned officer in U.S. Navy. (NASA Release 64-257)
Cook Electric Co., Chicago, unveiled a $2 million observatory to be included in NASA’s first Oao. Cook built the equipment for NASA under contract to Univ. of Wisconsin, where astronomers were planning observations in the far ultraviolet region of the spectrum.	(Houston Post, 6/12/64)
The House Science and Astronautics Committee Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development made recommendations to equalize the national distribution of Federal research and development funds: that additional funds be budgeted to the National Science Foundation to ensure at least one major center of excellence in research and technology in each appropriate region of the nation; that dod and NASA emphasize building new centers of science and technology when existing facilities in research-concentrated areas become obsolescent. The Subcommittee also called for the White House to convene a Government-industry conference to study such problems. (M&R, 11/16/64,11) During November: A team from Lockheed Propulsion Co. visited NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to brief scientists there on possible use of 156-in. solid motor as a strap-on for the first stage of both Saturn IB and Saturn V. (M&R, 11/23/64, 7)
Discovery by two astronomers of what they believed to be the most distant object identified to date was announced. Thought to be several billion light-years away, the object—named 3C-147—was considered to be from 10 to 20 per cent farther away than 3C-295, previously considered the most distant object. Both objects were “quasistellar radio sources,” which produce 100 times the brightness and energy of an entire galaxy of 100 billion stars. Dr. Thomas A. Matthews located the new object by observing its radio emissions with Cal Tech’s twin antennas. Then Dr. Maertin Schmidt photographed the object from Mt. Palomar Observatory. (Sullivan, NYT, 3/30/64, 27)
Three Soviet cosmonauts spent the day undergoing medical checks and post-flight examinations, following their 24-hour orbital space flight. (Clymer, Balt. Sun, 10/15/64)
Reception honoring Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of NASA Lewis Research Center, was held on his 35th anniversary of service with naca-nasa. (Lewis News, 1/YIJ(A, 3)
NASA announced appointment of Francis J. Sullivan as Acting Director of Electronics and Control Div., NASA Hq. The position was formerly held by Dr. Albert J. Kelley, who became Deputy Director of NASA’s new Electronics Research Center. Sullivan was Deputy Director of the division since November 1963. (nasa Release 64-276)
Appointment of Lt. Gen. Frank A. Bogart (USAF) as Special Assistant to Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight announced by NASA. Appointment would become effective shortly after his retirement from USAF Oct. 31. General Bogart would be concerned with industry relationships and special management problems of program control and contracting. (NASA Announcement 64-255)
NASA announced appointment of two directors in Advanced Manned Missions Program, Office of Manned Space Flight. M. J. Raffensperger assumed duties last week as Director of Manned Earth Orbital Missions Studies. F. P. Dixon would become Director of Manned Planetary Mission Studies on June 15.	(NASA Release 64-137)
NASA Lewis Research Center undertook supervision at Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, Sunnyvale, Calif., of the design and development of a metal shroud section to replace the fiberglas section in Mariner 4. Investigations had indicated that the fiberglas fairing of mariner ill probably had structural failure when exposed to the flight environment and that this prevented shroud separation from the spacecraft, (ksc Release 206-64)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded an honorary degree by Iowa Wesleyan College. (MarshaU Star, 6/17/64,1)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of nasa Lewis Research Center, was awarded honorary Doctor of Applied Science degree by Fenn College, Cleveland, O.	(Lewis News, 6/19/64, 2)
Republican Critical Issues Council of the Republican Citizens Committee, chaired by Dr. Milton Eisenhower, issued statement calling upon U.S. to abandon the 1970 goal of a manned lunar landing. It also called for increased international cooperation in space exploration: “. . . The exploration of our universe is a goal too vast, too hazardous, too costly, and too important to all mankind to be financed and conducted by one country alone, and least of all in an atmosphere of unfriendly competition.” Council also deplored claims for military value of space exploration : “We are aware of no compelling argument thus far for the development and deploying of weapons in space. . . .” (Text, CR, 5/28/ 64,11775-77)	_
NASA announced selection of Lear Siegler, Inc., Electronics Instrumentation Div. for negotiation of contract to install new electronic systems and modify present systems at East Test Area of Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. Contract value was estimated to exceed $4,000,000. (nasa Release 64-59)
Testimonial dinner for Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, resigning to return to MIT as Dean of Science, held in Washington. For three years Dr. Wiesner had been Director of the Office of Science and Technology, Chairman of the Federal Council of Science and Technology, Chairman of the President’s Science Advisory Committee, Special Assistant to the President, and Acting Director for Telecommunications Management. (Miller, Wash. Daily News, 1/22/64)
A Japanese astronomer of the Kurashika Astronomical Observatory observed a new comet. It had been earlier sighted by an observer at Tokyo Astronomical Observatory on June 7, as well as by an Australian. On June 9, Soviet astronomer Anatoli Bakharev discovered what was described as a 9th-magnitude comet moving rapidly with respect to the stars. (AP, NYT, 6/15/64; Pravda, 6/13/64, 6, atss-t Trans.)
NASA announced that a 10-month study contract for $191,835 to assess the technological problems of designing, building, and operating a manned orbiting astronomical observatory had been awarded to the Boeing Co. Boeing would study possible ways in which such an observatory might he operated, with particular emphasis on the role of man in its scientific program. A requirement of the study was that the orbiting telescope be sufficiently adaptable to support a broad astronomical program. The study would assume that the telescope would be operated in conjunction with a proposed Manned Orbital Research Laboratory (morl) under study by NASA Langley Research Center for NASA Office of Manned Space flight. (LaRC Release)
Paul L. Styles, Chief of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s Industrial Relations Office, was named Labor Director of NASA. In the new position, which he assumed in addition to his present one, Styles would advise NASA management officials at Hq. and all field installations on all aspects of labor-management relations, also would serve as NASA representative with Dept, of Labor, nlrb, President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, and Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service. (NASA Release 64-14)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $2 million contract to Motorola’s Western Military Electronics Div., to develop the Airborne Ranging Orbital Determination (arod) system. (M&R, 12/14/64, 21)
One-year program of general orientation for 60 recent university graduates beginning their professional careers at NASA Langley Research Center began with ceremony presided over by LaRC Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson. (LaRC Release)
House adopted by voice vote the conference report on NASA FY 1965 authorization bill (H.R. 10456) and sent bill to Senate. Senate adopted conference report, clearing bill for President’s signature. Bill provided nasa authorization of $5,227,506,000 of which $4,341,100,000 was for research and development, $622,880,500 was for construction of facilities and $623,525,500 was for administrative operations, (nasa LAR III/133)
In a House debate over the patent policy for the proposed Water Resources Research Center, Rep. Chet Holifield (D.—Calif.) criticized current dod and NASA patent policies. He urged that the policy be revised to permit any industry to “use any kind of a device or any kind of a patent procedure which is paid for by federal funds.” (CR, 6/2/64, 12045)
Experimental hot-electron propulsion system had completed 1,000 hrs. of testing at RCA David Samoff Research Center without degradation of components or performance, RCA announced. (NYT, 2/11/64, 53; M&R, 2/17/64,21)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences voted (10-4) to approve NASA’s report on the electronics research center. (House Science and Astronautics Committee had approved the report Feb. 24.) (nasa lar III/43)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director of NASA’s newly created Electronics Research Center, said in an interview with Missiles and Rockets that erc would issue between 35 and 40 contracts, averaging about 850,000 each for a total of 82 million, within the next four months. Most of the contracts were expected to run for one year. (M&R, 11/16/64, 10-11)
Dr. Evelyn Anderson, research scientist at NASA Ames Research Center, was among the six distinguished' career women to receive Federal Women’s Award at banquet in Washington, (nasa Notice)
Albert J. Evans, NASA Acting Director of Aeronautics, said before Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “The Aeronautical Research effort of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has one specific goal: to provide technical information for use by the aircraft manufacturers of the United States, information which is sufficiently far advanced to permit the design and production of military and civil air vehicles which are superior to those of any other nation. “Our aeronautical program is classified in four broad disciplinary categories . . Aerodynamics, Structures, Air-Breathing Propulsion, [and] Operating Problems. “The resources utilized in accomplishing the NASA Aeronautical Research program are found primarily in the highly-competent technical staffs of the four Research Centers of the NASA. The in-house effort is supported, as required, by a certain amount of out-of-house contract research performed by universities, non-profit organizations, and private industry. The funds requested for the NASA Aeronautics program support these in-house and out-of-house research efforts. The program, however, is predominantly an in-house effort, conducted in the established framework of the theoretical and experimental research activity of the NASA Research Centers. . . .” (Testimony)
Sen. Stephen M. Young (D.-Ohio) spoke in Senate of NASA’s selecting Boston as site for new electronics research center, charging that “there is little to indicate that thorough evaluation was given to potential locations distant from the Boston area” and pointing out that “in all respects, Cleveland eminently qualifies for this important new facility. . . Each time a new facility is proposed, we hear the same well-worn argument that it should go to an area which already has institutions with experience in this field. As a result a vicious cycle has formed, and it can almost be predicted that any new important space facility will go to Boston, Houston, or to California. . . . “Frankly, I am tired of the argument. I rise today to speak briefly in protest of what has been going on. . . .” (CR, 3/2/64, 3943-44)
FAA Administrator N. E. Halaby announced National Academy of Sciences had assumed advisory capacity in connection with sonic-boom research program, at invitation of faa. First step in nas program would be review of sonic boom study now being conducted at Oklahoma City. (faa Release 64-50)
NASA announced that space scientists had adopted a new analytical method— neutron activation analysis—to help them determine the presence and quantity of oxygen in alkali metals. General Atomics Div. of General Dynamics Corp. undertook this oxygen-identification problem under a contract from Lewis Research Center. ( lrc Release 64-102)
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) spoke in the House of recent report By Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development which was a preliminary investigation of how existing Congressional resources of scientific and technical information can be made more effective. “. . . The critical need for Congress to study and evaluate its uses of scientific information cannot be minimized. It is imperative that we be prepared to assemble the necessary information for Congress to make complex policy decisions in order to meet national goals. As I have indicated we are more concerned with the policy of the decision than its technical aspects. In making these decisions the translation and conversion of scientific and technical information into policy terms is essential. . . .” (CR, 8/13/64,18753)
Appointment of Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control Div. of NASA OART, as Deputy Director of the new NASA Electronics Research Center, was announced by NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff. Appointment was effective Sept. 1. Dr. Kelley formed NASA research program in electronics and control when he was assigned to his position in November 1961; he joined NASA in March 1960 to establish development program for Agena launch vehicle, (nasa Release 64-199)
NASA Technology Utilization Report (SP-5005) on the retrometer, a new system of voice communications transmitted on a beam of light, was published. Invented at NASA Langley Research Center by Numa E. Thomas, the retrometer differed from previous light beam-communications systems in that the originating station required no power other them the human voice. The T—U Report described the system, gave instructions for building experimental retrometers, and suggested many possible applications of the system.	(NASA T—U Rpt. SP-5005; NASA Release 64-82)
NASA Langley Research Center announced that a foam generator developed for possible use in recovery at sea of instrument packages returned from space had been patented. Attached to instrument packages, generator mixes chemicals to produce almost instant plastic foam as it parachutes to water landing, filling a bag which keeps the payload floating on the surface awaiting recovery. (LaRC Release, 10/16/64)
Democratic Party Platform completed, containing space plank which stated: “In four vigorous years we have moved to the forefront of space exploration. The United States must never again settle for second place in the race for tomorrow’s frontiers. “1. We will continue the rapid development of space technology for peaceful uses. “2. We will encourage private industry to increase its efforts in space research. “3. We will continue to ensure that any race in space is won for freedom and for peace.” (Text, AP, Balt. Sun, 8/24/64)
Lewis Research Center conducted drop tests down a main elevator shaft at Cleveland’s Terminal Tower, dropping model experimental packages from heights of up to 400 ft. to gather data for design of decelerator for lrc’s new zero-gravity facility, (lrc Release 64-40)
Dr. Smith J. DeFrance, Director of NASA Ames Research Center, was one of 10 recipients of the 1964 Career Service Award of the National Civil Service League. Director of Ames since 1940, Dr. DeFrance was recommended for the award on the basis of his 43-year career as an outstanding administrator and leader of aeronautical and space research. (NASA Release 64-75)
European Space Research Organization (esro) announced plans to build research center at Noordwijk, the Netherlands. Center would employ 800-man international staff, would include laboratories, proving grounds, and other facilities. (NYT, 10/27/64, 5)
Kenneth C. McCracken, head of cosmic ray research of the Earth and Planetary .Sciences Laboratory at the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest said that the Imps (Interplanetary Monitoring Platforms) scheduled to be shot into earth orbit in 1966 would be the best tool for studying cosmic rays during the years of the quiet sun. Besides lasting much longer than either the “deep” space probes or the balloons, they would have one other tremendous advantage, McCracken said. “The imps will have very eccentric orbits, skimming 200 miles over the surface of the earth at the closest points of their orbits, or ‘perigees,’ and soaring 185,000	miles out in space at their ‘apogees,’ or farthest points of orbit. . . . That means that in counting and analyzing cosmic rays we shall for the first time be able actually to compare the virgin, or primary, rays with the secondary particles that have had all the wear and tear of passing through the earth’s atmosphere and magnetosphere.” (Getze, L.A. Times, 12/17/64)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced award of $797,200 contract for construction of concrete-lined shaft for the 500-ft. gravity facility, to Patrick Harrison, Inc. The underground shaft would be first phase of construction of largest zero-gravity facility in the U.S. Completion of the facility was expected this year, (lrc Release 64-30)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory released figures on mariner iv, valid as of 12:01 pm: total miles to travel—325,000,000; total miles traveled—44,000,000; miles remaining to travel—281,000,000; miles from earth—4,306,180; speed in relation to earth—7,023 mph; speed in relation to sun—72,532 mph; total days required for trip—228; days already in space—26; days remaining to travel—202. (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/24/64)
A hingeless Lockheed XH—51N rotor helicopter for advanced research in rotary wing aircraft had been delivered to NASA Langley Research Center. Studies would be made of the loads and flying qualities problems that might be encountered by operational aircraft of this type and of the extent to which their potential advantages of simplicity and improved flying qualities could be realized in practice. Rotor blades on the XH-51N were held firmly to the hub, which was attached rigidly to the engine drive shaft. On other helicopters, the blades were either hinged at the side of the rotor hub or were gimbaled atop the mast. (LaRC Release 12/16/64)
The faa awarded contracts totaling $6 million each to the Boeing Company and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for the design of a supersonic transport. In addition, contracts totaling $5 million each were awarded to the General Electric Co. and the Pratt & Whitney Division of United Aircraft Corp. for designs for the engines of the transport. Boeing and Lockheed would do extensive design work, wind tunnel testing, and structural studies aimed at refining designs to conform to the technical and economic requirements established by the FAA. The two engine contractors would develop detailed preliminary layout designs. (AP, NYT, 6J3/64!, 16; faa Release 64-55)
NASA announced FAA—NASA Memorandum of Understanding specifying NASA’s role in development of U.S. supersonic transport aircraft, under overall responsibility of faa. NASA would furnish facilities, background research, technical advice, and resources to faa and would conduct advanced flight research. In addition, NASA would conduct necessary background research to provide supporting technology and technical assistance and make available nasa’s facilities and technical resources. In flight testing phase, faa would be responsible for direction and acceptance testing, and certification trials; NASA would be responsible for flight research with its own funds, instrumentation, and resources. (NASA Release 64-28)
Results of experimental drop tests down elevator shaft of Cleveland’s Terminal Tower showed that styrofoam could be used successfully as a deceleration medium, according to NASA Lewis Research Center design engineer Terrence E. Russell. Purpose of the deceleration tests, conducted by LRC last May, was to verify use of styrofoam as filler in cart used to “catch” free-falling test packages at lrc’s new 500-ft. zero-gravity facility. ( lrc Release 64-64)
NASA Langley Research Center announced that power supply capability tests were being conducted on two huge magnet coils at the Space Radiation Effects Laboratory. In operation, the magnet coils would be capable of creating a pulling power greater than 3,500 tons. The magnet coils were part of the 600-million electron volt synchrocyclotron which NASA would operate to study the effect on spacecraft and their systems of the particle radiation streaming from the sun or trapped in the earth’s magnetic field. (LaRC Release)
NASA awarded $16,975,000 contract to Blount Brothers Corp. for construction of three major elements of space environment facility known as Space Propulsion Facility, to be built at Plum Brook Station of NASA Lewis Research Center. The facility would simulate temperatures and pressure conditions at altitudes up to 100 mi. from earth, permitting evaluation and development testing of spacecraft, chemical propulsion systems, and nuclear electric power generation and propulsion systems. (lrc Release 64-61)
Aerospace industry sales for second quarter of 1964 rose to $4,006 billion from $3,808 billion in preceding quarter, Securities and Exchange Commission-Federal Trade Commission reported. (Av. Wk., 9/21/64, 34)
NASA Director of Personnel Robert J. Lacklen said in Aviation Week he had ordered a “complete re-write” of NASA Management Manual section dealing with employees’ acceptance of gifts and gratuities from aerospace industry representatives. “The same thing has jumped us off on a re-write that caused the Defense Dept, to issue its new orders. That is the continuing appearance of NASA names on contractor entertainment lists.” (Av. Wk., 10/5/64, 18)
NASA’s astronomy program was topic of background briefing for the press at NASA Hq., by astronomy program chief Dr. Nancy Roman. Dr. Roman disclosed at the briefing that NASA was studying concept of a manned orbiting telscope. The 100-in. telescope would operate in space automatically, but man would have to make final adjustments in its focus, change auxiliary instruments from time to time for varying the experiments, collect photographic film, and make repairs. NASA had invited members of the astronomical community to propose studies basic to the Mot concept. Several NASA centers and Hq. offices were supporting related engineering studies. Dr. Roman said design studies for a Radio Astronomy Observatory were “pretty well completed.” Not yet an approved program, Rao would have four 750-ft. antennas extended in two V’s to receive radio emissions from space. (nasa Transcript; ATPh)
