Evidence of the impact on education of achievements in space technology was cited by James V. Bernardo, Director of NASA Educational Programs Div., at the Michigan Education Association Meeting in Detroit: (1) greater demand for scientists, engineers, and technicians; (2) examination and revision of the science and mathematics courses in high schools and colleges to include new concepts and to provide enrichment of basic principles through space-related materials; (3) recognition of the need for better teacher training to meet the increasing needs of science and technology in our society; (4) recognition that science should be a basic part of general education for all students and that we must develop a science-literate public; (5) effort to develop a well-balanced national effort in science, technology, the social sciences, and the humanities; (6) need for advancing scientific research activities related to space exploration problems, including the development of training programs for scientists, engineers, and technicians. (Text)
USn’s f-111b fighter aircraft, originally designated tfx, was given its first test flight over Long Island at 2,000-mph for an hour and 18 min., during which the variable wing-sweep of the craft was tested. (Wash. Post, 5/19/65, 11; upi, Wash. Post, 5/20/65, 2)
XB-70a research bomber, leaving Edwards afb, flew 1,700 mph at 65,000-ft. alt. on its 13th test flight. It landed three minutes earlier than planned because of a possible leak in a hydraulic system, (ap, Balt. Sun, 6/17/65)
usaf xb-70a research bomber reached a speed of 1,850 mph at 66,000	ft. in a test flight at Edwards afb. (afftc Release 65-7-18)
DOD announced that U.S. would sell United Kingdom: (1) F^l (Phantom II) fighter/close-support aircraft and (2) c—130e combat assault transport aircraft. It had also been agreed that the two countries would expand existing program of cooperation in defense research and development. Serious consideration would be given to joint development of advanced life engine for vertical- and short-takeoff aircraft. (dod Release 80-65)
. . . The last two Gemini missions have shown clearly that the U.S. manned space flight program has come of age technically. They also demonstrated the operational flexibility that can be achieved in long-duration manned missions,” wrote Robert Hotz in Aviation Week. “With each new manned mission, the Gemini program is forging a record that insures its place in space history as the great leap forward in space flight that transformed the role of man himself from that of a surviving passenger to a useful performer of vital functions in the space environment. . . . “It was really the conclusive demonstration that adding a long-term manned capability would improve satellite reconnaissance by orders of magnitude that finally forced the decision to proceed with mol after nearly two years of delay under the guise of ‘further study.’ ” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 9/6/65,17)
The Jodrell Bank Observatory, British tracking station, was visited by a group of six Soviet scientists led by M. V. Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, (ap, Boston Globe, 2/17/65)
S. Walter Hixon, Jr., Supervisory Employee Development Officer at the NASA Langley Research Center, was selected for his educational activities as the Federal Civil Service Employee of the Year in the Hampton Roads area. Hixon had conducted four major programs at Langley including graduate study, advanced in-house training, a cooperative college education plan, and an apprenticeship training system. (LaRC Release)
President Johnson, on the advice of Defense Secretary McNamara, and contrary to the opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had decided to postpone the production order for the Nike-X missile defense system, Neal Stanford of the Christian Science Monitor asserted. $2 billion had already been spent on the R&D phase of the Nike-X and an additional $20 billion would be required to produce and deploy it. The fy 1966 budget provided approximately $400 million for continued research and development on the Nike-X system pending the decision on whether to put Nike-X into production. (Stanford, CSM, 1/28/65)
U.S.S.R. was building a spaceship designed not for space flight, but for exhibition in a new space museum to be built at the site of Moscow’s Space Monument. Inside the model cabin, which would have a seating capacity of 100, a movie showing the earth as it appeared from space would he shown to visitors, (ap, San Diego Eve. Trib., 4/9/65, 22)
Fourth Chrysler-assembled Saturn ib first stage left NASA Michoud Assembly Facility aboard the nasa barge Palaemon for static-firing tests at Marshall Space Flight Center. Trip would take about seven days, (msfc Release 65-295)
Dr. Fred Whipple, director of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, had suggested landing on a comet. Dr. Whipple also speculated that if a space vehicle were sent near a comet scientists could use a low-velocity probe that could be put into an orbit in the comet’s vicinity for a week or more to study the velocities of gas and dust particles boiled off the comet by solar radiation. The probe would also be able to take core samples of the comet to give direct measurement of one of the oldest physical processes in the solar system, Dr. Whipple said. (NYT, 2/14/65, 50)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director of NASA Electronics Research Center, retired as a U.S. naval commander. He had been assigned to detached duty with NASA by USN in 1960 and would continue with erc as a civilian. (Boston Globe, 7/1/65)
Six out of ten Minnesotans said in a recent survey conducted by the Minneapolis Tribune's Minnesota Poll that the U.S. should at least maintain its $5 billion a year budget for space exploration. 59% felt the U.S. had outdistanced the U.S.S.R. 10% considered the “space race” about even. {Minn. Trib., 7/4/65)
A $1,366,511 contract for construction of a high temperature heat load testing facility at nasa Flight Research Center was awarded to Santa Fe Engineers, Inc. The facility would be capable of producing temperatures up to 3,000°F on small isolated areas of aircraft; larger areas could be heated up to about 600°. Contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers, which was administering it for NASA, (frc Release 9-65)
NASA engineers Harry Carlson and Francis E. McLean believed the sonic boom problem in the operation of the supersonic transport could be solved by fattening the fuselage just forward of the wing, thereby altering the air flow in such a way as to cut the boom to an acceptable level, reported Richard P. Cooke in the Wall Street Journal. Fattening the Sst fuselage forward of the wings, said the NASA engineers, would also help the lift and might permit room for more seats. (Cooke, WSJ, 5/20/65)
A turbocompressor, first flight-weight hardware for an eight-kilowatt space power generating system, arrived at NASA Lewis Research Center for testing. It would use a 30-ft. solar mirror to gather the sun’s rays and operate on a Brayton cycle with an unreactive gas as its working fuel. In space, heat source could be a reactor, a radio-isotope, or a solar heat receiver supplied by concentrated sunlight reflected from a mirror. Turbocompressor was built for NASA by Air Research Manufacturing Co. as part of NASA’s Advanced Technology Program, (lrc Release 65-64)
NASA and the U.S. Army had entered into an agreement which would establish a joint effort in the area of low-speed aeronautical research to be accomplished in facilities at NASA Ames Research Center, Ames reported. The program would be conducted in cooperation with personnel of the U.S. Army Materiel Command, (arc Astrogram, 6/24/65, 1)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, speaking in Minneapolis, Minn., before the Twin Cities Section of aiaa, said: “We believe that activities in the exploration of space, a modern social need recognizable from the passage of the National Aeronautics and Space Act and the appropriation of large sums of money by the Congress, provide the essential environment to accelerate greatly the growth of theoretical and experimental science in many areas. It is true that this accelerated growth in science and technology is essential to the on-going development of space capability, but of deeper significance is the complex dynamic interaction between science, technology, and space exploration, which is essential to the growth of science, technology, and space exploration. In this case, as in the cases previously cited, to use an analogy from bacteriology, there has to be a nutrient solution (money and employment opportunities) to feed the scientific and technological effort, and as soon as this environment is provided, many latent efforts in science and technology begin to assert themselves and move forward. “I believe that this interpretation of certain aspects of the space program is more significant and meaningful than the current concepts of technology utilization and technological spinoff as incidental or serendipitous benefits of space exploration.” (Text)
NASA announced closing of its Santa Monica and Dallas Area Professional Staffing Offices and moving of its New York office to Boston to assist in recruitment program for new Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, (nasa Release 65-156)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala., received an honorary doctorate of laws from Iona College. (NYT, 3/17/65, 38)
Dr. Winston E. Kock, Director of NASA Electronics Research Center, was guest of Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, on a tour of MSC facilities. While in Houston, Dr. Kock addressed the annual banquet of the Institute of Navigation. In his speech he revealed ERC would investigate possibilities of new guidance techniques for future ion-propelled (or other low-thrust) spacecraft, employing Mossbauer radiation as an accelerometer to monitor systems performance on the spacecraft. He termed Mossbauer radiation “the most precise electromagnetic frequency yet known” in guidance applications, (msc Roundup, 5/14/65, 7)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Douglas Aircraft Co1, for nine additional s-ivb flight stages to be used as the third stage of the Saturn V launch vehicle being developed at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Work would also include related spares and launch support services. Value of the S-IVB contract presently totaled some $312 million. The new work was expected to exceed $150 million. (nasa Release 65-209; msfc Release 65-162; Marshall Star, 6/30/65, 1)
NASA announced appointment of Bernard Moritz, NASA Assistant General Counsel for Procurement, as Assistant Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs. S. Neil Hosenball, Chief Counsel at NASA Lewis Research Center, would succeed Moritz, (nasa Release 65-387)
U.S. Chamber of Commerce released a report entitled “Criteria for Federal Support of Research and Development,” which proposed the establishment of a forum for debating scientific and technical issues (such as space exploration and desalting of the oceans) before they became national policy. The council, to be composed of representatives of industry, labor, the Government, and the academic industry, would investigate the inherent worth of proposed programs and their value to society to increase public understanding of issues that were usually decided by the Government alone and debated afterward. (Clark, NYT, 1/11/65, 46)
Soviet Union had asked the Federation Aeronautique Internationale to officially confirm two spacecraft world records established by the crew of VOSKHOD II on March 18, 1965, reported Interavia Air Letter. Applications were for first extravehicular activity of a man from a spacecraft in orbit and a new altitude record of 497.7 km. (309 mi.). {Interavia Air Letter, 9/22/65, 6)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, predicted in a luncheon address to participants in the National Youth Science Camp “a revolution in aeronautics within the next 15 years” as a result of advances being made now. Breakthroughs being made in development of more powerful rockets, heat resistant metals, and more sophisticated engines would soon lead to vertical takeoff craft capable of undergoing sustained flight at speeds up to 12 times the speed of sound, General Schriever postulated. (Text; Wash. Eve. Star, 7/9/65)
NASA and U.S. Army Materiel Command adopted an agreement for joint participation in low-speed and Vtol aeronautical research. The research program was centered at NASA Ames Research Center, (nmi
Formation of a Voyager Landing-Capsule Task Team at Ames and Langley Research Centers to assist JPL during early phases of the design was announced by NASA. This would include research and analytical support, (arc Release)
Theo E. Sims, Manager of NASA Langley Research Center’s Project Ram, reported results of reentry communications blackout research before the IEEE national convention in New York. Sims said significant progress had been made toward understanding the fundamental nature of the blackout problem and suggested that vehicle shape selection, signal frequency choice, use of static magnetic fields, and material addition to the flow field were all possible solutions. Flight experiments, he indicated, had shown the materials addition technique to be useful at speeds up to 12,000 mph, and an experiment to be flown on the first manned Gemini spacecraft would attempt to demonstrate the effectiveness of water addition at even higher speeds. (LaRC Release)
Dr. Winston E. Kock, Director of NASA Electronics Research Center, announced that NASA had authorized architects to proceed with detailed designs for a 26-story tower building, a three-story microwave laboratory, and an auditorium-cafeteria building at ERC. Construction would begin next spring, provided approval were given for urban renewal proceedings in the Kendall Square-Cambridge site. The buildings would be built with $15 million already approved by Congress, (erc Release 65-31)
Two Presidential citations were among 12 awards presented to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center employees recently, msfc announced. Ralph Butler of the Aero-Astrodynamics Laboratory had suggested an improved method of measuring local atmospheric conditions by using radio-controlled model airplanes. Franklin Williams of the Saturn V Program Office had made two cost-reduction proposals, one concerning x-ray radiation protection and the other recommending an inexpensive covering for clean room insulation. Butler and Williams saved the Government an estimated $306,000. (msfc Release 65-182)
A prototype experimental life-support system enclosed in a simulated space cabin was placed on a ship in San Diego for delivery to NASA Langley Research Center. Designed and constructed by the Convair Div. of General Dynamics Corp., the system was intended for use in a research program to enlarge the scope of life-support technology. Within the device were subsystems to:	(1) extract oxygen from the carbon dioxide exhaled by the occupants; (2) convert waste liquids and humidity condensates to drinking water; (3) provide control of internal temperature and humidity; (4) allow storage and handling of a freeze-dried food supply for four test subjects for 90 days at a time; (5) remove from the cabin atmosphere all contaminating vapors which might be generated; and (6) provide personal hygiene facilities. (LaRC Release)
Max Quatinetz of nasa Lewis Research Center addressed International Powder Metallurgy Conference in New York. He discussed LRC research in adding fibered metals to tungsten to strengthen that metal, which has a high melting point but is brittle and difficult to work. Quatinetz described a new method of producing the fibered compounds —extrusion of powdered metals. Researchers had formed tungsten composites containing high-temperature additives such as oxides, borides, nitrides, and carbides; they had noted increases in the metal’s stress-rupture life of up to 50 times. Quatinetz observed that the new method of fibering would have wide potential application in materials research, (lrc Release 65—45)
Twenty Llrv Program personnel at nasa Flight Research Center were honored at an informal ceremony. Six employees received plaques for special and outstanding contributions to the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle project. ( frc X-Press, 2/19/65, 1)
The first major Saturn V flight component, a 33-ft.-dia., 60,000-lb. corrugated tail section which would support the booster’s five 1.5-million-lb.-thrust engines, arrived at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center from NASA Michoud Operations, near New Orleans. The section was one of five major structural units comprising Saturn V’s first stage. (Marshall Star, 1/27/65, 1)
Aerospace industry would probably increase its employment of scientists and engineers by more than seven percent this year, announced Karl G.	Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Association. He made public a study which indicated that employment of scientists and engineers in aircraft, missile, and space fields would increase by about 13,000	from March to December, reaching a total of 190,000 by the end of the year. He said total aerospace employment would increase by 9,000 from 1,123,000 in March to 1,132,000 in December. This forecast contradicted other recent surveys which had predicted a decline. (Text; ap, NYT, 9/5/65, 5)
The communications blackout problem was discussed by Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg, NASA Director of Research, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology: “One of the phenomena that occurs in gases at high temperatures is ionization, that is, electrons are torn away by the highspeed collisions of the gas atoms and molecules. . . . The free electrons, produced by the high temperatures in the shock layer around a reentry vehicle, interfere with and block the propagation of radio signals. . . . This effect produces the communications-blackout problem. To understand what is going on and to eliminate, or at least minimize this communication difficulty, one must be able to calculate the distribution of free electrons about the body in order to predict when the plasma sheath will become opaque for certain radio frequencies. This calculation cannot be made until the flow field (temperature, density, pressure and velocity) about the body is known. A significant part of the fluid physics program is concerned with the investigations of flow fields. The results of these studies also give us better information on the heat transfer to reentry bodies. “As a possible remedy for the communications blackout, we are studying the characteristics of various gases, called electrophylic gases, which have the unique property of capturing free electrons. Such a gas, which effectively reduces the electron concentration when injected into the flow, might solve the problem. . . . This work is tied closely with the work on radio attenuation going on at the Langley Research Center and the technique is being adapted to test a variety of fluids suggested by the work at Langley.” (Testimony; 1966 NASA Auth. Hearings, 447-62)
Technical Systems Office had been newly established by MSFC to handle launch vehicle technical systems problems, MSFC announced. Dr. J. C. McCall, deputy director of Research and Development Operations, would serve as acting director of the office until Oct. 1, when L. G. Richard, assistant director of the Astrionics Laboratory, would become director, (msfc Release 65-193)
nasa Electronics Research Center had accomplished a promising advance in microwave research by generating higher frequency microwaves by interaction of hot electrons in solid-state component material. Technique applied low voltage across a bulk gallium arsenide semi-conductor crystal less than one-thousandth of an inch thick and might improve microwave signal transmission efficiency in space, (nasa Release 65-373)
Two hrs. and 20 min. of radio signals from Jupiter were received around midnight New Year’s Eve as predicted by George A. Dulk of the Univ. of Colorado. The signals were received at the Altitude Observatory of the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, which had kept its radiotelescope operating for the event. (Osmundsen, NYT, 1/2/65, 1)
Astronomers of the Pulkovo Observatory, Leningrad, had completed installation of a more powerful telescope, Tass announced. Diameter of the instrument’s main mirror was 440 mm. (17.3 in.) ; its focal length, 17.5	m. (57.33 ft.). The new telescope would be able to produce spectrograms from any sector of the sun and simultaneously measure the magnetic field. (Tass, 7/21/65)
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory announced the discovery in England of a new comet. Discovered Sept. 26 by astronomer G. E. D. Alcock (and named after him), the lOth-magnitude comet appeared as part of the constellation Hercules, (ap, Wash. Post, 9/28/65, Al)
nasa announced the appointment of Robert F. Thompson as Mission Director for the future Gemini missions and Col. C. H. Rolender (usaf) as Mission Director for the first and second Apollo/Saturn IB flights. Thompson and Bolender were assigned to the Mission Operations Organization in the Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA Hq., and would have overall responsibility for directing assigned missions. Christopher Kraft would continue in his regular assignment as Flight Director for Gemini missions. Thompson was Chief, Landing and Recovery Div., NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, before receiving this assignment. Col. Rolender had directed a studies group in the office of the usaf Chief of Staff and had engaged in extensive guided missiles and aeronautical systems work, (nasa Release 65-211)
A. J. Hayes, president of the International Association of Machinists, said at a Dallas briefing of industry sponsored by dod and the National Security Industrial Association that Federal procurement officers were meddling in negotiations of labor and the aerospace industry to the extent that free collective bargaining was being eroded away. He said the affected unions would not settle this year for less than the 57-cent package in wage increases and fringe benefits recently worked out for the United Auto Workers, (ap, Denver Post, 4/15/65)
NASA Lewis Research Center planned to buy enough Vg-in.-dia. pingpong balls to fill a bucket-like device 12 ft. in dia. and 19 ft. deep. The miniature pingpong balls would be used to cushion experiments in lrc’s 500-ft.-deep zero-gravity shaft. Experiments would be recovered intact for evaluation and later reuse. The pingpong balls, it was hoped, could cushion up to 6,000 lbs. (lrc Release 65-34)
The U.S. GEMINI v mission established eight new world records: (1) longest manned space flight—190 hrs., 55 min.; former record, 119 hrs., six min. held by U.S.S.R.; (2) national man hours in space—641 hrs., 24 min.; former record, 507 hrs., 16 min. held by U.S.S.R.; (3) longest multi-manned space flight—190 hrs., 56 min.; former record, 97 hrs., 48 min. set by U.S.; (4) most revolutions for a manned space flight—120; former record, 81, set by U.S.S.R.; (5) most manned flights—9; former record held by U.S.S.R., 8; (6) first man to make a second orbital flight—L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) ; (7) individual with most space flight time—Col. Cooper; (8) individuals making the longest single space flight—Cooper and Conrad (Lcdr., usn) ; former record held by U.S.S.R. (ap, NYT, 8/30/65, 17)
NASA Ames Research Center was conducting tests on a Douglas f5d aircraft with a specially designed planform wing that might minimize landing speeds for the proposed supersonic transport. A tornado-like flow, called “vortex airflow,” and resulting from the sharp difference between the low pressure on the top of the wing and the high pressure on the underside, was generated along the leading edges of the “S”-shaped wing. Engineers said use of the sharply angled wings with tornado effect on top had these advantages: (1) the tornadoes affected air flow over the entire aircraft and eliminated turbulence that would make other aircraft directionally unstable when coming in nose high for a landing; (2) the tornadoes made it almost impossible for the wings to lose their lift completely. Also, it was felt this wing shape took maximum advantage of the cushioning effect produced in compressing air between the underside of the wings and the ground which would make it necessary to level off sharply at the last moment before touching down. Existence of this tornado-like flow along the leading edges of the wing encouraged the belief that a supersonic airliner might be built without resorting to variable-sweep wings. In current design competition for supersonic transport under Government auspices, the Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had taken the first approach. The Boeing Co. had a design with movable wings, (arc Release 65-3; Witkin, NYT, 1/30/65)
NASA established an Office of Industry Affairs at the Pentagon by arrangement with the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Installations and Logistics), to coordinate dod-nasa mutual interest procurement and contract management matters, including quality assurance. Clyde Bothmer, who formerly directed management operations in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, became Director, (nasa Release 65— 55; NASA Ann. 65-35)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center awarded ibm a 5-yr. 8175,125,000 contract for integration and checkout of instrument units for Saturn IB and Saturn V programs. Initially announced in 1964, the contract would give IBM the additional responsibility for structural and environmental control systems and integration of all systems, (msfc Release
U.S. Army’s Nixe-X Project Office at Redstone Arsenal announced appointment of Dr. Oswald H. Lange as Chief Scientist and Charles E. Richardson as Chief Engineer. Lange was returning to the Army after more than five years with NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, where he directed the Saturn vehicle project and for the past two years was assistant msfc director for scientific and technical analysis. Richardson was formerly chief of the Nike-X Project’s Test and Range Operations Div. (Marshall Star, 9/29/65, 1)
Dr. Willard F. Libby, chemist and Director of UCLA Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, advocated emphasis on manned scientific missions in the U.S. space program. “In my opinion, space is a great unknown from which we will obtain many new scientific discoveries.” He approved of the use of scientist-astronauts, “but they must be backed much more wholeheartedly by the entire scientific community, particularly the academic community, than is at present the case. Education will help to accomplish this eventually, but there is a particular urgency to determine the post-Apollo objectives in the near future.” A solution to the immediate problem, which had been proposed to and adopted by NASA: formation of a “Scientific Task Force,” made up of scientists about the same age as the astronauts, to work and live at msc and be closely connected with the astronauts, msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of the Office of Space Sciences Dr. Homer E. Newell, and the Advisory Committee for Science and Technology. The Scientific Task Force would educate the scientific community with the manned space flight program and thereby acquire its ideas on the subject, and acquaint the NASA directors with the ideas for scientific experiments suggested by the academic community. (A&A, 4/65, 70-75) During April: Martin Summerfield, Princeton Univ., said in aiaa editorial that most of the critics of the U.S. space program were erecting and knocking down “straw men.” Some of the attacks on the space program were designed to divert space funds “to other, supposedly more important purposes,” and these viewpoints are “pushed too hard and can lead the nation in dangerous directions.” The more significant criticism on scientific grounds was that ground-based instruments (supplemented by unmanned probes) can gather data about space, the moon and other celestial bodies more effectively than rocket-launched exploration. This criticism, he said, “misses the mark completely because it takes for granted that the national space program—or at least the NASA part of it—was conceived simply as a scientific venture. . . .” He recalled the words of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, which provided “clearly . . . the overriding intent to develop the technology of space flight as an extension of the former naca’s commitment to aeronautical flight. . . . “The real issue is whether the nation should continue to develop the technology for flight in space, capitalizing on such useful applications as seem practical from time to time. The answer can only be ‘yes,’ and nothing less than a vigorous program will do. It makes no sense to insist that so broad a program be evaluated in competition with telescopes or unmanned scientific probes. Advances in space science will not substitute for flying capability. Each of these efforts is important in its own right. . . .”	(A&A, 4/65, 23)
Six rhesus monkeys exposed to a total radiation of 500 rads during a 10-day simulated space flight experienced no performance decrement, reported Heather M. Davis in Missiles and Rockets. Radiation was administered at rate of 2 rads per hour from an 80-curie gamma radiation source at the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Thirty-day physical examinations just conducted showed the animals were still in good health. (David, M&R, 9/27/65, 38)
NASA Flight Research Center issued requests for proposals for two preliminary feasibility studies of a manned lifting reentry vehicle to 16 industrial firms. Primary objective of the proposed studies would be to determine problem areas and their influence on design and to provide accurate estimates of the weight, cost, and developmental schedule involved with such a research craft, (frc Release 5^65)
The first photographs taken at the Yale-Columbia Observatory in the Andes in western Argentina had fulfilled the “best optimistic expectations,” reported Professor Dirk Brouwer, director of the Yale Observatory. Brouwer said three test photographs of Orion, nebulae, and Omega Centauri had indicated the lenses apparently were the best of their kind. Principal mission of the Ford Foundation-financed observatory was to make two-hour exposures of the Southern Hemisphere sky to obtain positions of the stars in our galaxy against a background of distant galaxies, (upi, NYT, 9/6/65, 31C)
3C-9, a quasar (quasi-stellar radio source) receding from the earth at 149,000	mps or 80% of the speed of light, had been discovered with the 200-in. telescope at Mt. Palomar Observatory, Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times. It was the most distant of a new generation of five quasars which included cta-102, the object Soviet astronomers had suggested might be transmitting signals under intelligent control. All appeared to be so distant that their life had probably ended during the billions of years required for their light to reach earth. Dr. Allan R. Sandage of Mt. Palomar Observatory said his studies of brightness and velocities of these five quasars and four others previously calculated resulted in evidence supporting the “oscillating universe” theory. Data on the nine quasars’ velocities largely was the work of Dr. Maarten Schmidt, Mt. Palomar Observatory. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/18/65, 1, 2; 5/23/65, 6E)
Lt. Gen. Frank A. Bogart (usaf, Ret.) was appointed Director of Manned Space Flight Management Operations. Since joining NASA on December 1, 1964, General Bogart had served as Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, (nasa Announcement 65-30)
Jack G. Webb was named director of the Federal Aviation Agency’s National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center near Atlantic City, N.J., headquarters for FAA’s research and development activities. (faa Release 65-97)
Over 500 contractors shared the work in NASA’s SI.35 billion Gemini manned space flight project, it was reported. The biggest contractors were aircraft companies, but computer manufacturers, major airlines, telephone companies, and small businesses, manufacturing highly specialized items were included. (Hines. Wash. Sun. Star, 3/21/65 )
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn. ) disclosed in speech before Washington Section, National Association of Science Writers, that the House Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development (of which he was chairman) was planning an investigation of the National Science Foundation. He said: “For some years, there has been the need to review its work and to determine if it were, in fact, thoroughly successful in promoting the progress of science, the national health, prosperity and welfare and for other purposes.” ( Wash. Post, 4/28/65, C9)
U.S. Senate passed a bill (H.R. 7717) authorizing appropriations to nasa for fy 1966 totaling $5,196,826,350, as follows:	$4,533,350,000 for research and development; $67,376,350 for construction of facilities; and $596,100,000 for administrative expenses. (CR, 6/2/ 65, 11816)
Venus’ surface was dry, radio astronomers at Cal Tech reported, probably consisted of sand or porous rock, and was much too hot for any known form of life—up to 675° F. The planet’s cloudy atmosphere was at least 40-mi. thick consisting mostly of carbon dioxide with some nitrogen and a trace of water vapor. Observations were made at Cal Tech’s Owens Valley Radio Observatory by Dr. Barry Clark of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., and Dr. Arkady Kuzmin of the Lebedev Institute of Physics in Moscow. (ap, NYT, 8/7/65, 10)
VENUS H 2,123-lb. unmanned space probe was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. into a heliocentric orbit on a three-and-one-half month journey toward Venus. Tass announced that the trajectory was “close to the prescribed one” and that all onboard equipment was functioning normally. During its flight, VENUS II “would carry out an extensive space research program using onboard scientific instruments.” (Tass, 11/12/65; NYT, 11/13/65, 10)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a $4,514,295 modification to its existing contract with Boeing Co. to provide services in Saturn V ground support. Tasks included analysis of ground support equipment, monitoring equipment qualification testing, acceptance testing, conducting design verification, and interface and installation control documentation, (msfc Release 65-234)
Ball and roller bearings assembled according to the Lewis Hardness Differential Guide could be expected to have four to five times greater fatigue life, NASA announced. The Guide was developed by a NASA Lewis Research Center team of engineers whose tests showed that bearing load capacity and fatigue life were greatest when the rolling elements of the bearing were between one and two points harder (measured on the Rockwell C Scale) than the races. Manufacturers usually made bearings with balls and races of the same hardness. (NASA Release 65-246; lrc Release 65-51)
Clarence A. Syvertson had been named Director of NASA’s new Mission Analysis Division of the Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Technology. NASA announced. He would be responsible for study of future missions for research and technology programs. The Mission Analysis Division, to be located at NASA Ames Research Center, would be staffed by outstanding scientists drawn from all NASA Centers and would be organized along aeronautical and space mission lines. (NASA Release 65-46; NASA Ann. 65-341
Dr. Michel Bader, nasa Ames Research Center scientist, reported that comet Ikeya-Seki had apparently suffered no structural deformation as a result of its close passage to the sun October 20. The tail of the comet now appeared to be about 12° (25 million miles) in length, (arc Astrogram, 10/28/65, 1)
The successful use in modern surgery of plasma probes developed for the U.S. program by High Temperature Instruments Corp. under contract to NASA Lewis Research Center was reported by Dr. Walter T. Olson, Assistant Director for Public Affairs at lrc. The temperature-sensing elements of these tiny probes were used in a cryogenic cannula for treating Parkinson’s Disease, a malady involving control centers in the brain. The surgical probe, through which low-temperature liquid nitrogen flows, is used to destroy parts of the brain by freezing without affecting adjacent tissue. It also permits the neurosurgeon to probe at an intermediate temperature; once located, the selected brain tissues can be frozen by using the thermocouple to monitor the temperature. (lrc Release 65-50)
Urban Renewal Div. of Massachusetts Department of Commerce and Development approved Cambridge’s Kendall Square urban renewal project, thereby opening the way for construction of NASA Electronics Research Center there. (Boston Sun. Globe, 10/10/65)
NASA announced it had extended the Scout Reentry Heating Project to include one more ballistic flight and had invited industry to submit proposals for the design of the spacecraft. Sub-orbital reentry experiment was scheduled for 1967 and would be sixth in the Langley Research Center project. It would require launching of a 13-ft.-long, pointed cone from Wallops Island, Va., using a modified three-stage Scout launch vehicle with no heat shield. Reentry would take place near Bermuda at a velocity between 12,000 and 13,000 mph. (NASA Release 65-384)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced $40 million modification to contract held by General Electric Co. for the design of electrical equipment for Saturn vehicle launch support. Modification would cover the design portion of the work involved in providing electrical support equipment for Saturn IB and Saturn V launches, (msfc Release 65-100)
First successful flight test of a miniature mass spectrometer specifically for biomedical and environmental use was made at NASA’s Flight Research Center. The system weighed 46 lbs., measured 10 x 10 x 20 in. with vacuum system, and could monitor and chemically analyze samples of gases that might be encountered in either the cockpit environment of the spacecraft or in the pilot’s respiratory system. It could detect buildup of harmful gas or absence of necessary life support gas. The mass spectrometer was built by the Consolidated Systems Corporation, Monrovia, California, (frc Release 6-65)
The appearance is deceptive. Actually, we are in a critically important germination period of research and development of future missile systems.’ ” Rutter noted that the shift in the missile program “does not mean . . . that its wings have permanently been clipped or that the scores of companies with a stake in the missile field face a bleak future. The missile era, in fact is still aborning.” (Rutter, NYT, 10/15/65, 65, 69)
AEC reported it had decided not to build a new type of breeder nuclear power reactor that had been considered as a source of electricity for pumps for California’s water project. The reason given was that technical problems had been encountered in research and development. The reactor would have used thorium as the key fuel. It would have been designed to breed more fuel than it consumed and run about nine years on one fuel charge, (aec Release H288; AP, NYT, 12/28/ 65, 4)
NASA had awarded one-year, cost-plus-incentive-award fee contracts to nine firms for engineering, fabrication, and institutional support services to six laboratories and three offices of Marshall Space Flight Center. Cost of work was estimated at $58.5 million for one year and was primarily in support of the Saturn/Apollo launch vehicle program. The firms were Sperry Rand Corp., Brown Engineering Corp., Vitro Corp., Hayes International Corp., Northrop Corp., Spaco, Rust Engineering Co., RCA Service Co., and Management Services, Inc. (nasa Release 65-77; msfc Release)
Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev told a Moscow news conference that VOSKHOD ix had been scheduled to land after 16 orbits, but that there was an inaccuracy in “the solar system of orientation” that prevented use of the automatic landing system. He said he then had to obtain radioed permission from the Soviet space center to land by manual control after the 17th orbit. The landing site was overshot “by a certain distance” Belyayev said without disclosing how much. Belyayev said success of the gt-3 flight of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young “was a national achievement of the United States.” He congratulated “the courageous American cosmonauts,” and said: “May the flights of both ours and American cosmonauts be dedicated to unraveling the mysteries of the universe in the interests of science and for the good of all mankind.” Belyayev said voskhod ii was capable of maneuvering in space as did the U.S. Gemini iii but that this was not in the Soviet flight plan. Leonov described time outside the ship saying “it is too early to call it a pleasant walk. It could not have been done without hard training.” He reported his small push on voskhod ii to move away from it after going out of the hatch started the spacecraft into slow rotation. In pulling himself back to the voskhod ii by his cable, Leonov disclosed he had yanked rather vigorously and had to put his hand out to avoid collision with the spacecraft. Belyayev said he and Leonov were found by a helicopter 21/2 hrs. after a soft landing in snowy woods near Perm. He said voskhod ii was airlifted back to the launch site at Baikonur in Soviet Central Asia and could be used again if necessary, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/26/65; Shabad, NYT, 3/27/65; Flight International, 4/8/65,542—44)
Month-long experiment for NASA to test man’s ability to withstand rotational stress ended at U.S. Navy School of Aviation Medicine. Capt. Ashton Graybiel, Research Director, expressed satisfaction with results of the test which confined four U.S. Navy men in a windowless, circular room, equipped with all necessary living accommodations. The room began rotating at 2 rpm’s and in 16 days built up to 10 rpm’s, stopping three times daily for meals. This pattern of speed build-up had no adverse affect on the men and produced no nausea or significant discomfort. This test, one of a series conducted by Naval School of Aviation Medicine, was to check new procedure for conditioning men for space flight. Since long space voyages could require rotating spacecraft to create artificial gravity, scientists wanted to determine spinning rate man could endure without discomfort. (NASA Release 65-84)
Ground test version of the Saturn V launch vehicle’s first stage (s—ic—1T stage) was static fired for its full flight duration of about 2V2 min. at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. S-IC-T, designed by msfc and the Boeing Co., generated its full thrust of 7,5-million lbs., equivalent, at maximum flight velocity, to about 160 million hp. Firing was the second conducted by the Boeing Co., MSFc’s prime contractor for the s-ic. All early firings were conducted by the msfc Test Laboratory, which directed today’s test, (msfc Release 65-287)
Statement by President Johnson on the delay of the Gemini VI flight: “We are all disappointed that Gemini 6 did not go off as expected. But our disappointment is exceeded by our pride in Astro-auts Walter Schirra and Thomas Stafford and the flight directors of NASA. With the world watching, they acted with remarkable courage in the face of danger and potential disaster. Their eager desire and determination to try again proves once more that men are the real heroes—and the essential factor—in space exploration.” {Pres. Doc., 12/20/65,587)	_
tsr-2, Britain’s tactical and reconnaissance bomber, broke the sound barrier for the first time. The aircraft was flown to more than 1,400 mph over the Irish Sea, to a landing at Wharton. This was the 14th test flight of tsr-2 by its manufacturer, British Aircraft Corp. (Reuters, NYT, 2/23/65, 53)
Dr. Jeanette Piccard’s 1934 balloon Bight, establishing the still current women’s world altitude record for a balloon, was celebrated in Dearborn, Mich., by a ceremony and placing of a marker near the takeoff site. The balloon had a 600,000 cu. ft. volume, reached 57,559 ft. altitude, and took Dr. Piccard from Dearborn, Mich., to Cadiz, Ohio. {CR, 5/18/65, A2465)
Army Lockheed XH-51a, fastest helicopter in the world, demonstrated its rigid rotor system and auxiliary jet engine in a successful test flight. It had a top speed of 272 mph. Without thrust from the engine, the XH-51a could be operated as a helicopter. (Wash. Post, 5/27/65, A7)
Following the gt-3 space flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at a press conference: “This particular flight is noteworthy for many reasons. Perhaps most importantly it is the first manned flight of a Gemini vehicle and it represents, then, the first step in the remaining twelve Gemini flights. In this flight ... we did for the first time carry out an orbital maneuver in space. Another first was the first demonstration of reentry control. We did control reentry landing point on this mission. Another first was the use of Syncom for communications with the Coastal Sentry Quebec during the course of the flight.” (NASA Transcript)
Nucleus of comet Ikeya-Seki had split into three pieces, all of which were traveling together in parallel courses into deep space. The three-piece break, observed Nov. 4 and 5 by Howard Pohn at U.S. Geological Survey Observatory in Flagstaff, had been confirmed by Mt. Palomar Observatory and Boyden Station, South Africa. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 11/15/65, 74)
NASA Langley Research Center announced it would negotiate with Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., an $8 million incentive contract to provide complete system management for the Scout launch vehicle. The contract would continue support services and materials LTV had provided under several contracts. It would include systems engineering, logistic support, operational support, test program support, payload coordination, preflight planning, data reduction and analysis, standardization and configuration control, reliability and quality assurance, vehicle modification, checkout, and delivery, (nasa Release 65-54)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center was readying its first Saturn V S-IC stage, designated S-ic-t, for static firing late this spring, NASA reported. The s-ic-t, a static test stage, would be hot-fired on a captive test stand in MSFc’s West Test Area and would be ground tested repeatedly over a period of many months to prove out the propulsion system, (nasa Release 65-27)
nasa Langley Research Center scientist Windsor L. Sherman proposed conversion of Project Mercury spacecraft into unmanned, recoverable orbiting telescope platforms. Equipment would include a 76-cm. Cassegrainian telescope, a camera recording system, and an attitude control system. The system would weigh approximately 4,700	lb. and would be aimed for a 300-mi. orbit. The observatory would remain in orbit 100-200 days, exposing four frames of film on each orbit for a total of 6,000 frames. After all film was exposed, the system would be braked out of orbit and would descend into the Bermuda recovery area of the Eastern Test Range, using the same recovery techniques developed for the manned Mercury landings. In addition to its capacity to perform a variety of such astronomical observations as high resolution photography, photometry, and spectroscopy, Sherman said, the recoverable observatory would permit reuse of capsule, optical, and control systems. It would allow study of space effects on equipment, and the system could serve as a test bed for advanced orbiting telescopes. (Av. Wk., 1/11/65, 23)
NASA announced selection of Documentation, Inc., Bethesda, Md., to operate its Scientific and Technical Information Ficility, the world’s' largest collection of aerospace literature, in a Government-provided building in College Park, Md. Contract negotiations were expected to result in a cost-plus-award fee contract for approximately $3.6 million. In Fiscal Year 1965, the contract figure was $4.9 million. Mission of the facility was to acquire and organize worldwide technical reports in the aerospace sciences, indexes, abstracts, and items on space exploration; prepare announcement journals; process selected items on microfilm; and provide a central reference service to nasa and its contractors. (nasa Release 65—263)
Article in Science discussed “factors pressing France toward greater emphasis on international collaboration” in space exploration, then said: “Hence there was warm, if somewhat skeptical, interest in France when, in October, a Soviet scientific delegation brought up the idea of launching French payloads on Soviet rockets. It appeared, according to the one authoritative account of this proposal (Le Monde, 11 November), that the Soviet scientists did not envisage French requests for precise knowledge about acceleration and vibration from Soviet rockets so that the payload design could proceed, nor did they expect that French scientists would wish to be present in Soviet launch-bases and tracking stations ... it was expected that the negotiations would be long and delicate. . . .” (McElheny, Science, 12/24/65, 1700-01)
aec entered into 33 mo. contracts with Combustion Engineering, Windsor, Conn., and Atomics International, Canoga Park, Calif., for joint research and development work on the heavy water-moderated, organic-cooled reactor concept. This concept could lead to construction of large central station power plants and applications to large-scale water desalting operations, (aec Release H-12)
NASA Ames Research Center was spending over $20 million in an expansion program designed to provide the necessary research tools to stay ahead of the industry’s hardware designers, reported Robert Lindsey in Missile Space Daily. Major facets included a new advanced space flight guidance simulator costing more than $12 million, a $4.2 million life sciences building, and a $1.4 million supersonic transport flight simulator. Space-related research would account for about 75% of the center’s projects, but arc was continuing a broad-based program in atmospheric flight, ranging from V/Stol research to a current major study of hypersonic transports. (Lindsey, M/S Daily, 7/27/65, 1, 2)
Soviet Premier Aleksey Kosygin was asked in an interview at the Kremlin by New York Times associate editor James Reston if expenditures for space exploration were questioned by Soviet government officials. He replied : “I would say that man will always go on seeking a solution to the problems of the universe. There will always be funds that will be set aside to resolve the problems relating to the world and the universe; this is all to the good, if it’s purely scientific. . . . We. don’t have any contradiction in the Soviet Union between appropriations for space research and for the needs of the population. The funds appropriated are relatively small compared with the funds serving the needs of the population on education and such. They are negligible on the over-all expenditure. Space expenses do not detract from the needs of the population.” Asked if the U.S.S.R. wanted to go forward with peaceful space arrangements, Kosygin said: “We have expressed our view on this. We are in favor of peaceful, not military, uses of outer space. Now, to insure that peaceful research in space does not place too much of a burden on us, states might reduce military expenditures and channel the funds into peaceful space explorations.” Reston queried: “You have made great progress in space with the use of the most sophisticated and complicated computers and other modern science, yet your speech on Sept. 27 was highly critical of the lag in the use of modern science in Soviet industry. Why this discrepancy?” Kosygin replied: “I don’t understand your distinction between space and economic and industrial development. We judge our economy as a whole—we include all spheres. It is true that not everything is going satisfactorily in science and technology. Not everywhere are the most advanced methods being used. We are now taking all possible measures and we shall remedy this situation. For this it is necessary to utilize all the achievements of engineering thought. We are doing our utmost to insure the further rise of our economy and our technology. In four months I will make my report to the party congress on our forthcoming five-year development plan. In this plan our most advanced scientific and technical achievements will be mobilized.” (Text, NYT, 12/8/65, C20)
Scientists at NASA Lewis Research Center had successfully operated a high-field-strength cryomagnet having a volume many times larger than any previously known, NASA announced. The cryogenic magnet would provide research facilities for magnetics, solid state physics, and plasma physics. Effects of' high-strength magnetic fields on life could also be examined, using plant life, fruit flies, and small animals placed in the field, (nasa Release 65-170; lrc Release 65-38)
In New York Times Richard Witkin said F-lll variable-sweep-wing plane, intended as the mainstay of U.S. fighter forces before 1970, had developed problems with engines and with the inlets that feed air to the engines. Officials maintained that problems were normal in any development, but conceded that fewer difficulties had been anticipated because of record number of wind tunnel tests. The two prototypes tested, one of which was supersonic, had continuously run into two main difficulties: (1) air flow through compressors of engines had become disturbed, causing erratic power output; and (2) combustion in afterburner section had been suddenly stopping. Otherwise, officials contended that flight tests, including tucking wings far back for high-speed runs, had been going better than anticipated. (Witkin, NYT, 3/14/65, 58; Chic. Trib., 3/15/65)
Western Electric Company had received a $90,644,200 modification to an existing cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for research and development of Nike-X missile system, dod announced, (dod Release 3-65)
NASA announced award of $15 million contract to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. to build an additional Orbiting Astronomical Observatory. Grumman already was building three Oao spacecraft under a previously awarded contract, (nasa Release 65—154)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, told a National Space Club luncheon that he had met with nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller and had reached a formal agreement on cooperation in R&D, including Mol experiments. Discussions were also underway, he said, for joint use of NASA and DOD global range facilities—tracking station, communications, and other supporting units—in the Apollo and Mol programs. “Now we are in the beginning stages of two new ventures, the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and the c-5a large transport aircraft. . . . “Both the mol and the c—5a have great potential significance for our continuing national security. They also promise to yield a number of ‘fallout benefits’ of a scientific or economic nature. The knowledge gained from the MOL program, in addition to its possible defense applications, should also prove very useful for future manned scientific ventures into space. The C-5a transport not only will greatly increase our ability to respond to military crisis situations and other emergencies such as earthquakes or floods in remote areas, but also may prove quite attractive to the commercial airlines. . . .” General Schriever said he felt a follow-on to the b-52 was needed; that an Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft (Amsa) would have considerably longer range than a contemplated B-lll and would be superior; and that a maneuverable ferry vehicle for supplying Mol could very well come out of the Start program. (Text; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/20/65, E8; M/S Daily, 10/20/65)
S-IVB stage of the first Saturn IB launch vehicle—first piece of flight hardware from Douglas Space Systems Center at Huntington Beach—had been shipped aboard nasa barge Orion to Douglas Sacramento Test Flight Center for flight readiness testing. The stage, 58 ft. long and 21.5 ft. in dia., had single Rocketdyne J-2 engine, developing 200,000 lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 65-104)
Faa released the first two volumes of a comprehensive five-part report on the sonic boom public-reaction study conducted in Oklahoma City in 1964. Their main conclusion: weather had a greater effect in determining the strength of booms than suspected, but the effect was within a corrective capability. The first volume, “Sonic Boom Exposures During faa Community-Response Studies Over a Six-Month Period in the Oklahoma City Area,” prepared by NASA Langley Research Center, said measurements taken directly under the flight path of the supersonic fighters showed that about 80% of the booms were lower in intensity than scientists expected. About 20% equalled or exceeded the anticipated levels. “Meteorological Aspects of the Sonic Boom,” prepared by the Boeing Co., revealed that: weather had a greater effect on booms generated by planes flying less than mach 1.3 than those produced by aircraft exceeding mach 1.3; overpressures were increased by headwinds but decreased by tailwinds and crosswinds, with variations as much as 20%, particularly in the mach 1.3 range; under some atmospheric conditions, including such factors as wind, temperature, and even the time of day, sonic booms may vary from a complete cut-off with no boom heard to heavy overpressures concentrated over a small area or spread almost unlimited over a wide lateral area; turbulence had the effect of distorting booms and increasing or decreasing intensity and distribution, (faa Release 65-15; UPI, Minn. Trib., 2/12/65)
nasa Flight Research Center awarded separate lifting body study contracts to McDonnell Aircraft Co. and Northrop Norair. The two separate six-month studies would investigate a vehicle concept whose sole mission would be the basic research involved with reentry of a manned lifting body from orbital flight. Preliminary objectives included determination of problem areas and their influence on design. Both contracts were fixed price; McDonnell received $152,496 and Norair $150,000. (frc Release 11-65)
NASA’s Flight Research Center engineers had made direct comparison of the noise levels generated by the xb-70 and a 707-120B commercial jet transport under the same atmospheric conditions. NASA made the measurements as part of its general study of runway noise conditions for use in the design of a supersonic transport, (frc Release 8-65)
NASA's Convair 990 airborne research laboratory photograph of solar eclipse. First indications were that the mission was a complete success; detailed analyses of data from 13 observation projects would be made. Most obvious phenomena were large prominences on the sun, Jupiter shining brightly in the sun’s corona, and long corona streamers flashing with surprising brightness. Scientists in the mission were from Belgium, The Netherlands. Italy, Switzerland, and the United States, (nasa Release 65-178; ap, NYT, 6/1/65, 20)
The new Magnetic Field Components Test Facility at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center—which would create the precisely-controlled magnetic environment necessary for testing and calibrating spacecraft instruments intended to measure the low magnetic fields in outer space— became operational. The facility was also equipped to demagnetize the spacecraft carrying the magnetic measuring instruments, (gsfc Release G—16-651
NASA had selected the Bendix Field Engineering Corp., Owings Mills, Md., to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for continued operation, maintenance, and support services of the NASA Manned Space Flight Network of tracking stations. Contract was valued at about $36 million over two years. (NASA Release 65—48)
Tass reported that astronomers at the Vladivostok Observatory had taken clear photographs of the Ikeya-Seki comet. Iupi, Wash. Post, 11/ 12/65, C4)
NASA selected three aerospace firms to develop a concept and prepare preliminary designs for hypersonic ramjet research engine:	Garrett Corp., General Electric Co., and Marquardt Corp. Total value of first phase of contract would be about $1.5 million. During 9-mo. parallel studies, opening phase of NASA’s Hypersonic Ramjet Experiment Project, the companies w'ould prepare engine development plans that would serve as technical proposals for the second phase of the program. The ramjet engine, because of its relative fuel economy at hypersonic speeds, was expected to be useful for hypersonic transport aircraft, boosters, and spacecraft flying within the atmosphere. Flight research with the engine mounted on the X-15 aircraft was planned. Hypersonic Ramjet Experiment Project would be under the technical direction of NASA Langley Research Center, with the assistance of NASA Ames, Lewis, and Flight Research Centers, (nasa Release 65-110)
At the Seventh International Conference on Phenomena in Ionized Gases in Belgrade, NASA Lewis Research Center scientist Charles M.	Goldstein outlined the effect of collisions on a monoenergetic elec-tronbeam current in the presence of a low-density neutral scattering gas. Research had been conducted in connection with electromagnetic propulsion studies, (lrc Release 65-56)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a ten-month, $10,934,377, cost-plus-award fee contract to Mason-Rust Co. to continue support services at Michoud Operations, New Orleans, and at its Computer Operations Office in Slidell, La. (msfc Release 65-84)
A $1,260,000 contract to build an addition to Central Computer Facility at Slidell, La., had been awarded by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to Quinn Construction Co., New Orleans, La. The computer facility was used to support the Michoud Operations in New Orleans and the Mississippi Test Operations, Hancock County, Miss, (msfc Release 65-48)
NASA Ames Research Center discussed for the press the major significant advances in aeronautics and space-oriented research accomplished by the Center during 1964. Accomplishments cited were: (1) establishing feasibility of manned control of large boosters; (2) problem definition for hypersonic transport; (3) design of new takeoff and landing aid to precisely locate aircraft position on the runway; (4) design of probe vehicle to define Mars atmosphere; (5) improvement of m-2 maneuverable atmosphere entry craft; (6) discovery that Mars contamination problem is probably not severe; (7) development of system for measuring stress in humans; (8) demonstration of need for special training for jet transport pilots to combat severe air turbulence; (9) discovery in meteorite of an extraterrestrial mineral unknown on earth; (10) feasibility demonstration of moon and planet mission navigation by hand-held sextant; (11) formulation of certification requirements for supersonic transport take-off; (12) design of ducted-fan to provide efficient airflow for flight from hover to high subsonic speeds; (13) formation of organic material under Martian conditions; (14) development of a new magnetic field chamber; (15) derivation of formula for simple calculation of convective (friction) heating of spacecraft in planet atmospheres; (16) tests of radiative heating in simulated planet atmospheres; (17) improvement of techniques for prediction of heat shield performance; (18) development of a low-power, high-performance magnetometer; (19) measurements of solar wind on imp-b and OGO n; (20) feasibility demonstration of new pod for vertical-lift engines for Vtol aircraft at flight speeds up to 170 mph. (arc Release)
An accelerated reservoir light-gas gun had set a world speed record of 25,300	mph for controlled flight of a visible object, of known mass and shape, and over a known distance in a ground facility in tests at nasa Ames Research Center, Ames announced. The shot was 3,200 mph faster than the previous record. In the light-gas gun used, an explosive charge was set off in a cylinder behind a plastic piston. The explosion pushed the piston into a chamber of hydrogen gas, compressing it, and the gas in turn pushed the projectile out of the firing tube. A light gas must be used because it has low mass and would expand at the highest speed after compression. With the ability to move objects this fast, researchers could extend their knowledge of space flight problems, (arc Release 65-13; ARC Astrogram, 4/29/65, 1, 2)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, nasa Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics that “although space research, development, and operations have absorbed much of our resources within the past few years, the NASA has been and will continue to be dedicated to a strong program of aeronautical research keyed to the Nation’s needs.” He testified:	“. . . The [aeronautics] program embraces the entire spectrum of flight from lowspeed private and v/stol aircraft to hypersonic vehicles. I have already described . . . our part in the evolution of the xv-5a and F-lll aircraft, in the evaluation of supersonic transport proposals, and in the solution of jet transport rough air problems. Looking ahead to fy 1966, we are requesting $42.2 million in Research and Development for aeronautics. This figure can be separated into two categories:	one funds a broad and continuing effort in the scientific disciplines underlying advances in all areas of air transportation, civil and military; the other funds a more concentrated attack on specific advances in air transportation whose potential is identified by research in the various scientific disciplines. . . . “Throughout the aeronautics program budget, provision has been made to support the direct requests of the Department of Defense and the Federal Aviation Agency. It can be pointed out that although the Research and Development request in FY 1966 for aeronautics is $42.2 million, we expect to spend a total sum of $106.2 million in this field. The difference is accounted for by Administrative Operations and Construction of Facilities funds as well as supporting research and technology directly applicable to aeronautics in fields such as electronics, human factors, basic research, and others. Approximately 1600 direct personnel will be engaged in aeronautical research in FY 1966. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 213-269)
Soviet spaceships make their landings on terra firma, and practically everybody in the space flight business agrees that this is much more desirable than splashing down in the ocean,” wrote the Washington Evening Star. The article said that water landings by U.S. spacecraft proved that “U.S. manned spacecraft lack the capability to come back to land.” (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/7/65, A6)
First Phoebus 1a nuclear reactor test was conducted at NRDS, the reactor operating successfully at full power for 10JA min. The reactor was damaged during shutdown when the facility liquid hydrogen supply was unexpectedly exhausted. Test was part of nasa-aec Phoebus program to extend graphite reactor technology developed under the Kiwi series to higher power and temperature, ultimately leading to high-thrust nuclear engine system for space exploration. (Rover Chron.; Atomic Energy Programs, 1965, 145)
Ground test version of Saturn V’s first stage, s-ic-t, was captive fired for the 14th time at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. This was a full-duration firing in which the unit developed 7.5-million lbs. thrust for 150 sec.; it was conducted by Boeing Co., s-ic prime contractor, (msfc Release 65-301)
Life Sciences Research Laboratory dedicated at NASA Ames Research Center. The laboratory was organized into divisions for exobiology, environmental biology, and biotechnology. In the dedication address, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) said that “the work done at Ames is a reaffirmation of the avowed goals and aspirations of a world that is painfully searching for peace and hope.” Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said during the ceremonies: “This new structure represents many things. It represents efficiency and economy for it brings together a staff and associates numbering almost 250 who formerly were scattered about in 22 separate quarters. It represents a grouping of new research tools which can be used for new advances in science and technology; but most important, I believe, this Life Sciences Laboratory, placed within the complex of physical laboratories, represents the interdisciplinary approach to solving new problems.” (nasa Release 65-394; Text; arc Astro gram, 1/6/66, 1)
Excerpts from comments on management of research and development activity by Dr. L. R. Hafstad, director of General Motors Research and Defense Research Laboratories, appeared in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “In the modern laboratory the basic research activity is essentially an information-gathering intelligence operation. The operatives must be trained to speak, and allowed to speak, the language of the area on which they are expected to keep informed, and to interact with other researchers in the same area. It is this apparently excessive freedom of action on the part of employees which makes for the concern of students of administration about the management of research, or the lack thereof. My conclusion is that most of this problem evaporates once it is realized that a director of research directs the research program—but certainly not the individual researchers. “The partnership of science, engineering and industry is really a rather new concept developed since the turn of the century and only now reaching maturity. An even newer concept is the partnership of science, engineering, and government. A problem we must face up to —whether we represent industry, government or science—is the effective use of research in creating a better future for everyone. “There is never a dearth of projects—the difficulty is to pick worthwhile projects. It is here that I feel that the discipline of the profit and loss statement is essential. . . .” (Av Wk., 4/19/65, 21)
First full-duration static test of Saturn V first stage at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center.
Creation of an Institute for Earth Sciences to conduct advanced and applied research in seismology, geomagnetism, and geodesy, was announced by Dr. Robert M. White, Administrator of the Environmental Science Services Administration (essa). Under the direction of Dr. Leroy R. Alldredge, the Institute would actively seek new knowledge of the properties of the earth’s interior and develop methods of using this knowledge to predict earthquakes, (essa Release 65-7) Week of November 21: msc remote site flight controller teams for the Gemini vil/vi mission began deploying to the seven locations around the world where they would exercise detailed real-time mission control during the upcoming flights of the two Gemini spacecraft, (msc Release 65-109)
Telephone calls between two Moscow city exchanges would be routed soon over a three-mile-long laser beam, the newspaper Trud reported. The laser link, developed by the Soviet Central Scientific Research Institute of Communications, was already in experimental use. (NYT, 10/31/65, 26)
Representatives of 27 firms interested in providing computer services to support NASA Michoud Assembly Facility and NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s Mississippi Test Facility attended a pre-proposal conference at the New Orleans installation. The computer services contract, which would cover a one-year period with three one-year renewal options, would include operation or maintenance of about 20 digital and analog computers, a data transmission system, a data reduction system, and related electronic equipment, (msfc Release 65-211)
A five-week technical assessment of supersonic transport air-frame designs proposed by the Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. was begun by an 82-member Government technical team with representatives from NASA, faa, usaf, and usn. Formed under the FAA Director of Supersonic Transport Development b/g J. G. Maxwell (usaf), the group would emphasize operational performance of the proposed configurations in terms of program objectives for a safe, economical aircraft compatible with present airports, airline operating requirements, and engine noise and sonic boom criteria. Performance characteristics of each design would be examined in detail, both analytically and through wind tunnel tests at nasa Langley Research Center and NASA Ames Research Center. Results of the assessment would provide guidance for further contractor programing in the present detailed design and hardware test phase of the Sst development program which called for prototype construction to begin by the end of 1966. (faa Release 65-110)
The first industry-produced Saturn I first stage (s—I—8) arrived at Cape Kennedy aboard the NASA barge Promise after a six-day trip from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. The stage, which was 80 ft. long and 21.5 ft. in diameter, had been built by the Chrysler Corp. (msfc Release 65^16; ap, NYT, 3/1/65, 12)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced successful test of a large-scale facility to investigate the boiling of liquid sodium. Test was just one milestone in the complex and extensive research being conducted on the properties and engineering performance of liquid metals. Liquid alkali metals, having excellent heat-transfer capabilities and large liquid range, were being considered as working fluids in future advance electric power systems in spacecraft, (lrc Release 65-46)
dod Advanced Research Projects Agency had selected three contractors for research programs in the materials field: Martin Co., awarded $1 million, subcontract with the Univ. of Denver and conduct a three-year program on the high energy rate of forming metals; Union Carbide Corp., with $2.5 million, would subcontract with Case Institute of Technology and the Bell Aerospace Corp. and conduct a three-year research program on carbon composite materials; Monsanto Research Corp., awarded approximately $2 million, would subcontract with Washington Univ. of St. Louis, Mo., and conduct a two-year research program on high-performance composites, (dod Release 193-65)
A new alloy of hafnium and tantalum had been developed which could withstand temperatures as high as 4000° F. It would raise temperature limits formerly placed on such engine components as nozzles and throat inserts by the lack of reliable protective coatings. Application of the alloy was developed on a NASA contract by the IIT Research Institute, (nasa Release 65-365)
Brig. Gen. Julian H. Bowman (usaf, Ret.) was appointed Special Assistant to the NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. General Bowman would handle special management problems in areas such as program manpower and organization, career management, and industry relationships. (NASA Hq. Bull., 7/20/65)
A Group Achievement Award was presented at NASA Langley Research Center’s annual awards ceremony to Eugene Schult, Head of the Scout Project Office, in recognition of “the outstanding Scout vehicle success record during the past eighteen months.” (LaRC Release)
Evaluating the controversy on manned versus unmanned exploration of space, Robert Colburn said in International Science and Technology: “I see no meaningful issue between (unmanned) space science and (manned) space exploration. The real question is what sort of space science contributes best to the success of space exploration. More concretely, the question is not whether to investigate the moon with an unmanned Surveyor shot or a manned Apollo; it’s whether an extra Surveyor mission now would significantly reduce the cost or danger of the eventual Apollo mission and, if not, whether it may be wasteful to send a Surveyor now when the same information can be had more easily later, once there is a man on the moon to help.” Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.), member of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, inserted Colburn’s editorial in the Congressional Record. (CR, 9/14/65) During September: NASA’s Technology Utilization Div. published a 66-page illustrated book outlining potential uses of space telemetry techniques in the biological and medical fields. (NASA Release 65-309)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.), speaking on the floor of the House, compared the states in distribution of Federal research and development funds per scientist employed: “Of the seven states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin only Illinois exceeds the national average of approximately $25,000 in research and development funds per scientist employed in educational institutions in this area. Even then this one state exceeds the average distribution by only $4,600. The shares of other states range from a high of $15,000 per scientist in Michigan down to only $9,000 in my own state of Indiana. In between these we find Minnesota, $13,000; Ohio, $11,000; and Wisconsin, $10,900. “Leading the national list is New Mexico with $163,000 per scientist followed by Nevada with $109,000 and California with $63,000 per scientist. At the very bottom of the list is Maine with only $4,000 per scientist. “. . . this matter of the uneven geographic distribution of Federal research and development funds is involving our national interest.” {CR, 3/18/65, 5186)
Continuation of Weather Bureau-Navy Project Stormfury during the 1965 hurricane season was announced. Hurricanes and cumulus clouds would be seeded to investigate the feasibility of modifying clouds and tropical storms. The hurricane research program began in 1961, included experiments on hurricanes Esther (1961) and Beulah (1963) and on tropical clouds (1963). Objectives for 1965 were to intensify the hurricane-seeding experiments and to begin new experiments on hurricane rainbands. (Commerce Dept. Release wb 65-100)
Fred P. Strother, in charge of requirements for Boy Scout merit badges, announced that details of a space exploration merit badge were being worked out with NASA. (NYT, 3/6/65, 27)	*
A 707 jet transport, owned and fitted by the Boeing Co. with extensive instrumentation, including an analog computer and a 15-ft. needle-like nose extension to make it an in-flight dynamic simulator, had arrived at NASA Langley Research Center for a four-month program of supersonic transport experiments. The research program would assess simulated landing approaches with both the fixed-wing and variable-sweep concepts, including conditions such as emergency use of cruise sweep-back during a landing. (NASA Release 65—233)
Educators from various elements of nasa and a group of 65 lecturers employed in the NASA Spacemobile program began a week-long training session at NASA Langley Research Center. (LaRC Release)
NASA Langley Research Center scientists Harry W. Carlson and Francis E. McLean said that for the first time there was hope for a significant reduction in the sonic booms expected from proposed supersonic airliners. A plane flying faster than the speed of sound compresses the air around it into shock waves trailing from the nose, wings, engine inlets, tail, and any other protuberances. Near the plane there would be separate waves, producing “near field effects.” Traced on a graph to show changes in pressure, the waves would make a jagged line resembling the letter “N.” As the waves traveled toward the ground, they would coalesce into two powerful waves—one appearing to trail from the nose and one from the tail—producing “far-field effects” also shaped as a letter “N” in terms of pressure patterns. The sharp peaks of this N-shaped wave were suspected of causing most of the annoyance and structural damage possible from sonic booms. Carlson and McLean discovered that planes the length and shape of supersonic airliner designs would not fly far enough away from the earth for their far-field effects to be felt on the ground, leaving only the less bothersome near-field effect to be taken into account. It was hoped that this new finding would mean that designs currently submitted to the Government in the design competition for supersonic transport, or minor refinements of them, would fit within Government-imposed sonic boom limitations and that still further improvement through design changes would bring further decreases in the boom. Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, LaRC Director, called what had been learned “significant new knowledge” and said it could, under the best of circumstances, “have great significance.” He pointed out that the best of circumstances were seldom found in designing an airplane— particularly the supersonic transport, which he said was “at least as sophisticated technically as the Apollo.” (Clark, NYT, 1/14/65, 1, 12)
Soviet pilot Natasha Prokhanova, flying an e-22 supersonic jet trainer, climbed to 79,000-ft. altitude, exceeding the world altitude record for women of 56,073 ft. set by U.S. pilot Jacqueline Cochran in 1961 at Edwards afb in a Northrop t-38 Talon supersonic jet trainer.	(NYT, 5/31/65, 24)
Remarkable adaptability of some fungi and bacteria to life in atmosphere containing high concentrations of ammonia and methane was discovered by Dr. S. M. Siegel and Miss Constance Guimarro of the Union Carbide Research Institute and reported in Icarus. The report suggested there might therefore be life on Jupiter, where extremes of temperature and a dense atmosphere of these noxious gases would seem to make life-forms resembling those on earth unlikely. The research was supported by nasa contract. (Schmeck, NYT, 5/12/65; Icarus, iv/1965, .37—40) During May: Carl Sagan, Harvard Univ. and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, and Sidney Coleman, Lyman Laboratory of Physics, Harvard Univ., reviewed the need for sterilization of Mars-bound spacecraft to protect that planet from contamination. Using probability theory, Sagan and Coleman specified formulas to provide predictions of onboard-experiment and Mars-contamination relationships. (.A&A, 5/65, 22-27)
NASA announced it had approved a grant of $100,000 for establishment of a Technical) Utilization Program at the Univ. of Minnesota. Along with funds to be provided by private business concerns, the NASA grant would support the development and experimental testing of newT ways in which developments in space science and technology could be rapidly transferred to and assimilated by business and industry. North Star Research and Development Institute would participate in part of the program. (NASA Release 65-69)
Three Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched vapor trail experiments from Wallops Station, Va., as nasa completed a five-shot, two-day series of experiments to measure wind direction and velocity over the Atlantic coast as part of its meteorological research program. Payloads also contained instrumentation to compare electron densities with wind dispersion and to measure electron temperatures. Experiments were conducted for the GCA Corp. under contract to NASA. (Wallops Release 65-39)
mariner iv’s ion chamber experiment failed completely, Jet Propulsion Laboratory officials reported. Count-rate of the Geiger-Mueller tube portion of the experiment had become abnormal in February. The experiment had been designed to measure proton and electron radiation. Otherwise the spacecraft was operating normally; all other high-energy radiation detectors aboard were continuing their interplanetary measurements. In its 110th day of flight, mariner iv was traveling 27,743 mph relative to earth and was 35,000,004 mi. from earth. It had traveled more than 178,000,000 mi. (nasa Release 65-90)
Army Corps of Engineers awarded Fisher Construction Co. a NASA-funded $1,497,728 fixed-price contract for construction of Lunar Mission and Space Exploration Facility at Manned Spacecraft Center. (dod Release 220-65)
dod had asked NASA to consider using Minuteman I missiles scheduled to be removed from their silos, as launch vehicles, Missiles and Rockets reported. NASA Hq. transferred study to Langley Research Center. LaRC was expected to complete its feasibility investigation in three to four weeks. (M&R, 4/26/65, 7; LaRC)
Officials at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory confirmed discovery by two Japanese astronomers of a new comet, Ikeya-Seki, named after its discoverers, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 9/22/65)
Soviet President Anastas Mikoyan sent President Johnson congratulations on the Gemini Gt-3 space flight, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/25/65)
Col. Jack Bollerud (usaf) was appointed Deputy Director of Space Medicine, Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA Hq. He would be deputy to Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace n. (nasa Release 65-207)
Over 50 security guards at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center—members of the International Union of United Plant Guard Workers of America —went on strike over wage and contract issues with their employer Wackenhut Services, Inc. Wackenhut, operating at GSFC under contract, provided additional guards; there was no breakdown in security. Some 250 guards at NASA test sites near Las Vegas, Nev., also went on strike against Wackenhut. They were members of a separate local union. (Wash. Post, 7/2/65, A3; DJNS, Balt. Sun, 7/2/65; Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/65)
NASA and usaf announced agreement for extended XB-70 flight research beginning next spring in joint project to' obtain supersonic operational flight information impossible to get in ground facilities. Among the items of interest were skin friction, stability and control, drag, boundary layer flow, air loads, thermal environment, sonic boom, landing, and crew workload, (nasa Release 65-393)
A newly-created Manpower Utilization and Administration Office, headed by Keith Wible, became operational at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Wible had been assistant manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility from November 1961 to February 1965. (msfc Release 65-181)
NASA had awarded an $8,150,833 contract modification to General Electric Co. for supporting the Computation Laboratory at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, (msfc Release 65-169)
Arthur D. Little, Inc., released a 54-page study entitled “Strategies for Survival in the Aerospace Industry,” which predicted that in the next five years the production portion of the defense budget would decline about 30 per cent and research and development would decline about 15 per cent. The report recommended that “in view of a declining market and fewer opportunities within the market, the aerospace industry’s principal objective within the next few years should be to achieve stability, rather than to search for growth opportunities.” (Duggan, N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/12/65)
$13-million, 140-ft.-wide radiotelescope, one of the largest in the world, was dedicated at Green Bank, W. Va., by the National Radio Astronomy Observatory. It would be able to amplify radio emissions from deep space. (Wash. Post, 10/14/65, A15)
