usaf XB-70 No. 2, flying at 2,000 mph, reached 70,000-ft. altitude for three minutes in 112-min. test flight from Edwards afb to determine how aircraft would handle during increasingly longer periods at top speed. Flight broke record set by XB-70 No. 1 Oct. 15, 1965. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/4/66)
Five-man Observatory Class Spacecraft Review Board had been appointed by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications. Robert F. Garbarini, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Engineering), would head the board, established to "study all phases of design, development, testing and space operations procedures of the orbiting observatory spacecraft.” Other Review Board members were: F. John Bailey, Chief, Flight Safety Office, Msc; Jack N. James, Director for Lunar and Planetary Programs, jpl; Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director, erc; and Francis B. Smith, Assistant Director, LaRC. (nasa Release 66-91)
In answer to charge that the "rush of Jodrell Bank Observatory to distribute Luna IX pictures and of scientists both in the U.S. and U.K. to comment on the pictures can only be considered a breach of ethics [see Feb. 4 and 5],” Sir Bernard Lovell said in an open letter in Science: "We did not 'rush’ to distribute the Luna IX pictures in advance of the Russians. Our pictures came off the facsimile machine several hours after the Russians had convened a large press conference in Moscow to show the pictures which Luna IX had transmitted the previous night. Why they did not do so, or publish them in Izvestia the following morning remains a mystery. As for commenting on the pictures before the Russians, my only remarks were that the lunik seemed to be resting on a hard surface with little evidence of dust, and these comments had previously been made by scientists in Moscow. Any suggestion that we published a scientific analysis of the results before the Russians is absurd.” (Science, 3/25/66, 1477)
L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth flew X-15 No. 2 for 81 sec. in test to measure stability and control of X-15 with ventral fin attached. He reached 3,689 mph (mach 5.43) and 99,000-ft. altitude. Flight was 158th in nasa/usaf X-15 research program, (frc; X-15 Proj. Off.)
Arthur G. Wimer, Jr., assistant deputy chief of staff for science and technology in the Air Research and Development Command, was named chief scientist for AFSC, replacing Dr. Bernhard H. Goethert who had resigned to become director of Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute. (afsc Release 206.66)
Pratt & Whitney Div.’s entry in Sst engine competition—the JTF-17A—was operated for the first time at p&w’s Florida Research and Development Center, W. Palm Beach, Fla. Twin-spool turbofan "was started and operated for the programmed time.” (p&w Release, 4/1/66)	_
New NASA-developed technique for making biomedical checks on test pilots was being used at Univ. of Kansas Medical Center. Method, which replaced bulky sensors with bare wires acting as their own electrodes, permitted doctors to send instrumented patient home after office visit and record biomedical data while patient resumed normal activities. Wires were applied in three-minute operation. Data obtained in this way—rather than while patient was on operating table—were considered more meaningful by some physicians. Technique was conceived by Dr. James A. Roman, chief of biomedical research at NASA Flight Research Center, and introduced to the Univ. of Kansas by Midwest Research Institute, mri was under contract to nasa’s Technology Utilization Div. in its program of transferring aerospace technology to the public, (nasa Release 66-116)
Dr. Winston E. Kock, first director of ebc, had resigned to return to Bendix Corp., effective Oct. 1. James C. Elms, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, would replace him. (nasa Release 66-247)
International Union of Electrical Workers acceded to Government request to remove pickets at ksc from entrance gates used by building trades workers. Electricians had struck for higher wages April 18 after expiration of contract with United Technology Center. (NYT, 4/21/66, 27) April 20: H. Julian Allen, Director of NASA Ames Research Center, was among 27 elected to National Academy of Engineering "in recognition of their outstanding contributions to engineering theory and practice or to the pioneering of new and developing fields of technology.” (nae Release, 4/20/66)	_
Sharing of research with U.S. industry under NASA’s technology utilization program was commended in Petroleum Today article by Clay Hor-nick. December 1965 Conference on Selected Technology for the Petroleum Industry at Lewis Research Center, Hornick said, had encouraged utilization of space research discoveries in fields of combustion, lubrication, and nuclear resonance. (Hornick, Petroleum Today, Summer 1966, 16-19)
Multi-foil high-performance insulation system to reduce supercold propellant "boil off” in space had been successfully tested for 96 hrs. at msfc in a vacuum chamber at pressures approaching the vacuum of space. Since liquid hydrogen propellant, already used in Saturn IB and Saturn V upper stages, was being considered as a propellant on longer-duration missions, cryogenic technology was being extended at msfc to meet the needs of future space exploration programs, (msfc Release 66-41)
Of President Johnson’s State of the Union message, Robert Hotz said in Aviation Week: "The President’s statement that he will 'propose a program to construct and to flight test a new supersonic transport plane that will fly three times the speed of sound, in excess of 2,000	mph.’ came as somewhat of a surprise in view of the stretched out program he had been sponsoring. Apparently, this statement means that some funds for actual prototype supersonic transport construction will be requested in Fiscal 1967, although the size of this request may dismay the management entrusted with the task of building the prototype in time to remain competitive with the Anglo-French Concorde.” (Hotz, Av. WL, 1/17/66, 21)
Data transmitted from NASA’s pioneer vii spacecraft (launched from etr Aug. 17) to Johannesburg dsn station indicated spacecraft had penetrated earth’s magnetic tail at 3.25 million mi. from earth, nasa Ames Research Center announced. Spacecraft measurements of solar wind flux suggested pioneer vii had emerged from and repenetrated tail several times, pioneer vi (launched Dec. 16, 1965) had observed that solar wind does not flow from the sun in straight lines but blows magnetic tail from side to side; this "flapping” was reason spacecraft entered tail several times, (arc pao, 9/26/66)
Heinz Kaminski, chief of the Bochum Observatory, West Germany, said the emergency abort March 16 of the gemini viii mission showed that control systems onboard the spacecraft as well as on the ground were versatile enough to cope with even the most serious trouble: "The Americans now have realistic data on space emergencies and. . .the mission has been very successful. The emergency has been a blessing in disguise.” (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 3/18/66)
Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko, member of Soviet delegation to iaf Congress, told press conference in Madrid that U.S.S.R. was "doing very serious preparatory work” for another manned mission that would be "a serious new step in space exploration.” He disclosed no details but indicated mission might include extravehicular activity. Asked why there had been no Soviet manned spaceflight since March 18, 1965, voskhod ii mission, Gazenko explained it reflected Soviet desire to make a major advance with each flight rather than repeat proved techniques. (Wilford, NYT, 10/15/66, 11)
Calculations by computer at Astronomisches Rechen Institut, Heidelberg, Germany, and Yale Univ. Observatory had helped astronomers rediscover Tempel-Tuttle Comet responsible for Leonid meteor showers each November. Comet had been found 100 yrs. ago and not seen again until summer 1965. Meteor shower was expected to be spectacular in November 1966; it would occur close to time of comet’s return to vicinity of earth. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 6/19/66, 26)
"The lunar research program by means of Luna 9 has been fulfilled and successfully concluded,” Tass reported after LUNA ix had completed 48 hrs. of active life transmitting a total of 10 panoramic photographs of lunar surface. Several hours after the announcement, jodrell Bank Experimental Station reported it had received 2H more photos of poor quality. Third picture transmitted by luna ix’s instrument package Feb. 4 was shown on Moscow television. During transmission, camera was inclined toward horizon and sun was to the east. Part of spacecraft was visible in the lower left-hand corner of the picture and another part in the lower light, but out of focus because of short distance from camera lens. Soviet astronomer Nikolay Barabashov told Tass photographs confirmed his theory that moon’s surface was "highly pitted, porous and probably covered with numerous rocks and fragments.” luna ix "has proved beyond doubt that the upper layer of lunar soil is a spongelike rough-textured mass scattered with individual sharp-edged fragments of various sizes.” (NYT, 2/7/66, 1, 15; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/7/66, Al, A5)
nasa appointed George J. Howick Director of Technology Utilization Div. He would succeed Dr. Richard L. Lesher, Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization who, in addition to his other duties, had been serving as Acting Director of the Technology Utilization Div. Howick was formerly manager of industrial technology services for Midwest Research Institute, (nasa Release 66-5)
Prof. Emilio Segre of Univ. of California, Berkeley, reviewed postwar physics in Science-. ". . . many illustrious men of science, physicists in particular, have made the mistake of thinking that the end of physics was in sight. They have consistently been proved wrong by the opening up of completely new fields. . . . Space exploration and the study of the interior of the earth are new departures. Here we do not yet see any new phenomena, but we are penetrating in unexplored regions. It is possible that these regions will not yield anything extraordinary, such as extraterrestrial life. However, they present phenomena on scales impossible to reproduce in the laboratory, and a change in orders of magnitude is a well-known source of surprises. Furthermore, we must not forget that particle physics originated .with the study of cosmic rays.” (Science, 3/4/66, 1052-5)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, who directed the development of usaf’s strategic missile force, would retire this summer, the White House announced. General Schriever, retiring for personal reasons, would be replaced Aug. 31 by L/G James Ferguson, usaf Deputy Chief of Staff for Research and Development. (AP, NYT, 4/23/66, 5; Norris, Wash. Post, 4/23/66, A2)
25 scientific experiments for sixth Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (ogo-f), scheduled for launch into polar orbit in 1968, were selected hy Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, on recommendation of ossa’s Space Science Steering Committee. Fifty-five scientists at U.S. and foreign universities, industrial firms, and Government laboratories would make correlative experiments of near-earth space phenomena based on data from the ogo-f experiments, (nasa Release 66-36)
On the floor of the Senate, Sen. Daniel B. Brewster (D-Md.) paid tribute to the late Hugh L. Dryden and proposed "that Wallops Island be renamed Dryden Island, as^an appropriate memorial to his immense contribution to space exploration.” Dr. Dryden was born on the Maryland Eastern Shore in Pocomoke City. (CR, 1/19/66, 583)
ComSatCorp signed agreements to purchase 210-acre site in Montgomery County, Md., for $7- to $ 10-million Research and Development Center. Construction would begin in 1967. (ComSatCorp Release)
"Nobody has yet found any space goals that will stir the Europeans the way manned space flight and the race toward a lunar landing have generated tremendous technical impetus in the U.S. and U.S.S.R.,” Robert Hotz reported in Aviation Week. "If new fomulae can be found to fit changing European requirements, the prospects for applying the spearhead technology of the aerospace industry will never be brighter. For the United States, this will require a more realistic government policy in permitting more first-line technology to be exported to our allies. For Europe, it will require a more realistic appraisal of how its technical resources can be applied to compete successfully in the world market.” (Hotz, Av.Wk., 9/5/66, 21)
Helicopter-like atmosphere-entry-and-descent system employing unpowered rotor was undergoing wind tunnel testing at ARC as means of returning to earth from space. System could land on any solid, level surface and return vehicles of wide range of shapes from orbit; most of the lift would be supplied by auto-rotor and not by aerodynamic shape of vehicle. In orbit, blades for rotor system would be folded and stowed. On approaching earth, blades would be released and passage through atmosphere would start them turning, (nasa Release 66-217)
nasa oso II Orbiting Solar Observatory, activated by gsfc officials, transmitted scientific and engineering data from four of its eight experiments. Launched from etr Feb. 3, 1965, oso n had exceeded its six-month life expectancy by 50% before it was turned off Nov. 3. (gsfc Release G-10-66)
124,000-mi.-long cluster of sunspots which could affect weather and radio and television signals was detected by West Germany’s Bochum Observatory. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/3/66, B7)
Arnold Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs and U.S. representative to the Working Group of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, supported U.S.S.R. proposal for an international conference in 1967 to commemorate the first decade of space exploration, further international cooperation in space, and promote the practical benefits of man’s exploration of space. He suggested four topics for the conference: (1) appraisal of contributions of scientific research in space to practical applications and international cooperation; (2) opportunities for participation in space exploration through space research and cooperative projects; (3) applications and economic implications of space research; and (4) impact of space exploration on education. (SBD, 1/27/66, 170)
nasa and dod signed memorandum of agreement establishing Manned Space Flight Experiments Board (msfeb) to coordinate scientific, technological or nonmilitary experiments on dod and NASA flight missions. Board would recommend approval or disapproval, assignment, and relative priority of experiments submitted, after screening, by sponsoring nasa or dod Program Offices. Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, would act as chairman; other members would be Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology; Daniel J. Fink, dod Deputy Director for Strategic and Space Systems; and Gen, Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander. (Text; nasa nmi 1154.4, 4/27/66)
nasa Langley Research Center would negotiate $450,000 study contract with Martin Co. for 11-mo. study of "costs, crew size, and complexity of a flight research program using a manned lifting body vehicle.” In conducting the study, the firm would be required to consider an HL-10 lifting-body concept capable of carrying one, two, four, six, or eight crew members. HL-10 was considered representative of advanced lifting entry vehicles. nasa had specified Titan II, Titan in, and Saturn IB as potential launch vehicles. For study purposes, Rogers Dry Lake at Edwards afb would be a probable landing site, (nasa Release 66-82; LaHC Release)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Business Council in Washington, D.C., that "so far as overall manned space flight manpower is concerned, we have passed our peak” in engineering, we’re "reaching our peak in manufacturing,” and we’re "at our peak in total manpower costs.” He added: "One of the anomalies of the space program is that we must begin to 'go out of business’ before we fly our first operational vehicle. ... By the time manned flights begin, the employment level will be quite low in comparison with the peak, which occurred in 1965. . . .” Commenting on post-Apollo plans, he said: "The budget for the coming fiscal year permits nasa to hold open the option for a program to procure additional flight vehicles beyond those now programmed, so as to employ the Apollo hardware and capabilities at least through 1971. If we do not exercise this option, in the decision for the [FY] 1968 budget we will have to begin a phase down of the manned space flight activities and the 'mothballing’ of some of our facilities.” (Text)
Astronomers in six European countries—Denmark, Sweden, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, and West Germany—had agreed to share the expense of constructing $7-million observatory on Lasilla, a mountain peak several hundred miles north of Santiago, Chile. (Reuters, NYT, 4/2/66, 27; Reuters, Wash. Post, 4/2/66, A16)
Dr. Jan H. Oort, recipient of Columbia Univ.’s 1966 Vetlesen Award for his work in earth sciences, told Washington Post that Univ. of Leiden Observatory, which he directed, was building world’s largest radiotelescope. A one-mile-long row of twelve 83-ft.-dia. parabolic disks in a remote area of the Netherlands, device would enable Oort and his colleagues to extend their explorations beyond earth’s galaxy. 1968 was scheduled completion date. (Wash. Post, 12/18/66, B19)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, after conferring with President Johnson, told newsmen at the Texas White House that there was "considerable evidence” that U.S.S.R. was building and deploying an antiballistic missile system around its cities, which might require an increase in U.S. offensive capacity. He said the Administration would probably recommend to Congress that U.S. begin production and deployment of Poseidon missile—a large submarine-launched missile with greater power to penetrate sophisticated defense system than Polaris missile. The Secretary reported that no decision had yet been made on deployment of Nike-X antimissile missile, on which $500 million had already been spent for research and development. (Semple, Jr., NYT, 11/11/66, 1, 19; Wilson, Wash. Post, 11/11/66, Al, A10; Horner, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/11/66, Al)	.
On floor of House, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) paid tribute to surveyor I and Gemini ix-A mission successes and said they were possible because of "the unity of purpose that exists between the aerospace industry and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.” (CR, 6/15/66)
nasa extended for one year a contract with Documentation, Inc., to operate its College Park, Md., Scientific and Technical Information Facility •—containing world’s largest collection of aerospace literature—during FY 1967 at cost of $5,150,000. Monitored by NASA Hq. Scientific and Technical Information Div., contractor would also operate Selective Dissemination of Information Program, using computer techniques to notify nasa scientists and engineers individually of new developments of direct interest to their work, (nasa Release 66-227)
Fred J. Drinkwater III, aerospace research engineer, scientist, and test pilot at NASA Ames Research Center, received the Flight Safety Foundation’s Richard Hansford Burroughs Test Pilot Award for his "significant contributions to the safety and efficiency of flight testing.” Award was established by United Aircraft Corp. (Av. Wk., 1/3/66, 13)
Some 1,000 meteors a minute were recorded at height of Leonid shower by Northwestern Univ.’s Observatory near Las Cruces, N. Mex., Dr. J. Allen Hynek reported. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/18/66, 39M)
Reports by Volunteer Flight Officers Network—new tracking system in which 22,000 commercial pilots on 51 airlines searched the skies for reentering space hardware-—had proved valuable to Smithsonian Institution’s Astrophysical Observatory and usaf in improving computer methods and clearing records. Network was founded by amateur astronomer Herbert E. Roth, director of Denver Moonwatch team. (Clark, NYT, 9/4/66, 68)
New York Univ. announced completion of New York Univ.-NASA aerospace laboratory in Bronx was scheduled for June 1966. One-story, 15,000-sq.-ft. facility constructed with $582,000 NASA grant would include wind tunnel capable of duplicating speeds of up to 14 times the speed of sound for four seconds; models of supersonic transports, spacecraft, and other advanced aerospace designs would be tested there. (NYT, 3/16/66, 55)
usaf awarded Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., $46,000 contract to continue studying methods of eliminating six-minute communications blackout caused when friction of the atmosphere envelops reentering spacecraft in a ball of hot, electrically charged gases. Dr. Ronald Row, Sylvania Electronic Systems Applied Research Laboratory, told the New York Times in a telephone interview of the development of a device to simulate the flow of charged gases around typical spacecraft antenna. He said Sylvania was considering shortening pulses of signals so they could penetrate gases or covering antennas with plastic or ceramic shrouds that would shield them from gases and heat but still permit radio signals to penetrate. (Wilford, NYT, 3/7/66, 19) During week of March 6: Possibility that residents of communities afflicted by jet noise might develop psychotic symptoms because their dreams were interrupted at night was suggested by Dr. Julius Buchwald, psychiatrist, and Dr. Howard M. Bogard, psychologist, at a hearing held by New York State Assembly’s Mental Hygiene Committee. Dr. Buchwald said that everybody dreams at least five times a night. If a person is awakened and prevented from having his dreams, psychotic symptoms from mild to "more severe” could occur, including paranoidal delusions, psychoses, hallucinations, and suicidal and homicidal impulses. Dr. Bogard said persons prevented from dreaming would "tend toward true psychoses.” He urged study of whether residents near airports "lose out on dream time,” whether such communities become "disoriented” by people leaving, and whether family life is disrupted because of interruptions of ordinary communications. (Hudson, NYT, 3/13/66, 66)
nasa Langley Research Center awarded a $5-million contract to Virginia Associated Research Center to operate nasa Space Radiation Effects Laboratory—a $15-million facility established by LaRC for research in support of national programs in space technology—through mid-1970. (LaRC Release)
NASA Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr reached 102-mi. (165km.) altitude in GSFC-Princeton Univ. Observatory experiment to study ultraviolet radiation from the star Epsilon Canis Majoris. Although spectrograph recording was limited by rocket’s low altitude, good spectral resolution was obtained and wavelength limit was extended shortward to lines never before observed, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Editorial comment on U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement on space law treaty announced Dec. 8. New York Times: "No one has yet demonstrated that there would be any military advantage to placing bombs either in orbit or on celestial bodies. But there is a clear need both for space law and for reducing the wasteful competition in space exploration. The ability of Moscow and Washington to reach agreement . . . offers hope of further East-West cooperation on space problems.” (NYT, 12/10/66, 36C) Washington Daily News: ". .. reason and peacefulness have prevailed. And we will all benefit. There will be no military bases or forts, no testing of weapons and tactics—nor their threat or expense. And no claims to territory in space, and thus no arguments and battles over conflicting claims.” (Wash. Daily News, 12/10/66) Washington Post: ". . . the treaty can be applauded for the good that it has achieved as of today; and it can be praised for the larger good that it will do tomorrow when the practical aspects of space relations have become infinitely more pressing. The world will surely have occasion to look back to this day as one that set the nations on the right path and on which the great powers made a wise decision to shun the military exploitation of celestial bodies and of outer space for narrow, nationalistic purposes.” (Wash. Post, 12/10/66)
Proposal for an "international research program for the establishment of contact with extraterrestrial civilizations” was sent to International Astronomical Union by unidentified Soviet astronomers, Tass reported. The scientists believed search for extraterrestrial life should concentrate first on radiation from stars within 1,000-light-yr. radius from the three nearest galaxies. Kommunist, party’s major theoretical journal, said that question of the existence of other civilizations, and the establishment of contact with them was one of three "fundamental problems” confronting astrophysics. (Zorza, Wash. Post, 2/5/66, A7; AP, NYT, 2/3/66, 9)
Dr. Ivan L. Bennett, Jr., Deputy Director of White House’s Office of Science and Technology, warned in speech at seminar on Research in the Service of Man in Oklahoma City that unless scientists "educated” the President and "other intelligent, concerned laymen” about the applicability of their work, their fields of research would suffer. Science, he said, could no longer hope to exist "through some mystique, without constraints or scrutiny in terms of material goals, and isolated from the competition for allocation of resources which are finite.” (Sullivan, NYT, 10/25/66, 78M)
nasa Lewis Research Center had awarded General Dynamics’ Convair Div. a $15,565,331, fixed-price contract to fabricate and assemble five additional Centaur stages for future space missions, (nasa Release 66-253)
LaRC awarded 7-mo. study contracts, valued at $390,000 each, to Northrop Corp. and Fairchild-Hiller Corp. to design V/Stol aircraft for research on handling qualities and operation during instrument approach in the terminal area. Aircraft would be used by NASA and usaf to gather flight research information necessary to improve operation of V/Stol jet aircraft in hovering and transition speed range. (nasa Release 66-259)
Independent Offices Appropriations Bill H.R. 14921 for FY 1967 was reported to the House and scheduled for floor action May 10. Appropriations Committee recommended $4,245,000,000 for NASA research and development, compared to $4,248,235,000 authorized by House; $75,000,000 for construction of facilities, compared to $94,419,000 authorized by House; and $630,000,000 for administrative operations, compared to $644,210,150 authorized by House. Total recommendation was $4,950,000,000, compared to $4,986,864,150 authorized by House. (Text; nasa lar V/75, 5/5/66)
Gov. Edmund Brown of California told aerospace executives meeting in Los Angeles of plans to create state-level Office of Science and Technology to provide liaison between Government and industry in using aerospace skills to solve civilian problems. Five state contracts had been let for preliminary study of the problems, using the aerospace "systems engineering” approach. Brown said state’s studies "not only demonstrated that the systems analysis concept would work” but also that "in some cases it was the only concept that would cut through the red tape and the customs arising from generations of solving social problems in the same old ways.” (Sederberg, L.A. Times, 8/26/66; CR, 8/29/66, 20129-30)
First new comet in 1966 was discovered by Stephen Kilston, recent Harvard Univ. graduate, at Lick Observatory, San Jose, Calif., and confirmed Aug. 9 by Central Telegram Bureau, Smithsonian Astro-physical Observatory. Named for its discoverer, Comet Kilston had a magnitude of plus 10.6 and could be seen in the constellation Hercules, apparently moving southeast. (AP, NYT, 8/10/66, 5; AP, Wash. Post, 8/10/66, A5; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/10/66, B4)
usaf pilots Col. Robert L. Stephens and L/Col. Walter F. Daniel received official certificates from President Johnson for establishing three absolute and six jet-class world records May 1, 1965, in YF-12A aircraft. Col. Stephens had set new speed record of more than 2,070 mph and new altitude record of 80,259 ft. Col. Daniel had set new speed records for straight course of over 2,000 mph and on closed course of 1,688 mph. Records were formerly held by U.S.S.R. (Pres. Doc., 8/1/66, 1000)
European Space Research Institute (esrin) had begun operations in a temporary location in the Park Hotel, Frascati, Italy. A center of the European Space Research Organization (esro), it would work initially on plasma physics and its application to spacecraft control as well as plans for proposed esro astronomical observatory. Permanent facilities were planned near the Italian Atomic Energy Authority’s research center. (M&R, 1/24/66, 7)
1966’s second new comet—first with a tail—had been discovered by Dr. Roberto Barbon, Italian astronomer visiting Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar Observatories, and confirmed by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Named for its discoverer, ninth magnitude object was in constellation Cetus. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 9/6/66, 46)
N. A. Zakharov, chief of Soviet Civil Aircraft Research Institute, announced that U.S.S.R. would construct 220-passenger, 560-mph Tu-154 subsonic airliner to replace the Tu-104, 11-18, and An-10. New Yak-40 short-haul aircraft, designed to carry 24 passengers up to 375-mi. distances at 275 mph, was already under construction and would replace the Li-2 and An-2. (Pravda, 8/1/66, 6)
Col. Jack Bollerud (usaf) was named Acting Director, Space Medicine, NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, and would assume all duties assigned to the late Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace. He would also continue to discharge the functions of Deputy Director, Space Medicine, a position he had held since May 1965. (NASA Hq. Bull., 2/14/66, 2)
Giss marked fifth anniversary with lecture by Dr. Harold C. Urey, prof, of chemistry at large, Univ. of California, La Jolla. Reception preceding lecture had honored Dr. Urey’s 73rd birthday on April 28. (Goddard News, 5/30/66, 8) During April: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Special Assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb and aiaa President, sought to define the role of a professional and of a professional society in an editorial in Astronautics & Aeronautics. ". . . in my reading of the history of science and technology, I have been impressed by the key role of individuals who related science and technology to social needs. I would suggest that they are the professionals, and that a true profession deliberately exercises science and technology to meet social needs. "Unlike most professional and technical societies, aiaa composes a wide variety of engineers and physical and life scientists. Yet definite social concerns bind us in a single profession—society’s expressed need to transport goods and people by atmospheric flight and to explore space. . . .” (A&A, 4/66, 30-31)
NASA Langley Research Center had invited four aircraft manufacturers— Boeing Co., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Douglas Aircraft Co., and General Dynamics Corp.—to submit by Sept. 30 proposals for a research program to reduce noise generated by commercial jet transports, (nasa Release 66-242)
M2-F2 lifting body mated to B-52 launch aircraft at NASA Flight Research Center, in preparation for flight tests. for a space mission, Sedov said it would be economically and scientifically feasible, but "we don’t have any plans for joint launchings. The situation is not technical but political and I think the international situation in these days cann'ot change this.” (Wilford, NYT, 10/13/66,12) October 12: iaf conferees toured the nasa-inta Robledo de Chavela Space Tracking Station outside Madrid. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/14/66, 1)
President Johnson, in 10th anniversary edition of Russian-language America Illustrated, published by usia for distribution in U.S.S.R., appealed to Soviet people for new era of friendship and understanding between the two countries. Johnson said "constructive steps” toward that goal would be "progress in the field of disarmament and in greater cooperative efforts ... in space exploration, medical research, and communications.” He added: rfWe’ve got to get into the habit of peaceful cooperation. The test ban treaty was a significant step. There have been others since 1963. We have agreed not to put bombs in orbit, we are working together on . . . desalination, weather information, exchanges of scientists, artists, and yes, magazines.” (Pres. Doc., 10/3/66, 1360-3)
usaf XB-70 research bomber flew at 45,000-ft. to 47,000-ft. altitudes in test flight from Edwards afb, to collect data for development of supersonic transports, (upi, NYT, 1/16/66, 60)
A $50-million, 18-mo. flight research program involving afsc’s supersonic XB-70 experimental aircraft was scheduled to begin in spring 1966, afsc announced. Joint usaf-nasa effort would acquire experimental data on flight dynamics, flight loads, structures, propulsion and air induction, and environmental factors. Overall direction would be by afsc’s Aeronautical Systems Div. (asd) ; technical direction would be by nasa. (afsc Release 15.66)
gsfc selected Brush Instruments Co. for $900,000 contract to provide 22 Unified S-Band (Usb) Systems Monitors for NASA’s Manned Space Flight Tracking Network. Systems, composed of high-speed, finite sensing and recording devices, would provide "immediate reading of critical subsystems performance while simultaneously recording operating events as they occur,” pinpoint and record trouble or failure, and serve as diagnostic tool for remedial action, (gsfc Release G-ll-66)
An 8,189-hr. test of cesium electron-bombardment engine performed for LRC by Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., ended when supply of cesium fuel was exhausted. Conducted in space simulation chamber, test was part of NASA’s electric engine research program. Studies had shown that such systems could result in increased payloads in unmanned and manned spaceflight missions, (nasa Release 66-306)
Employment in the aerospace industry would reach 1,349,000 in December 1966—an increase of 11 per cent over December 1965—Aerospace Industries Assn, estimated in a semiannual survey. Estimate was based on reports from 267 plants and facilities of 59 companies which represented nearly 80 per cent of entire industry, (aia Release 66-55)
New program to disseminate information to industry was initiated by NASA and aec’s Argonne National Laboratory. Purpose was to identify technological innovations resulting from Argonne’s research and development projects; prepare brief, business-oriented summaries of innovations; and distribute them to industry. Summaries—to be known as aec-nasa Tech Briefs—would contain information not customarily reported in scientific literature such as descriptions of devices, processes, and techniques developed to meet specific or engineering needs at Argonne and would be combined with similar information currently published by nasa. (nasa Release 66-183)
U.S.S.R.’s "period of inactivity in manned space flight” received editorial comment in Kansas City Star: "About all the West can do is wait until something happens. Meanwhile, the U.S. program moves ahead with significant achievements. But while guessing can be fun, a word of caution: Let’s not make the mistake of counting the Russians out of the space race.” (Kansas City Star, 9/26/66)
NASA successfully launched 550-lb. Project Scanner instrument package from Wallops Station to 380-mi. (612-km.) altitude on 13.5-min. suborbital flight: two-channel radiometers measured infrared energy emitted from earth’s horizon by carbon dioxide and water vapor; star-mapper telescope provided attitude orientation data. Managed by LaRC, Project Scanner was advanced research program to obtain data for designing and developing improved horizon-scanning instrumentation for space missions. (Wallops Release 66-43)
nasa had begun contract negotiations with TRW Systems to convert the prototype Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo) into a flight observatory. Negotiations might also include option to fabricate an additional flight observatory. Contract was expected to be for $9 million. (NASA Release 66-16)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. reached impasse over question of access to tracking facilities that would be part of U.N. treaty on space exploration. U.S. Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg blamed U.S.S.R. for halting agreement on treaty, voicing U.S. contention that tracking facilities must be negotiated by bilateral agreements and not guaranteed by treaty. Compulsory access to tracking facilities, Goldberg said, would constitute sovereignty violation. Soviet Ambassador Platon D. Morozov defended proposal as means to correct a discriminatory situation in which U.S. had certain advantages because of its alliances with other nations. (Teltsch, NYT, 9/17/66; Sanger, Wash. Post, 9/17/66, A4)
Nike-Apache launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 59-lb. instrumented payload to 108-mi. (174-km.) altitude and impacted 67 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Conducted for essa and Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, Dallas, the experiment sought to obtain ionospheric electron density profile measurements using a plasma resonance probe and to obtain data concerning sporadic E phenomenon in the valley region between the E- and F-layers of the ionosphere. Data were telemetered to ground stations during flight. Experiment was first of three to compare techniques for measuring characteristics of upper atmosphere and ionosphere. (Wallops Release 66-16; nasa Rpt. srl)
Commenting on the Federal budget for FY 1967, Science said it was the first budget since the middle 1950’s which had not carried a request for an increase in total funds for research and development: "This downturn in what for about a decade has been a steadily ascending curve reflects the major rationale of the new budget: to provide funds to support a military buildup in Southeast Asia without underfinancing new education and welfare programs enacted during the past two sessions of Congress. ...” (Science, 1/28/66, 425)
Wilhelm Forster Observatory (West Germany) reported that on 127th orbit, Soviet spacecraft cosmos cxm returned to earth and soft-landed at Baikonur, Kazakhstan. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/30/66, A14)
President Johnson, in World Meteorological Day statement, said: "This day symbolizes for us—and for all mankind—a new dawn of hope for a better, safer, and more meaningful life. It looks to the time when all our science and technology, and all the wonders of the space age, will give us the power of which man has always dreamed—not the power of one nation over another, but the power of the human race over the forces of nature. "The instrument of this program is the World Meteorological Organization—a specialized agency of the United Nations with a membership of 127 countries. Through the World Meteorological Organization, the concept of a World Weather Watch is now taking shape. On this occasion, I am proud to say that the United States strongly supports international cooperation in this vital field.” {Pres. Doc., 3/28/66, 439)	;
Role of Venus in NASA’s future space sciences program was reviewed in report by ossa to House Science and Astronautics Committee. Report suggested that NASA might increase interest in Venus with combinations of Mars-Venus flights and single missions to Venus using Mariner, Voyager, and advanced Automated Biological Laboratory spacecraft to investigate "the possibility of life forms. . . . From almost every aspect . . . Venus is an important, puzzling, and paradoxical planet, meriting continued examination by space flight missions.” (Text; Tech. Wk., 9/12/66, 18-9)
Sunspots as large as 12 times the earth’s diameter were detected by Bochum Observatory, West Germany. One group reportedly measured about 97,200 mi. across; smaller sunspots were about 27,000 mi. wide. (Reuters, NYT, 11/15/66, 61; Reuters, Wash. Post, 11/14/66, A23)
HL-10 lifting body vehicle, designed and developed by nasa Langley Research Center to help solve control problems of future manned spacecraft entering earth’s atmosphere, was formally delivered to nasa by its builder, Northrop Corp., in ceremonies at company’s Hawthorne, Calif., plant. The 22-ft.-long, 4,600-lb., wingless, tri-finned research vehicle would be dropped from B-52 aircraft for flight tests at 45,000-ft. altitude and mach .8 (530 mph). (LaRC Release)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, former NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology and new aiaa president, wrote his first "President’s Message” in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "One of the dilemmas of modern times is that science and technology can do a multitude of things—many of which the community may not necessarily desire and so will not support. As professionals we have tended to preoccupy ourselves with the potential of science and technology rather than the expressed needs of the community. A responsible professional society of the future must find . . . the wisdom among its members to relate its technologies to human needs. A wise professional society . . . will convey the legitimate aspirations of its thinkers and men of action to the community at large. . . .” (A&A, 2/66, 29)
NASA Langley Research Center awarded General Electric Co. $3,000,000 incentive-type contract to build the sixth spacecraft in nasa’s Scout-launched reentry heating flight series. The 13-ft. conical spacecraft would be launched to measure heating rates associated with turbulent air flow close to vehicular surface, which could not be simulated with ground equipment. (LaRC Release; NASA Release 66-54)
U.S. physics was facing severe shortage of funds necessary to sustain progress in research and education, concluded nas Physics Survey Committee in its report Physics: Survey and Outlook. Report recommended that physics support by Federal agencies be increased by 1969 to two and one-half times the 1963 1500-million level for physics and astronomy. Assessing U.S. strength in six subfields, report noted for astrophysics "a pressing need for more observational facilities.” Based on 1964-65 studies by an 18-member group headed by George E. Pake, Provost of Washington Univ., St. Louis, report stated: "Our strength in observational astrophysics with optical telescopes has long been established with the 200-in. telescope on Mount Palomar, but we have many more bright astrophysicists and astronomers than have access to the two US telescopes most suited for frontier research. Our relative strength will be altered with the implementation of plans for construction of several large telescopes in the Soviet Union. Any nation can, by placing a large telescope in the Southern Hemisphere, assume leadership in the observational astronomy of stellar evolution and cosmology, because the Magellanic Clouds are the nearest of all external galaxies. The United States has taken the initiative in the expensive but highly promising field of space-based optical and x-ray astronomy. "In radioastronomy the United States now has an impressive group of major radio telescopes, but the US position is not preeminent. Even the new instruments nearing completion at the California Institute of Technology and the National Radio Astronomy Observatory are inferior to existing instruments in Australia and the Soviet Union and to large new crosstype arrays nearing completion near Sydney and Moscow. The US position in space physics and cosmic radiation is good, with some question whether present conditions permit further strengthening of that position. Research on gravitation is at present not a large sector of research, but the US effort is of very high quality and is being increasingly recognized.” (nas Release; Science, 3/18/66, 1363-6; Physics Today, 4/66, 23-36)
Rep. Mark Andrews (R-N.D.) introduced a resolution calling for nsf to make recommendations for wider geographic distribution of Federal funds for research and development. (CR, 3/16/66, 5755)
Catalog identifying and locating every known star in the heavens down to the ninth magnitude, providing astronomers with instant reference to the entire sky, was published by gpo. Compiled by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory under NASA grant, 2,700-page, four-volume catalog unified 50 different sources to provide position, photographic and visual magnitude, spectral type, and other essential data for 250,000	heavenly bodies. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 5/5/66, 21)
Astronomers at Bochum Observatory, West Germany, reported they had sighted a giant new sunspot at the approximate center of the solar disc. Visible to the naked eye in early morning or just before sunset, sunspot had 88,000-mi. dia. and was expected to affect weather conditions and radio communications on earth during the next few days. Sunspot was unexpected since 1966 had been designated "year of the quiet sun” and scientists had expected only a minimum of solar disturbances, (upi, Chic. Trib., 3/21/66)
Thorough knowledge of cosmic dust, particularly interplanetary dust particles near the asteroid belt, was necessary for space engineers to successfully design manned and unmanned probes, wrote M. J. S. Belton of Kitt Peak National Observatory in Science. He stressed the importance of cosmic dust in theoretical and observational astrophysics: "It is apparently an important factor in the process of star formation. The polarization of starlight which is induced by aligned particles of interstellar dust gives information about the magnetic field in galactic systems, including our own. ... In the solar system, the presence of dust in planetary atmosphere may lead to misinterpretations of photometric and polarimetric data that would otherwise give important information about the total mass of the atmosphere. . . . And finally, dust is responsible for such interplanetary phenomena as the F corona, zodiacal light, gegenschein, and type-II comet tails. . . .” (Belton, Science, 1/7/66, 35-43)
Dr. Serge A. Korff, director of New York Univ.’s cosmic research program, told a youth science seminar at the Explorer’s Club in New York that he believed many Ufo sightings had been of giant balloons sent aloft by nyu to test the upper atmosphere: ''[They] are 300 to 400 feet across and because they are partly inflated, assume strange shapes as they ascend. At high altitudes they often reflect sunlight and become visible to viewers below in areas where the sun has set or before it has risen.” (NYT, 10/30/66, 45)
Quasars are relatively small objects 10 million to 1 billion yrs. old and 30 million to 300 million light years from earth that have been shot at super speeds out of another galaxy by a titanic explosion, astronomer Dr. Halton C. Arp, Mt. Palomar Observatory, contended in Science. Arp’s theory contradicted prevailing view that quasars could enable man to see the ends of time and space and possibly glimpse the secrets of creation because they were on the rim of the universe—10 or more billion light yrs. away—and were almost as old as the universe—8 billion yrs. Astronomers believed that the quasars’ "red shifts” in light-—changes toward red end of the light spectrum as objects speed away—were caused by extremely rapid motion away from our own galaxy. Arp suggested that quasars might be very dense and compact, exerting a strong gravitational attraction for their size which could shift wavelengths to produce "red shifts.” (Science, 3/11/66; Weil, Wash. Post, 3/12/66, 2; Sullivan, NYT, 3/11/66, 28; Ubell, N.Y. Her. Trih., 3/11/66)
