NRL announced world’s lowest recorded temperature—less than onemillionth of a degree Kelvin above absolute zero—had been achieved by Naval Research Laboratory scientists Dr. Arthur Spohr and Edwin Althouse through use of magnetic cooling technique, described as nuclear cooling. Previous lowest recorded temperature had been about 1.3 millionths of a degree above. The difference was of great significance because in this range most physical properties, including degree of orientation of atomic nuclei, varied markedly with even a slight change of temperature. At absolute zero, nuclei of most materials would have the highest state of order possible for the material. New record at Naval Research Laboratory would further advance development of an apparatus to study interaction forces between nuclei and to examine effects of oriented nuclei, (nri. Release)
The creation of a European Institute of Science and Technology to help narrow the technological gap between U.S. and Western Europe was proposed at a Deauville, France, conference of 70 U.S. and European businessmen, scientists, academicians, and public officials. Institute, which would be supported initially by private funds, would offer one-year postgraduate course. Faculty and student body would be international. Conference concluded that such an institute would be “a considerable stimulant for the various European educational systems and a rich source of trained engineers.” Meeting was sponsored by North Atlantic Assembly’s Science and Technology Committee and Univ. of Pennsylvania’s Foreign Policy Research Institute. (Mooney, ATT7,5/30/67,25)
NASA was consulting with Aerospace Industries Assn, (aia) and with individual aircraft companies on a proposed research program which would support areas of general aviation, Technology Week reported. At the request of several users, NASA had identified a number of technical areas where the application of advanced technology seemed warranted but emphasized that NASA’s efforts should be with aircraft designers and it should have no responsibility for the application of technology. (Tech Wk, 6/12/67, 3)
Office of Science and Technology released an interim report on usaf test flights at Edwards afb to study the effects of the sonic boom June 3-23, 1966, and Oct. 31, 1966-Jan. 17, 1967, 11 types of aircraft made 367 supersonic and 261 subsonic flights. Report concluded that flights caused little or no physical harm to test structures, 393 test subjects, or 220,570 test animals, and noted relative annoyance of booms of differing intensity and of booms compared to jet aircraft engine noise. Between 33% and 98% of the test subjects objected to booms in the 2.0- to 3.5-lb-psf overpressure range that ssts were expected to produce under the worst possible conditions. Other preliminary conclusions: (1) sonic booms sounded louder outside than inside; (2) walls of houses were more effective in blocking out jet engine noise than sonic booms; and (3) annoyance increased faster with increasingly bigger booms than with increasingly louder engine noise. (Text; Clark, NYT, 8/3/67, 1, 24)
U.K. had agreed to buy 40 more F—111 supersonic military aircraft from U.S. at total cost of $785 million, Anthony Lewis reported in New York Times. Ten F-lll’s had been ordered March 31, 1966, with a one-year option to purchase 40 more. Deliveries were expected to begin in 1969. To offset impact on U.K.’s balance of payments, U.S. had agreed to buy $785 million worth of British equipment during the next 10 yrs or help U.K. get orders elsewhere. (Lewis, NYT, 4/1/67, 1) During March: Aerospace praised NASA’s contributions to U.S. aeronautical research: “Since the United States started sending experimental vehicles beyond Earth’s atmosphere nine years ago aeronautical research has been overshadowed by space exploration as far as the annual budgets of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration are concerned. . . . But dollar comparisons fail to tell the whole story. For its space work, NASA has had to build from scratch a variety of expensive ground facilities and equipment and to make heavy outlays for complex, nonreusable flight hardware. NASA’s aeronautical teams spend little on flight equipment and what they do buy is reusable; furthermore, they operate from facilities for the most part built and paid for prior to the Space Age. There is no question but that space has played the dominant role in nasa’s programs, but the aeronautical research effort has been far more substantial—and more rewarding—than an examination of budget figures would indicate. In the coming year, assuming Congressional approval of the pending budget, it will be increased.” (Aerospace, 3/67, 3)
Naval Research Laboratory scientists reported the Milky Way galaxy was not capable of producing numerous new stars; instead, its star-producing days were virtually over, based on data gathered from rocket-borne instrument, a Far-Ultraviolet Image Intensifier Spectrograph [see Mar. 16]. Mission of spectrograph was to measure amount of invisible, gaseous, molecular hydrogen in interstellar space along the Milky Way; should bountiful amounts of hydrogen be indicated by the spectrograph, proof of Milky Way’s capability to produce numerous new stars would have been obtained. Instead, spectrograph measurements had found no such evidence. (AP, NYT, 5/14/67)
A 236-in-wide mirror which would be used by U.S.S.R. in world’s largest reflector telescope was nearing completion, Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times. After cooling from a molten state for D/> years, mirror had been cut to produce concave, parabolic configurations and was currently undergoing final grinding at a factory near Moscow. It would soon be shipped to a new observatory in the northern Caucasus, which would be operated directly by the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Largest reflector telescope in use at present time was 200-in-wide instrument at Mt. Palomar Observatory. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/11/67, 15)
usaf reported that an SR—71 strategic reconnaissance aircraft was missing and presumed down after test flight from Edwards AFB. (UPI, W Post, 1/7/67,3)
Using $55,000 nasa grant, ucla had purchased a 24-in telescope with photometer and spectrograph for observatory at Thacher School, Qjai, Calif., New York Times reported. Telescope was 15th largest in California and already had produced the most complete spectrographic coverage of stellar explosion of star Nova Delphini. (NYT, 11/19/67, 73)
NASA’s work on advanced air-breathing engines was aimed at development of significantly improved propulsion systems, primarily for second-generation supersonic transports, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Based mainly at LeRC, advanced engine component research program was designed to improve overall performance by improving efficiencies of individual components such as the compressor, combustor, turbine, and nozzle. Although program was directed primarily to supersonic powerplants, most anticipated improvements were expected to be applicable to future subsonic jet engines. (Av Wk, 9/4/67, 64-71)
According to National Aeronautic Assn., Soviet authorities had filed with Federation Aeronautique International two new world speed records and one new world altitude record for their Mikoyan E-266 twintailed fighter aircraft. Pilot Peter Ostapenko had completed 1,000-km (621-mi) closed course with 4,410-lb load at average speed of 2,910 km/hr (1,808 mph). With same load, pilot Mikhail Komarov had completed 500-km (311-mi) closed course at 2,928 km/hr (1,820 mph). Alexandr Fedotov reached an altitude of 98,462 ft. (Av Wk, 12/18/67, 54-5; naa/pio)
NASA and usaf were expected to sign an agreement in fall 1967 for a joint lifting-body vehicle research program, Technology Week reported. nasa would probably have overall management responsibility of program, which would include test flights by USAf’s SV-5P and NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicles. {Tech Wk, 6/19/67,3)
USA—USAF—usn X-22A v/stol research aircraft designed and built by Bell Aerosystems Co. under USN contract completed its 100th successful test flight at Niagara Falls (N.Y.) International Airport. The four-engine, dual-tandem, ducted-propeller aircraft had made 239 vertical and 100 short takeoffs and 245 vertical and 94 short landings. During 40.9 hrs of actual flying time 54 vertical/horizontal transitions had been conducted. Present aircraft was second of two models in X-22A program; first model crashed Aug. 8, 1966, after completing 15 flights. Second model would be tested through 1968 and would then be delivered to a tri-service group at Patuxent (Md.) Naval Air Test Center for further evaluation. (Bell Release 92; NYT, 12/25/67,42)
Australia would be able to maintain its prominence in radio-astronomy with a new 150-in optical telescope to be constructed at Siding Spring, New South Wales, the New York Times reported. Construction of the $11,760,000	telescope, a joint British and Australian project, was expected to be completed in six years to provide Australian scientists-—who currently had to send findings to Mt. Palomar (Calif.) Observatory for verification—with a suitable size optical telescope to check their observations. {NYT, 5/14/67, 37)
nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell and ossa Director of Space Applications Programs Leonard Jaffe discussed impact of space research on science and technology in Science. As a result of space research, they said, science and technology could contribute to the arts by furnishing new media for human expression; enrich the humanities hy furnishing new media for broader basis for understanding himself and his place in nature; provide the historian with a better approach to history because of scientific methodology; and enable archeologists more accurately to date materials and identify their sources. As the entire world “absorbs the increased understanding of man and nature that science generates, and reflects that understanding in its literature, its social, political, and economic institutions, and its application to human daily living ... it may be hoped that this common bond will . . . give increased motivation to solve peaceably the problems that beset the world . . . [and] provide increased means for doing so. . . . To use properly and effectively these powerful tools of our times is an inescapable challenge to men and governments the world over.” (Newell, Jaffe, Science, 7/1/61, 29-39)
General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. engineers said NASA had tentatively selected its double delta wing design for a hydrogen-fueled hypersonic aircraft of the future. Aircraft would weigh 500,000 lbs and cruise at six times the speed of sound. (AP, NYT, 3/2/67)
Paper model of “possible lifting re-entry vehicle design” had flown at 17 times the speed of sound and withstood 4,000° F temperature and pressure equal to 177,000-ft altitude in test to check out recently repaired wind tunnel at LTV Aerospace Corp. in Dallas. Designed by ltv scientist Charles J. Stalmach, model emerged after *4-sec test with only the nose and leading wing edges slightly blackened, (upi, NYT, 3/17/67)
More than 2,000 major construction and supply firms in the U.S. received invitations to bid on the second phase of NASA’s Electronics Research Center at Kendall Square, Cambridge, Mass., announced the New England Division Engineer, Corps of Engineers. The construction package would include three brick-faced buildings: one at least 10 stories high to house laboratories, offices, and cafeteria; 350-seat auditorium; and a center support building for service utilities. The Electronics Research Center had been in operation since Sept. 1, 1964, in temporary quarters at Technology Square near the permanent site in Kendall Square. (USA Release, 9/22/67)
NASA rejected industry bids ranging from $13.6-14.9 million for construction of four buildings at NASA’s Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, Mass, erc Director James C. Elms said that difference between bids and $10.4-million, Government estimate was too great to be adjusted and that building plans would have to be revised. (McElheny, Boston Globe, 4/6/67)
The Senate had unanimously passed S.J. Res. 109, which would mark the 50th anniversary of the Langley Research Center in October 1967. (NASA lar VI/102)
Langley Research Center engineers at jpl, after repeated efforts to reactivate Lunar Orbiter Ill’s photo system which failed March 2, had concluded there was virtually no hope for transmission of further photos from the spacecraft. Analysis of events indicated failure had originated with momentary fluctuation in spacecraft’s electrical power which disturbed photo system logic by turning the film advance motor memory to forward mode. Cause of fluctuation had not been identified. Motor, following incorrect logic, stalled as it attempted to move film which was being mechanically held in a fixed position while readout was in progress. During stalled condition, motor overheated to failure point. Despite termination of photo transmission, Lunar Orbiter III continued to serve as a tracking target, providing practice for nasa Manned Space Flight Network stations, and to record information on radiation and meteoroids in moon’s vicinity, (nasa Release 67-76)
NASA released “Opportunities for Participation in Space Flight Investigation” (nhb 8030.1A) describing opportunities available to scientists and technical groups for including their experiments and equipment on NASA missions. Handbook, which superseded earlier edition published in July 1965, described each of NASA’s present flight programs and noted opportunities available in automated and manned flights and in flight-related programs so that scientists would have an up-to-date review of missions currently being sponsored by NASA and could develop compatible experiments. (nasa Release 67—169)
A fir tree had been tested in the Royal Aircraft Establishment’s wind tunnel at Farnborough, U.K., to study the effects of high storm winds on forests. (Can Press, NYT, 1/21/61,3)
Charges that many specifications for construction of $25-million tank chamber at Plum Brook Station were being compromised were denied by Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of NASA Lewis Research Center which operated station. Charges, made by Plum Brook employee and referred to Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio), were being investigated by GAO. Silverstein said almost all the allegations were “not true” or represented a difference in judgment between himself and the complaining employee: “It’s a matter of his judgment against ours, and I don’t have to accept it.” (Thomson, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 1/20/67)
Western Electric received a $43.4 million addition to an existing Nike-X research and development contract. Approximately $18.0 million of this was initial implementation of the decision announced Sept. 18 by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara to deploy a Communist Chinese-oriented abm system. The remainder of the announced addition of $43.4 million would be for continuing research and development on the Nike-X system, supplementing the FY 1968 contract signed early in September. Under that contract Western Electric had received initially $215.3 million for continued research and development effort on Nike-X. The Communist Chinese-oriented abm system would consist of two types of radar and two interceptor missiles, (dod Release 992-67)
Lift-drag space vehicle had been gaining more attention, Space/Aeronautics reported; reasons were said to be: “X-15 hypersonic tests, unmanned lifting-body reentry, manned subsonic glides and wind tunnel research.” For manned spacecraft, atmospheric lift would put an end to worldwide recovery alerts as in Mercury/Gemini experience. (S/A, 2/67, 52)
Lane was developing a new airfoil that could improve performance of advanced variable-sweep-wing fighter aircraft, increase efficiency of subsonic jet transports, reduce helicopter blade tip stalling, and virtually eliminate local shock wave formation, B. K. Thomas, Jr., reported in Aviation Week. Airfoil, which was actually a “transonic wing,” delayed boundary layer separation at high subsonic speeds, thereby delaying the rapid rise in aerodynamic drag in the transonic region. It was currently undergoing wind tunnel tests at LaRC, but no aircraft flight testing was planned before FY 1970. (Thomas, Av Wk, 1/24/61, 25)
President Johnson signed Executive Order 11381 enlarging Federal Council for Science and Technology to include representatives from dot, hud, and Dept, of State for more effective operation. (PD, 11/13/67,1537-8)
Findings of 14-mo study by Denver Research Institute (dri) , under NASA contract, of methods governing acquisition of new technology in 62 firms in four industries—electric batteries, printing and reproduction, industrial controls, aqd medical electronics—were summarized in Science. Report, “The Channels of Technology Acquisition in Commercial Firms and the NASA Dissemination Program,” concluded that (1) few organizations were vigorously seeking to acquire new technological know-how from space research; (2) little had been done to increase the technical awareness of the manufacturer outside the space and military fields; and (3) the technologist faced with an immediate problem was inclined to use information in standard manuals two to five years behind the state of the art. The report noted that “most individuals felt it too difficult to retrieve relevant material from the mass of government publications and indicated that they expected to learn of important government-developed technology through trade and professional channels. In several firms, those interviewed felt it wasn’t really practical to keep up with and use government technology unless one’s firm had government R&D contracts.” (Greenberg, Science, 9/15/67,1016-18)
NASA announced that Oso HI Orbiting Solar Observatory, launched from ksc March 8, had not only achieved but exceeded its primary and secondary objectives. Primary objective was to obtain high-resolution spectral data from pointed solar experiments during major portion of one solar rotation and adequate operational support of spacecraft subsystems to carry out acquisition of these scientific data. Secondary objective was to obtain useful data from the non-pointed experiments, and to obtain data from pointed experiments during more than one solar rotation. Oso III had operated satisfactorily for over two solar rotations and was continuing to acquire useful scientific data from both pointed and wheel experiments, (nasa Proj Off)
Hall of Aerospace Art would become “an integral part” of the new National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution announced. Permanent collection already included paintings and drawings of NASA manned space flight projects by Norman Rockwell and Chesley Bonestell and 18th and 19th century prints illustrating balloon flight. (Smithsonian Institution Release)
Sprint, launched from underground cell as the high-speed, short-range missile for Abm system, completed successful test flight at wsmr when it hit intercept point in sky after several planned sharp maneuvers. Interception simulated actual one for incoming enemy missile and was programmed into computer for 27-ft-long missile. Sprint tests had been conducted since March 29,1965. (dod Release 1040-67)
Quasars, which radiate as much light and energy as a galaxy, appear to have a diameter only 1% as large as galaxies, scientists from U.K.’s Royal Astronomical Observatory and Royal Radar Establishment reported in Nature. Theory was based on measurements of radio signals of 30 quasars, obtained by using two radiotelescopes 80 mi apart in combination as if at extreme ends of single instrument. Data indicating quasars are smaller than previously believed compounded the problem of explaining their enormous quantities of energy. (W Post, 2/26/ 67) .
Aerospace industry must develop new type of management to cope with its record $26-billion workload during 1967, Robert Hotz wrote in Aviation Week. “What makes the current management problem so acute is the fact that military demands are reaching a peak at the same time that commercial aviation is soaring on the greatest boom in its history. During 1965, the aerospace industry actually manufactured slightly more commercial airframe pounds than military—a historic milestone. The industry also has under development six new types of airline jet transports for which there were no prior military programs and which must be financed from privately raised funds. This is another unprecedented task for aerospace managements to tackle. . . .” (Hotz, Av Wk, 1/2/67, 11)
Aerospace industry sales in 1967 would total $27.3 billion—a 13% increase over 1966 sales—and in 1968 would reach $29.2 billion, Aerospace Industries Assn, (aia) predicted. Commercial transport aircraft production and DOD procurement had increased significantly in 1967, while NASA sales had declined from $4.9 billion to $4.1 billion, (aia Release 67-55)
Successful simulation of a meteor was achieved when tiny manmade iron pellet fired by Trailblazer launch vehicle reentered earth’s atmosphere at unprecedented speed of 38,180 mph and landed on target. Launched from NASA Wallops Station, six-stage Trailblazer reached 190mi (306-km) altitude before firing one-gram pellet on downward leg of ballistic trajectory. Artificial meteor was visible for two seconds. Experiment was part of LaRC-Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory program to study luminosity and ionization of simulated meteors, thereby increasing scientists’ knowledge of natural meteoroids. (LaRC Release)
Col. Maynard E. White (usaf, Ret.), former Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel, usaf Hq. in Europe, was appointed Director of Manned Space Flight Program Control, OMSF. (nasa Ann)
JPL scientist Sidney J. Slomich, writing in Astronautics and Aeronautics, emphasized need for national purpose to apply the highly advanced technology of space. “New impetus would be gained through the establishment of a coordinating national organization, governmental or private, to take advantage of the potential of advanced technology through modern communication techniques. The situation calls for a comprehensive national effort, with leadership coming from the highest levels of government to break down further interdisciplinary, interagency, organizational, and psychological and occupational barriers and to check out in detail a wide variety of potential applications like those cited above, relating them to the country’s and the world’s most pressing problems. . . . Emphasis should he on the application of the vast array of existing techniques, not on the development of new ones, and on nearterm objectives—no longer, say, than two or three years. Government agencies, the universities, publicly and privately supported research centers . . . must be banded together into a cooperative effort devoted to applying to the problems of our age the many solutions the new high technology makes possible. There is needed ... a public or private national organization, a research center, and, above all, a national purpose to bring this about.” (Slomich, A&A, 12/67, 54-8)
At the insistence of Sen. Albert Gore (D-Tenn.), the Senate Foreign Relations Committee agreed to qualify in its forthcoming report its interpretation of two clauses in the space law treaty [see March 7]. One clause questioned said benefits of space exploration “shall be the province of all mankind”; the other said that each nation would be liable for damages to another caused by its space vehicles. Committee specified that (1) nothing would “diminish or alter the right of the United States to determine how it shares the benefits and results of its space activities”; and (2) damage “pertains only to physical, non-electronic damage.” Senator Gore had suggested that if there were two competing U.S. and Soviet space communications networks, one nation might sue the other for damage from electronic interference of one system on the other. (W Post, 3/14/67, A7; Finney, NYT, 3/14/67, 20)
Committee on Science, Engineering, and Regional Development had been formed from persons working on problems of science and technology impact for nas and nae. Among other projects, Committee would examine “effects on given region of different kinds of institutions— university, not-for-profit laboratories, industrial and government laboratories [and would assess] . . . role of r&d institutions [and] . . . other factors . . . such as risk capital, entrepreneurial skills, and political leadership.” The 14-member committee would be chaired by Univ. of Illinois Graduate College Dean Daniel Alpert. (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 12/67,8-10)
Employment in the aerospace industry would reach 1,384,000 by September 1967—a 3.4% increase over September 1966—Aerospace Industries Assn, predicted. Forecast, based on survey of 60 companies representing 80% of entire aerospace industry, cited continuing demand for civilian aircraft; stable levels of missile and space sales; and increases in nonaerospace activities as reasons for steady growth in number of employees, (aia Release 67-17)
Dr. Mac C. Adams, nasa Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, was featured speaker at MIT conference sponsored by Electronics Industries Assn, to acquaint aerospace industry with NASA’s requirements for electronic systems on future space missions. He outlined objectives of nasa’s electronics research program: (1) stabilization systems to maintain orientation in space environment and to point telescopes and other experiments at celestial bodies with precise accuracy; (2) communications systems to translate data acquired in space activities over millions of miles and at rates comparable to exchange of information on earth; (3) communications and navigation satellites to meet increasing demands in commercial air transportation; (4)	data-handling systems to quickly and efficiently store, catalog, analyze, and edit data produced by space exploration; (5) instrumentation systems to detect and measure environmental characteristics over broad ranges of temperature, pressure, and density; and (6) components and technology which could operate reliably for long periods of time despite extremes in radiation and temperature. (Text; NASA Release 67-103)
F-111A aircraft, lent by usaf to nasa to obtain basic flight research data for the design and development of advanced variable sweep wings, was delivered to frc. (nasa Release 67-7)
Scientists at National Radio Astronomy Observatory (nrao), Green Bank, W. Va., and Naval Research Laboratory successfully demonstrated new technique to obtain high-resolution pictures of quasars. Radiotelescopes at both locations were focused simultaneously on a quasar 240 trillion mi away, and radio signals beamed to earth by the quasar were recorded on magnetic tape at both centers; processed by a computer; and matched to form a single, clearer tape. NBAO Director Dr. David Heeschen speculated that facilities even farther away could be combined for sharper pictures: “Using this technique, there’s no reason why we can’t link up two telescopes 1,000 miles apart and improve our resolution 100 times over what we had.” (O’Toole, W Post, 5/25/67, D18)
West Germany’s 1966 budget for space technology and research shown on Finance Minister’s summary report revealed that, while $57 million had been available, only $44.3 million had been spent, according to Interavia Air Letter. Aerospace industry complained government was so slow to issue contracts that firms themselves had to provide about 50% advance financing. Contracts were not officially approved until the end of each year. (Interavia, 11/16/67, 3)
AIAA President Harold T. Luskin, in Astronautics and Aeronautics editorial, proposed a joint Soviet-American safety program to reduce hazards of manned space flight. He urged that representatives of U.S. and U.S.S.R. meet to exchange technical data on spacecraft safety features, to set up a common communications network for use in emergencies, and to plan joint rescue operations. “Cooperation for safety could be a step forward in promoting the greatest possible success of manned space exploration. The world would regard it as a meritorious indication that nations can find ways to compete and cooperate at one and the same time. . . . “Let both countries work toward the day when a flight crew is saved through cooperative action. That event would be the finest space spectacular, the best space first!” (A&A, 7/67,33—4.)
NATO intelligence had learned that French President Charles de Gaulle would begin extensive cooperation with U.S.S.R. in the field of space exploration, including the orbiting of nuclear weapons, Henry J. Taylor reported in the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin. Taylor claimed U.S.S.R. was devoting a “substantial percentage” of its total military budget to the orbiting of nuclear weapons. (Taylor, P EB, 8/30/67)
Informed sources reported that U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 supersonic transport would not be ready for the Paris International Air Show in May as upi reported March 7 but would still fly before the Anglo-French Concorde and U.S. SST, according to AP. First test flight of Tu-144 would be in late 1967. (AP, NYT, 4/19/67,73)
Lewis Research Center issued rfp’s on system employing 2,000- to 6,000-lb comsats which could broadcast directly to home TV sets from 22,300-mi-altitude synchronous orbits. Successful proposal would receive study contract. (LeRC Release 67-6)
Jerome F. Lederer, NASA Manned Space Flight Safety Director, received Flight Safety Foundation’s Distinguished Service Award for distinguished service in achieying aircraft uses under safer conditions. (NASA Hq WB, 50)
Hawker Siddeley P—1127 Kestrel vtol strike fighter crashed on ferry mission over Great Britain with heavy damage. Pilot, Sqdn. Ldr. Hugh Rigg, ejected and sustained cuts and bruises. In U.S., LaRC had decided against repairing one of two P-1127s obtained for flight testing; NASA’s aircraft had crashed at WS Aug. 21 with heavy damage. Parts would be used as spares for remaining aircraft. (Av Wk, 10/2/67,17) Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Science, Research, and Development Subcommittee, addressed House Seminar on Technology Assessment: “The past few years have brought a change in attitude toward science and technology, both in the public which is more technically literate, and in the Congress with its enhanced understanding. Faith in science, and awe of technology, have been supplanted by a recognition of a grave responsibility for decision—that is, what should we do with what we know? Technology assessment is a major key to discharging that responsibility. We are now turning to the natural sciences and asking them to move further in achieving a collective wisdom with politics, law, economics, and social interests for the management of technology. . . . The technical community must introduce a concern for public policy impacts and methods of operation—at an early point and in considerable detail. We believe that technology assessment will involve the scientific method and will be largely accomplished by scientists and engineers. But the purpose of assessment is to enable decisions for the public good.” (Text)
Electronic machine was developed by erc contractor Dr. Huseyin Yilmaz of Arthur D. Little, Inc. Machine visually displayed spoken word profiles on small oscilloscope, with objective of eventually allowing voice commands to maneuver spacecraft. Used to teach deaf and retarded people, machine helped deaf person to correct his speech by “seeing” his voice, and NASA scientists would use this project and similar studies to categorize and encode speech patterns, (erc Release 67—39)
Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, Acting Under Secretary of Commerce and Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology, had been appointed President of Oklahoma Univ., effective Sept. 1. (AP, NYT, 5/23/67, 32)
Italy’s space effort for 1967-68 was detailed in Interavia Air Letter. National research program ($2.72 million) included studies of solar winds, ionosphere’s electronic composition, albedo neutrons, x-rays and cosmic rays, solar and galactic gamma radiation, and stellar uv radiation. Other research would cover celestial mechanics, propulsion systems, and telemetry. For international programs, $3.52 million had been approved for Phase B of San Marco project and for launching San Marco C in joint effort with NASA. Supplementary funds ($1.3 million) probably would go for Bologna Univ. and nasa effort using oso-G to measure x-rays and cosmic rays. Italy’s share in 1967 eldo funding would be $10.2 million, and in esro $5.63 million. For esro programs, Italian industry would supply antennas and telemetry equipment for tracking network, pcm telemetry equipment, and radars for launching base at Kiruna, Sweden. (Interavia, 11/14/67, 3)
Lewis Research Center awarded two one-year award-fee contracts totaling $22,500,000—$17,665,000 to General Dynamics Corp. and $5,171,000 to Honeywell, Inc.—for management and sustaining engineering services on Centaur launch vehicle (nasa Release 67-43)
usn F-111B fighter aircraft crashed on takeoff in test flight at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp.’s Calverton, N.Y., flight test center. Both Grumman pilots were killed. Adapted for use by usn and usaf, the F-lll (formerly tfx) had been subject of continued controversy between Congress and DOD since Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara insisted that the F-lll be used by both services and overruled military leaders’ objections to selection of General Dynamics Corp. for construction of the aircraft. Crash was first for USN test model, which had been stripped to remove excess weight; USAF test model (F-lllA) crashed in January, killing one crew member. (Wilson, W Post, 4/22/67, A5)
U.S.S.R.’s Venus IV planetary probe (also designated Venera IV) entered atmosphere of planet Venus at 12:34 am edt and ejected instrumented capsule intended for softlanding on Venus. After aerodynamic braking, automatic parachute system provided gradual descent through 15-mi dense, hot, windy atmosphere, and capsule made [purported] softlanding at 2:08 am edt. Mstislav Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, later presented scientific proof for softlanding [see Oct. 30]. Launched June 12, the 2,438-lb Venus IV had traveled trajectory of more than 210 million mi; 49 million mi would be covered by transmitted signals from capsule to earth antennas. According to Soviet scientists, atmosphere as recorded by instrumented capsule had almost whole carbon dioxide composition with about 1.5% oxygen and water vapors; no significant traces of nitrogen; and a temperature range of 104-536° F. Reports indicated no noticeable magnetic field and no radiation belt, but detectable weak hydrogen corona. “Because Venus rotates so slowly around its axis [purported to be once in 244 earth days] half the planet is cold,” said Soviet scientist Josif Shklovski. Because the other half heated to “monstrous temperature,” he said surface of Venus would appear to be “a dry hot desert.” He noted that temperature extremes would cause constant winds on Venus “of about 450 mph” [accounting for large amount of drift of capsule during descent]. Moscow news reports from Izvestia and Tass said: Venus IV’s mission had been accomplished and instruments had ceased functioning after radioing data from softlanding site on heat, pressure, and carbon dioxide hostile to most forms of life; mother spacecraft burned in Venus’ atmosphere. Some reports did not claim softlanding. Soviet astronomer Vitali Bronshtein’s claim that radio contact was being maintained with instrumented capsule was unconfirmed. Also, cessation of signals from instrumented capsule received varied explanations from international sources. Tass reported antenna of package had failed to point in the right direction and that package’s bulk had blocked direct contact with earth. Jodrell Bank Observatory Director Sir Bernard Lovell expressed doubt that any electronic device could withstand high temperatures on Venusian surface. (Friendly, W Post, 10/18/67, 1; Kamm, NYT, 10/19/67, 1; Bishop, WSJ, 10/19/67, 4; AP, B Sun, 10/20/67; AP, W Star, 10/22/67, A3; SBD, 10/24/67, 283-5)
Dept, of State announced appointment of Office of Outer Space Affairs Director Robert F. Packard as director of new Office of Space and Environmental Science Affairs. This office would be a part of the International Scientific and Technological Affairs offices, whose responsibility is to advise and assist the Secretary on scientific and technological factors affecting foreign policy. Packard would be responsible for the international aspects of U.S. programs in space, atmospheric science, marine science, and earth sciences. Packard had served from 1961 to 1962 in the Office of the Special Assistant to the Secretary for Atomic Energy and Outer Space. (State Dept. Release, 9/13/67)
U.S.S.R. had invited U.K. to help track its Venus probe, Venus IV, in telegram from Mstislav V. Keldysb, President of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, to Sir Bernard Loved, Director of Jodrell Bank Observatory, reported Washington Post. U.S.S.R. did not furnish code to signals; Sir Bernard had said that tapes of signals would be sent to Moscow. Keldysh’s telegram referred to “this experiment’s extraordinary importance and significance for mankind.” Sir Bernard speculated that U.S.S.R. might attempt softlanding on planet Venus. Not since launch of Venus I in 1961 had the Soviets requested British working assistance. (Schmidt, NYT, 10/17/67, 13; W Post, 10/17/67, A17)
Chimpanzees could survive sudden exposure to near vacuum according to tests performed by 6751 Aeromedical Research Laboratory at Holloman afb. Visual inspection of the eeg as well as power spectral density computer analysis indicated the expected greater subcortical resistance to anoxia when compared to cortical responses. Results showed that all subjects not only survived the exposures in excellent health but recovered within 4 hr after rapid decompression and were able to execute a complex behavioral schedule at a preexposure level of performance. Central nervous system damage was absent or negligible. (Text)
