National Radio Astronomy Observatory astronomers at Green Bank, W. Va., disclosed discovery of first pair of pulsars, near Crab Nebula, 6,000 light yr from earth. Through association with the decayed star, they might provide clue as to pulsars’ identity. (Cohn, W Post, 11/7/68, A4)
Eighth anniversary of NASA’s largest Center, Marshall Space Flight Center. It became operational July 1, 1960, with 4,400 employees and facilities valued at estimated $100 million. On eighth anniversary MSFC had 6,500 employees. Plant value was estimated at $400 million, with real property values accounting for $140 million and capital equipment for remaining $260 million. Achievements during first eight years included development and successful flight of Saturn I, Saturn IB, and Saturn V launch vehicles, (msfc Release 68-143)
mit physicist and radioastronomer, Dr. Bernard Burke, and teams of scientists using 140-ft “Big Dish” antenna at National Radio Astronomy Observatory began first radioastronomy test of Einstein’s general theory of relativity in attempt to discover gravity’s effect on universe. Among three basic tests proposed by Einstein to test his theory to account for action of all bodies under gravitational force was one to measure bending of light from distant source as it passed an energetic body like the sun. Dr. Burke’s experiment measured signals from newly discovered quasars to determine amount of bending they underwent in passing the sun. If light, in form of quasar radiowaves, was bent, Einstein theory would receive added support; if it was not bent as much as he predicted, or if astronomers were unable to detect significant bending, theory would remain intact until further proof was provided, (nrao Proj Off; Lannan, W Star, 10/1/68, A9)
nasa and France’s Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (onera) had agreed on cooperative research project on tilt-rotors for vertical-flying aircraft. Data were expected to assist in design of rotors and propellers for v/stol aircraft. NASA would provide rotors, hardware, and instrumentation for tests, minimum engineering support, and basic computations of structural strength; onera would conduct tests in Modane, France, wind tunnel at no cost to NASA. (NASA Release 68-104)
Cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for Cal Tech’s operation of Jet Propulsion Laboratory as a major NASA installation was renewed by NASA and Cal Tech through Dec. 31, 1971. Cal Tech staffed and operated JPL; property, facilities, and equipment were owned by Government. (NASA Procurement Off; NASA Release 69—2)
Harold D. Babcock, 40-yr member of Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar Observatory staffs, died. He was specialist in study of spectra of sunspots and discoverer of fact that magnetic field of sun reversed polarity periodically. (nas—nrc—nae News Report, 5/68, 10)
Univ. of California scientist Dr. David Cudaback, in telephone interview, said rhythmic light flashes coming from one of newly discovered pulsars, which he described at nasa pulsar meeting May 21 in New York, had turned out to be rhythmic effect from his tape recorder. However, Kitt Peak National Observatory, which reported flashes at same meeting, still argued they seemed real. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/8/68, 32)
Harold T. Luskin, chief advanced design engineer at LockheedCalifornia Co. and former AIAA President, was named NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Technical), effective March 18. Luskin would be responsible for ensuring technical excellence and would share responsibility for overall planning and direction of Manned Space Flight Program with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight and his other deputies, (nasa Release 68—39)
F—111 A aircraft crashed near Edwards afb, Calif., on test flight. Crewmen, Col. Henry W. Brown (usaf) and L/Col. Joe B. Jordon (usaf), parachuted to safety in escape compartment. Crash was fourth for F—111; one F—111B and two F—lllAs had crashed previously. (AP, NYT, 1/4/68, 74)
Soviet economist Dr. Viktor A. Cheprakov had published in Izvestia what appeared to be rebuttal to prognosis by Soviet nuclear physicist Prof. Andrey D. Sakharov of convergence of communism and capitalism by year 2000 [see July 22]. In “Problems of the Last Third of the Century,” translated by New York Times, Dr. Cheprakov foresaw sharpening of struggle between the two ideologies and discussed role of science. “Science and technology are endowed with tremendous possibilities. ... a new achievement ... is being recorded every 25 seconds. We have figures on what and how much can be extracted from the earth, on the benefits to be derived from new methods of food production . . . and on the undoubtedly vast prospects of using the resources of seas and oceans. But the realization of all these potentialities will require the victory of socialism . . . for only socialism makes it possible to funnel vast funds into scientific research and into the practical use of its results in the interest of the peoples.” (Anderson, NYT, 8/19/68,1)
NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology James M. Beggs dedicated new $3.5-million Flight Control Research Facility at LaRC. Facility, connected to LaRc’s data analysis and computation center, would be used for guidance and control research in support of manned flight. During ceremony, Center’s Digital Computer Complex Group received LaRC Group Achievement Award for “outstanding performance and dedicated efforts in combining unique concepts in computer organization and operating systems” contributing to “one of the most outstanding research computer installations in the United States.” (Langley Researcher, 7/26/68, 1, 4)
Demonstrated success of lunar module’s (lm) initial unmanned test flight in earth orbit Jan. 22 and of subsequent ground test analysis by NASA Manned Space Flight Safety Office had eliminated need for second unmanned lm flight, NASA announced. First manned lm flight using Saturn V launch vehicle was planned for late 1968. (nasa Release 68-50; upi, W Star, 3/17/68, A4)
Lawrence A. Hyland, Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., received naa’s Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1967 on behalf of Hughes Surveyor Program Team, JPL, and other companies and organizations involved in project which citation said, had “put the eyes and hands of the United States on the Moon.” Award was presented by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey for greatest annual achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in U.S. In ceremonies at Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum, Humphrey called U.S. space program “a splendid challenge and a noble mission . . . one whose practical benefits for today are exceeded only by its promise for tomorrow. “I urge every American to support the future development of our space program, and I . . . shall do so with pride and vigor.” Humphrey said Nation had decided to commit resources “to venture in space for one primary reason: We believe that this mission to the far-out will produce many down-to-earth benefits for men. ... In fact . . . the nation that is first in science and technology has a chance to be the first to overcome some of the perplexing problems that have beset mankind since the beginning of civilization.” Space research “has vastly expanded our capabilities in navigation, communication and meteorology. It has given us new products and processes in such fields as agriculture, photography, metallurgy, and oceanography.” Techniques “that are going to put a man on the moon are . . . exactly the techniques that we are going to need to clean up our cities . . the systems analysis approach ... is the approach that the modern city of America is going to need if it’s going to become a livable social institution. “So maybe we’ve been pioneering in space only to save ourselves on earth . . . maybe the nation that puts a man on the moon is the nation that will put man on his feet first right here on earth. . . . “I think a certain extravagance of objectives—a will to push back
Washington Evening Star said U.K. and Australian governments had drawn up joint plans for largest telescope in Southern Hemisphere, 150-in optical telescope at Siding Spring Mountain Observatory of Australian National Univ. It would cost $10.5 million. (W Star, 11/21/68, A6)
nasa successfully completed month-long laboratory test of Biosatellite capsule which would maintain primate in space for 30 days in 1969. Fully instrumented, 15-lb, pigtailed monkey which made simulated space flight was alert and responsive when removed and was undergoing postflight examination and physiological measurements identical to those planned to follow actual flight. Test had been terminated after 28 days when biomedical instrumentation measured less urine than monkey would normally secrete. Biosatellite D primate flight would duplicate most routines of manned flight to provide data on effects of prolonged weightlessness. During simulated flight, monkey ate pellets, drank water, and performed two 30-min tasks each day. Test was conducted by Biosatellite experimenters at UCLA with support from NASA and General Electric Co. arc was managing project, (nasa Release 68-142; AP, B Sun, 8/29/68, A4)
Harvard College Observatory scientists Dr. George R. Huguenin and Dr. J. H. Taylor became first U.S. scientists to identify a new pulsar when they discovered HP 1506 in northern sky near Little Dipper. Pulsar, similar to four pulsars discovered in 1967 by U.K. scientists, had pulse rate of one every 0.7397 sec, each lasting 0.020 sec. Pulse rate of other four pulsars ranged from 0.25 to 1.4 sec, with each pulse lasting 0.020 sec. Harvard scientists used National Radio Astronomy Observatory antenna at Green Bank, W. Va. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/19/68, 20)
LaRC was conducting operational research program at NASA Wallops Station to evaluate runway grooving as a means of reducing aircraft hydroplaning, loss of friction during high-speed landing because of water or slush film. Aircraft landed on specially prepared runways with grooves % in wide, % in deep, and 1 in apart and braking effectiveness was recorded by instruments on aircraft and on ground. Research indicated grooving helped to alleviate all known phenomena which resulted in low tire-ground friction, but scientists were concerned that undesirable vibrations might be introduced into aircraft. (Langley Researcher, 5/17/68,4)
Aerospace Industries Assn, released its 1967 Annual Report, reviewing “industry’s continuing pattern of growth”: 11% increase in sales over 1966, to $27.2 billion; maintenance of 1,400,000-man work force, making aerospace industry largest U.S. manufacturing employer; and $575-million increase in exports, to $2.2 billion, including 42.9% increase in civilian aircraft, to $789 million. (Text)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded ibm’s Space Guidance Center $1,303,758 contract for spare parts and logistics support of instrument units that guided Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles, (msfc Release 68—63)
President Johnson released Noise—Sound Without Value, report of Federal Council for Science and Technology task force, and challenged industry, universities, and public authorities to attack noise in environment from many sources. He directed Federal departments and agencies to undertake or expand noise abatement programs. Among recommendations endorsed by President, report said: NASA should complete studies of community response to airport noise, in addition to hew, dot, and hud studies of effects; nasa and dot should continue air transport noise abatement research; DOD and NASA should continue to study and set standards for noise in special situations; and DOT should develop sonic-boom-control standards. (Text; PD, 11/11/68,1575-6)
Formal establishment of Science and Public Policy Studies Group temporarily housed at mit became effective. Group was designed as focus of interest and information for scholars, universities, and government officials engaged in teaching and research in science and public policy. Any university with active teaching and research program in science and public policy could become affiliate. Some 50 had indicated interest. Funding for two-year period was from university contributions and matching Sloan Foundation grant. Prof. Eugene B. Skolnikoff of MIT would serve as chairman. (Group Ann)
Naval Research Laboratory scientists Dror Sadeh, Stephen Knowles, and Benjamin Au reported in Science observations made in two experiments in which an apparent decrease in frequency of radio or light waves was detected when optical path was in vicinity of a mass. Radio waves skirting earth and sun appeared to increase in wavelength, leading scientists to reason that all lights crossing portions of universe would be similarly affected by mass of objects along the way. Effect could account for part of “red shift” (shift in spectra of distant galaxies as they receded from earth), chief tool for measuring expansion rate of universe which, in turn, was used to measure age of universe. Thus, if observations by nrl scientists were confirmed, they could necessitate revision of long-standing estimates of age and expansion rate of universe. Experimenters, however, indicated their findings appeared inconsistent with results from “round-trip” experiments, such as those obtained during past year when radar impulses were bounced off Venus and Mercury. (Science, 8/9/68, 567—9; Sullivan, NYT, 8/10/68, 27)
President Johnson sent to Congress Marine Science Affairs—A Year of Plans and Progress; The Second Report of the President to the Congress on Marine Resources and Engineering Development and reported on FY 1969 budget, which included $516 million for marine science and technology programs. Increased funding was requested for program on application of spacecraft technology in oceanography and improved observation and prediction of ocean environment. (PD, 3/18/68, 489-90)
British Minister of Technology Anthony W. Benn announced in House of Commons that U.K. would underwrite production of Anglo-French Concorde supersonic aircraft with $180- to $240-million loan for working capital, bringing total U.K. commitment to more than $1 billion. He later revealed first test flight would be delayed until summer 1968. First flight of U.S. sst had been postponed until 1972 [see Feb. 22]. (Lee, NYT, 2/28/68, 5)
MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, discussed “The Outlook for Space Exploration” addressing National Space Club’s Goddard Memo
New York Times article said at least eight nations, including U.S. and U.S.S.R., were building astronomical observatories in Chile, which had been termed ideal site because of its latitude, near 30° South. Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc. (aura) , dependency of NSF, had invested $19 million thus far in observatory of Cerro Tololo. Other groups were European Southern Observatory (eso, consortium of West Germany, France, Holland, Belgium, Sweden, and Denmark) and Soviet Astronomical Mission. A 36-in-telescope at U.S. observatory already had photographed powerful ray-emitting star whose existence previously had been only suspected. (NYT, 11/24/68, 27)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, in statement before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, pointed to “establishment of a Manned Space Plight Safety Office ... to focus all our safety activity at the highest level of management.” NASA, he said, was ensuring “that quality assurance and reliability officials have direct access to contractor management and nasa management.” (Testimony)
Dr. Ernest Harry Vestine, expert on geomagnetism who had joined RAND Corp. in 1957 after 20 yr with Carnegie Institution, died in Santa Monica, Calif., of heart attack at age 62. He had been an originator of 1957—58 International Geophysical Year and had served as consultant to DOD, NASA, and Dept, of Commerce. He had been one of leaders of 1933 International Polar Year expedition, which established observatory to measure earth’s magnetic field. (W Post, 7/19/68, B6)
AEC refused comment on Science and Citizen report U.S. had set off 3 and U.S.S.R. 22 undisclosed underground atomic tests in 1964 through 1967, bringing total underground tests to 168 for past three years. Magazine, published by Committee for Environmental Information in St. Louis, Mo., said source of information was publication of Research Institute of Swedish National Defense and that three undisclosed U.S. tests had occurred in 1964. All subsequent U.S. tests had been reported. {W Post, 5/7/68, 7)
National Science Foundation released Research and Development in Industry, 1966. Total 1966 industrial r&d expenditure was $15.5 billion, with industry accounting for 70% of nation’s R&D performance. Federal Government R&D performed in industry reached $8.3 billion, 53% of industrial total. In January 1967, 163,900—30% of total—industrial scientists and engineers were engaged in R&D directly supported by Federal Government. In 1966, NASA and DOD financed work of 89% of R&D scientists and engineers employed by industry on Federal projects, with 54,000 working on NASA projects, an increase of 50% over 1963. DOD-financed scientists and engineers decreased 23% in same period. (Text)
In New York Times, Walter Sullivan said President-elect Richard M. Nixon’s entourage had discussed creation of Cabinet post for science and technology. “The science adviser, in the view of the Nixon entourage, has been unable to streamline the machinery for making science policy. Science, and the problems relating to it, has outgrown its old boundaries. The big problems are interdisciplinary. Their solution requires expertise in many fields, and the cooperation of many departments of government. This has led to a proliferation of interdepartmental committees.” However, “because the creation of a Cabinet post would have major repercussions within the scientific establishment, it is unlikely that such a step will be taken until there has been an extensive study, lasting perhaps a year or more.” (ATT, 12/8/68, 3E)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told British Interplanetary Society in London: “I believe that the exploitation of space is limited in concept and extent by the very high cost of putting payload into orbit, and the inaccessibility of objects after they have been launched. Therefore I would forecast that the next major thrust in space will be the development of an economical launch vehicle for shuttling between earth and the installations, such as the orbiting space stations which will be operating in space.” Dr. Mueller said efficient earth-to-orbit transportation system would be needed to shuttle thousands of tons of material in and out of space, operating in mode similar to that of large commercial air transports and compatible with airports. Same technology could be applied to terrestrial point-to-point transport. (Text)
NASA scientists working with Deep Space Network (dsn) had quadrupled distances over which signals from three Pioneer spacecraft currently in interplanetary space could be heard. Pioneers could view sun from every side. Improvements in DSN receivers so far had allowed return of 50% more of their data than had been planned. All three Pioneers— now 29, 116, and 182 million mi from earth—could be heard through DSN antennas, ensuring return of data until they wore out. Together they had, to date, amassed 55 mo in orbit, measuring particles and fields of sun’s atmosphere and returning seven billion bits of data. Change of polarization of tracking antennas from circular to linear had doubled received signal power, (arc Release 68—13; ARC Astrogram, 8/29/68, 1)
Clifford C. Furnas, President of Western New York Nuclear Research Center and member of nae, was appointed to newly created position of Vice Chairman of National Research Council (nrc), in which he would “assist the Chairman, nas President Frederick Seitz, in the general administration of the nrc and help coordinate activities” between nae, nas, and nrc. (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 3/68,5: nas pio)
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory dedicated multipurpose astronomical station at Mount Hopkins, Ariz. Station, supported by nasa Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition and Office of Advanced Research and Technology, would be site of experimental series on laser communications to be conducted by NASA and Smithsonian. (Smithsonian pao)
Rare photographic zenith tube, pzt, which provided almost exact measurement of astronomical time, had been installed at Dominion Observatory, Priddis, Alberta, Canada. It would be used in conjunction with another pzt at Royal Greenwich Observatory near Herstmonceux, U.K., to study continental drift by establishing exact measurements between two points on same latitude and observing whether distance changed with time. (Can Press, NYT, 6/15/68, 20)
Guidance and control equipment used during Gemini XI reentry Sept. 15, 1966, was being flight-tested at nasa Wallops Station to set up system performance requirements for automated landing for v/stol aircraft. Tests were part of long-range NASA research program to develop all-weather aviation electronics systems for v/stol aircraft, (erc Release 68—12; WS Release 68—14; Marshall Star, 8/14/68, 2)
Univ. of Virginia announced it would use $100,000 NASA grant to finance construction of 40-in astrometric telescope at its observatory south of Charlottesville, Va. Additional funding would come from estate of Leander McCormick, who provided funds for its 26-in telescope built in 1882. (AP, W Star, 7/3/68, A20)
National Science Foundation released Federal Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities: Fiscal Years 1967, 1968, and 1969. Federal obligations for basic research, applied research, and development (plant excluded) totaled $16.5 billion in FY 1967 and were expected to total $16.2 billion in FY 1968, first drop since 1955. Obligations had been expected to total $17.3 billion in FY 1969, but, because of appropriations and apportionment actions, probably would be even less than in 1968. Basic research obligations totaled $2.0 billion in FY 1967 and were expected to be $2.1 billion in 1968. Applied research obligations totaled $3.3 billion in FY 1967, with $3.3 billion estimated for 1968. Originally expected increases in FY 1969 obligations, to $2.4 billion for basic research and $3.6 billion for applied research, probably would not occur because of cutbacks in FY 1969 budget. Development obligations were $11.3 billion in 1967, highest ever reported, but were expected to drop to $10.8 billion in 1968. Originally expected rise to $11.3 billion in 1969 probably would not be achieved. In FY 1967, obligations for r&d plant totaled $620 million, with estimated $517 million for 1968 and $777 million for 1969. dod, nasa, and aec provided bulk of r&d funds, with 90% average share during 1960—66 and 85% during 1967—69. dod, NASA, and aec together supported 60% of Federal research total and more than 95% of development total in 1968. During 1967—69, 80% of Federal R&D funds were scheduled for extramural performers, chiefly U.S. industrial firms. In 1968 they received 60%. (Text)
Pig-tailed monkey was in good health after May simulated test flight, with 15-day medical countdown and 5-day postflight monitoring. Monkey, identical to one scheduled for 50-day orbit of earth on NASA’s Biosatellite D in 1969, had been instrumented with two dozen sensors. In photo, primate is seated in test fixture. maintain highest safety standards possible in national aerospace program by solving technical safety problems and providing NASA and its contractors with current information on safety data and procedures. Institute would be directed by I. Irving Pinkel, consultant on aircraft safety to usaf and faa and former ApoUo 204 accident investigator and consultant, (nasa Release 68—79; LeRC Release 68—32)
Sen. Gaylord Nelson (D-Wis.), member of Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, on Senate floor praised Construction of Wisconsin Regional Space Center as “a place where the layman can acquire information about the developments and our accomplishments in the space age.” He inserted in Congressional Record article by Barbara E. Kocjan, stenographic coordinator of projects for Center, describing Center as “a highly effective teaching laboratory that can readily be tied into the on going programs of tens of thousands of elementary and secondary schools and hundreds of colleges and universities.” (CR, 3/22/68, E2151)
Charles J. Donlan was named Acting Director, Advanced Manned Missions Program, NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, replacing Edgar M. Cortright. He would serve in addition to his duties as Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Technical). (nasa Ann)
A 15-lb pig-tailed monkey, like one scheduled to orbit earth for 30 days on board Biosatellite D in 1969, had successfully completed simulated space flight fully instrumented with some two dozen separate biological sensors. Test, first joining of instrumented primate and its complete array of biological instrumentation with flight-type spacecraft, met all objectives, including 15-day medical countdown, 3-day simulated flight, and 5-day monitoring, (nasa Release 68—76; W Post, 4/26/68, A19)
Scientists from Stanford Univ. and Univ. of California, using telescope at Lick Observatory atop Mt. Hamilton, Calif., and telescopes on Kitt Peak, Ariz., had found one of four recently discovered pulsars flashed visible wavelengths of light at half the rate of its radio pulse. Discovery was disclosed by Univ. of California at Berkeley astronomer, Dr. David Cudaback, at pulsar meeting in New York sponsored jointly by NASA Institute for Space Studies and Belfer Graduate School of Science, Yeshiva Univ. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/21/68, 14; 5/22/68, 24; 5/26/68, 12) .
nasa selected Computer Sciences Corp., Lockheed Electronics Co., Computer Applications, Inc., and Service Technology Corp. (ltv) , for competitive negotiations on $1-million one-year renewable contract to provide computer support services at Electronics Research Center, (nasa Release 68-99)
Aerospace Daily survey showed most experts considered military r&d funds prime candidate for budget cuts. Services had been told to slash $900 million from FY 1969 requests as their part in $6-billion reduction demanded by Congress, which exhibited little support for either Manned Orbiting Laboratory program or Sentinel abm system. Federal Contract Research Center also was likely to be cut, though Pentagon sought $48 million, $3 million less than FY 1968. Government was spending estimated $17 billion annually on research and there was “rising general Congressional reluctance to approve more funds or even to provide additional money merely to keep pace with the inflation of the economy.” (Aero Daily, 5/27/68, 26)
Newsweek commented on break-up of European Launcher Development Organization: “The seven-nation . . . [ELDO] which never really got off the pad, will be buried early in October. Efforts to get Britain to remain only made clear the reason for her withdrawal: France refused to accept Britain as a member of Euromart and the British pulled out. The Netherlands backs Britain’s move in the face of De Gaulle’s stubbornness, and Italy has already expressed reservations about the project. If Western Europe wants launchers for scientific space exploration in future, it will have to buy them from the U.S.” (Newsweek, 9/30/68, 20)
Senate Report No. 957, Aeronautical Research and Development Policy, sponsored by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, concluded NASA should increase its aeronautical effort, particularly in the development phase, and carry it on to “proof-of-concept testing as a means of providing a larger variety of options to aircraft designers and systems engineers.” Report called for NASC to act as focal point for development of more comprehensive and better coordinated aeronautical R&D policy and recommended that NASA’s aeronautical activity be upgraded to major office level and directed by an Associate Administrator. (Text)
In Baltimore Sun William J. Perkinson warned against “A Czechoslovakia In Space.” He said experts explained U.S. and other free-world nations “must insure that future Russian leaders will never be able to blackmail nations or whole continents of nations into submitting to the will of such Soviet leaders the way the leaders of the Kremlin forced Czechoslovakia to yield through the invasion of that country on the night of August 21.” By marrying technology of “spook,” or hovering, satellite with that used to produce mirv and by use of more powerful rockets, “it would be possible to launch truly ‘orbiting men-of-war’ that could be used far more effectively to cow any nation than the most powerful of gunboats were able to do in the days of ‘gunboat diplomacy.’ ” Blackmail might not occur, if arms limitation treaties granted each nation right to board and inspect all heavy satellites in orbit. “But even that right would have to be backed up by means of spacecraft and spacemen capable of exercising that right. That ... is why the invasion of Czechoslovakia is certain to spark new interest in manned space flight.” (B Sun, 9/1/68, 3)
NASA selected Nortronics Div. of Northrop Corp. and Fecker Div. of Owens-Illinois Co. for competitive negotiations for $2.5 million cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to design, build, and install 36-in aperture infrared telescope in NASA’s high-altitude observatory aircraft. Aircraft, modified Convair 990 jet transport, was operated by arc as national facility for astronomers and other scientists. Telescope would provide information on planets, comets, asteroids, solar surface, stars, nebulae, and galactic phenomena. Above interference of most of earth’s atmosphere, it would gather information in infrared portion of spectrum not available from ground observatories, (nasa Release 68—144)
nasa announced organizational change effective May 19. Functions and personnel of Procurement Management Div. of Management Operations Directorate, Office of Manned Space Flight, was transferred to Office of Industry Affairs. Procurement Office would become Program Support Div. (omsf), reporting to Director of Procurement, (nasa Ann)
Report called 2% for planetary exploration out of NASA FY 1969 budget “totally inadequate.” It recommended diversion of funds from manned missions to instrument exploration, including biennial flights to orbit Venus and Mars until 1975; dropping capsule on Mars in 1973 to detect life signs and a major lander later, perhaps in 1975; multiple-drop probe of Venus’ surface in 1975; Mercury flight in 1973; and priority Jupiter flybys in 1972 and 1973. Panel advocated pursuit of planets in economical way: use of existing Pioneer spacecraft in Venus and Jupiter missions, elimination of second spacecraft in all missions unless “clear gain . . . will result from such double launches,” and use of single launch for both Venus and Mercury missions by scheduling them when planets were in alignment (same technique could be used for “Grand Tour” of major planets in 1977, when they would be aligned in space). Referring to U.S.S.R. exploration, report said, “We certainly believe we cannot abandon this broad area of space activities to our competitors.” Report also recommended strong support for radioastronomy, including development of major new observatory primarily for planetary study, and continued support of ground-based optical planetary astronomy. It proposed coordinated, informal contact with Soviet scientists on possibility of joint planning of planetary exploration. (Text; NRC Release; Lyons, NYT, 8/15/68, 17; O’Toole, W Post, 8/15/68, Al; Lannan, W Star, 8/15/68, C8; Carter, Science, 8/16/68,671—3)
Lockheed-Georgia Co. test pilot Leo J. Sullivan successfully flew C—5 Galaxy, world’s largest aircraft, on 94-min first test flight from Dobbins AFB over Georgia countryside at speeds ranging from 143-mph takeoff to 230 mph and reaching 10,000-ft altitude. No attempt was made to reach maximum speed of 550 mph. C—5, powered by four TF—39 turbofan jet engines, each delivering 41,000 lb of thrust, could carry 265,000-lb payload over 2,875-mi range or 100,000-lb payload over 6,325-mi range at cruising speed of 506 mph. Military version would carry 350 fully equipped troops, usaf had ordered 58. “We like to talk about a commercial plane similar to the C—5 which could carry nearly 1,000 passengers,” said Lockheed-Georgia President T. R. May, but he found idea of carrying both passengers and freight attractive. “We have preliminary plans for airplanes weighing over a million pounds. But it is fairly clear that the world is not quite ready for a
New York Times said article in December issue of Australian Quarterly by Australian National Univ. lecturer Robert Cooksey had suggested U.S. “space research facility” at Pine Gap near geographical center of Australia might be station designed to guide orbital missiles fired from U.S. to targets in Communist China. Article had caused flurry of questions about base in Australian press. Later New York Times story said U.S. officials in Washington had denied suggestion and said Pine Gap installation was joint U.S.-Australian space research facility established by agreement in 1966. (Trumbull, NYT, 12/29/68, 30)
NASA established Office of Facilities, merging facility functions and applicable staff elements of Office of Manned Space Flight, Office of Space Science and Applications, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, and Facilities Management Office. New office, under direction of m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), would encompass planning, design, acquisition, construction, repair, alteration, maintenance, operations, utilization, and disposal of facilities including land and collateral equipment. It would report to the Assistant Administrator for Administration. (NASA Ann)
Retirement of H. Julian Allen as Director of Ames Research Center, announced Oct. 25, would be deferred, NASA announced. Allen would be Special Assistant to Associate Director, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, and would serve as Acting Director of arc for indefinite period. ARC Associate Director James F. Parsons, named to be Acting Director after Allen’s retirement, had become seriously ill. Parsons died March 2, 1969. (nasa Ann, 12/2/68; arc Memo from Director to Staff, 3/3/69)
NASA announced retirement, effective Nov. 1, of Werner R. Kuers, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center’s Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory since 1961. (msfc Release 68—257; Marshall Star, 10/30/68, D '	...
Astronomer Dr. Gerritt L. Verschuur, with aid of National Radio Astronomy Observatory, had measured for first time strength of Milky Way’s magnetic field as it existed in far reaches of the galaxy, to help explain theories of star formation, radio wave propagation, and cosmic ray acceleration unprovable previously. (W Post, 9/10/68, A10)
In letter to President Johnson, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), Chairman of House Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development, urged reorganization of environmental science activities of Federal Government and asked that responsibility for development of weather modification programs be given to Environmental Science Services Administration (essa). His committee, originator of NSF Amendments Act of 1968 which became effective July 18, was interested in implementing section which relieved NSF of that responsibility as of Sept. 1. Rep. Daddario stated three beliefs: “1. The weather modification program involves the development of environmental understanding which is crucial to the protection of our planetary resources; it should be supported and pursued without significant hiatus. 2. In light of the nature of the program and the present administrative organization of the executive branch, it seems clear that weather modification should become part of the portfolio of the Environmental Science Services Administration. 3. At the same time, there is considerable doubt whether the Environmental Science Services Administration should remain part of the Department of Commerce; therefore consideration should be given to executive reorganization which might either relocate the Administration or give it independent status.” (Text; W Star, 8/23/68, A4)
Defense Projects Support Office (dpso) was established in Special Programs Office at nasa Hq. to manage specialized tasks where nasa’s unique capabilities could provide needed support to a limited number of dod projects. M. J. Raffensperger, Director of Advanced Manned Missions Planning and Operations, Office of Manned Space Flight, was appointed Deputy Director of Special Programs Office and Acting Director of dpso. (nasa Release 68—66; nasa Ann, 4/17/68)
