Dr. Caryl P. Haskins, Carnegie Institution President, announced 40-in telescope of advanced design would be erected atop 8,000-ft Las Cam-panas Mountain in north central Chile. It would be first telescope of Carnegie Southern Observatory, which eventually would house 200-in reflector similar to that at Mt. Palomar Observatory in California. New telescope, expected to be operational in one year, would be equipped with ultrasensitive photoelectric instruments to measure light from remote sources and with digital data system. (Carnegie Institution Release)
In Duke Univ. lecture, Dr. Peter van de Kamp, Director of Sproul Observatory at Swarthmore College, Pa., described discovery of fourth planet-like body found outside solar system. Existence had been deduced from 30 yrs telescopic observation of irregularities in Barnard’s Star, six light years from earth. (NYT, 4/15/69, 16; AP, W Post, 4/17/69, F13)
NASA Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight, chaired by Dr. Charles H. Townes, published Proceedings of the Winter Study on Uses of Manned Space Flight, 1975—1985, Vol. I—■ Proceedings: NASA program for next two decades must project state of technology for that period. Program must be balanced in use of manned and automated operations. “The benefits to the nation, both internal and international, dictate that the United States remain in the forefront of all major categories of space activities,” space sciences, exploration of solar system, manned space flight capability, and economic applications of space flight. Study said it was reasonable to use to 1% of gnp to support civilian space flight program of which major elements were: (1) aggressive-automated planetary exploration program as recommended by nas—nrc Space Science Board, with options for manned phase to follow early automated phase; (2) economic applications program as recommended by 1968 Summer Study on Space Applications by nas; (3) continuation of lunar exploration after Apollo landing as recommended by Lunar and Planetary Missions Board of nasa; (4) vigorous program of astronomical observations in earth orbit as recommended by NASA Astronomy Missions Board; and (5) extension of manned space flight capability in earth orbit to longer duration for scientific and technological purposes. Achievement of manned low-cost transportation system deserved high priority. Study recommended use of long-duration manned space station designed to support men in weightless condition “unless unexpected biomedical problems are encountered or overwhelming engineering advantages for artificial gravity are discovered.” It agreed on advisability of placing observatories and laboratories in earth orbit but noted, “Relative emphasis among these activities and the extent of manned attendance desirable in each, must be decided by appropriate studies and experiments.” “To provide a focal point for structuring a manned planetary program a target date of 1982 and the Mars landing mode . . . are assumed here for discussion. Achievement of the operational capability in that year would require initiation of system design in about 1975.” (Text)
Specific objectives of lunar exploration were discussed in testimony by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Evaluation of natural resources on 14.6-million-sq-mi lunar surface would include minerals of yet undetermined nature and unique combination of high vacuum and gravitational field one-sixth as strong as earth’s. “On the results of our evaluation will depend our decision some years from now as to whether there is sufficient potential to justify establishing a lunar base.” NASA also would investigate use of moon as “island near our shores to which we can voyage ... to develop man’s potential to function as an explorer throughout the solar system.” (Testimony)
Eugene Luther Vidal, who as Director of Air Commerce of Dept, of Commerce (1933—1937) promoted growth of U.S. civil aviation, died, at age 73 in Palos Verdes, Calif. He had furthered construction of airports and beacons, encouraged private flying and manufacture of small aircraft, advanced commercial aviation, and reorganized Government control of commercial flights. After leaving Commerce Dept, he had established research laboratory near Camden, N.J., where he developed process for making airframe parts from molded plywood. (NYT, 2/21/69, 43)
Tass quoted unidentified Soviet space scientist, described as chief designer of automatic interplanetary stations, as saying U.S.S.R. favored manned space flight, but only in earth orbit “so far.” It would continue probing planets with automatic apparatus. (Reuters, B Sun, 5/19/69,
In Science, Bryce Nelson reviewed Science Policy in the USSR, study sponsored by Directorate for Scientific Affairs of Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (oecd). It indicated, he said, that Soviet scientists and political leaders “need to spend considerable time thinking about how to correct imbalances in their R&D system.” U.S.S.R. had succeeded outstandingly in aviation rocketry, space exploration, atomic energy, machine tools, and iron and steel technology but its R&D system seemed sluggish. Main bottleneck was relative Unavailability of testing facilities. Central planning system in U.S.S.R. reinforced separation between R&D establishments and industry and contributed to reluctance of factories to innovate. Increasing use of contract system, with industries placing growing number of R&D contracts with institutions of higher learning, was helping bridge gap between research centers and industry. (Science, 2/28/69, 917—8) During February: In Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial written just before his appointment as Secretary of Air Force, incoming aiaa President, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said: “I believe that to understand adequately the challenges that confront those of us in aeronautical and aerospace activities, we must take as our perspective the commitments that challenge the nation as a whole. President Eisenhower, President Kennedy, and President Johnson, each in his own way, had a major impact on aeronautics and astronautics. And for each, his support of aerospace was a function of his belief that such efforts were instrumental in the accomplishment of national goals. In the future, as in the past, governmental support of aerospace will be based largely on its demonstrated relevance to the needs of the nation.” (A&A, 2/69, 26-7)
AH—56A helicopter, under development by Lockheed California Co. for USA, was destroyed when it broke loose and moved downwind inside wind tunnel at ARC. Flying debris punctured steel wall and injured two men in control room. (NASA Release 69—154)
NASA announced award to Bendix Field Engineering Corp. of $30 million, one-year, cost-plus-award-fee contract extension for operation and maintenance of major portion of Manned Space Flight Network. Extension was third exercised under option and brought total funding to $139,215,832. (nasa Release 69—100)
In first large-scale attempt at radar mapping of ice-buried continent surrounding South Pole, scientists of Scott Polar Research Institute in Cambridge, England, would make at least 20 flights with airborne-radar-equipped usn C—130 Hercules aircraft from McMurdo Sound in Antarctic, New York Times said. Radar equipment already had penetrated more than 14,800 ft of ice, recording profile of mountains and valleys underneath. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/1/69, 30)
Inaccurate signals from controlling gyro mechanism had caused Sept. 17 destruction of AH—56A helicopter inside wind tunnel at arc, nasa announced. Investigation board, appointed by arc Director, Dr. Hans Mark, had determined accident did not result from malfunction of rotor control system or of wind-tunnel systems and equipment. Board recommended greater use of computers to analyze rotor systems before test, study of safety systems and hazards and procedures for windtunnel crews in emergencies, and addition of metal barriers to protect control room and sections near tunnel. It said visual close observation of tests should be minimized. AH—56A was under study for stability and control at USA request. (NASA Release 69-154)
Systems approach was needed in applying “human and technological resources to domestic problems,” Space/Aeronautics said. Growth areas for aerospace industry spinoff included urban, environmental, surface-transportation, medical, and ocean systems. Lessons to be learned in dealing with these systems were: (1) massive problems required efforts on massive scale; (2) R&D cycle for civil system was always longer than political cycle being counted on to support it; and (3) even when system was built jurisdictional prerogatives could “make a mess of the implementation.” Aerospace companies should employ their capabilities “to assess their experience in high technology and their managerial skills” and apply experience “to new systems challenges.” (S/A, 1/69, 106-7)
Laser range-finding equipment was installed at afcrl’s Lunar Laser Observatory near Tucson, Ariz. Constructed largely with nasa funding, Observatory was built specifically for lunar laser-ranging experiments. (oar Research Review, 3—4/70, 31)
In Bonn during European tour, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman addressed enthusiastic crowd of 1,500 students and government officials after film showing on lunar mission in Beethoven Hall: “I believe this research will teach us that we are first and foremost not Germans or Russians or Americans but earthmen.” Borman met West German Chancellor Kurt Georg Kiesinger at lunch and later discussed space research with Scientific Affairs Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg. He attended evening reception given by West German Air and Space Research Institute. (Falbe, B Sun, 2/12/69)
NASA announced it had extended $69,692,000 contract with Bellcomm, Inc., to provide systems analysis, study, planning, and technical support of manned space flight. Value of one-year cost-plus-fixed-fee contract extension was $11,483,000. (nasa Release 69—25)
Swedish aircraft constructor Has Fancher had said that in 1944 Adolf Hitler took delivery of first Junkers 390 aircraft with 14,400-hp engine constructed specially to bomb New York, Washington Daily News reported. Fancher, pilot on aircraft’s nonstop test flight between Germany and South America, said plane weighed 93 tons with bombs and had planned range for nonstop flights from Bordeaux in occupied France to New York and return. Aircraft, delivered too late for use in war, had been burned by Germans. Comparable aircraft was not built until 1956, Fancher said. (W News, 9/3/69)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from WSMR to conduct stellar x-ray studies. Nike-Apache carried Dudley Observatory payload and Aerobee 150 carried University of Wisconsin payload. (NASA Proj Off)
nsf published Research and Development in Industry, 1967: Funds, 1967; Scientists and Engineers, January 1968 (nsf 69—28) : Historically, about 70% of U.S. R&D had been performed by industrial sector. In 1967, industry spent $16.4 billion for R&D, four and half times 1953 level of $3.6 billion. Federal agencies financed 51% of 1967 total, or $8.4 billion. Ratio was down from 1959 high of 59%. NASA and dod furnished 89% of Federal funds to industry in 1967 and supported 89% of 158,000 R&D scientists and engineers working on Federal programs in January 1968. NASA’s R&D cost was $55,400 per scientist or engineer, while DOD spent $51,600. Industry spent $8 billion of its own funds for R&D in 1967, 11% more than in 1966 and 265% more than in 1953. In January 1968, 387,900 full-time-equivalent R&D scientists and engineers were in industry sector, of which 59% worked on company-financed R&D projects. Industrial spending for basic research reached $655 million in 1967, 5% higher than previous year and more than four times 1953 level. (Text)
nsf released Federal Support to Universities and Colleges, Fiscal Year 1967, prepared for Office of Science and Technology. Federal support to universities and colleges totaled $3.3 billion in 1967, up 9% over 1966 but below increases of 32% and 42% in previous two years. Federal support of academic science activities reached $2.3 billion, up 6%, with two-thirds for science education and institutional development and one-third for operating and plant costs for R&D projects. Nonscience activities reached $987 million, or 30% of total. While hew, Dept, of Agriculture, aec, and nsf increased aid to higher education, NASA decreased spending by $11 million (8%) and dod by $37 million (12%). (Text)	_
nas released Scientific Uses of the Large Space Telescope, report of ad hoc committee of nas—nrc Space Science Board appointed to consider scientific functions and practical feasibility of placing in earth orbit or on lunar surface diffraction-limited, optical telescope with 120—in aperture. Committee concluded lst would make dominant contribution to understanding content, structure, scale, and evolution of universe and provide important, decisive information in other astronomical fields; efficient space astronomy program would also require continuing series of smaller telescopes; and most effective utilization of powerful space telescope would require substantial increase in ground-based instruments. (Text)
French scientists, using “world’s most powerful laser” at Limeill Weapons Research Center of French Atomic Energy Commission near Paris, had generated succession of tiny thermonuclear explosions, Walter Sullivan said in New York Times. It was important step toward taming hydrogen bomb energy. It also underlined concern of some scientists that lasers might simplify design of devastating nuclear weapons. (NYT, 9/19/69, 1)
Two photometers on board NASA’s Ogo V orbiting geophysical observatory (launched March 4, 1968) had successfully scanned Lyman-alpha radiation, nasa announced. Data were expected to provide new information on Lyman-alpha emission from Milky Way and to help determine what portion of observed radiation was from geocorona and what portion was from outer space. On Sept. 12 Ogo V had pointed at sun and spun slowly while scanning mirror in Univ. of Paris experiment rotated, covering 30° of celestial sphere. On Sept. 14 spacecraft returned to normal three-axis-stabilized operation, where it would remain until December when second series of maneuvers would be conducted to cover remaining portion of sky and provide first complete mapping of extraterrestrial Lyman-alpha radiation. Univ. of Colorado photometer, which provided broader coverage of Lyman-alpha radiation at 180° to Univ. of Paris experiment, would be used to confirm measurements and verify calibration levels. Ogo V had 18 of 24 onboard experiments still operating. It had provided first measurements of electric fields in earth’s bow shock and comprehensive data on particles and fields in earth’s magnetosphere. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69—137)
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge, Mass., said comet Tago-Sato-Kosaka, discovered Oct. 10 by Japanese astronomers, was being observed by astronomers in Southern Hemisphere and should be visible to naked eye throughout U.S. in mid-January 1970. It was first comet visible without telescope in more than two years, (upi, W Star, 12/14/69, A33)
U.S.S.R.’s supersonic transport, Tu-144, made second test flight. Of 50-min duration, flight did not achieve supersonic speed, according to Pravda. (Reuters, NYT, 1/11/69, 65)
Astronomers at Univ. of Arizona detected for first time existence of rapidly flashing star in Crab Nebula with rhythm coinciding with that of pulsar observed by radio telescope at same position. Flashing was confirmed during week by McDonald Observatory of Univ. of Texas and by Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona. Presumably star and pulsar were identical. Discovery was first unequivocal observation of pulsar in visible light. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/21/69, 29)
usaf’s C—5A Galaxy jet became heaviest aircraft flown, in test flight from Dobbins afb, Ga., with 728,100-lb takeoff weight. Manufacturer, Lockheed-Georgia Co., said weight exceeded design gross takeoff load by 100 lbs. Its previous record was 703,826 lbs. (AP, W Star, 5/22/69, A5)
During day climaxed by shots from what U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry called “schizophrenic” gunman, Soyuz IV and V Cosmonauts Vladimir Shatalov, Boris Volynov, Yevgeny Khrunov, and Aleksey Yeliseyev flew from Baikonur Space Center, Kazakhstan, to Moscow for Kremlin ceremony honoring success of Soyuz missions. Attack occurred as motorcade escorting cosmonauts approached Kremlin’s Borovitsky Gate. Reports said driver of cosmonauts’ limousine and security guard had been injured by bullets and that Cosmonaut Beregovoy had been slightly injured by flying glass. Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and Soviet President Nikolai V. Podgorny, riding several cars behind cosmonauts, were not injured. Western newsmen had already been admitted to Congress Hall for ceremony at which cosmonauts received Medal of the Order of Lenin. Reports said gunman had been apprehended, (upi, W Star, 1/22/69, A13; AP, W Star, 1/23/69, Al; NYT, 1/23/69, 10; Shabad, NYT, 1/24/69, 1; Shub, W Post, 1/24/69, Al)
NAS announced formation of Universities Space Research Assn, (usra) —national consortium of 48 universities—to foster cooperation among universities, other research organizations, and Government for advancement of space research [see Jan. 10]. It would acquire, plan, construct, and operate laboratories and other facilities for R&D and education in space science and technology and had submitted proposal to NASA for management of Lunar Science Institute in Houston, Tex. Existing contract between NASA and nas would expire in autumn. (nas Release)
Richard W. Cook, Deputy Director for Operations in Science and Engineering Directorate, MSFC, would become Deputy Director, Management, to msfc Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc announced. He would succeed Harry H. Gorman, new nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Management), for one or two years, or until permanent replacement became available. (MSFC Release 69-232)
Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf) piloted usaf X-24.4 lifting-body vehicle on its first glide flight. The wingless craft, which depends on shape and speed for aerodynamic lift, was air-launched from a B-52 aircraft at 45,000-foot altitude and mach 0.66. Designed for maximum speed of mack 2 and altitudes to 100,000 feet, the X—24A was one of three wingless experimental vehicles in the joint usaf—nasa research program studying concepts for reusable and maneuverable reentry spacecraft.
Senate confirmed appointment of Dr. Lee A. DuBridge as Director of Office of Science and Technology. (CR, S1536—7)
NASA acknowledged it was reviewing proposed orbital flight of monkey with transplanted heart. Project was one of two based on work of Dr. Christiaan Barnard, South African surgeon and heart transplant pioneer. Second Barnard-based study would deal with effects of space flight on mechanism of rejection of foreign tissues in living organisms. Both proposals had been submitted by General Electric Co. Reentry Systems Div. (W Post, 10/16/69)
Washington Evening Star said: “As man’s horizon of space expands, the costs of maintaining an effective program expand in direct proportion. Already, the first limited steps have resulted in an economic burden that the richest nation in the world finds almost intolerable. If the adventure is to continue much longer, it will have to be as an international effort. Nixon’s inaugural statement raises the possibility that some international body, a sort of United Nations for space exploration, could be established to pool the talents and the resources of all nations. It is an idea well worth pursuing. (W Star, 2/6/69, A10)
NASA announced selection of RCA Service Co. to receive two-year, costplus^award-fee contract with one-year option for logistic support to Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan), Manned Space Flight Network (msfn), and nasa Communications Network (nascom). Contract was expected to exceed $17 million, (nasa Release 69-127)
Conclusion that rings of Saturn were water ice of extraordinarily low temperature was announced by Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, Director of IJniv. of Arizona Lunar and Planetary Laboratory. Researchers had ruled out earlier theory that composition could be ammonia ice by comparing spectra of rings and ices of number of compounds. Team had studied infrared reflection of spectrum of rings with interferometer attached to 61-in NASA telescope at lpl observatory near Tucson. (Univ. of Arizona Release 6911.29 dh)
Oso VI Orbiting Solar Observatory (launched Aug. 9) was adjudged successful by NASA. All spacecraft systems had operated satisfactorily and all primary objectives had been met. Spacecraft had been operating at slightly lower than expected temperatures and elevation motor current was higher than on previous flights. As result, elevation servo jitter was less than 2 arc secs, zero to peak, best achieved on any OSO flight, (nasa Proj Off)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. Hans M. Mark, Chairman of Dept, of Nuclear Engineering, Univ. of California at Berkeley, as Director of Ames Research Center. He would succeed H. Julian Allen, who had announced retirement Oct. 25, 1968, but had remained as Acting Director. Dr. Mark, expert in nuclear and atomic physics, was also Reactor Administrator of Univ.’s Berkeley Research Reactor, research physicist at Univ.’s Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, and consultant to USA and NSF. Clarence A. Syvertson, Director of Astronautics at arc, was appointed to newly created position of arc Deputy Director. Both appointments were effective Feb. 28. Because of prior commitments, Dr. Mark would spend one-fifth of his time at arc until July 1969. (nasa Release 69—32; arc Astrogram, 2/24/69, 1)
At confirmation hearing on his appointment as Director of Office of Science and Technology before Senate Labor and Public Welfare Committee, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge said he would place his energies on analysis of weapon systems, environment and effect of technology and pollution on environment, and utilization of science and technology by Government departments. He planned to concern himself with social problems and hoped to increase social scientists on President’s Science Advisory Committee from one to two. He hoped for increased funding for hud and dot, and regretted allocations for basic research were declining in dod, NASA, and aec because such agencies “will profit by good relations with universities.” (Nelson, Science, 2/14/69, 657)
New York Times editorial: “Now it appears that the solution to the cosmic ray mystery may be intimately related to the explanation for the strangest astronomical phenomena discovered in recent years, if not all history, the pulsars.” Present favored explanation “views pulsars as neutron stars composed of matter packed so tightly that a mass the weight of the earth would be a sphere with a diameter of a few hundred feet. The extremely swift rotation of a neutron star, it is now theorized, produces both the periodic radio emissions of the pulsars and the super-energetic cosmic rays.” (NYT, 5/9/69, 46)
President Nixon announced intention to appoint Stanford Univ. physicist Hubert B. Heffner as Deputy Director of Office of Science and Technology, succeeding Ivan L. Bennett, Jr., who had resigned. Nomination was submitted to Senate June 9. (PD, 6/9/69, 806; 6/16/69, 845)
NASA published A Long-Range Program in Space Astronomy: Position Paper of the Astronomy Missions Board (nasa SP—213), which Board had submitted to NASA in July. Board of 19 leading U.S. astronomers— chaired by Dr. Leo Goldberg, Harvard College Observatory Director— had been appointed by NASA in autumn 1967 to consult scientific community and propose program for 1970s. Astronomy had “far greater potential for advancement by the space program than any other branch of science.” Astronomical instruments in space could reach regions of electromagnetic spectrum unable to penetrate earth’s atmosphere; thus, “most fundamental problems of astronomy may be brought within range of solution.” Board provided guidelines for minimum balanced program costing $250 million annually in 1970s and optimum program “proceeding at fastest possible rate consistent with available scientific and technical manpower” and costing $500 million annually during same period. Proposals included “careful assignment of priorities and balanced allocation of resources in order to optimize scientific progress on such problems as the origin of the universe; the course of stellar evolution, including the ultimate destiny of the Sun and solar system; the existence of other planetary systems, some of which may support other forms of intelligent life; and other problems with deep philosophical significance which are of great interest to everyone and are therefore properly supported by public expenditure.” Board recommended increased effort in x-ray and gamma-ray astronomy using Explorer spacecraft with large payload capability; optical uv astronomy program leading to large space telescope in 1980s; r&d of detectors and small cooling systems for infrared astronomy from spacecraft to complement ground and aircraft observations; observation of astrophysical objects in longwave radio portion of spectrum; more sophisticated solar spacecraft to extend observations of solar surface and study effects of solaf activity on earth; continued observations of planets from earth orbit using OAOs and Small Astronomy Satellite; more advanced observation of interplanetary medium, cosmic rays, and magnetic fields, with astronomy instrumentation on planetary and Explorer spacecraft; and augmented experiments using aircraft, balloons, and suborbital rocket launches. (Text; nasa Release 69—149)
Dr. Vesto M. Slipher, astronomer who headed team that discovered planet Pluto in 1930 and discoverer of aurora-like radiations of night sky, died at age 93. He had been director of Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Ariz., 1916—1954. (upi, LA Times, 11/10/69)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, addressed 25th Annual General Meeting of IATA in Amsterdam, Netherlands. “Within the next ten years we can expect the full effect of the space age to be felt. New insights into our complex environment will spur the development of new industries, new products and the new jobs which we need to gainfully employ our expanding population.” Air transportation would be one of first areas “dramatically affected” by space experience. “An inertial guidance system fundamentally the same as that which carried Apollo 11 to the moon is now being installed in the Boeing 747. Data concerning the flammability of nonmetallic materials, accumulated for use in the Apollo Modules, is being utilized for interior fittings. . . .” Other space-to-aviation transfers included composite materials to withstand stresses and temperatures not previously encountered, optical tooling for large structures, welding with new materials and by new processes in new aircraft, and general-purpose onboard digital computers. “The use of solid-state large-scale integrated circuits for multiplexing and self-checking circuits will eliminate most cabling and much maintenance.” Desired characteristics of space shuttle, which could be operational by 1976, would anticipate those of next generation of air transports, possibly, global transport “so that no place on earth would be more than an hour from any other.” (Text)
Sen. Claiborne Pell (D-R.I.) introduced on Senate floor S.R. 33 calling on U.S. representatives to U.N. to place before U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Seabed and Ocean Floor set of detailed principles to govern activities in ocean space of all nations of world. Resolution was referred to Committee on Foreign Relations. (CR, 1/21/69, S597)	> Fifth of eight spacecraft launched in NASA’s oso program to provide direct observation of sun during most of 11-yr solar cycle, Oso V weighed 636 lbs, carried eight experiments, was designed with six-month lifetime, and had two main sections—wheel (lower) section, which provided stability by gyroscope spinning and housed telemetry-command equipment, batteries, gas-spin control arms, and five experiment packages; and sail (upper) Section, which contained solar cells and solar pointing experiments and was oriented toward sun. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of preceding OSO spacecraft, were provided by University College (London) and Univ. of Leicester, Univ. of Paris, Univ. of Colorado, Univ. of Minnesota, Naval Research Laboratory, and gsfc. Both tape recorders were turned on and were operating satisfactorily and all spacecraft subsystems were operating nominally, nrl wheel x-ray experiment was turned on during 11th orbit and was obtaining good data. By Jan. 29 Oso V had received 707 commands and had completed 102 orbits. All eight experiments had been turned on and obtained good scientific data. All spacecraft systems—including raster scan and both tape recorders—had operated satisfactorily. Data from gsfc x-ray experiment were being used to plot spectrum of sun. Data from NRL uv pointed experiment had been used to obtain Oso P’s first Lyman-alpha spectroheliograph. Oso I (launched March 7, 1962) and Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965) had surpassed their six-month design lifetimes and, together, provided 6,000 hrs of scientific information. Oso III (launched March 8, 1967) and Oso IV (launched Oct. 18, 1967) continued operating satisfactorily, each providing 7% hrs of real-time data daily, oso program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction. (NASA Proj Off; nasa Release 69—13)
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission opened three-day hearings in Los Angeles on extent of racial discrimination in aerospace industry. Commission’s figures showed only 177, or 0.9%, of 20,000 officials and managers in Los Angeles aerospace industry in 1968 were black. (Pasadena Star-News, 3/13/69)
Dr. Murray Gell-Mann of Cal Tech was named winner of 1969 Nobel Prize in physics for “fundamental work in nearly all domains of his field,” especially for “discoveries concerning the classification of elementary particles and their interactions.” Dr. Gell-Mann, who would receive $72,800 award, had introduced concept of quark—hypothetical particle from which other particles of nucleus of atom were made—and had proposed eightfold-way theory that many particles might change places and their differences from each other lay in their energy quotient. Dr. Gell-Mann was member of NASA Physics Advisory Committee from 1964 to 1969. Chemistry prize was awarded Prof. Derek H. R. Barton of Imperial College of Science and Technology in London and Prof. Odd Hassell of Univ. of Oslo for work to develop and apply concept of conformation in chemistry. (Getze, LA Times, 10/31/69; AP, W Star, 10/30/69, Al; nasa ossa)
Commission on Marine Science, Engineering and Resources recommended in report Our Nation and the Sea creation of new agency, National Oceanic arid Atmospheric Agency (noaa), to coordinate and accelerate oceanology research and development. It proposed agency be composed initially of U.S. Coast Guard and Bureau of Fisheries, plus some functions of Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife, National Sea Grant Program, U.S. Lake Survey, National Oceanographic Data Center, and essa. (Pasadena Star-News, 1/12/69; Nelson, Science, 1/17/69, 263-5)
nas—nrc Space Science Board had formed 13-member standing Committee on Space Medicine to respond to requests from NASA on problems in manned aspects of national space effort, nas—nrc—nae News Report said. Chairman was Dr. Shields Warren of Cancer Research Institute of New England Deaconess Hospital, Boston, who was noted for his work on effects of radiation, (nas—nrc—nae News Rpt, 5/69, 1)
Basic research program conducted by Dr. Wilhelm Rindner had led to development of cardiovascular pressure transducer, erc reported. Tiny device had been placed in arteries and hearts of laboratory animals to measure blood pressure while using 100 times less power than conventional devices. Medical team headed by Harvard Univ. cardiologist Dr. Bernard Lown, in collaboration with NASA, said device was significant advance in monitoring important blood flow changes. Eventually it should be possible to implant device in human beings to observe blood flow and pressure in persons suffering from hypertension and other blood pressure disorders, including heart attacks. Discovery of properties of device was made during erc study of effects of pressure on semiconductors. Properties would also be important in space applications; sensing of acceleration already had been demonstrated, (erc Release 69—9)
Ogo VI Orbiting Geophysical Observatory, launched into low-altitude polar orbit June 5, was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had completed first diurnal cycle and had provided data on global characteristics of neutral atmosphere; association of electric fields with ionospheric irregularities; airglow emissions associated with oxygen, sodium, and molecular nitrogen; and propagation of proton whistlers. Performance of Ogo VI subsystems had been excellent and instrumentation for 23 of 25 experiments was operational. Active three-axis stabilization had been maintained since initial acquisition and gas usage was consistent with one-year operation. To extend attitude-stabilized lifetime beyond one year, operations plan had been modified to include manual control of gas jet firing, (nasa Proj Off)
New York Times said dot had received detailed proposals for construction of 150- to 300-mph, air-cushioned vehicle guided by track or guideway. Agency hoped to design vehicle that could avoid problems of steel train , wheels and rails, which lost traction and spun at speeds of 150—200 mph. dot expected to award contract for Tracked Air Cushion Vehicle (tacv) within three months, with completion of prototype and several miles of test track by mid-1971. (NYT, 5/31/69, 46) During May: Space/Aeronautics said: “Reshaping of the budget, in combination with a flurry of new activity among NASA, the Air Force and the President’s in-house and specially commissioned science advisors, has left no doubt that the Administration favors continuation of a strong manned space flight program and a total space effort much more national in character than the current one. The latter point involves greater pressure on the Air Force and NASA to bring their future programs together, particularly in the space station and support areas. “Although manned space flight was the clear victor in the Republican amendments to the NASA budget, the surgery on the unmanned sectors was artfully performed.” Although $41 million was cut from ossa, none of it came from Earth Resources Survey satellite program. Although $14 million was cut from oart, none came at expense of nerva program. Only notable individual reductions in areas other than manned space flight came in deferral of Sunblazer program, cancellation of Biosatellite-F, and deferral for one year of new Planetary Explorer project. In net increase in omsf, NASA essentially traded off slippage in AA program for resumption of Saturn V production and insurance that lunar exploration would continue into early 1970s. (S/A, 5/69, 31-6)
President Nixon authorized immediate $10-million increase in expenditure ceiling placed on National Science Foundation by Johnson Administration in 1968. He said: “The colleges and universities of this Nation provide a critical resource which needs to be fostered and strengthened. Our higher educational system provides the advanced training needed for tomorrow’s leaders in science and technology, industry and government, and also conducts the basic research which uncovers the new knowledge so essential to the future welfare of the country. It is essential that these programs of education and research be sustained at a level of high excellence.” (PD, 2/10/69, 224-5)
NASA announced appointment of l/g Frank A. Bogart (usaf, Ret.) as msc Associate Director, succeeding Wesley L. Hjornevik, who had been nominated Deputy Director of Office of Economic Opportunity. Bogart would be succeeded as Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Management) at NASA Hq. by Harry H. Gorman, msfc Deputy Director (Management). (NASA Release 69—144)
U.S.S.R. publicly demonstrated Tu-144 supersonic airliner in 90-min test flight from Moscow’s Sheremetyevo Airport. Test pilot Eduard V. Yelyan said aircraft had not yet exceeded speed of sound although it was designed for speeds to 1,600 mph (mach 2). At airport press conference Boris Savchenko, head of U.S.S.R. aircraft export agency, said production had started on 120-seat, 130-ton airliner. In New York Times, Bernard Gwertzman said observers believed purpose of demonstration was to dispel Western reports of accident to aircraft. (NYT, 5/22/69, 94; upi, W Post, 5/21/69, Cll)
Christian Science Monitor reported interview with Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, President-elect Richard M. Nixon’s Science Adviser-designate: “The balance between manned and unmanned [space] exploration has to be studied. But there comes a time, place, and activity where the judgment and quick reaction of men are needed to do the job or make emergency repairs. There may even be situations in which it is cheaper to have men do this than to have automated instruments. That time has not yet arrived. Manned flight is still very expensive. But I foresee the time when you will run beyond the ability of automatic instruments to do a job either adequately or economically in space exploration.” (Cowen, csm, 1/17/69)
Dr. Frederick Seitz, nas President, appointed 12-member Universities Organizing Committee for Space Sciences, chaired by Frederick T. Wall, Vice Chancellor of Graduate Studies and Research at Univ. of California at San Diego. It would serve NAS as national Board of Governors of Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex., establishing policy, reviewing operations and budgets, and advising Institute’s director on program development. Committee also would draft objectives and procedures for consortium of universities operating the facilities for research, development, and education associated with space science and technology, (nas—nrc—nae News Rpt, 2/1969, 2)
President Nixon approved “Policy on Expanded Use of Federal Research Facilities by University Investigators” which directed Federal agencies to make equipment in Federal laboratories more readily available to qualified university scientists. He directed Dr. Lee A. DuBridge to monitor execution of policy with help of Federal Council for Science and Technology, which had recommended adoption. (PD, 3/3/69, 304)
Some NASA scientists were helping their communities and hiding their aid projects “as tho they were sinful,” Ray Cromley said in Washington Daily News. Scientists were using space-acquired skills “to help their fellow men in ways they were uniquely qualified.” Projects included applying systems analysis to air pollution problem, planning school expansion to meet population expansion, applying systems concept to town management and to city police force problems, developing new concepts for airport planning and new technique for vandalism prevention, developing improved communications systems for city emergency departments, and helping an agency develop ways of evaluating proposals for study and development contracts with private industry. (W News, 9/4/69, 23)
usaf and Lockheed Georgia Co. jointly announced six-month delay in C—5A production schedule attributed to labor strikes and material shortages caused by Vietnam war. First aircraft would be delivered to USAF in December rather than June. Announcement followed successful test flight during which 250-ton aircraft reached complete stop on 1,500 ft of runway—44 distance required by conventional 85-ton airliners. (Lindsay, NYT, 2/26/69; AP, W Post, 2/27/69, A18)
Federal Council for Science and Technology transmitted to nasa “Policy on Expanded Use of Federal Research Facilities by University Investigators” approved by President Nixon Feb. 21. (nasa Off of Policy Memo, 3/14/69) Vice President Spiro T. Agnew told American Management Assn, briefing on oceanography in Washington, D.C., that Nixon Administration was not yet ready to endorse concept of “a wet nasa”—marine-oriented Government agency. As Chairman of National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development he was studying opinions of advocates of such an agency, as well as [Jan. 11] report by Commission on Marine Science, Engineering and Resources. (Smith, NYT, 2/25/69, 53) February 24—March 3: First documented pulsar acceleration was discovered in Pulsar PSR 0833—45 in Vela constellation in southern sky by JPL radio-astronomers Paul Reichley and Dr. George S. Downs, using 85-foot dish antenna at Goldstone, Calif. While pulsars normally showed moderate but steady slowing in pulse rate, Vela’s rate accelerated, then slowed at slightly faster rate than before, during week’s observation. Findings in NASA-sponsored research were confirmed by Parkes Observatory astronomers in Australia, (jpl Release BB—513, 4/16/69)
M2—F2 lifting-body vehicle damaged in accident May 10, 1967, would be repaired, modified, and returned to service as M2—F3, NASA announced. Modifications would include center-stabilizing fin, special equipment for use as test bed for lateral control systems research, jet reaction roll control system, and improved internal components for precise maneuvering by pilot. M2—F3 would rejoin HL-10 and X—24 in NASA—usaf flight research program to evaluate wingless vehicles for manned horizontal landings at airfields after return from space. (NASA Release 69—15)
nsf released Technology in Retrospect and Critical Events in Science (traces), report by Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute which traced key scientific events leading to five major technological innovations: magnetic ferrites, video tape recorder, oral contraceptive pill, electron microscope, and matrix isolation. In all five, nonmission, or basic, research “provided the origins from which science and technology could advance toward the innovation which lay ahead.” Approximately 70% of key events documented were nonmission research, 20% mission-oriented, and 10% development and application. Ten years before innovation-—i.e., shortly before conception of that innovation—90% of nonmission research had been accomplished. (Text)
msc Deputy Director George S. Trimble announced his resignation, effective Sept. 30, after 2% yrs with NASA. He had been Director of Advanced Manned Missions Program in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight before appointment to msc post Oct. 13, 1967. (msc Release 69-70; W Post, 8/28/69, A8; NASA Ann, 10/13/67)
Supercritical wing would be flight-tested on usn F—8 fighter at FRC, NASA announced. Airfoil shape had been developed in four-year wind-tunnel studies at LaRC by Dr. Richafd T. Whitcomb. If wind-tunnel performance was achieved in flight, wing could improve performance and efficiency of future aircraft, particularly jet transports. It would allow efficient cruise flight near speed of sound at 45,000-ft altitude and reduce operational cost of subsonic flights by increasing operational range or permitting less fuel and more payload on faster schedules. Supercritical wing shape was developed to delay rise of drag force and onset of buffeting at high speeds. Flattened top was designed to reduce intensity of airflow disturbances; downward curve at rear of wing supplied lift lost by flattening. Flight program would evaluate behavior of wing in actual flight with both high-lift maneuvering and off-design performance, and determine sensitivity of supercritical wing to wing-contour variations associated with manufacturing processes and deformations due to flight loads, (nasa Release 69—27)
Aerospace Industries Assn, released Annual Report 1968: Aerospace industry had gained “in virtually every major category”: sales reached record $30.1 billion, up 10.5% over 1967, with turbine-powered commercial aircraft sales accounting for $3.73 billion, up 211% over 1965. General-aviation aircraft sales reached 13,698 units valued at $426 million. Civil helicopter production increased to 528 units valued at $59 million, dod sales reached $16.9 billion, up nearly 7% over 1967; nonmilitary sales decreased 3.7%, to $4,047 billion. Backlog at end of third quarter was due primarily to commercial transport orders. (Text)
NASA announced the supercritical wing, a new airfoil shape developed in four years of wind-tunnel studies at Langley Research Center, would fie flight-tested on a USN F-8 fighter at the Flight Research Center. Dr. Richard T. IF hit comb, inventor of the design expected to improve performance of subsonic fet transports, stood with his model in the test section of the wind tunnel at Lane. ■	Meteorite broke into fragments in air and fell near Pueblito de Allende, Chihuahua, Mexico. Scientists at MSC Lunar Receiving Laboratory and Oak Ridge National Laboratory later reported from tests of fragments that meteorite was chondrite (C3 and C4) with opaque and microcrystalline matrices. Gamma rays from short-lived isotopes were observed in specimens brought to low-background gamma counter less than 41/2 days after fall. (Science, 2/28/69, 928-9) ■	Boeing Co. test pilot Jack Waddell flew 355-ton, $20-million prototype of 490-passenger Boeing 747 jet transport from Paine Field, near Seattle, Wash., for 1 hr 15 min of scheduled 2^-hr maiden flight. Waddell returned aircraft to field after encountering “minor malfunction” of wing surface control while lowering wing flaps to 30° angle. Later he said aircraft was “a pilot’s dream” which could be “flown with two fingers” and indicated flap misalignment would not delay further testing. The 210-ft-long 747 used only 4,500 ft of runway to become airborne at 170 mph. Spectators were impressed with quietness of its engines. (W Post, 2/10/69, 1; AP, W Star, 2/10/69, A5)
NASA announced appointment of Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, as Acting Associate. Administrator for Manned Space Flight, replacing Dr. George E. Mueller. (nasa Ann)
NASA announced selection of Heliodyne Corp. and Wolf Research and Development Corp. for final negotiations leading to one-year $1-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract with two one-year options to operate National Space Science Data Center at gsfc, (nasa Release 69-118)
