U.S. and France had agreed on program to launch series of 18 NikeCajun sounding rockets from France’s space center in French Guiana, French National Space Study Center announced. Launches would begin in February or March 1971. (upi, WPost, 10/5/70)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center was study mg subsfjfuf/on of a thermal reactor for the standard manifold on an automobile engine, to reduce pollution from exhaust. In the photo technician Warren A. Moore connected a temperature sensor to an experimental reactor during testing on a VS engine at LeRC. The reactor burned up the carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons formed during combustion. funds for firm orders. British and French governments had put $1.5 billion into project in seven years and were ‘‘increasingly reluctant" to see Concorde spending spiral. Result might be “that everybody concerned (except the French and British manufacturers) will be contenttosee the program slow down." British prototype 002 had been fitted with more powerful Olympus 593 engines and was undergoing runway testing. French prototype 001 was undergoing engine refitting and was scheduled to fiy again in September. Together, two prototypes had logged 225 hrs in 120 test flights. French model had logged 170 hrs in air, 30 at supersonic speeds. Neither had flown at mach 2 but this would become possible with engines now being fitted. Testing would be over 1290km (800-mi) “boom corridor” from Northwest Scotland to tip of Cornwall over Irish Sea. Flight plan called for 25 runs at mach 2 within 50 days. Measurements would be taken of sonic boom, noise level at takeoff, and smoke emission. (WPost, 8/9/70, El)
Portuguese Government announced plans to establish permanent study committee on space exploration. Committee would collect, collate, and study information on space travel, promote training of scientists and technicians, and maintain contact with world organizations on space exploration. (Reuters, WPost, 1/22/70, A7)
NASA announced selection of Bendix Field Engineering Corp. to receive $85-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for operation of 10 stations of NASA’s Manned Space Flight Network. Contract covered three years with two one-year options, (nasa Release 70-161)
dot takeover of nasa’s Electronics Research Center was discussed in Science: Since inception in September 1965, erc had built up to about 825-member staff including 420 professionals. “If the NASA and dot proponents are right it may not require so wild a transition to bring space electronics research down to earth and deploy it against problems of air traffic control. There seems to be a fair amount of optimism that the technical problems of developing effective control systems will yield to electronics research, but dot, which plans a budget of about $20 million next year for the center, is likely to encounter the practical problems of getting research funds equal to the task.” (Science, 4/3/70, 100)
Discovery of hydrogen cyanide in radio emissions from space was described by Dr. David Buhl of National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Kitt Peak, Ariz., during interview with New York Times. Dr. Buhl, with Dr. Lewis E. Snyder of Univ. of Virginia, had used 11-m-dia (36-ft-dia) dish antenna at Kitt Peak to locate second or
At NASA Hq. briefing, NASA and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory officials displayed and described 10-kg (22-lb) meteorite found by Prairie Network [see Jan. 9], Observatory’s Dr. Richard Mc-Crosky said meteorite was “not sucked into earth by gravity.” It had flamed through atmosphere on direct collision course and was “almost a direct hit. Earth’s gravity had a very little role.” Eight billion meteors struck earth’s atmosphere daily, but most burned out and only few remaining ones were discovered. NASA official said Lost City, Okla., meteorite was “freshest” ever examined. (NASA pao; WPost, 1/14/70, A7)
Bronzite chondrite meteorite weighing 10 kg (22 lbs) was found by Gunther Schwartz, field manager of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Prairie Network, near Lost City, Okla., 73 km (45 mi) east of Tulsa, six days after it had been photographed by network’s automatic cameras [see Jan. 3]. Schwartz found meteorite less than three fourths kilometer (half mile) from impact point predicted by Smithsonian Observatory scientist Dr. Richard E. Mc-Crosky. (sao Release 70-01)
Photos of falling meteorite were taken by automatic cameras at Hominy, Okla., and Pleasanton, Kans., field stations of Prairie Network operated for NASA by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Sao). Fireball was observed over large area of midwestern U.S. Observatory scientist Dr. Richard E. McCrosky later predicted from film records probable impact point near Lost City, Okla. Meteorite entered earth’s atmosphere at 56 300 km per hr (35 000 mph), creating trail that was visible for nine seconds. (SAO Release 70-01; McElheny, Boston Globe, 1/20/70)
Approximately 155 representatives from industry, universities, and government attended pre-proposal briefing on proposed High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) at MSFC. (msfc Release 70-58)
Lidar, new light detection and ranging device to detect air pollutants, was described in New York Times interview of meteorologist Ronald Collins of Stanford Research Institute. Device sent energy signal outward to bounce off air particle and return to receiver on ground. Returned signal was then translated from energy pulse into visual pattern seen on picture tube. Unlike radar, which used longer microwave, lidar used wavelengths measuring 0.6943#*, which picked up extremely small particles in concentration too thin to be seen with naked eye. It was even possible to track some gases in atmosphere with lidar. (Blakeslee, NYT, 12/14/70, 53)
DOT’S SST development environmental impact statements and comments received by DOT on draft statement from other agencies were transmitted to Council on Environmental Quality by James M. Beggs, DOT Under Secretary of Transportation. Statement, required by National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, said development of two prototype SSTs “will not give rise to any long-range environmental problems.” Possible adverse environmental consequences arising from fleet operation of SSTS represented “only possible effects on long-term productivity of environment.” Such effects “remain in the realm of speculation at this time.” Prototype development “would not involve an irreversible commitment of any environmental resources.” Prototype would demonstrate performance, economics, safety, and environmental qualities of sst design before large-scale production of ssts. Government research application to sst environmental factors included; LaRC r&d program to determine feasibility of tubular noise-suppression technique for sst engines, noise reduction and control at source program, system analysis of aircraft noise abatement, university research program to develop and expand noise research interest within educational institutions, theoretical and experimental studies of structure and turbulence levels of ssts to reduce sideline noise and turbomachinery noise, LeRC, studies of noise reduction potential of suppressors and engine cycles, and work on control and evaluation of noise on receiving end, including human factors. Other sst environmental programs were: dot-nasa-usaf high-altitude-radiation research program and noaa air-transportation atmospheric weather-modification research program. NASA and dod gave unqualified support to draft impact statement. hud said it would support prototype development on assurance that new airports would not be needed tor ssts. State Dept, felt “insufficient information exists now to negate all possible significant adverse environmental effects.” Dept, of Commerce said there were still significant questions about sst effects on climate and atmosphere. Dept, of Interior endorsed impact statement after dot had met its previous objections. (Text; dot Release)
usn F-14 Tomcat fighter aircraft crashed and burned after developing hydraulic problem during second flight from Grumman Corp. test flight facility at Calverton, N.Y. Aircraft had made maiden flight Dec. 21. Grumman Corp. officials and engineers said aircraft was not dawned by major design errors. Both pilots ejected at 90 m (300 ft) and parachuted to safety. (Hoffman, W Post, 12/31/ 70, Al)	_
nsf issued Research and Development in State Government Agencies, Fiscal Years 1967 & 1968 (nsf 70-22). State government agencies spent $131 million in FY 1967 and $155 million in FY 1968 for r&d and additional $5.1 million in 1967 and $4.5 million in 1968 for supporting r&d plant. Expenditures had grown at 20% annual rate since 1964, when expenditures were $77 million. Federal agencies provided funds for nearly one half of state agency r&d expenditures in both years. Applied research activity represented 50% of state agency r&d expenditures; development accounted for 20% of total in 1968 and basic research 23%. (Text)
Semiannual aia employment analysis said aerospace industry payrolls would drop by 374 000 persons to 1 044 000 by March 1971. Industry would remain largest manufacturing employer in U.S. despite drop from 1968 peak of 1 418 000 employees. (Corddry, B Sun, 11/12/70, A7)
MiT-sponsored group of U.S. and European scientists concluded month-long environmental study at Williams College to advise 1972 U.N. Conference on Human Environment and other national and international conferences. In preliminary report, Study of Critical Environmental Problems, group recommended that large-scale operation of supersonic transport aircraft be delayed until serious questions about potential for environmental contamination could be ' answered. Study had indicated increase of water vapor induced into stratosphere by supersonic aircraft favored formation of clouds and that fine particles from jet engine exhaust would double global averages of particles, with unknown effects. Particles reflected sunlight back into stratosphere and tended to warm it. Report recommended program to measure lower stratosphere for water vapor quantities and sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide, and hydrocarbons—fine particle matter. Study also found increasing carbon dioxide in atmosphere had caused little climate change. Earth’s oxygen supply remained fairly constant. (Webster, NYT, 8/2/70,1)	_
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Nov. 12 confirmation by jpl radioastronomers of Einstein theory of relativity: “nasa scientists who have confirmed the general relativity theory as well as the critical scientists who have thought it to be in error, have alike based their calculations on the most sophisticated and expensive
Harry H. Gorman had accepted, in permanent capacity, position of NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Management) to which he acceded in October 1969, MSFC announced. Richard W. Cook had been named to fill Gorman’s former post as MSFC Deputy Director, Management, pending Hq. approval. (MSFC Release 70-129)
ESSA announced it had assumed control of Solar Particle Alert Network (span) from NASA. Network, which originated in 1966 in support of NASA space flight programs, included observatories in Canary Islands and Carnarvon, Australia, and at essa’s Space Disturbance Laboratory in Boulder, Colo. Under ESSA management, principal observatories would have identical optical and radio solar telescopes to provide continuous coverage of sun. Three stations were connected by voice-quality communications links to allow real-time transmission of data and observations, and all stations were equipped to photograph sun in hydrogen (H-alpha) light. Stations could be supplemented by standby observatory at msc. essa also had accepted responsibility for processing, storing, and distributing photographic data and radio data from span observations, (essa Release 70-74-238)
President Nixon had asked Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Science Adviser, to explore future use of erc, Office of Science and Technology announced. (ostpio)
Establishment of Charles S. Draper Research Center and appointment of mit scientist Dr. C. S. Draper as its President were announced by Dr. Jerome P. Keuper, President of Florida Institute of Technology, site of new center. Dr. Draper would continue as Vice Director of MIT Instrumentation Laboratory, which had been renamed Charles S. Draper Laboratory, with cognizance of dod projects and responsibility for advanced technology in control navigation guidance, (fit Release)
U.S.S.R. and West Germany signed agreement in Moscow calling for exchange of scientists and direct contacts between institutes and laboratories. At news conference after signing, Chairman Vladimir A. Kirillin of Soviet State Committee for Science and Technology said countries planned to cooperate in physics, physical chemistry, astronomy, biology, medicine, oceanography, computing techniques, problems of information, and education. (NYT, 9/29/70, 3)
nsf Released Research and Development in Industry, 1968: Funds, 1968; Scientists & Engineers, January 1969 (nsf 70-29). of 36% of industrial scientists and engineers in r&d activities in January 1969, about two fifths worked on Federally financed r&d projects. For first time since 1956, companies financed over half of tneir r&d work with their own funds, spending $8.9 billion in 1968. Company funds increased 23% between 1966 and 1968, while Federal spending remained nearly level. Pattern was expected to continue from 1968 to 1970, with company r&d financing expected to rise about 20% and Federal support possibly declining slightly. In 1968, 90% of $8.6 billion in r&d funds furnished to industries by Federal agencies came from dod and NASA, dod funded 104 600 r&d scientists and engineers in 1968, at an average cost of $51 800 per r&d professional. NASA projects averaged $66 000 per r&d professional and included 35 000 persons. Industrial firms spent $3.7 billion on research, both basic and applied. Federal Government furnished 32% of these funds. In 1968, 72% of applied R&D funds was devoted to five product fields—guided missiles and spacecraft, electrical equipment and communication, aircraft and parts, machinery, and chemicals (not including drugs and medicine). (Text)
Rep. Charles H. Wilson (D-Calif.) introduced in House H.C.R. 710, “to utilize more effectively the expertise and abilities” of NASA scientists and engineers in “fight against environmental pollution.” (CR, 8/12/70, H8191)
Harold G. Miller, Chief of Mission Simulation Branch in MSC’s Flight Control Div., received AlAA’s DeFlorez Training Award in Cape Kennedy for “contributing significantly to the United States space flight programs through development of flight controller training techniques and capabilities.” (aiaa Release, 3/11/70)
Scientists at Royal Observatory in Edinburgh unveiled Galaxy, machine conceived by Dr. P. N. Fellgett of Reading Univ., Scotland, to measure star images at rate of 10 000 per hr. Machine had found 1103 stars less than 28 million yrs old in constellation Perseus, where only 15 had been found previously. Galaxy contained Elliot 4130 computer linked to 406-mm (16-in) Schmidt telescope and could measure accuracy of star’s position to one micron. British scientists said they believed machine established world lead in astronomy for U.K. (WPost, 1/21/70, A3)
Second fragment of Lost City, Okla., meteorite weighing 277.8 g (9.8 oz) had been found by farmer Philip Halpain in Lost City pasture, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory announced. It had been flown to Richland, Wash., for analysis of short-lived radioactive byproducts of radiation in outer space. (McElheny, Boston Globe, 1/20/70)
Sud-Aviation test pilot Andre' Turcat flew Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport to mach 2 (2125 km per hr; 1320 mph) for first time during 90-min, 102nd test flight from Toulouse-BIagnac Aerodrome. Soviet supersonic transport Tu-144 had flown at 2150 km per hr (1336 mph) May 26. (Farnsworth, NYT, 11/5/70, 94)
National Air and Space Museum was victim of “shocking lack of attention” by Smithsonian Institution management, Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said on Senate floor. He said that museum received “extremely meager share,” about 1.7% of $40-million-plus annual Smithsonian appropriation, and was undermanned, with “only 31 people on board.” Museum attracted at least one third of visitors to Smithsonian Park. It had no director “even though it has been 24 months since the last Director gave notice of his planned retirement”; museum had been put into arts and humanities wing of Smithsonian for years rather than being considered science and technology component; in 1969, Smithsonian management had threatened to expel museum from Mall. Most museum exhibitions were badly housed and deteriorating rapidly, and program for construction of permanent Air and Space building was ‘‘at dead center.” In words of ‘‘Paul Johnston, the last Director of the museum, the project ‘may never get off the ground.’ ” (CR, 7/22/70, SI 19116) .
During April: Science and Technology: Tools for Progress, report to President Nixon by President’s Task Force on Science Policy, was released. Report, submitted Dec. 10, 1969, recommended that President enunciate as national policy, need for vigorous, high-quality science and technology and continuing leadership in science and technology “relevant to our other national goals and purposes”; that President direct Federal departments and agencies to strengthen capability to use science and technology in attack on social, urban, and environmental problems; and that U.S. achieve effective and consistent commitment to long-range research, uninterrupted support of graduate education, improved use of Federal laboratories, and improved process for establishing priorities in Federal support of science. Report further recommended President enunicate policy of increasing long-term participation by private institutions—particularly business—in social, urban, and environmental programs and direct appropriate departments and agencies to identify deterrents to private investment of capital and technology in these programs; suggest incentives for action and remedies for each deterrent; enunciate policy of increased emphasis on r&d for national security, if necessary; and continue encouragement of new science-based foreign policy initiatives and opportunities for international cooperation. Administration should make clear policy of technical assistance to underdeveloped nations to help them establish their own scientific research, education, and technical training institutions. Task Force recommended President direct his Science Adviser to develop, for his approval, broadly-based program for continuing development of national science policy. (Text)
Flight model of Skylab multiple docking adapter was flown from msfc to Martin Marietta Corp. Space Center in Denver, Colo., aboard Super Guppy aircraft. It would be outfitted with controls and display panels for solar astronomy and earth resource experiments, storage vaults for experiment film, and thrust-attitude control system. When completely equipped, adapter would be mated with Sky-lab airlock flight version at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. in St. Louis, Mo., and unit would perform simulated mission in altitude chamber, (msfc Release 70-237; msfc pio )
Concorde 002, British prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport aircraft, reached its fastest speed—1600 km per hr (1000 mph) during test flight. French Concorde 001 had already reached 1600 km per hr. (Reuters, NYT, 8/24/70,6)
The U.S. Navy's F-14 Tomcat fighter made a successful /0-minute maiden flight from the Grumman test flight facih'ty in Ca/verfon, N.Y. Capable of mach 2 speeds, the F-14 would be successor to the F-4 Phantom and the F-l I IB. composed of quadrants separated by explosives lining seams. Each panel had to be ejected without touching Skylab vehicle in flight. Plum Brook vacuum chamber had been selected for shroud test because tank, 36.6 m (120 ft) tall and 30.5 m (100 ft) wide, could produce hard vacuum equivalent to 483-km (300-mi) altitude and easily house shroud 17 m (56 ft) high and 6.7 m (22 ft) wide, (nasa RgIc&sc 70-214)	■
NASA announced selection of Computer Sciences Corp. for $5 million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to provide programming and computer support services for Manned Space Flight Network (msfn) Central Computing System at gsfc. Contract covered two-year period, preceded by six-month phase-in, with option for one-year extension. (NASA Release 70-187)
nsf released Federal Support for Research and Development at Universities and Colleges and Selected Nonprofit Institutions, FY 1968: A Report to the President and Congress (nsf 69-33). Federal Government had obligated $1.4 billion for r&d in FY 1968—5% increase over FY 1967. Average annual increase of Federal obligations to universities and colleges for r&d 1955-1967 had been over 21%. Dept, of Agriculture and dod reported cutbacks in academic R&D funding in FY 1968, including $21 million in defense R&D. Number of academic institutions receiving Federal support rose 8%, from 573 in FY 1967 to 620 in FY 1968. One hundred top-ranking institutions received 93% of R&D totals obligated by NASA and aec and 88% of dod r&d total in 1968. mit was largest recipient again, with $80 million, “three-fourths of which was obligated by dod and NASA.” (Text)
Full-scale hypersonic research engine (hre) under development by NASA was tested for first time in 8-Foot High-Temperature Structures Tunnel at LaRC. Mach-7.4 speed was reached at temperature of 1800 K (2000°F) and pressure of 6.2 meganewtons per sq m (900 psi). NASA project would demonstrate technology needed for engines to propel future aircraft at hypersonic speeds—more than five times speed of sound. (Pres Rpt 71; NASA Photo Release 70-H-1362)
U.S.S.R. was constructing astrophysical observatory atop 5633-m (18 481 -ft) Mt. Elbrus in Caucasus mountains to house 599-cm (236in) altazimuthal telescope, Los Angeles Times said. Instrument would be largest optical telescope in the world. Its mirror would be tested in autumn 1971, with observations to begin in autumn 1972. Telescope would be used for extragalactic exploration; study of nebulae and stars, particularly faint stars; and planetary research. (Bengelsdorf, LA Times, 2/17/70)
House Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development submitted to Committee on Science and Astronautics Technology Assessment: Annotated Bibliography and Inventory of Congressional Organization for Science and Technology. Bibliography was designed to identify selected items on technology assessment as part of public policy. Citations dealt with concept of technology assessment, proposals made for organization of technology assessment mechanisms in Government, and examples of technology assessments completed or in progress. (Text)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Nixon Administration’s cut in space funding: “The lowering of the sights in space is regrettable. It is unfortunate that, with the new frontier now open to us, we cannot move out to the full extent of our technical ability. But the decision to cut down on expenditures and to spread out the enormous cost of space exploration was no mistake. ... The planets and the ocean of space beyond have endured for quite some time. They will wait undisturbed for man’s intrusions. The economy is not so accommodating.” (W Star, 1/17/70, A4)
President Nixon announced transfer of Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, Mass., from NASA to DOT, effective July 1. James C. Elms would continue as Director and Center would be renamed Transportation Development Center. Later, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced dot would use center for r&d efforts on systems and equipment to automate air traffic control system more highly, economically feasible collision avoidance system for commercial and private aircraft, sensors to measure and monitor air pollution caused by transportation elements, automatic landing systems for aircraft, system analysis on urban transit systems and highway traffic control, ocean-data buoy systems to transmit weather and oceanographic data, and auto-driver simulation systems to study accident causes and prevention. (PD, 3/30/70,446; dot Release 6870)
Concorde 002, British prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport, reached mach 1.54 speed in test flight over North Sea. Concorde 002 flew for two hours at 12 500-m (41 000-ft) altitude in seventh flight of series to prove aircraft could fly at up to 2250 km per hr (1400 mph). (AP, B Sun, 8/30/70)
AIAA Board of Directors meeting in Denver Colo., created two new committees: Technical Committee on Application of Aerospace Technology to Society would report through Technical Activities Committee (tac); Committee on International Cooperation in Space Flight would “foster international cooperation in space activities among the engineers and scientists of the world.” (A&A, 6/70,76)
Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) certified establishment of two space flight records by U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz VI, VII, and VIIImission (Oct. 11-18, 1969). One was for group flight of two spacecraft, with five men logging 35 hrs 19 min 33 secs over 989 242-km (614 685.3-mi) distance. Second was for group flight of three spacecraft, with seven men for 4 hrs 24 min 29 secs over 123 425 km (76 692.6 mi). (SBD, 4/27/70,268; fai)
Pravda said new 3-m (10-ft) wide telescopic mirror being installed at Zelenchuk Observatory in northern Caucasus could pick up glimmer of candle 24 900 km (15 500 mi) from earth and enable astronomers to see parts of universe never before viewed by man. Largest of its kind, mirror was cut from 64-metric-ton (70-short-ton) mass of glass and was cooled in furnace from 518 K (472°F) to room temperature during 18-mo casting period. (Reuters, B Sun, 6/27/70)
Dr. W. Ross Adey, head of ucla Brain Research Laboratory and principal investigator for NASA Biosatellite III primate experiment launched June 28, 1969, had filed $2-million defamation of character suit against United Action for Animals, Inc. (antivivisectionist group), Washington Post reported. Group had accused Dr. Adey of “savagery” in death of Bonny, pigtailed monkey used in experiment. Suit had been prompted by feeling among researchers that attacks on scientists by antivivisection movement should be discouraged. (Auerbach, WPost, 9/19/70)
President Nixon sent to Congress annual report on marine resources and engineering development. Budget request for FY 1971 would provide $533.1 million for marine science and technology activities to improve management of coastal zone, expand Arctic research, develop program for restoring damaged lakes, expand collection of data on ocean and weather conditions, and undertake other projects. Funds also would support U.S. participation in International Decade of Ocean Exploration. (PD, 4/13/70, 518)
Mt. Palomar Observatory and Mt. Wilson Observatory were collectively renamed Hale Observatories, in honor of founder George E. Hale. As California facilities operated jointly by Cal Tech and Carnegie Institution of Washington, Mt. Palomar housed 5080-mm (200in) Hale telescope, world’s largest optical telescope, and Mt. Wilson, 1524-mm (60-in) reflection telescope, (upi, W News, 1/19/70, M) .
Fvii-scate hypersonic research engine (Hre) was tested for the first rime in Langley Research Center’s 8-Foot High-Temperature Structures Tunnel, which produced a stream of hot gases moving faster than seven times the speed of sound, nasa project would demonstrate technology needed for future hypersonic aircraft. The test engine incorporated advanced technology in structure and materials and a cooling system that circulated liquid hydrogen through engine parts to protect them from the intense heat of hypersonic Sight. Coolant was then burned as fuel. tacular areas. And while politicians may glare at each other, the technologists are finding common interests.” (NHav Reg, 10/20/70) October 21: Two solid fuel rockets, carrying cloud-measuring payload triggering device, were launched from ksc in lightning study, but electrical field was too low for triggering payload to ignite lightning discharge. Launches were first in NASA Mighty Mouse program being conducted by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency to study feasibility of discharging lightning potential from clouds before lightning could damage vulnerable areas, such as launch pads. (KSC Releases 354-70,337-70)
Imaging photopolarimeter for Jupiter probe was being developed by Santa Barbara Research Center for ARC, Armed Forces Journal reported. Instrument for Pioneer F and G spacecraft to be launched in 1972 and 1973 would map density and distribution of “asteroidal debris,” measure gas above Jupiter’s cloud layers, and transmit two-color spin-scan images of planet. (AFJ, 2/7/70, 2)
Observation of nighttime lightning activity from Oso II orbiting solar observatory (launched Feb. 3, 1965) by monitoring light in 10° field of view of four telescopes was described in Science by Univ. of California at Berkeley physicists. Positions of nighttime thunderstorms determined from detection of optical radiations by Oso II had revealed that 10 times as many lightning storms occurred over land areas as over sea. (Vorpahl, Sparrow, Ney, Science, 8/28/70,860-2)
Science editorial noted that President’s Council of Economic Advisers had projected increase in Federal expenditures from $189 billion in 1970 to $206 billion in 1975. It was “within this budgetary situation—one so cramped as to allow little room for maneuvering—that future research funds must be considered. The President’s budget for 1971 calls for $15.8 billion of R&D funds, an amount which constitutes a smaller percentage of the total federal budget than in any year since 1959. Research and development funds hit a high of 12.6 percent of the federal budget in 1965 and have been decreasing by an average rate of 0.8 percentage point a year, to 8.7 percent in 1970 and a requested 7.8 percent in 1971. Any statistical projection of r&d funds for the next several years looks bleak, and there is little that can be done to improve matters for the coming year.” (Wolfle, Science, 4/3/70, 69)
Discovery of cyano-acetylene molecules in gas cloud Sagittarius B2 near center of Milky Way was announced by Dr. Barry E. Turner of National Radioastronomy Observatory in Green Bank, W. Va. Discovery, made through radiotelescopes on earth, suggested that planets and life were being created in Milky Way galaxy and brought to seven the number of chemical radicals (incomplete molecules) and chemical molecules found in deep space. Dr. Turner said radio emissions from cyanoacetylenes, most complex chemicals yet found in space, were stronger than background radiation filling all of space. He thought they were remnants of radiation from fireball that created the universe billions of years ago. (O’Toole, W Post, 10/4/ 70, A5)
Gen. James Ferguson, AFSC Commander, discussed role of military in current controversies over cost and efficiency of F-lll and C-5A aircraft during Seventh Space Congress at Cocoa Beach, Fla.: “If we in military development have been remiss, I would say it is because we not only failed to fully communicate the difficulties involved in pushing the state of the art, but we also neglected to stress the uncertainties between known design parameters on paper and the hardware that ultimately results. To the intense competition for finite resources, and to a flood of paper studies, we reacted with overoptimism and neglected to properly qualify the normal uncertainties of development or the technical risks involved.” Advancing state of the art was “synonymous with working beyond the boundaries of the certain and the known. As long as we operate at these outer limits of science and technology, performance, schedule and cost are inevitably going to be, at best, elastic parameters. The alternative is to stand pat with the F-4, the B-52, and the C-141. Such an alternative would be hardly supportable in even a static world.” (Text)
Discovery of carbon monoxide in five regions of Milky Way was made by scientists of Bell Telephone Laboratories using National Radio Astronomy Observatory telescope at Kitt Peak, Ariz. Carbon monoxide was sixth molecular substance identified in outer space. nsf later said discoveries would “stimulate further work by chemists as well as astrophysicists, looking toward better understanding of the chemical processes taking place in space, and eventually more knowledge of the possibilities of life elsewhere in the universe.” (upi,W Star, 4/11/70, A14)
Dr. Cyril A. Ponnamperuma, heading a team of Ames Research Center Scientists, reported the first positive identification of amino acids formed outside the earth's environment. A meteorite that fell near Murchison, Australia, Sept. 28, 1969, was found to contain these constituents of living cells and was probable proof of extraterrestrial chemical evolution—chemical processes preceding the origin of life. research project under way to insure against damage. Further progress on tne part of the United States in the sst field will give this country a much stronger voice with regard to any iong range effects on the environment than if we permit other nations to take over the entire field. . . .The sst is an airplane that will bp built and flown. The issue is simply which nation will build them." (PD, 12/7/70, 1630)
Soviet and West German talks on future cooperation in science and technology would begin in Moscow in November, Hans Leussink, Minister of Science and Education in Bonn, West Germany, said at news conference. (NYT, 10/1/70,6) During September:	Scientists at frc, LaRC, arc, and msfc were conducting flight-test programs and studies into ways to alleviate trailing vortex hazards from large transport aircraft, NASA reported. Research was concentrating on understanding trailing-vortex-sys-tem movement and attenuation for different aircraft, operation modes, and meteorological conditions; developing remote monitoring technique for trailing-vortex position and wind intensity; and discouraging formation of high-density vortices by aircraft design or artificially induced impedances. Theoretical descriptions of trailing-vortex-system behavior would be developed from flight-test programs at frc and LaRC. arc was experimenting with wing design to reduce trailing-vortex intensity and with effects of induced impedances near aircraft path. MSFC was attempting to adapt laser Doppler technology to flight research programs and to development of remote monitor for trailing vortices in airport areas. (NASA Aviation Fact Sheet, 9/70)
In Astronautics and Aeronautics, Herbert Friedman discussed pulsars and their implications in new astronomy. “Even with the modest payloads of small rockets it is possible to instrument for pulsar detection at periods as short as 1 millisecond.” X-ray astronomers had been eager to have NASA provide program of high-energy astronomy payloads in 4500- to 9000-kg (10 000- to 20 000-lb) class that would be launched by vehicles of Titan-Centaur capability. Large x-ray detector could “very likely detect thousands of weak sources and discover high-frequency pulsar characteristics, if present. Such a program,” heao (High Energy Astronomy Observatory), “was to have begun in 1970 but has been a casualty of the present budgetary squeeze.” (A&A, 4/70, 22-5)
Four Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched by NASA from Kiruna, Sweden, carrying AFCRL and Dudley Observatory payloads to study noctilucent clouds. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Article by woman cosmonaut Valentina V. Tereshkova-Nikolayava published in January UNESCO magazine Impact asserted equality of sexes in space, New York Times reported. Cosmonaut—who had orbited earth 48 times in June 16-19, 1963, mission—said that “a woman can stand all the conditions of space flight as well as a man.” Women had endured silence and isolation as well as men and had adapted to weightlessness more quickly, although takeoff and landing of spacecraft should be timed to consider menstrual cycle. (NYT, 4/4/70,20)
Soyuz IX Cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Vitaly Sevas-tyanov returned to Moscow and complained of having “heavy bodies” in adjusting to earth gravity after 17-day space flight and 1 day on ground. Doctors escorted cosmonauts to hotel for extensive physical examinations and start of 10-day debriefing. Later Tass said cosmonauts were “quickly adapting. What was heavy an hour ago is becoming light.” Initial results of debriefing under precautionary quarantine indicated “condition of health, working efficiency and the general tone of the cosmonauts are much higher than medical men expected.” (upi, C Trib, 6/21/70; W Post, 6/21/70, A22)
By vote of 180 to 37, House passed H.J.R. 1421 making further continuing appropriations for FY 1971. Resolution would provide additional $51.7 million to DOT for SST development funding through March 30,1971. (CR, 12/31/70, H12603-6; NYT, 1/1/71,1) During December: Discovery of two galaxies possibly only 10 million yrs old—one thousandth the age determined for galaxies under “big bang” theory that all material in universe had exploded in one place 10 billion yrs ago—was reported in Astrophysical Journal by Hale Observatory astronomers Dr. Wallace L. W. Sargent and Dr. Leonard Searle. Galaxies, about 100 light years in diameter against 100000 for larger galaxies, contained only 1000 to 100 000 stars of short-lived blue type. Milky Way galaxy contained 10 billion stars, including those capable of living billions of years. If newly discovered galaxies were young, they would provide first evidence that galaxies evolved from infancy to old age and that galaxies could be created after “big bang.” Dr. Sargent and Dr. Searle tentatively concluded that galaxies were “dense intergalactic clouds of neutral hydrogen in which the formation of massive stars is proceeding vigorously while the formation of low-mass stars is suppressed.” (As-trophysical Journal, 12/70, LI 55-9)
NASA announced selection of Hughes Aircraft Co. for $22-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for new, more advanced series of Orbiting Solar Observatory (OSO) spacecraft, Hughes would deliver three flight spacecraft, oso I, J, and k, for missions in 1973, 1974 and 1975; provide ground support equipment; and perform launch services. (NASA Release 70-218)
First radar receiver developed by Naval Research Laboratory scientists was presented to Smithsonian Institution’s Hall of Electricity by Capt. James C. Matheson, Director of nrl. Device had been successfully tested first on April 28, 1936, when it detected and ranged aircraft in flight at 40-km (25-mi) distance. (Naval Research Reviews, 7/70, 31)
msfc announced appointment of Robert E. Lindstrom as Deputy Director of Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory, Science and Engineering Directorate. Lindstrom had worked in aerospace industry since his resignation from NASA in 1963. (msfc Release 70-10)
Feasibility of high-speed, efficient, digital message transmission through troposphere had been confirmed by afsc scientists, afsc announced. Findings were result of research program conducted at AFSC Rome Air Development Center near Niagara Falls, N.Y. (AFSC Release 151.70)
Financial plight of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. was “symptomatic of a far more pervasive malaise spreading in the aerospace industry,” Robert A. Wright said in New York Times. Because of “intricate interwoven pattern” of subcontracting common to large defense programs, Lockheed’s problems would affect other companies including 2000 that supplied or made parts for C-5A cargo aircraft. “In the current atmosphere of defense spending cuts and political criticism of the so-called military-industrial complex, the attention generated by Lockheed’s problem is unlikely to enhance the poor prospects of the depressed aero-space industry.” (NYT, 4/12/70, FI)	.
Concorde 002, British prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport, reached mach 1.68 (1770 km per hr; 1100 mph) and created double sonic boom in test flight over Oban, Scotland. It was first time British Concorde had broken sound barrier in current test series. No sonic boom damage was reported. (AP, W Post, 9/2/70, A19)
Decline to 2.3%—lowest point in several years—of U.S. aerospace industry profits in first quarter of 1970 was reported by Space Business Daily. Net income of entire manufacturing industry had declined, but profits remained at 4.0%. Aerospace backlog at first quarter’s end was $27.1 billion, off $1.2 billion from end of preceding quarter, and down $4.3 billion from end of first quarter of 1969. (SBD, 10/16/70,199)
Use of radiotelescopes to identify pollutants in atmosphere had been advocated by astronomers Dr. David Buhl of National Radio Astronomy Observatory and Dr. Lewis E. Snyder of Univ. of Virginia, Washington Evening Star reported. Astronomers believed pollutants from oxides of nitrogen to sulfur dioxide and small particles could be measured day and night in all weather at low cost, but radioastronomers did not have background “to do the chemistry.” They recommended modification of equipment to survey regional atmosphere or known polluting sources unattended, by use of receivers feeding into computerized data banks via microwave links. Identification and quantification of pollutants could be instantaneous and single-dish antenna could be electronically controlled to “sweep” wide range of pollutants at regular intervals. (Lannan, W Star, 8/10/70, A4)
MSFC announced selection of Grumman Aerospace Corp. and TRW Systems Group for negotiation of $250 000 fixed-price contracts for one-month definition and preliminary design studies of 10 000-kg (22 000-lb) High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao), scheduled for launch in 1972. MSFC also announced award of three contracts for continuation of nuclear shuttle definition studies: $343 000 to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for completely modular concept with earth-to-or-bit shuttle to transport modules for in-space assembly; $245 000 to NR Space Div. for nuclear stage with 10-m (33-ft) diameter to be orbited by Saturn V and refueled by earth-to-orbit shuttle; and $282 000 to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. for both types, (msfc Releases 70-97, 70-98)
