Identification of molecule magnesium tetrabenzporphine in outer space as forerunner of chlorophyll by Dr. Fred M. Johnson, California State College spectroscopist, was reported in Washington Post. Dr. Johnson had analyzed spectral lines taken of Milky Way from Lick Observatory optical telescope during 18-yr effort to identify nitrogen-bearing hydrocarbons among hydrogen clouds in interstellar space. He had succeeded after analyzing spectral line surrounding hot, young star in Orion constellation. Finding, Dr. Johnson believed, might provide clue to building blocks of life in universe. “Whatever mechanism occurs here occurs throughout the universe and you can be sure it occurs in the solar system.” (O’Toole, W Post, 10/26/71, A3)
NASA announced it had issued RFPs for automated HEAO to study high-energy radiation from space. Proposals were due Aug. 27 at msfc and contract would be awarded early in 1972 if heao became approved project in FY 1972. Single contract for two spacecraft would continue through launch and mission operations support for seven years. Contract called for system engineering of heao payload; design and development of spacecraft; procurement and integration of orbit adjust stage and shroud; integration of experiments; design, development, and delivery of one set of heao ground support equipment; and launch operations support. Winning contractor also would provide mission operations support for observatory for up to two years for each mission, (nasa Release 71-127)
MSFC announced selection of Itek Corp. to perform large space telescope definition study under $400 000, 12-mo contract. High-resolution optical telescope 3 m (120 in) in diameter would be placed in 630- to 810-km (391- to 503-mi) orbit aboard research and applications module (ram) by reusable shuttle vehicle or Titan III launch vehicle in late 1970s as national facility for operation by many astronomers. (msfc Release 71-219)
First combination of modern radar data from observations of inner planets with existing optical observations of sun and planets made between 1750 and 1970 had shown that Pluto’s mass could not be determined reliably from existing data, MIT scientists M. E. Ash, Irwin I. Shapiro, and W. B. Smith reported in Science. Total 300 000 measurements had been made during experiment which also included available observations of asteroids Eros and Icarus. Radar data were from MIT’s Millstone Hill and Haystack facilities; optical data were from original observatory reports transformed over six years into machine-readable form. Results had shown “insufficient basis for the widespread conclusion that Pluto’s average density is greater than, or even comparable to, the earth’s.” (Science, 11/5/71, 551-6)
President Nixon in message transmitting FY 1972 budget to Congress said: “Science and technology can make major contributions to the public by developing creative solutions to a wide range of national problems.... I am proposing in this budget a substantial expansion in outlays for federally supported research and development.” President recommended increased funding to “make greater use of our scientific and engineering capabilities and resources to cope with.. . pollution, crime, health, transportation, and other environmental and social problems; strengthen research essential to the advancement of our technology and economic productivity; and increase our investment in fundamental science which leads to the long-term progress of our society.” President recommended increase in nsf budget from $506 million in 1971 to $622 million in 1972. In 1972, defense spending would increase but, even with increase, would “drop from 36% of total spending in 1971 to 34% in 1972.” Human resources programs’ share would be 42% of total. Budget proposed “sharing Federal revenues with States and communities,” “national strategies to improve health care” and to ensure “an income floor for every family,” and efforts toward “full-employment in peacetime with relative price stability.” (PD, 2/1/71, 130-9)
Discovery of hydroxyl molecule in interstellar dust between stars of M—82 and NGG—253 galaxies 97 billion km (60 billion mi) from earth by use of big dish radio telescopes, was reported by Dr. Leonid N. Weliachew, visiting fellow at Cal Tech from Meudon Observatory in France. Discovery implied that chemical evolution was proceeding throughout universe. Hydroxyl was considered a chemical essential to evolution of life, (latns, W Post, 7/15/71, A3; B Sun, 7/19/71)
Moscow Trud published account of test flight by Soviet pilot Oleg Gudkov of new supersonic fighter aircraft to ascertain whether aircraft could be brought out of spin. Test had been successful. (fbis-Sov—71-149, 8/3/71, Ml)
Aerospace industry sales continued anticipated decline in 1971, to $23.3 billion from $24.9 billion—decrease of 6.3%. Commercial aerospace sales, primarily jet transports, increased 7.1% in 1971, from $4,578 in 1970 to $4,903 billion. Increase reflected increased deliveries of wide-bodied jet transports. Space sales continued decline, to $3,220 billion from $3,580 billion in 1970. Aerospace industry remained nation’s largest manufacturing employer during 1971, despite continuing drop in employment from 1 069 000 workers in December 1970 to estimated 931 000 in December 1971. (Aerospace, 12/72, 3-5)
NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from wsmr. One carried Univ. of Colorado and gsfc experiment to study airglow, and one carried Dudley Observatory and gsfc experiment to collect micrometeoroids. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
usaf X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Cecil A. Powell (usaf) in joint nasa-usaf research program, reached 21000-m (70 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.35 during 26th flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft from frc. Objectives were to determine lateral-directional derivative with rudder bias at 2° toe out, check out lateral acceleration feedback to control system, and check out automatic mach schedule for upper flaps, (nasa Proj Off)
nasa announced it had begun joint program with USA Air Mobility Research and Development Laboratory to develop flight research vehicle to test various rotors in actual flight under controlled conditions with provision for extensive engineering measurements during maneuvers. LaRC had issued rfps for two parallel design studies requiring 10 mos to determine feasibility of attaining Government’s research goals and provide development plan for further phases of program. Joint NASA-Army team would base detailed specifications for vehicle preliminary-design competition on results of predesign studies. (NASA Release 71—152)
NASA released Goals and Means in the Conquest of Space by R. G. Perel’man (nasa Technical Translation F-595 dated May 1970). Translation of Tseli i Puti Pokoreniva Kosmosa, “Nauka” Press, Moscow, 1967, concluded: “The time will come when space liners will be sent across interstellar routes, but the achievements of Soviet science and technology will never be forgotten, since they first made it possible for man to set foot in the universe, and since the labor of every Soviet citizen is involved.” (Text)
Perspective in science funding was drawn by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator, in Science editorial: “The funding proposed for 1972 for basic science ($2.4 billion), or even that for the entire space exploration program ($3 billion), is a very small fraction of the funding that is proposed for efforts to ameliorate societal problems today ($90 billion). The real need is not so much for additional dollar attention as it is for attention of a different kind. Ideas, new approaches, and new insights into the wise management and utilization of our human and natural resources are what is required. Many experimentally before application to human patients recovering from open heart surgery, (nasa Release 71-69)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate James H. Wakelin, Jr., as Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology succeeding Myron Tribus, who had resigned in November. Nomination was submitted to Senate Jan. 25. (PD, 1/25/71, 84; 2/1/71, 141)
Retirement of Jerome F. Lederer as NASA Director of Safety Jan. 14, 1972,	was announced by NASA. Internationally recognized authority on air and space flight safety had joined NASA as Director of Flight Safety for omsf June 1, 1967, after having been Director of Flight Safety Foundation since 1947. Lederer, who had received NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1969, would return to Flight Safety Foundation as part time consultant, (nasa Release 71—224)
Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory, launched by NASA Sept. 29, had completed more than 850 orbits of the earth and was officially adjudged a success. Primary objective, to obtain high-resolution data from solar corona in particular spectral bands in EUV and in visible regions during one solar rotation, had been achieved. Fulfillment of secondary objective, of investigating intensity and spectrum of solar and cosmic x-rays from nonpointed instruments beyond one solar rotation, continued. All spacecraft systems, including star-tracker— gyro night-pointing feature new to OSO—had operated satisfactorily. Tape recorder No. 1, inoperative when first interrogated on seventh orbit, had not recovered despite several attempts to operate unit. Tape recorder No. 2 had performed required data storage and readout functions satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
usaf YF-12 aircraft, one of two in joint nasa-usaf aeronautical research program to advance technology of supersonic military and civil aircraft, crashed on routine flight from Edwards AFB, Calif. Both pilots parachuted to safety. Coincidentally, nasa announced addition of another usaf YF—12 to program. New aircraft was specially instrumented for inflight propulsion studies of engine internal flow dynamics, propulsion and airframe interreactions, air inlet dynamics, atmospheric turbulence and temperature variations, rapid airflow changes, and factors affecting inflight stopping and restarting of engines, (afsc pio; frc Release 16-71; Aero Daily, 6/28/71, 316)
Three men would spend up to 56 days in MSC altitude chamber in early 1972 to obtain medical data and evaluate medical experiment equipment for Skylab program, NASA announced. Test would closely simulate Skylab conditions so that differences observed during actual flight might be attributed to causes such as weightlessness which could not be simulated in chamber tests. Test would evaluate 16 medical experiments and selected items of experiment equipment and aid in training ground-based medical operations team for their participation during actual space flight. Chamber was 6 m (20 ft) in diameter and was being modified to resemble Skylab Workshop crew quarters. Atmosphere would be 70% oxygen and 30% nitrogen at 34.5 kilonew-tons per sq m (5 psi) pressure with 45% to 60% humidity, (nasa Release 71-86)
msfc announced it was checking out extreme uv coronal spectroheliograph, first flight instrument to be delivered for atm solar observatory. Instrument was one of two designed by Ball Brothers Research Corp. from nrl concepts. Second nrl flight instrument—extreme uv spectrograph—would be shipped to msfc in March 1971. (msfc Release 71-7)
British Aircraft Corp. said in London that Concorde test flights had “met with success unique in the annals of commercial aircraft flight development.” bac chief test pilot Brian Truhshaw told press conference he was optimistic since British and French prototypes had flown total 393 hrs 56 min, including 92 hrs 35 min at supersonic speeds. Aircraft had maintained directional stability at twice speed of sound and on stalling two of its four engines at same speed. Modifications would he made on nacelles before next phase of test flights because of Jan. 22 incident to French prototype 001 at mach 2 over Atlantic. Air pressure had broken off forward intake ramp of No. 4 engine and engine had fallen off into sea. (Berger, B Sun, 2/16/71, C6)
usn announced cause of Dec. 30, 1970, crash of F-14 Tomcat fighter aircraft on second test flight was two pencil-thin hydraulic lines that ruptured after severe vibration. Findings confirmed those of aircraft manufacturer, Grumman Aerospace Corp, usn said problem could be corrected without major redesign or changes. (AP, NYT, 2/15/71, 44)
Impact of aerospace industry slump and termination of lunar excursion module project on Grumman Corp. and Long Island, N.Y., area was described by New York Times. With 26 000 employees, Grumman Corp., “reaches out into every corner of the economy of Nassau and Suffolk Counties and, as one of the nation’s largest aerospace combines, even far beyond those two counties that jointly claim Grumman as their own.” Nearly 1000 subcontractors depended on Grumman’s patronage. Firm was “largest real estate taxpayer in Nassau County, the largest customer for the Long Island Lighting Company and hundreds of smaller corporations. And in salaries for its employes alone it pumps nearly a third of a billion dollars each year into the Long Island economy.” Grumman figures indicated that for every person laid off, 4Y2 persons somewhere in U.S. economy lost their jobs, including 2V2 in Nassau or Suffolk Counties. From December 1969 to December 1970 nearly 5700 persons at Grumman had lost jobs; 14 250 elsewhere on Long Island had lost jobs as result. (Andelman, NYT, 10/21/71, 45)
nasa announced reorganization of Office of Manned Space Flight to reflect new management requirements for future manned flight programs. Reorganization established two new technical support offices, Engineering and Operations Office and Quality and Safety Office; established two functional offices, Administration Office and Program Analysis Office; and abolished Mission Operations, Field Center Development, Institutional Operations, and Space Medicine organizations. m/g John D. Stevenson (usaf, Ret.), Director of Mission Operations, became Deputy Director of Engineering and Operations. Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Director of Field Center Development, became Special Assistant to Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Space Medicine Office had been combined with other life science activities under Dr. James W. Humphreys, Director of Life Sciences, as announced Dec. 3, 1970. (nasa Release 71-10)
msfc announced award of $2 249 700, one-year contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to supply and deliver liquid hydrogen for all Government aerospace use in eastern U.S. (msfc Release 71—55) During March: Prestige of U.S. science was being undermined by assaults from many sides—which might leave U.S. “a second-rate power and a third-rate place to live”-—Lawrence P. Lessing wrote in Fortune article. Funds had been “damagingly cut in such basic areas as the life and medical sciences . . . while a large amount of advanced but abstract technology, which could begin to solve the problems of overcrowding, energy, pollution, transportation, and waste, . . . are going neglected.” New hostility to science and technology had arisen among many “ordinary Americans,” even from within science itself, and among young activists. But if man’s store of knowledge were torn down, man would “backslide not a few centuries but two hundred thousand years.” Severe cutback in research and development because of Vietnam war, inflation, and contracted economy—with Federal r&d expenditures declining in real dollars by more than 20%—possibly endangered whole structure of science. Decline followed post-World War II growth that had produced antibiotics, atomic power, cryogenics, computers, jet planes, rocket vehicles, radar, transistors, masers, and lasers and had spurred U.S. to do its own basic research. “From . . . only a sparse dozen Nobel Prizes in the forty years up to 1940, U.S. scientists went on in the next thirty years to win forty-five.” “While men and talent are . . . going to waste the things that need doing . . . keep piling up.” U.S. was beginning to lag behind other nations in high-energy physics, radioastronomy, plasma physics, conventional energy research, space science, transportation, and life sciences. “With two of the later, more scientifically oriented Apollo moon flights canceled, though equipment is hought and paid for, work on NASA’s forward-looking space station, nuclear-powered rocket, and unmanned planetary exploration vehicles has been so cut back that after 1975 almost nothing will be scheduled. And research funds in life sciences were still lagging 20% behind research capacity—in field that ^ held promises for much safer biological insecticides, genetic repair of congenital defects, and basic attacks on cancer and heart disease. (Fortune, 3/71, 88-9, 153-5)
Nixon Administration’s New Technology Opportunities Program “expected to be announced early next year” was described by New York Times. Basic concept was to define technologies that could help solve domestic problems, establish r&d priorities accordingly, and provide incentives for industry to pursue technological goals. Times said program could be major step toward making Government partner for first time in industries outside aerospace and defense, result in greater Federal r&d funding, and constitute counterattack against “those who increasingly criticize science and technology as disruptive and destructive forces in society.” (Wilford, NYT, 10/31/71, 1)
NASA issued rfps to major airframe manufacturers for design and fabrication of two experimental transport jet STOL aircraft to start Quiet-STOL program to relieve airport noise and congestion. Aircraft, incorporating propulsive lift principles, would provide technological data and experience for developing environmentally acceptable, economical, and safe fan-jet STOL transport system in NASA—DOT— faa—USAF program. Program would implement major recommendations of joint nasa-dot Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Study by providing industry with basis for stol development, Government regulatory agencies with rules for STOL certification and operation, and usaf with modernized tactical airlift capability. (nasa Release 71-146)
ost released Final Report of the Ad Hoc Supersonic Transport Review Committee of the Office of Science and Technology, March 30, 1969. Release of previously secret report was prompted, ost said, “by continued public interest and certain impressions that the government may be concealing factual data on the sst program.” Report recommended “termination of the development contracts and the withdrawal of Government support from the sst prototype program.” Reasons given were: sst operating costs would exceed those of then-available subsonic aircraft; “attendant surcharge makes the airline market uncertain”; program was unattractive to private financing and “substantial government involvement is likely to be sought in the supply or guarantee of some S3—5 billion of capital for the certification and production of a U.S. sst”; there was “substantial uncertainty regarding the range and payload and the environmental effects” of sst and “costs and duration of the program are both likely to increase” in attempt to develop production aircraft; there was “substantial doubt that the present configurations of the Concorde and the TU—144 will become commercially viable aircraft”; balance of payments argument was not sufficiently strong to warrant Government investment in sst; U.S. leadership in aviation did not depend upon affirmative sst decision in near future; and, “when the right combination of technology and market demand appears, the U.S. aircraft industry may well decide on its own to proceed with the development and production of an sst.” (Text)
Mrs. E. Margaret Burbidge would become first woman director of Royal Greenwich Observatory in 1972, Washington Post reported. British-born former professor of astronomy at Univ. of California would not inherit title of Astronomer Royal, traditionally bestowed upon Observatory Director. She would direct staff of 200, including 25 women scientists. (Nossiter, W Post, 11/19/71, A26)
Dr. Dennis Gabor, winner of 1971 Nobel Prize for physics, said in Bridgeport, Conn., that space exploration was “strictly a dead end occupation.” It was “extremely uninteresting—the only interesting place is earth.” Dr. Gabor made comment during interview at Univ. of Bridgeport honors convocation, (upi, W Post, 11/5/71, A7; W Star, 11/6/71, A7)
Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, MSFC Director, announced establishment of temporary heao Office in MSFc’s Program Management Directorate to plan High Energy Astronomy Observatory. Office would replace heao Task Team formed in spring 1971. (msfc Release 71-148)
usaf X-24A lifting-body vehicle had completed flight-test program and would be reshaped and renamed X-24B, frc announced. Decision to end flight operations and reshape vehicle had been made by joint NASA—USAF flight research team. X-24A was one of three lifting-body vehicles in joint nasa-usaf program managed since 1967 by frc. Vehicle had made 28 flights— 10 glide and 18 powered—since beginning test program April 17, 1969, reaching 1687 km per hr (1048 mph) and 22 000-m (71 000-ft) altitude. New X-24B would be built around existing basic X—24A structure, but outward appearance would be changed dramatically, with sharply pointed flat-iron shape replacing bulbous one. New shape would also have improved hypersonic lift-to-drag ratio that would permit investigation of how well vehicle designed for good hypersonic performance would perform at low supersonic, transonic, and subsonic speeds, with emphasis on landing. Other changes would include 4.6-m (15-ft) extension of nose, removal of rear center fin, 1.5-m (5-ft) widening in rear, and 680-kg (1500-lb) increase in weight. Modifications would be completed by Martin Marietta Corp. in about one year, (frc Release 18-71)
nsf released Research and Development in Local Governments, Fiscal Years 1968 & 1969 (nsf 71-6): Local government r&d expenditures doubled between 1966 and 1969, from $20 million to $40 million. Approximately 50% of funds spent by local governments for r&d came from Federal Government. Life, social, and engineering sciences were largest fields in local government R&D. (Text)
French President Georges Pompidou was passenger aboard Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic airliner, in 75-min flight from Paris to Toulouse. Aircraft reached twice speed of sound. Later, Concorde 002, British prototype, was forced to turn back after taking off from Toulouse because of faulty landing gear. Aircraft circled for half hour at 600 m (2000 ft) but made perfect landing 38 min after takeoff. (Reuters, B Sun, 5/8/71)
New $200-million international airport at Kansas City, Mo., was being built under NASA-developed management system, NASA announced. Midwest Research Institute, management consultant for project, was using It Cl Management Information Center—fully equipped briefing room that resembled itsc’s—as repository for reference data on airport project, (nasa Release 71-232)
Senate passed H.R. 7960, $706.5 million FY 1972 nsf authorization bill. Bill included $2.5 million for Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) ; $4 million for Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico; $7.7 million for Kitt Peak National Observatory; $2.5 million for Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in Chile; $7 million for National Radio Astronomy Observatory; and $19 million for National Center for Atmospheric Research. Report accompanying bill described program of Research Applied to National Needs (rann) established by nsf during FY 1971 to coordinate research in selected environmental, social, and technological problems. Major research efforts consolidated to form RANN were: weather modification, earthquake engineering, interdisciplinary research relevant to problems of our society (irpos), and other efforts formerly funded under scientific project support. (CR, 6/28/71, S9974-81; S Rpt 92-232)
nasa announced plans for first launchings of nasa sounding rockets from French Guiana Space Center at Kourou in cooperative France-U.S. upper-atmosphere research project. Project would launch 20 French Centaure and NASA Nike-Cajun rockets to obtain data on structure and circulation of equatorial atmosphere between 30- and 95-km (18- and 60-mi) altitudes. Under agreement between French National Center for Space Studies (cnes) and nasa, ones would provide Centaure rockets with sodium vapor payloads, F— 1 launcher, launch team, and tracking and ground support. NASA would be responsible for Nike-Cajuns with grenade and ozone payloads, one Nike with an inert 2nd stage, and ground support for payloads. Each agency would bear cost of its agreed responsibilities, (nasa Release 71—53)
New York Times editorial advocated reimbursement by Government of airlines’ investment in SST: “The bill which the sst lobby seeks to amend is a Supplemental Appropriations bill that contains money for the Government’s closing costs arising from cancellation of the contract for the plane. The bill does provide an opportunity for the Government to consider its debt of honor to the airlines. They were strongly advised by the Department of Transportation in 1967 to advance money to the Boeing Company, to be credited against the future purchase of sst’s. The airlines realistically recognized that this was risk capital if the plane should prove a technological failure, but in view of the Federal Government’s insistent if unwise pressure in behalf of the plane, they had good reason to rely upon continued Government backing for the project. Although the $58.5-million involved is not a legal obligation, Congress should honor this commitment.” (NYT, 5/11/71)
LeRC was studying blown-flap stol aircraft using series of fans mounted atop each flap semispan, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Concept was similar to fan/flap arrangements studied in wind tunnel tests-. Bleed air from main engines was ducted to periphery of each fan nacelle and drove fans through tip turbines. Flow from fans then passed over flaps, which could be deflected up to 60° for landing. (Av Wk, 4/5/71, 44)
nasa’s supercritical wing, flown on TF-8A aircraft piloted by NASA test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, successfully completed 10th flight from frc. Objectives of 40-min flight were to obtain additional pressure distribution and performance data at high subsonic speeds and evaluAugust 27; Noise tests of NASA’s experimental, quieter jet aircraft engine were under way in Peebles, Ohio, the Lewis Research Center announced. The project sought to develop an engine of 97 850-newton (22 000-pound) thrust that would operate at }5 to 20 decibels quieter ikon engines used in present subsonic air transports. In the photo the engine was being checked out before the General Electric Co. noise tests. A probe inserted in the exhaust nozzle (left) measured the smoke produced. ate flutter characteristics at low supersonic speeds. Aircraft reached 12 000-m (40000-ft) altitude, with pressure distribution and performance data obtained from mach 0.80 to 0.97 and flutter characteristics evaluated at mach 1.05 and 1.10. (NASA Proj Off)
President Nixon’s FY 1972 science budget was analyzed in Science: Budget proposed selective increases for r&d which would “start the federal science budget upward again after several years of virtually static financing.” Impact in FY 1972 spending would not be dramatic “since there is a lag of as much as 2 or 3 years between the obligation and actual spending” but budget served as “declaration of intentions.” Nixon Administration showed “inclination to maintain high-quality capabilities for research but to restrain expansion of research and, particularly, of manpower training except in areas judged to contribute to the solution of major nation problems.” Priorities were indicated by choices of agencies and programs for major increases: nsf budget would exceed $600 million for first time, with major portion of increases going to additional support of research grants. New cancer research program would receive $100 million. Substantial increases would provide funds for research on environmental problems, highway safety, air traffic control, and crime reduction, dod r&D spending would be increased with additional funds split between work on strategic and tactical weapons. Obligational authority for total Federal science budget would rise to $16.7 billion from $15.6 billion in FY 1971, but estimated expenditures would rise only from $15.3 to $15.6 billion, nsf would get new obligational authority of $622 million in FY 1972 but would spend estimated $546 million. (Science, 2/5/71, 459-60)
Assembly of solar radio telescope 10 m (33 ft) in diameter was nearing completion at Baldone, Latvia, Riga Sovetskaya Latviya reported. Parabolic antenna would enable Latvian Academy of Sciences Radio-astrophysical Observatory scientists to study all fluctuations of sun’s radiowaves. (fbis-Sov-70, 10/22/71, L4)
ARC-developed oximeter—device to measure oxygen content of blood by light absorption of blood circulating through ear—was being used by National Cancer Institute’s Leukemia Service for early detection of shock, nasa announced. Device had been introduced to Cancer Institute by Biomedical Application Team (bateam) of Research Triangle Institute. Team was employed by NASA to exchange space-developed technology between physical and medical sciences. Oximeter had been developed in 1960s to study effects of rapid acceleration in centrifuge on subjects, to determine reactions to simulated manned space flight conditions, (nasa Release 71—132)
Senate Committee on Nutrition asked Federal Government to provide emergency food for highly skilled professionals in Seattle, Wash., who had been hit by aerospace industry unemployment. Committee, investigating Seattle situation after Dept, of Agriculture had refused request from State of Washington for free distribution of surplus food in Seattle, said many families were going hungry. (Reuters, W Post, 11/29/71, A6)
usaf X—24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Cecil Powell (usaf) , reached mach 1 and 18 300-m (60 000-ft) altitude during 24th flight from frc in joint nasa-usaf research program. Purpose of powered flight was to determine lateral-directional derivatives with power on and to determine longitudinal derivatives at mach 0.6 (nasa Proj Off)
nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences had agreed on substance and mechanics of future exchanges of medical and biological data on their experience in manned space flight, NASA announced. Agreement’s details were contained in recommendations of joint working group on space biology and medicine which met in Moscow Oct. 9-13. Group—cochaired by Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director for Life Sciences, and Dr. N. N. Gurovsky of U.S.S.R. Ministry of Health and Academy of Sciences—recommended that meetings be held at least once annually, with next meeting held in U.S. during May 1972; working sessions be held to consider ways to predict state of human organism during and after space flights, response of certain body systems to space environment, techniques of dysbarism prevention, methods of preflight and postflight medical observations, and methods and results of biological experiments; and cochairmen explore possibility of an exchange of one or two specialists to work in laboratories doing similar biomedical research in space programs of U.S. and U.S.S.R. (nasa Release 71-251)
aia Aerospace Research Center published National Technology Support: A Study of Research and Development Trends and Their Implications: New patterns were emerging in magnitude and direction of R&D in U.S. “Recent R&D trends reflect diminishing governmental leadership in R&D which could lead to an erosion of the national research effort. The impact of continued inflation, the higher costs and longer leadtimes associated with increasingly sophisticated projects, plus accelerated efforts to meet specific national goals, suggest an even greater degradation of the total R&D effort than an examination of expenditures would indicate.” Recent growth of industrial financing and leveling of Federal funding indicated shift in direction of national R&D activities. “Whereas industrial research and development has focused primarily upon product improvement and product development, most of the nation’s basic research and the high risk, high cost activity has been financed by the Federal Government. Although their respective r&d programs frequently are complementary, certain technological projects traditionally initiated or sponsored by the Federal Government are beyond the financial scope of private enterprise. Consequently, a reduction in Federal r&d activity could have a negative impact on the level of sophisticated effort nationally.” Investments in higher education, level and nature of Federal r&d support, and utilization of existing manpower “provide some indication of the long-term scientific and technical capability of the nation. Previous Federal support of certain programs has had a feedback effect on the desirability of pursuing certain careers. Thus the failure to consider the long-term relationship among various fields of science implies future imbalances.” Establishment of longer range R&D priorities and well defined national technological strategy was needed. (Text)
NASA announced award of seven-month study contracts totaling $1 387 576 to nine universities and one NASA center to define requirements for seven astronomy experiments for proposed High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao). (msfc Release 71-52)
New York Times editorial praised end of sst: “This action expresses a sound sense of national priority and of concern with ecological values. It also exposes last week’s surprise vote in the House to revive the SST as a political power play that reflects no credit on the leadership of either party. To reopen a major issue without advance warning to opponents was highhanded; to do so without getting up-to-date cost estimates from the Boeing Company was frivolous.” (NYT, 5/21/71) May 21-22: Application of laminar air-flow techniques in medical surgery was discussed during symposium on Clean Room Technology in Surgery Suites at icsc. (nasa Special Release 5/14/71; ksc pao)
KSC tourist facilities were described in New York Times travel section: “In these days of popular denigration of space exploration, the tourist is likely to approach this vast space-age outdoor science museum in a defensively skeptical frame of mind. Three or more hours later he is likely to leave the center convinced that it was a valuable and exciting experience.” KSC was “one of the least commercialized major tourist attractions of the world.” NASA was “selling ... on tapes and in guide lectures, but not offensively and not at the expense of information you want.” There was little evidence of security “and the guides emphasize that you may photograph anything you see.” (Fried-lander, NYT, 4/25/71)
Sen. Edmund S. Muskie (D-Me.) introduced, for himself and cosponsors, S. 1382, “to authorize the Secretary of Transportation to carry out a special program of transportation research and development utilizing the unique experience and manpower of the airframe and defense industries.” (CR, 3/25/71, S3900)
NASA announced it was expanding its airborne research program by acquiring two Lockheed U-2 high-altitude aircraft under loan agreement with usaf and concentrating flights over four ecological test areas in U.S. Program objectives were to simulate data output of erts scheduled for 1972 launch, collect data simultaneously over various test sites with passes of erts and Skylab after they were orbited, support earth resources survey programs of other agencies, and make observations in astronomy, atmospheric physics, and geophysics for nasa’s physics and astronomy programs, (nasa Release 71-60)
Tass announced construction by Soviet scientists of “world’s first operating installation” to convert atomic energy directly into electricity. Installation had produced “several kilowatts” for “new major achievement of Soviet atomic science and technology.” aec said later that, while U.S. had done same thing on smaller scale, U.S.S.R. might be closer to building unit large enough to power giant, multichannel comsats, long-range space missions, or compact power station under sea or in remote places. (Cohn, W Post, 3/26/71, Al)
Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport, left Toulouse for Cayenne, French Guiana, on first leg of first transatlantic test flight, to Rio de Janeiro. Flight would promote sale of aircraft in South America and continue performance testing and long-range flying in context of commercial airports. (BAC-Aero-spatiale France Release 17C/71)
LaRC awarded $3 934 000 contract to Carey General Contractors, Inc., and Metropolitan Construction Co. of Missouri for joint construction of 4200-sq-m (45 500-sq-ft) Aircraft Noise Reduction Laboratory. Research facility, to be completed by November 1972, would include acoustics physics laboratory, applications area with anechoic room and reverberation room, and external effects simulation laboratory. (NASA Release 71-133)
nsf published Research and Development in Industry, 1969: Funds, 1969; Scientists & Engineers, January 1970 (nsf 71-18). In 1969 industry spent $18.5 billion for r&d—6% above 1968 level of $17.5 billion and 5 times amount spent on r&d in 1953. Increase in 1968-1969 was due to increase in companies’ own funds. Between January 1969 and January 1970 full-time equivalent number of r&d scientists and engineers employed in industry dropped from 387 100 to 380 600. Decline —first recorded by nsf in 13-yr series of reports, was primarily caused by cutbacks in personnel working on Federal r&d programs. Most of r&d unemployment among scientists and engineers occurred in aircraft and missiles industry. Number of R&d professionals in dod programs remained level between 1968 and 1969. Federal Government was source of 47% of r&d dollars spent by industry during 1969, down from 59% in 1959. dod and NASA furnished 89% of Federal r&d funds to industry in 1969 and supported 89% of industrial scientists and engineers working on Federal programs, at average annual cost of $56 200 each. In 1969 industry financed 53% of its r&d with its own funds, increase from 41% in 1959. Industry allocated 3% of its 1969 r&d funds to basic research with more than 50% of this amount spent on physical sciences. (Text)
Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport, landed at Rio de Janeiro after successful first transatlantic test flight, piloted by French test pilot Andre Turcat [see Sept. 4]. Turcat told newsmen aircraft had flown at mach 2 for nine minutes during 3240-km (2015-mi) flight. (AP, NYT, 9/7/71, 62)
Cambridge Univ. astronomer Dr. David Dewhirst said in Cambridge that irregularities in orbit of Neptune, eighth planet from sun, indicated possible presence of another body. “But I must emphasize that at present this is only a notion.” Dr. Dewhirst said U.S. Naval Observatory had supplied photos for study, (upi, W News, 11/18/71, 15)
Astronomers had asked Tucson, Ariz., to modify its outdoor lighting so their view of heavens would not be obstructed by nighttime glare, Science reported. Astronomers at Kitt Peak National Observatory, National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Steward Observatory, Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had complained. (Bazell, Science, 2/5/71, 561))
Rep. Glenn M. Anderson (D-Calif.) introduced Emergency Conversion Loan Act to aid victims of aerospace industry depression. Legislation would immediately qualify jobless engineers, scientists, and technicians for conversion loans from banks in amounts up to 60 °/o of prior salary, but not to exceed $12 000. (CR, 5/24/71, E4915)
Possibility of using electrically controlled optical sensors and signal processes—techniques used to guide military missiles to targets—was being examined as substitute for sightless eyes by Huntington Institute of Applied Medical Research team led by Dr. Robert H. Pudenz, New York Times reported. Electrical impulses, as coded messages, would stimulate visual cortex of central nervous system and communicate pulses of information to brain by way of optic nerve. Artificial system would bypass eyes and optic nerve and radio signals directly to brain. (Holies, NYT, 4/26/71, 23)
FRC announced award of $211260, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to LTV Aerospace Corp. for design and construction of side fairings for NASA’s supercritical wing test aircraft, modified F-8 jet. Installation of side fairings would improve overall aircraft with area ruling, an aerodynamic design feature that would permit aircraft to fly more efficiently, and provide more desirable test environment for evaluating aerodynamic characteristics of supercritical wing near speed of sound. (frc Release 29—71)
usaf’s X—24A lifting body was shipped by air from frc to Martin Marietta Corp.’s Denver plant, where it would be modified and redesignated X-24B. Modified vehicle, of new shape with improved hypersonic lift-to-drag ratio, would be delivered to frc in early fall 1972. X-24A had completed 28 flights in joint NASA—usaf research program, reaching 1676 km per hr (1048 mph) and 21 600-m (71000-ft) altitude, (frc Release 30-71; SBD, 12/17/71, 215)
U.S. and Canadian scientists were planning to build $12- to $15-million upper-atmosphere observatory to study relationship of space energy to weather, radio communications, and other phenomena on earth, Science reported. Transmitter and four receivers would be erected near Great Lakes, “where the earth’s magnetic field causes ionized layers of the upper atmosphere to form a low-density ‘trough.’ ” Preliminary engineering studies for observatory, which was scheduled for completion in 1974, were being conducted under $99 950 nsf grant. (Science, 4/16/71, 244)
Discovery of galaxies Maffei 1 and Maffei 2 about 3 million light years from earth was reported in Astrophysical Journal by team of Univ. of California at Berkeley, Cal Tech, and Carnegie Institution astronomers headed by Robert Landau of Univ. of California at Berkeley. Galaxies previously had been obscured by interstellar dust in Milky Way. Team had begun study after Landau read 1968 report of Italian astronomer Paolo Maffei that two strange objects had been observed on infrared photo Maffei made of region between constellations Perseus and Cassiopeia. Using Mount Palomar and Lick Observatory telescopes and advanced astronomical tools and research techniques, team had located galaxies twice as far from earth as Andromeda, nearest galaxy to Milky Way. Team believed brighter of new galaxies might be larger than either Milky Way or Andromeda and thus possibly largest member of local group of galaxies, measuring 50 000 to 100 000 light years in diameter. (Astrophysical Journal, 1/1/71, L25-31)
MSFC announced new projects in research program on application of remote sensing techniques. Land-use survey of five north Alabama counties would photograph area from air with remote sensing camera to study how land was being used. Results would be used by Top of Alabama Regional Council of Governments. In “ground truth survey” with Alabama A&M Univ., MSFC would supplement aerial photography; university personnel would make sample ground study to correlate remote sensing information, (msfc Release 71—79)
NASA and DOT released information given in Joint DOT—NASA Civil Aviation Research and Development Policy Study Report dated March 1971.	Study had been recommended by Congress and made by NASA,
Completion of arrangements for exchange of four computer programs between NASA and Japan’s Hitachi Central Research Laboratory was announced by NASA. Exchange, negotiated by NASA oart and Computer Software Management and Information Center (cosmic) operated at Univ. of Georgia under NASA contract, would make two Japanese programs available to U.S. users in exchange for two NASA programs that had been available to U.S. public for several years. (nasa Release 71—148)
nasa announced it had awarded Bellcomm, Inc., 17-mo, $11.5-million extension to contract for systems analysis, study, planning, and technical support to manned space flight program. Extension, which would continue through May 1972, brought total value of contract since March 1962 to $91 million, (nasa Release 71—17)
NASA announced award of $>4-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract modification to Ball Brothers Research Corp., Inc., for changes in oso—H Orbiting Solar Observatory to increase experiment capacity. Change orders definitized by contract included larger physical volume to handle larger experiment packages, improved command system security, and increased power for instruments. OSO-H would be launched in mid-1971. (NASA Release 71—2)
U.S.S.R. announced that Soviet supersonic transport Tu-144 had reached designed 2400-km-per-hr (1500-mph) speed at 16 700-m (55 000-ft) altitude during test flight Nov. 12, 1970. {NYT, 3/29/71, 53)
NATO intelligence had reported U.S.S.R. was flight-testing swing-wing supersonic strategic bomber designed to fly at twice speed of sound and equipped for low-level penetration of enemy defenses, New York Times said. Aircraft, christened “Backfire” by NATO, could become operational late in 1973. Western military intelligence specialists believed Backfire marked “emergence of entirely new Soviet air weapons system.” (Szulc, NYT, 9/5/71, 1)
Soyuz 11 accident in which crew lost lives [see June 6-30] might have been “greatest setback in Soviet space flight activity in past several years,” Space Business Daily reported. October, traditionally “bumper month for Soviet flight programming” had seen “relative depression” this year. In October 1970 U.S.S.R. had recorded 12 missions. This year, “up to last Week, there had been only 4 missions recorded.” (SBD, 10/26/71, 194)
