NASA announced issuance by Ames Research Center of request for proposals for studies on four proposed Pioneer-class missions to Venus in late 1970s. Proposals would cover design studies for entry probes and orbiting spacecraft. Two contractors would be selected to perform parallel, $500 000 design studies, (nasa Release 72—53)
Industrial Research magazine’s IR—100 award for 1972 had been awarded to Lewis Research Center and Arthur D. Little, Inc., for process for producing pure, very-high-strength, single-crystal, refractory ceramic fibers, LeRC announced. Award, given annually to developers of 100
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by Cecil Powell, completed 24th flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Flight objectives were to check out pilot and to obtain stability and control data at mach 1.1 and mach 0.9. All objectives were met. Vehicle reached 21000-m (69 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.25. (nasa proj off)
NASA TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, resumed flight program at Flight Research Center after three-week halt for improvement of fuselage area distribution and installation of pressure survey rakes. Purpose of flight— 28th in series—was to check out new instrumentation and angle-of-attack and airspeed calibrations. Aircraft reached 10 700-m (35 000-ft) altitude, instrumentation was activated, and calibrations were made at mach 0.90, 0.95, 0.97, 0.99, and 1.2. (nasa proj off)
Two NASA research aircraft, each equipped with five cameras, were photographing State of Arizona—area of more than 295 000 sq km (114 000 sq mi)—from 20 000-m (65 000-ft) altitude. NASA, Dept, of Interior, and State of Arizona project to develop land use inventory system for natural resource management included acquisition of film for development of orthophotoquads—large photographic maps of entire state— for use by Arizona agencies. Arizona Land Use Experiment would make comprehensive analysis based on remotely sensed data; document social and economic benefits of experiment; prepare manual on application of remote sensing to solving resource management problems; and provide plan for updating information by including data from spacecraft, high- and low-flying aircraft, and ground surveys. Arizona had appropriated $400 000 to project. Film processed by Ames Research Center was sent to U.S. Geological Survey laboratories, where orthophotoquads were to be prepared. (NASA Release 72-129)
Aerospace industry outlook for 1972 was described in Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial: “Much of the political miasma and public criticism . . . appears to be dissipating. The cruel bite of unemployment . . . has made it politically less attractive to attack technology. The legislators who were glad to equate their anti-technology votes with a blast at skin cancer now find these votes equated with stimulating unemployment. The industry will continue to be under vigorous public and legislative scrutiny and deserves it. But it has shown the first signs of fighting back and beginning to state its own very valid case. Hopefully, this will continue during the election year in an effort to force politicians to assess technology more accurately in their appeals to the electorate.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 1/3/72, 7)
National Science Foundation released National Patterns of R&D Resources: Funds and Manpower in the United States 1953-1972 (nsf 72—300). Research and development expenditures were expected to reach $28.0 billion in 1972, up from $26.8 billion in 1971, increase of 4.3%; 1970 to 1971 increase had been 2.1%. r&d was expected to account for 2.5% of estimated 1972 U.S. gross national product (gnp), down from 2.6% in 1971. In 1964, r&d and gnp ratio reached 3.0%. Approximately 54% of national r&d effort was supported by Federal funds, primarily from Dept, of Defense and NASA. Industrial sector was second largest source. Companies were expected to provide two fifths of total U.S. r&d funds in 1972, up steadily from 31% in 1964. Estimated 519 000 scientists and engineers in U.S.—more than one third—were employed in r&d during 1971, 5% fewer than in 1970. Nearly 70% of these professionals worked for industrial firms. Basic research expenditures for 1972 were projected at $4.1 billion, with applied research at $6.4 billion. In 1971, $4.0 billion and $6.1 billion had been spent on these activities. Universities and colleges were expected to perform more than 55% of national basic research effort during 1972, up slightly from 1971. (Text)
National Science Foundation reported rise in share of Federal research and development (r&d) expenditures on functions other than space and defense. During 1963—1973, 10 other budget functions shifted upward in R&d program emphasis. Until 1966 space research and national defense spent 90% of Federal R&d total. Joint share of these two functions was expected to be 77% in FY 1973. Share of other 10 functions had risen 5% between 1970 and 1973 alone, (nsf Highlights, 4/25/72, 1)
Laser Doppler airspeed indicator 10 times more precise than best systems in commercial aircraft was being tested by Ames Research Center in Global Atmospheric Research Program, nasa announced. System— proved accurate to one tenth of one per cent—focused carbon dioxide laser beam 18 m (60 ft) ahead of aircraft where air was undisturbed by bow wave, detected backscatter from small aerosols, and measured Doppler shift in frequency proportional to aircraft’s airspeed. Doppler shift was then measured digitally and recorded by digital data system. (nasa Release 72-228)
Manned Spacecraft Center’s Cellular Analytical Laboratory had developed system to improve early detection of illness and assess flight crew health before and after Skylab missions, nasa reported. Unique medical research effort under direction of Dr. Stephen L. Kimzey used sophisticated instrumentation in spectrophotometry, cytofluorometry, and electron microscopy to supplement existing laboratory analyses in detection and identification of cellular elements of blood by structural and chemical analysis. Laboratory would coordinate Skylab Ml 10 hematology experiment series of five experiments and seven scientific investigations outside NASA and would complete one experiment, M115 (special hematologic effects). Experiment would evaluate influence of long-duration space flight on mem’s immunological and hematological systems. Program would use complete electron microscopy facility to examine red blood cells for structural changes and x-ray analysis to detect alterations of internal electrolyte composition. Red cell represented model system to evaluate functional state of other body tissues and processes. Laboratory would improve medical care available to public by cooperating with medical schools in msc area and with Government agencies throughout U.S. Studies with Univ. of Texas Medical Branch had applied Laboratory’s procedures to evaluation of lymphocytes of burn patients to determine their cellular resistance to infection; early detection of disease program was under way with Baylor Univ. College of Medicine; and work with Texas Children’s Hospital would evaluate changes in muscle potassium and sodium concentrates associated with malnutrition. Joint effort with Environmental Protection Agency and Oak Ridge Laboratory would identify and quantitate early response of sputum cells exposed to agents having carcinogenic potential, (nasa Special Release)
About 150 engineering students from universities in Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee, and Mississippi attended special Fluid and Thermal Engineering Seminar at Marshall Space Flight Center, held to acquaint them with hardware and system developments in fluid and thermal engineering related to their studies. Group included 22 foreign students representing 6 foreign countries, who were students at Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute, (msfc Release 72-21)
Development of small-scale water-reclamation units for home use from NASA-developed technology was forecast by Langley Research Center scientist Richard H. Weinstein in Astronautics & Aeronautics. NASA had begun in late 1950s to develop regenerative systems for purifying and recycling water for long-term space missions. “Research programs have been concentrated on . . . physio-chemical systems. . . . Using largely existing water-processing concepts, the development has gone toward making the concepts efficient on a small scale and adapting them, where necessary, to zero gravity.” NASA systems were “far cry from the integrated, simplified systems needed for domestic water reclamation of the future” but provided “base from which to work.” (A&A, 3/72, 45-51) April 1:	Soviet news agency Tass reported Washington, D.C., interview with Dr. Philip Handler, President of U.S. National Academy of Sciences. Dr. Handler had praised scientific cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R: “Collaboration with their Soviet colleagues in so many fields—high energy physics, space research, and medical sciences, among others—promises markedly to benefit the work of U.S. scientists. ... We are pleased that new opportunities are being arranged for joint enterprises ... in space exploration, cardiovascular and cancer research, environmental monitoring, while we continue to explore the unique opportunities for mutual benefit in the broader enterprises in the international scientific unions.” (fbis-Sov, 4/1/72, LI)
Prominent Soviet astrophysicist Kronid A. Lubrasky had been sentenced to five years in labor camp for anti-Soviet activities, dissident sources in Moscow said. (AP, H Post, 11/1/72) During October:	Lunar Science Institute released Post-Apollo Lunar Science, report of July study by LSI scientists who met at Univ. of California at San Diego. Study had examined progress in lunar science, identified objectives for future work and drafted preliminary plan for long-term lunar science. Major recommendations were that NASA continue to “preserve and describe the samples, data, and photographs, and to make them available to the scientific community” through Lunar Receiving Laboratory at Manned Spacecraft Center; that Apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep) network and subsatellite be operated continuously as long as they provided significant new findings; that selected raw photographic observations be processed to ohtain usable scientific product; that lunar science program be continued at “substantial” level; that advisory panels be continued and augmented to emphasize geophysical and photographic data analysis; and that “small, selective program of mission planning be maintained” concurrently with instrument definition program “to provide the desired continuity between the present and the future.” LSI also recommended high priority for high-inclination orbital mission to determine geophysical, geochemical, and geological variables on planetwide scale, and joint and multinational lunar missions. (Text)
National Science Foundation published Federal R&D Funding Continues To Rise (nsf 72—314): Upward trend since 1970 in Federal research and development support was clearly established. Federal R&D obligations, exclusive of plant, were expected to rise from $15.5 billion in FY 1971 to $16.8 billion in FY 1972 and to all-time high of $17.8 billion in FY 1973. Figures showed increase of 8% in FY 1972 and 6% in FY 1973. Upward trend reversed downward trend from FY 1967 through 1970. (nsf Highlights, 8/11/72)
Portable, high-intensity light to illuminate Skylab workshop interior for motion picture photography during long space missions was being tested at Marshall Space Flight Center. Developed by iota Engineering, 8-kg (17-lb) light produced concentrated illumination of proper color balance for use with fast daylight film scheduled for Skylab. (msfc Release 72-15)
Extremely sensitive low-light-level image-intensification tube was being used by Hale Observatory astronomers to aim 500-cm (200-in) telescope atop Mt. Palomar at most distant objects in universe. Tube, developed to detect enemy troops in Vietnam, amplified faint light from remote celestial objects 2000 or more times. Tube had been adapted to astronomical use by Dr. Edwin W. Dennison of Hale Observatory and Cal Tech, (latns, W Post, 11/23/72, H9)	_ _
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed flight from Flight Research Center. Flight was made with wing vortex generators off at constant g of 200 from mach 0.50 to 0.99 and altitudes of 4800 to 14 000 m (16 000 to 46 000 ft). Windup turns and a few stick pulses with augmentation system off were performed. Pilot reported no significant differences in handling qualities and buffeting between flight with vortex generators on and off but said pitch seemed softer with generator off. (NASA proj off)
NASA announced appointment of J. Lloyd Jones, Jr., as Director of Aerodynamics and Vehicle Systems Div., Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, effective Aug. 6. Jones had heen Research Assistant to Director of Ames Research Center since 1970. (nasa Release 72—147)
Dr. Robert T. Jones of Ames Research Center stood by the wind-tunnel model of a conceptual aircraft being developed in computer and wind-tunnel studies. The fan jet transport’s wing would rotate <15” or more above a center pivot as the speed increased, in attempt to achieve supersonic speed without high fuel consumption and noise. By taking off with the wing perpendicular to the fuselage, the aircraft would require one fourth the takeoff energy of comparable delta-wing transports. would continue theoretical computer and wind-tunnel studies using models “flown” at speeds to mach 1.4. (NASA Release 72-104)
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed flight from Flight Research Center. Performance data were obtained at 10 700-m (35 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.95-0.99. Wing pressure distributions were recorded at altitudes from 8800 to 9100 m (29 000 to 30 000 ft) at mach 0.95-0.99. (nasa proj off)
Ames Research Center scientist Dr. Robert T. Jones was testing theory that antisymmetrical wing pivoting on center point might convert aircraft to supersonic transport without high fuel consumption and noise of conventional sst, NASA announced. Aircraft would have conventional straight wing at right angles to fuselage during takeoff on medium-length runways and would require about one fourth the takeoff energy needed by comparable delta-wing jet transports with similar payloads. As aircraft reached speed and altitude where swept wings were efficient, entire wing would rotate about 45° so that wing on one side would point in direction of flight and wing on other side would trail. Studies had indicated that cruising in this configuration at supersonic speeds to mach 1.2 would not produce sonic boom and could be accomplished with fuel economy similar to that of current jet aircraft at subsonic speeds. Conceptual aircraft could cruise up to mach 1.5 over ocean where sonic effects were not detrimental, arc
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $9.8-million contract modification to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for work on backup Skylab Workshop. Modification included production completion and post-manufacturing verification of backup hardware and launch site support operations through completion of second manned mission, (msfc Release 72-5)
Paralytic patients at Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Tex., were using system developed at Langley Research Center to adjust their immediate environment, United Press International reported. System used paddles and switches activated by patients’ eye movements and breath to control room lights, radio, TV, and other electronic devices. (C Trib, 1/29/72)
Plans for Upper Atmosphere Observatory for U.S. and Canadian scientists were described in Science by Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist J. V. Evans. Ground-based observatory would be close to U.S.-Canadian border, near magnetic 60° latitude. It would provide first opportunity to measure all parameters important in upper atmosphere—■ altitude to 1000 km (620 mi) over north-south expanse of 1000 km. Users could observe two distinct parts of upper atmosphere and transition between them, one part coupled to earth by magnetic field and second part loosely held and subject to particle bombardment from outside earth. Observatory’s applications would include long-distance radio communications, long-range weather prediction, and international cooperation in research and education. Facility, costing $14 million, would complement Global Atmospheric Research Program (carp). {Science, 5/19/72, 463-72)
Termination notices effective June 29 were sent to 198 employees at Marshall Space Flight Center; 115 were downgraded or reassigned in manpower reduction that would bring msfc employment level to 5317 by June 30. Further reduction of 103 was planned for June 1973. (Huntsville Times, 5/11/72)
First results of new radar astronomy technique for accurately measuring lunar topography from earth were described in Science by Haystack Observatory astronomer Stanley H. Zisk. Earlier techniques had measured radar backscattering properties by analyzing lunar echo simultaneously in both time and delay Doppler frequency. New technique extended earlier technique to three-dimensional measurement using radio-interferometer receiver for lunar echo signals. Technique had been used to measure lunar area that included craters Ptolemaeus, Alphonsus, and Arzachel and portions of Mare Nubium. Results had shown evidence of late episode of volcanism that had partially filled two craters through crustal fault of Imbrian origin. Other features coinciding with local gravitational anomalies could be correlated with flow events. Science cover photo of lunar topography showed floor of crater Ptolemaeus to be higher than large mare to its left. Lunar elevations were indicated by lighter shades of gray on black-to-white /photo. (Science, 12/1/72, cover, 977-80)
Lewis Research Center issued requests for proposals for first phase of three-phase effort to demonstrate that lower aircraft engine emissions could be reached without sacrificing combustion efficiency or combustor’s ability to reignite in flight. Firm selected would receive 15-mo contract to conduct screening tests of various combustor designs and modifications. Contractor would consider LeRC-developed “swirl can” design, which provided many fuel-injection points and premixed some fuel and air and could be operated to temperatures twice as hot as standard combustors with significant reductions in pollutants. Second phase of project would test best designs from phase one. Third phase would test best design as part of a complete engine, (nasa Release 72-38)
Flight Research Center announced successful remote-control landing of 1600-kg (3500-lb) modified Piper Comanche (PA-30) aircraft at FRC. Safety pilot was on board aircraft. Landing test demonstrated new technique to provide safer and more economical means of testing advanced aircraft and spacecraft when risk to aircraft or pilot was high or when costs precluded manned full-scale flight test vehicle. PA-30 was equipped with preliminary version of system that used telemetry to send control commands to aircraft and flight information to pilot displays in ground “cockpit” several miles away. Ground pilot used TV and radar to navigate aircraft. In later tests, large-scale models up to 9 m (30 ft) long would be launched from carrier aircraft. Test pilot on ground would “fly” remotely piloted research vehicles (rprv) using TV and telemetry, (frc Release 16-72)
Use of M518 multipurpose electric furnace developed by Marshall Space Flight Center for Skylab would permit increase in number of metals and metal-processing experiments to be carried on earth-orbiting station in 1973, NASA announced. New furnace would accommodate original composite casting experiments and 10 others to explore possibility of manufacturing and processing materials in zero g. Furnace would be delivered to NASA in December by principal contractor Westinghouse Corp. It would facilitate experimentation in solidification, crystal growth, composite structures, alloy structural characteristics, and other thermal processes that altered materials in weightlessness, (nasa Release 72-196)
Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Director of National Atmospheric and Oceanic Administration’s Environmental Research Laboratories, outlined space modification techniques at international meeting of Society of Engineering Science in Tel Aviv, Israel. Techniques would modify nearearth space environment to make it safe for manned space flight. “In the last few years experimenters have artificially modified the space environment. We can now produce artificial aurorae. We can change the population of the Van Allen radiation belt. We can artificially modify the ionosphere from the ground and our other ideas about artificial experiments for the future stretch as far as trying to copy the sweeping action being carried on naturally by Jupiter’s moons.” Other possible man-made changes in near-earth space environment included releasing beam of energetic particles from satellite to produce electromagnetic waves in space, injecting thermal plasma at high altitudes to change radiation population in space, and transmitting electromagnetic waves from earth to disturb particles trapped in Van Allen belt. Experiments would provide data on natural processes that caused geomagnetic storms on earth, permit improved predictions of radar clutter and quality of polar radio communications in future naturally occurring storms, permit modification or attenuation of naturally occurring storms, and enable scientists to make near-earth space environment safe for prolonged manned space flight and study. (noaa Release 72^83)
Federal Pay Board rejected contract settlements that would have provided first-year increase of 12% to more than 100 000 aerospace industry workers in 1973. (Shabecoff, NYT, 1/6/72, 1)
NASA Flight Research Center was testing new curved, steep, instrument landing approach for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to reduce noise discomfort and airport congestion. Approach could begin at various locations close to airport and would provide better aircraft separation, more landings per given time, less en route time, and lower airline operating costs by shortening terminal-to-terminal times. Approaches began at altitudes between 1200 and 1500 m (4000 and 5000 ft) and were flown to approximately 15 m (50 ft) above ground, (frc Release 7—72)
Semiannual survey released by Aerospace Industries Assn, said sharp three-year decline in aerospace industry employment had leveled off at slightly more than 900 000. Between June 1972 and June 1973, aerospace employment was expected to decline from 923 000 to 914 000, or one per cent. During previous three years more than 500 000 employees—one third of total aerospace work force—had been dropped from payroll. Survey projected December 1972 employment at 917 000, somewhat above earlier forecast of 887 000. Between June 1972 and June 1973, production workers were expected to decline by 1.8%, scientists and engineers by 0.6%, and technicians to increase by 1.6%. By June 1973 estimated 157 000 scientists and engineers would be employed; 1967 peak had been 235 000. (Text)
Panel of Geophysics Research Board of National Research Council released Summary Report of the Ad Hoc Panel on (NOx) and the Ozone Layer. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration had asked Panel to review paper by Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist Dr. Harold S. Johnston [see Aug. 1] and to consider research to resolve uncertainties that existed in Dr. Johnston’s hypothesis that nitrogen oxides from exhausts of supersonic transport aircraft could have destructive effects on ozone concentration. Uncertainties existed because dynamic processes might distort chemical equilibrium model based on static atmosphere, rates of some reactions in scheme of chemical kinetics might not be known, and estimations of SST engine exhaust products seemed uncertain to order of magnitude, at least. Panel had concluded: “There appears to be general agreement that Harold Johnston’s conclusions . . . are credible, but with the reservations cited.” Possibility of serious effects on the normal ozone could not be dismissed. “To the extent that existing information permits, Johnston has done a very careful and detailed analysis.” It was evident “that we suffer from serious ignorance of many fundamental aspects of the chemistry and dynamics of the stratosphere when we attempt to make quantitative assessments of the pollution consequences of high-altitude aircraft operations.” (nas—nrc-nae News Rpt, 10/72, 2)
Aerospace industry sales increased for first time since 1968. Sales for 1972 were $23.5 billion, up 5.9% over 1971. Commercial aerospace sales increased 11.6%, to reach estimated $4.8 billion. Increase reflected increase in deliveries of helicopters and general-aviation aircraft. Major aerospace sales included $13.8 billion to Dept, of Defense, up from $12.6 billion to DOD in 1971; missile sales to DOD at $5.2 billion, up from $4.7 billion; and military aircraft sales at $8.1 hillion, up from $7.4 billion. Space sales continued to decline in 1972, to $3.0 billion from $3.2 billion in 1971. Utility and executive aircraft sales increased from $321 million in 1971 to $500 million—up 55.8%. Units delivered increased 23.2%. Civilian helicopter sales increased from $69 million in 1971 to $95 million in 1972, gain of 37.7% Aerospace exports declined for first time since 1964—from $4.2 billion in 1971 to $3.9 billion, 6.6% decrease. Major reason for decline was drop in military aerospace exports—down 23.8% from $1.1 billion in 1971 to $854 million in 1972. Aerospace imports in 1972 were valued at $500 million, increase of 34.0% from $373 million in 1971. Aerospace industry profits were expected to increase from 1.8% in 1971 to 2.2%. Aerospace industry employment declined from 924 000 in December 1971 to estimated 917 000 in December 1972, but industry remained Nation’s largest manufacturing employer, (aia Aerospace, 3/73, 3)
NASA was working with Dept, of Transportation (dot) to define characteristics of clear-air turbulence (cat) better and to develop methods of detecting it in flight, Flight Research Center announced. Instrumented B-57 aircraft—equipped with dot prototype radiometric sensor able to detect cat up to 80 km (50 mi) ahead of aircraft—was being flown at altitudes up to 15 000 m (50 000 ft) in areas over western U.S. where cat was expected. Aircraft also carried Univ. of Wyoming aerosol and ozone detector to determine relationship between presence of aerosols or ozone, or both, and atmospheric conditions that caused cat. Since tests began one year before, B-57 had completed 13 flights. February 2r Flight. Research Center flew a B-57 aircraft equipped v.’ith Department of Transportation prototype radiometric sensor and Univ. of Wyoming aerosol ozone detector in a nasa-dot program to develop methods of detecting clear-air turbulence. When cat was encountered, 30-min flight pattern was flown to record data in turbulent area, (frc Release 1—72)
Pravda published interview with unidentified designer of U.S.S.R.’s Venus 8 Venus probe (launched March 27). “The vehicle was designed for prolonged work on the planet’s surface. Everything is aimed at delaying the apparatus’ ‘thermal death.’ New devices and additional scientific instruments were fitted to the descent apparatus. Therefore, the task was to reduce some of the weight and lighten the apparatus chiefly at the expense of the body. A new system for releasing the cover from the parachute section and an improved parachute system are used on the . . . descent apparatus. The parachutes were tested on a special stand . . . like a wind tunnel with a gas current heated to 500 degrees [centigrade; 773 kelvins] being blown through it. Carbon dioxide—the chief component of the Venusian atmosphere— was passed through the tube. With the help of sensors and a movie camera the testers thus had the opportunity of observing the behavior of the parachute system under near natural conditions.” Spherical capsule had been repeatedly tested in high-pressure chamber that simulated physical conditions of Venus landing. (fbis-Sov, 8/8/72, L2)
NASA announced establishment of joint Civil Aeronautical Research and Development (card) Review Group by National Aeronautics and Space Council, Dept, of Transportation, and NASA to help maintain close relationships among agencies with interests and responsibilities in aeronautics, (nmi 1052.160)
Development by Ames Research Center scientists of simple aperture method that made microscopic details of atomic dimensions clearly visible under transmission electron microscopy was announced by nasa. Method permitted perception of distances of one angstrom instead of resolutions of three angstroms normally obtained with standard electron microscopes. Cancer researchers had obtained best results using nasa technique, (nasa Release 72-59)
Lewis Research Center Deputy Director Eugene J. Manganiello was introduced as new President of Society of Automotive Engineers at SAE banquet in Detroit. (NASA Activities, 2/15/72, 35)
Science and Technology Div. of New York Public Library was closed after failing to meet $86 000 budget deficit by $9000. Library officials had said previously they expected to raise required funds and reopen by mid-January. (Andelman, NYT, 1/1/72, 18; nypl pio)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $26 923 contract to Huntsville (Ala.) Hospital to equip room with NASA-developed devices to test applications in aiding quadriplegics. When room was completed, immobile patient would be able to open and close doors and windows, control room temperature, change channels and control volume on TV set, dial telephone, adjust bed position, signal nurse at remote station, and turn pages in a book. Devices provided by msfc included sight switch operated by looking into sensor on eyeglass frame, panel switch operated by touching panel with head, foot switch, breath switch operated by blowing against small paddle, and pneumatic switch operated, by rolling head against pillow to depress airbag behind ear. Contract expenses would be shared, with msfc contributing $15 450 and hospital and Univ. of Alabama at Huntsville contributing balance. (msfc Release 72-25)
Deployment tests of Skylab Workshop meteoroid shield were under way at Astronautics Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Shield, thin sheet of aluminum wrapped around outer wall, would protect Skylab crewmen from micrometeoroids and ensure comfortable temperature in space, (msfc Release 72-19)
Adm. Thomas H. Moorer (usn), Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff, warned of possible U.S.S.R. nuclear superiority in testimony before closed session of Senate Committee on Armed Services considering FY 1973 military authorization bill: “The mere appearance of Soviet strategic superiority could have a debilitating effect on our foreign policy and our negotiating posture. It could erode the confidence of our friends and allies in the deterrent power of our strategic forces, upon which the entire structure of free world defense essentially rests.” (Corddry, B Sun, 2/17/72, A4) February 17:	First fully automatic landings hy full-scale manned helicopter at predetermined spot had been made by team of Langley Research Center engineers and pilots at Wallops Station, NASA announced. Accomplishment was milestone in research program aimed at permitting helicopters and future vertical takeoff and landing aircraft to fly routine missions under poor visibility. Landing approaches were fully automatic from 3 to 5 km (2 to 3 mi) from intended landing spot. Automatic system was engaged in level flight at 96.5 km per hr (60 mph) at 244-m (800-ft) altitude. When helicopter intercepted landing guidance path, system automatically locked on to start landing approach. At predetermined range helicopter began automatic deceleration to zero ground speed, came to hover 15 m (50 ft) above landing spot, and descended vertically to touchdown, (nasa Release 72-34)
Langley Research Center’s award of contracts to study technology requirements for future supersonic commercial aircraft was announced by NASA. One-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts—$316 415 to Boeing Co., $259 000 to McDonnell Douglas Aircraft Corp., and $231 015 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp.—were for independent and systematic assessment of existing aeronautical technology to determine state of readiness of supersonic transport and identify areas for additional research. Studies would seek ways to use advances in aerodynamics, propulsion, structures, materials, flight controls, and configurations to reduce sst noise and air pollution. Studies were part of NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology advanced planning to ensure existence of technology to maintain U.S. leadership in world aircraft market. Parallel studies in advanced propulsion technology would be managed by Lewis Research Center, (nasa Release 72-203)
Ames Research Center. Langlev Research Center, and Manned Spacecraft Center had received over 250 proposals for using space-related technology to solve problems of air pollution, water pollution, solid waste management, and clinical medicine, NASA announced. Proposals were in response to reauest for ideas to demonstrate possible applications of NASA-developed technology to public problems. They would be reviewed by experts and one or more projects in each category might be selected for maximum $75 000 contract, (nasa Release 72-3)
July 31:	Volunteers at Lewis Research Center were being trained to recognize odor intensity and character of jet engine exhaust gases. Project— Jet Combustor Exhaust Study—was part of overall program at LeRC to determine emissions of pollutants from jet aircraft and was being conducted by LeRC and Arthur D. Little Co. Findings were expected to help in reducing odors around airports caused by jet engine exhaust. Other studies were checking possible correlation between combustion efficiency and odor intensity. Project director Helmut F. Butz said best instrument “for attacking the odor problem ... is still the human nose, but the nose has to be trained.” Volunteers, on cue, opened sniffing port in special odor chamber, took short whiff, and recorded what they smelled. Classes of chemical compounds responsible for odor would be determined by analytical tests. (LeRC Release 72-78)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans to implement Center reorganization, pending NASA Hq. concurrence. Reorganization, necessitated by changing msfc roles and missions, included elimination of Program Management (pm) with major program offices reporting to Office of msfc Director; creation of Space Science Projects Office to ' furnish management and technical direction to High Energy Astronomy Observatory and Large Space Telescope projects; reassignment of Michoud Assembly Facility to Saturn Program Office; redesignation of Administration and Technical Services Directorate as Administration and Program Support; and consolidation of Contracts Office with Purchasing Office to become Procurement Office, (msfc Release 72-82)
NASA U—2 reconnaissance aircraft from Ames Research Center, equipped with high-resolution cameras using black-and-white and infrared film, photographed forest fire raging in Big Sur country of California’s Monterey County. It was first use of U—2 for forest fire reconnaissance. Photos made from altitudes of 20 000, 14 000, and 8000 m (65 000, 45 000, and 25 000 ft) were used by forestry officials to make plans for fighting fire. Photos and dense fog cover had helped firefighters contain 50% of fire by Aug. 3 and eventually fire was extinguished, (arc Release 72-55; LA Times, 8/4/72, 18; jpl Hist Off)
Lyudmila liquid-hydrogen chamber at joint nuclear research institute in Dubna, U.S.S.R., had been completed, Tass reported. Institute scientist Aleksander Baldin had said chamber would be used with world’s largest nuclear accelerator at Serpukhov to study photo-birth of particles—crushing of one proton by high-energy protons, (fbis-Sov, 1/10/72, LI)
California Lt. Gov. Ed Reinecke in press release announced progress in application of NASA-developed technology to management of California’s environment. Reinecke, chief aide to Gov. Ronald Reagan in developing use of new technology for solution of state problems, said Gov. Reagan had pronounced NASA technology vital to resource management. Series of symposia held in cooperative effort by State of California, Ames Research Center, and Univ. of California at Berkeley was examining environmental problems, including smog, (arc Release 72-16)
National Science Foundation published Federal Scientific, Technical, and Health Personnel in 1970 (nsf 71—47).	Federal scientists, engineers, and related nonprofessional personnel numbered 271000 in October 1970, 1% below 274100 employed in October 1969. Figure for 1970 included 79 300 scientists and 83 000 engineers—about 10% of total scientists and engineers in national economy. Decline of professional and nonprofessional personnel in Federal Government in 1970 followed several years of relative stability. Decrease in Federal scientists and engineers between 1969 and 1970 centered in Dept, of Defense, largest employer of such personnel. In 1970 dod employed 74 400 scientists and engineers, 3% below 76 000 in 1969. NASA decline was from 13 900 in 1969 to 13 400 in 1970. Engineers accounted for almost all of 1% decrease in Federal scientists and engineers from 1969 to 1970. Figures for engineers were 84 100 in 1969 and 83 000 in 1970. dod engineers declined 3%—from 53 800 to 52 300. Largest decline among other agencies was at NASA and Dept, of Interior. DOD scientists declined from 22 200 in 1969 to 21200 in 1970. NASA scientists declined from 5100 to 4800 (nsf Highlights, 2/22/12, 1)
Shuttle Program Office, managed by Roy E. Godfrey, was formed at Marshall Space Flight Center. Office would be staffed by Shuttle Task Team until July 1, when team would be abolished and some members assigned permanently to office. (Marshall Star, 5/17/72, 1; msfc pao)
House passed H.R. 16645, bill for construction of District of Columbia civic center that contained amendment to change name of Jet Propulsion Laboratory to H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory [see Sept. 19]. House then substituted Senate-passed bill, S. 3943, after amending it to contain language of House bill as passed. (CR, 10/3/72, H9027-51)
NASA announced personnel actions: l/g Marvin L. McNickle (usaf, Ret.) was named Special Assistant to Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight at nasa Hq. effective Dec. 3. l/g Carroll H. Dunn (usa) was elected Chairman of Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel to succeed Dr. Charles 0. Harrington, who was retiring, (nasa Release 72-237; NASA Ann)
Instruments to be used globally to monitor air pollution in upper atmospheric airways were being flight-tested on Convair 990 at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Lewis Research Center announced. Instruments—candidates for nasa Global Air Sampling Program (gasp) under direction of LeRC—would be installed on 10 to 15 foreign and domestic commercial aircraft to monitor gaseous and particulate pollutants. Particulates would also be collected by sampling device and later would be analyzed by electron microscopy and other methods. (LeRC Release 72-106)
First Lady Patricia Nixon visited Ames Research Center. She was received by ARC Director, Dr. Hans Mark; witnessed demonstration takeoff and landing by arc augraentor-wing jet, short takeoff and landing (stol), research aircraft; and was taken for “ride” in flight simulator for advanced aircraft, (arc Astrogram, 9/28/72, 1)
Establishment of Institute for Computer Applications in Science and Engineering (icase) at Langley Research Center was announced by NASA. Institute would be operated by Universities Space Research Assn., consortium of 51 U.S. universities, as cooperative research effort. Purpose was to solve aeronautical and space-related problems, develop efficient use of newest-generation computers, and help universities use LaRC advanced computer facilities for research, (nasa Release 72—202)
Federal support to universities and colleges had reached $3.5 billion in FY 1971, increase of $253 million (8%), National Science Foundation reported. Total academic science activities were up $148 million, or 7%, to $2336 million. Federal funding of academic research and development increased by 7%, to $1544 million. Support of life sciences projects constituted 48% of total Federal obligations for academic R&D and 53% of all Federal support for fellowships, traineeships, and training grants. Total Federal obligations (exclusive of loans) to institutions of higher education increased 2% in constant dollars for first time since 1967. (nsf Highlights, 9/22/72)
Dept, of Justice charged 20 major U.S. aircraft companies and Manufacturers Aircraft Assn., Inc., with violating Sherman Antitrust Act by agreeing to suppress competition in research and development of aircraft and patentable components. Alleged agreement “hindering and delaying” development of new inventions dated back to 1928, Justice Dept, charged. Civil suit filed in U.S. District Court in Manhattan, N.Y., asked dissolution of manufacturers’ association and injunction against aircraft companies entering into future agreements to restrict research or reduce competition in R&D by patent policies. Suit said U.S. manufactured nearly $8 billion worth of aircraft in 1967, more than half of which was military, and that four largest companies accounted for 60% of work, and eight largest for 88%. Manufacturers Aircraft Assn., Inc., and Boeing Co. later said charges were “completely unfounded in fact and law.” (Shanahan, NYT, 3/30/72, 1)
Lewis Research Center engineers were running first pure jet engine designed and assembled at LeRC to power single- and twin-engine light aircraft, Cleveland Press reported. Prototype of engine—expected to usher in generation of safe, easy-to-fly aircraft that could cruise at 644 km per hr (400 mph) and costing less to produce than current piston-engined aircraft—was about 31 cm (12 in) in diameter and 122 cm (48 in) long. (Cl Press, 3/1/72)
Marshall Space Flight Center began crafts apprentice program in which 20 persons would work at msfc and study at Calhoun Technical College in Decatur, Ala., during alternate periods, msfc would pay for books and tuition during college period and would pay wages for work done at Center. Participants in program would be predominantly veterans, with many from minority groups. They would be trained to become machinists, sheet metal workers, or electrical technicians. (Marshall Star, 3/29/72, 1; msfc pao)
U.S. planned to build world’s largest and most sensitive radiotelescope, Washington Post reported. President Nixon’s FY 1973 budget request for National Science Foundation contained $3 million toward construction of $62.5-million array of 27 antennas, 35 km (22 mi) deep, that could pick up signals from outer space. Array had been designed by National Radio Astronomy Observatory, at Green Bank, W. Va., and was expected to take 6 to 10 yrs to build. (Cohn, W Post, 1/14/72, A3)
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing, completed two flights from Flight Research Center. Objective was to check repeatability with two different pilots—Thomas C. McMurtry and Gary Krier. Wake surveys and pressure distributions were run at constant dynamic pressure of 9600 newtons per sq m (200 psf) and mach 0.90, 0.95, 0.97, and 0.99. (nasa proj off)
Measurement of speed of light “more accurately than ever before” with infrared laser was announced by National Bureau of Standards, nbs scientists using laser that generated extremely pure light heam, uncluttered by jumbled frequencies and wavelengths, had arrived at new light speed figure of 299 792.472 km per sec (186282.396 mps). New value was 100 times more accurate than value that had been November 21; A telescape-mounted laser instrument teas beamed at exhaust stacks of an industrial plant in tests proving the laser’s ability to detect suck air pollutants as sulfur dioxide. Remote detection from as far as one kilometer (3300 feet) was possible by the laser, developed at Langley Research Center. Tests were being conducted at the Carolina Power and Light Co. plant in Asheville, N.C., which had offered to cooperate in the LaRC and Environmental Protection Agency program, accepted for past 15 yrs and had opened up “new possibilities for an increase of 1,000 times in the number of frequency bands” used in communications, (nbs Release)
Symposium “A Progress Report on Flight Investigations of Supercritical Wing Technology” was held at Flight Research Center for engineers and scientists from Government, industry, and airlines. Meeting included interim report of NASA supercritical wing flight-test program and report on evolution of F-8 supercritical wing configuration. Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, head of 8-Foot Tunnels Branch at Langley Research Center and developer of supercritical wing concept, commented on correlation of wind-tunnel and flight-test results. Flight tests of nasa supercritical wing on TF-8A aircraft had demonstrated that new airfoil shape increased flight efficiency at speeds near mach 1. Since its first flight March 9, 1971, TF-8A had carried supercritical wing on 27 flights and had reached mach 1.2 (1274 km per hr; 792 mph) and 15 500-km (51 000-ft) altitude, nasa test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry said flight-test program had indicated that piloting procedures and tasks at near-sonic cruise speeds should be as routine as present jet transport operations and that introduction of supercritical wing was not expected to cause any serious problems. Future plans for supercritical wing included addition of side fairings for increased area ruling, determination by simulation of effects of wing roughness from manufacturing imperfections, and development of plans for follow-on flight programs to further the readiness of new technology for industry applications, (frc Release 2—72; frc X—Press, 2/18/72, 2)
Huntsville, Ala., police department was using “elapsed time speed computer,” developed by Chief Peter H. Broussard, Jr., of Marshall Space Flight Center Astrionics Laboratory’s Sensors Branch, to identify traffic speed violators. System consisted of low-cost electronic computer and two roadside markers. Timing switch was turned on when vehicle passed first marker and off when vehicle reached second marker. Elapsed time was measured by internal computer clock and compared with distance between markers. System would perform basic functions of radar units more economically. (NASA Release 72—223)
Marshall Space Flight Center engineers were conducting research on laser-doppler clear-air turbulence-detection system. System, ground-tested and installed in NASA’s Convair 990 at Ames Research Center for flight tests, could detect small-scale atmospheric motions. Laser system, which might lead to first commercially available instrument for air turbulence measurements, was designed and built by Raytheon Co. for NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology and U.S. Air Force’s Cambridge Research Laboratories. (NASA Release 72-182)
Development of automated visual sensitivity tester was announced by Ames Research Center. Simple, accurate, and easy-to-use device to map individual vision patterns was originally developed for use during long-term confinement, such as during space flight. It mapped position and extent of normal blind spot of each eye and plotted abnormal blind spots. Device was expected to be valuable in diagnosis and treatment of many disorders, including brain damage caused by tumors or injuries, optic track degeneration, glaucoma, and detached retina. It could be used in testing visual acuity, color blindness, dynamic ocular tracking, form discrimination, Optokinetic Nystagmus Reflex, and color sensitivity, (nasa Release 72-21)
Intense solar storm in solar region 331 was observed by sensors on NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory. Warnings were issued July 28. [See Aug. 2, 7, 13; and During October.] (nasa Release 72—164)
Most intense solar storm in two years, first observed by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory July 26, produced three major explosions. Storm was being observed by Oso 7 and 5; Explorer 41, 43, and 45; Pioneer 6 and 10; and ground-based observations. [See Aug. 7.] (nasa Release 72-164)
Intense solar storm observed by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory
Langley Research Center team working with Environmental Protection Agency had developed telescope-mounted laser to detect air-polluting gases from industrial smokestacks, NASA announced. Laser was beamed at smoke emitted and detected reflected light from pollutants through optical filters, epa was interested in laser for remote sensing of industrial plants. Tests were being conducted at Asheville, N.C., plant of Carolina Power and Light Co., which had offered to cooperate with Government agencies in experiments, (nasa Release 72-222)
Filter cassette—filter-paper holder developed by Lewis Research Center and Cleveland (Ohio) Air Pollution Control Div. and used in high-volume air samplers—was being used to simplify and improve collection of air samples over Cleveland area. Cassette had been developed to avoid contamination of filter papers used to collect trace materials. They were being used in 16 Cleveland air samplers as parallel network to city monitoring stations and in 7 LeRC samplers in Cleveland suburbs. (nasa Release 72-82)
Cost reduction suggestion by Marshall Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Thomas A. Parnell had saved NASA $57 000 in development of gamma ray telescope for scheduled balloon probe to investigate gamma ray sources, MSFC announced. Dr. Parnell had suggested substitution of scrap crystal (sodium iodide) for large, expensive crystal used to shield gamma-ray detectors from radiation sources other than desired target during probes. Scrap crystal material in tank containing oil-based liquid served as effective shield. Balloon probe was to be launched in March or April from National Center for Atmospheric Research. (msfc Release 72-2)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory had issued report calling for analysis of potential hazards of 64-m (210-ft) dish antenna at Goldstone Tracking Station near Barstow, Calif., Los Angeles Times reported. Beam could pose electromagnetic threat to electronics components in aircraft and to passengers on board who had cardiac pacemakers. Preliminary estimates indicated high potential hazard within tubular, 400 000-w invisible beam out to 16.9-km (10.5-mi) altitude, where its power diminished to safe levels. (Miles, LA Times, 3/21/72)
Soviet scientists at Krym Astrophysical Observatory had discovered unidentified astronomical objects, Tass announced. Using radiotelescope with 200-mm (8-in) mirror, scientists had located radio emitters emitting 3!/^-cm signals that “do not belong to the category of pulsating stars (pulsars), which emit short impulses only in a meter-long (three-feet-long) wavelength. For their properties the new astronomical objects are closer to the class of quasi-stellar radioemitters—quasars which are 1,500 million light-years from the earth.” (fbis-SoV, 4/3/72, L4)
NASA launched first in series of five Nike-Javelin III sounding rockets carrying Naval Research Laboratory cesium cloud experiments from Wallops Station at 5:15 am est. Payloads in series would be released at 97-km (60-mi) altitude, producing yellowish clouds visible for several hundred kilometers along East Coast. NRL scientists would make radio propagation, photographic, and geomagnetic observations to determine role of wind motions, magnetohydrodynamic effects, and chemical-thermal processes governing atmosphere. Second launch would be conducted March 27. (WS pao; WS Release 72-4)
Details of Mariner 10 mission to Venus and Mercury, first dual-planet flight, to be launched from Eastern Test Range in October or November 1973, were released by NASA. Jet Propulsion Laboratory would manage Mariner Venus mission project for NASA Office of Space Science. Project would include first use of one planet’s gravitational field (that of Venus) to propel spacecraft to another and first Mercury exploration. Spacecraft’s 500-kg (1100-lb) weight would include 78 kg (170 lbs) of scientific equipment—two TV cameras to take at least 8000 photos of planets and six experiments to return planetary and interplanetary data, with emphasis on Mercury. Objectives of experiments would be to provide celestial mechanics information during flight and physical characteristics of planets and their atmosphere; study structure of solar wind and its interaction with Venus and Mercury; search for magnetic field at both planets and measure interplanetary magnetic fields between orbits of earth, Venus, and Mercury; search for Mercury atmosphere and obtain data on Venusian atmosphere; measure temperature emissions from both planets and their atmospheres and correlate data with visible features; and measure charged particles over wide energy range to study solar charged-particle bombardment of Mercury and its possible atmosphere. Spacecraft would fly by Venus in February 1974 and by Mercury in March 1974, with closest approach to Venus 5300 km (3300 mi) and to Mercury only 1020 km (635 mi). (NASA Special Release, 9/5/72)
Largest NASA-owned aircraft—Lockheed C-141 StarLifter weighing 147 000 kg (325 000 lbs) with 49-m (160-ft) wing span and 43-m (140-ft) length—was delivered to Ames Research Center. Aircraft, modified to accept infrared telescope 91 cm (36 in) in diameter and two computers, would be used by NASA as international facility for infrared astronomy. Aircraft observatory would be unique when telescope was installed later in year, (arc Astrogram, 3/16/72, 1)
Publication of A Current Index of Technical Briefs (Cl-1) by NASA and Small Business Administration was announced. Brochure contained abstracts from NASA’s technical briefs filed during 1971 and 1972. nasa had published nearly 5000 technical briefs since 1963. First edition of new publication had been mailed to more than 50 000 small manufacturing and research and development companies. Brochure eventually would be published monthly. (NASA Release 72-188; NASA pao)
First anniversary of dedication of Visitor Center at Langley Research Center. Since June 8, 1971, opening, Center had attracted more than 175 000 visitors from all 50 states and more than 20 foreign countries. (Langley Researcher, 6/23/72, 1)
NASA announced it would continue Life Scientist Program for 1972 with award of up to five three-year institutional grants for research relevant to NASA needs. Principal investigators and their designated graduate students, selected from proposals due Nov. 20, would devote one third of their time to research at Manned Spacecraft Center, Ames Research Center, or Langley Research Center. Study areas would include physiological and psychological processes and medical aspects of manned space flight, changes in man’s health and safety, design of advanced life support systems, man-machine integration, human augmentation devices, bioinstrumentation, habitability considerations, and use of flight environment to understand living systems better. Other areas announced by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director for Life Sciences, were possible existence of life elsewhere in universe, scientific explanation of life’s origin, and detection and characterization from space of ecological phenomena on earth or other planets. Step-funded grants would not exceed $50 000 annually and would support maximum of 50% of scientist’s salary, (nasa Release 72-175)
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed one of two flights scheduled from Flight Research Center. Pressure distributions were measured from mach 0.90 to 0.99 at altitudes from 12 800 to 13 960 m (42 000 to 45 800 ft) with flaps closed and at 5° and 10°. Second flight, an excess-energy maneuver, was canceled because DC generator light came on at end of first flight. Problem was later corrected and second flight was rescheduled, (nasa proj off)
Dr. Keith A. Kvenvolden, organic geochemist at Ames Research Center, displayed a HA-hillion-yearold sedimentary rock thought to contain evidence of the beginning of photosynthesis on earth—the historical point of the origin of life.
National Science Foundation released Federal Funds for Academic Science, Fiscal Year 1970 (nsf 72—301). In FY 1970 total Federal support to universities and colleges declined 7% from FY 1969 funding level. Major portion of decrease was in academic science activities, which experienced 8% drop in 1970, contrasting with 3% in support for nonscience activities. Research and development and manpower development support accounted for bulk of total academic science funding. Obligations for these activities totaled $1,396 billion and $429 million. (Text)
Protocol on- agreement between National Academy of Sciences and Soviet Academy of Sciences for further development of scientific cooperation was signed in New York by nas President, Dr. Philip Handler, and Soviet Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh. Protocol agreed on planning 50% increase in interacademy exchange program and increasing interacademy cooperative research program. Parties had agreed to expand joint research after noting “that their efForts had already encouraged the development of the US-Soviet cooperation toward compatible docking mechanisms for space vehicles and other cooperation in space activities, organization of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, as well as cooperation in very long base interferometry in radio, astronomy, oceanography, and other fields.” (Text)
Major thrust of Dept, of Defense FY 1973 expenditures was to improve strategic weapon capability, Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial said. Budget [see Jan. 24] was “the best news the aerospace industry has had in several years ... a clear signal for action and forward thrust. It also imposes an awesome responsibility on the aerospace industry. Once again it is being called upon to produce new and demonstrably superior hardware on which it is possible to base a military power sufficient to deter major war and sufficient to win quickly any minor wars. It must produce swiftly and efficiently. Neither the aerospace industry nor the country can afford any more of the expensive development fiascos of the McNamara era.” (Av Wk, 1/31/72, 9) During January:	Space Science Board of National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council released Outer Planets Exploration, 1972—1985. Analysis of new cost and engineering data for unmanned spacecraft for missions to outer planets had been made for NASA by panel chaired by Dr. Francis S. Johnson of Univ. of Texas at Dallas. Extensive study of outer solar system was “one of the major objectives of space science in this decade.” Panel recommended thermoelectric outer planets spacecraft (tops) be developed and used in Grand Tour missions of late 1970s; Pioneer-level program be maintained for exploration of Jupiter and Saturn and their satellites every two years; Pioneer-F and -G evaluate radiation environment of Jupiter and Pioneer-H be readied for Jupiter magnetosphere mission to further evaluate planet’s radiation if necessary; NASA ground-based research on planetary exploration be continued; even-segment Titan booster or its equivalent be developed for outer planet exploration; support be provided for scientific advisory committees, development of instrumentation, and studies of alternative mission strategies for Jupiter and Saturn exploration; and NASA development of methods of solar and nuclear electric propulsion be continued. Report recommended programs for three funding levels: four tops Grand Tour missions in 1976-1980 period at $400-million annual budget level, compromise between Grand Tour missions and outer solar systems programs like modified Pioneer missions at $250-million-a-year level, and varied program of outer solar system exploration using modified Pioneer spacecraft at lowest funding level, approximately $400 million over one decade, (nas-nrc—nae News Rpt, 1/72, 8-9)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced appointment of Lynwood C. Dunseith as Deputy Director of Flight Operations. Dunseith had joined nasa in 1959 as member of Space Task Group at Langley Research Center and had been Assistant Director for Computation and Flight Support at msc since 1970. (msc Release 72-137)
President Nixon signed S. 3943, Senate version of H.R. 16645. Bill, for construction of civic center as memorial to President Dwight D. Eisenhower, carried rider that changed name of Jet Propulsion Laboratory to H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory, effective Jan. 4, 1973. Bill became Public Law 92-520. {PD, 10/30/72, 1548-9; PL 92-520)
White House announced plans for new series of awards, Presidential Prizes for Innovation. Prizes, to be distributed Sept. 15, would consist of medal and $50 000. Money would come from National Science Foundation budget for Research Applied to National Needs (rann). Recipients would be chosen by Prizes Staff of White House Office of Science and Technology, headed by National Bureau of Standards physicist Carl M. Muelhause. Prizes would honor technological advances dealing with “significant problem” in domestic area. (Sci & Gov Rpt, 6/15/72, 2) May 22:	President Nixon and party flew from Salzburg, Austria, to Moscow for first official visit of U.S. President to U.S.S.R. He met for two hours with Communist Party leader Leonid I. Brezhnev and later attended Kremlin dinner given by Presidium of U.S.S.R. During toast, Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny said: “. . . great importance is attached in the Soviet Union to Soviet-American talks which should cover a wide range of questions. We approach these talks from realistic positions and will make every effort in accordance with the principles of our policy to achieve positive results and try to justify the hopes placed in our countries and beyond them.” President Nixon responded: “Because we are both prepared to proceed on the basis of equality and mutual respect, we meet at a moment when we can make peaceful cooperation a reality.” Summarizing objectives of summit talks, President Nixon said: “First, we want to complete work on matters that years of patient negotiations have brought to the decision point: Bilateral matters will serve as our point of departure: Our two nations can work together in the exploration of space, the conquest of disease, the improvement of our environment.” {PD, 6/5/72, 915-7)
Flight Research Center announced selection of rca Service Co. for final negotiation of contract to support nasa Aerodynamic Test Range— radar/communication sites 550 km (340 mi) apart that provided high-speed flight corridor 1850 km (1150 mi) long from mid-Washington state to Edwards, Calif. Negotiations were for four-year, $359 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract with four one-year options, (frc Release 13-72)
National Research Council announced formation, at Dept, of Transportation request, of nrc Committee on the Department of Transportation Climatic Assessment Program. Committee, chaired by Dr. Henry G. Booker of Univ. of California at San Diego, would examine need for studies of effects of aircraft nitrogen-oxide emissions on earth’s ozone layer; atmospheric dynamics, physics, and chemistry; nature of prospective emissions into stratosphere; and biological effects on earth of stratospheric activities, (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 10/72, 2)
President Nixon accepted resignation of James H. Wakelin, Jr., as Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology, effective Aug. 1.	(PD, 8/7/72,1204)
Col. Robert R. Wessels (usa) had been assigned to Marshall Space Flight Center as Director of Shuttle Construction Office, Marshall Star reported. Col. Wessels previously had been Deputy District Engineer for NASA Support, responsible for monitoring and coordinating district’s design, engineering, and construction program at MSC and Mississippi Test Facility. (Marshall Star, 8/30/72, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced appointment of Dr. Charles R. O’Dell as project scientist for Large Space Telescope (lst). Dr. O’Dell was Chairman of Univ. of Chicago Dept, of Astronomy and Astrophysics and Director of university’s Yerkes Observatory, (msfc Release 72-118)
National Science Foundation published Company Funds Push Total Industrial R&D Spending to $18 Billion in 1971 (nsf 72-318). In 1971 total industrial research and development performance had amounted to $18.4 billion—equal to 1969 level. When measured in constant dollars, 1971 level was 3% below 1970 and 9% below 1969, Federal r&d funds in industry decreased by 1% between 1970 and 1971, to $7.7-billion level. Federal r&d funds to industry had decreased each year since 1968, when they had reached peak $8.6 billion. Company R&D funds totaled $10.7 billion in 1971, 3% above 1970 level of $10.4 billion, smallest year-to-year dollar gain in company R&D spending since NSF series began in 1953. But 1971 company R&D
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Ball Brothers Research Corp. for negotiation of contract to develop heavy nuclei experiment for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao—a), scheduled for launch in 1975. Experiment would measure charge-to-mass ratio, abundance, and energy of cosmic ray particles, (msfc Release 72-53)
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry and equipped with supercritical wing, completed 33rd and 34th flights from Flight Research Center. Unaugmented stability and control data were obtained from mach 0.8 to 0.99 at dynamic pressure of 19 152 newtons per sq m (400 lbs per sq ft). Wing loads were measured from mach 0.5 to 0.99 at 9576 newtons per sq m (200 lbs per sq ft). Targets placed along 35% chord line and at wing tip were photographed to determine wing deflections. (NASA proj off)
Selection of Lockheed-Georgia Co. Div. of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for negotiations leading to contract for design and option for fabrication of quiet, fan-jet, propulsive-lift research aircraft (questol) was announced by NASA. Agency also authorized $600 000, four-month, cost-reimbursable design-refinement phase. If construction was authorized, Lockheed was to deliver research vehicle in two years. Project was managed by Ames Research Center with technical support from Langley, Lewis, and Flight Research Centers, (nasa Release 72-224)
Cosmos 542 was launched from Plesetsk by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 640-km (397.7-mi) apogee, 527-km (327.5-mi) perigee, 81.2° inclination, 96.3-min period, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/72; SBD, 1/3/73, 2)	_ December 29:	Lunar scientists at Manned Spacecraft Center told press they had not yet been able to determine from study of Apollo 17 lunar samples whether orange soil found on lunar surface proved existence of lunar volcanic activity. Dr. Wallace C. Phinney, Chief of msc Geologic Branch, said soil had no “distinct evidence of alteration” as from steam or sulfur gas in volcanic action. “As to what caused the orange coloration, we must wait until we have more chemistry. The most interesting thing is it has very fine grain soil samples, greater than 90 percent in glass.” Dr. Paul Gast, Chief of Planetary and Earth Sciences, said glass could indicate volcanic or other crust-related activities. Soil was not particularly rich in water or sulfur, properties associated with volcanic action, (upi, W Star & News, 12/30/72, A3)
Reorganization of Marshall Space Flight Center, announced June 30, was implemented, (msfc Release 72-98)
Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded $11165 375 contract extension to Boeing Co. for design changes on final five Saturn V 1st stages (S-IC-11 through S—IC-15), Marshall Star reported. Work would be completed by Boeing Aerospace Group at Michoud Assembly Facility by Feb. 28, 1973. (Marshall Star, 6/14/72, 4)
Army Aviation Systems Command awarded research and development, cost-plus-incentive-fee contracts to Boeing Co. Vertol Div. and United Aircraft Corp. Sikorsky Aircraft Div. for engineering development phase of prototype helicopters for Utility Tactical Transport Aircraft System (dttas). Boeing Vertol would receive $91 million and Sikorsky Aircraft $61 million, (dot note to correspondents)
NASA announced Marshall Space Flight Center award of contracts and fund transfers totaling more than $49 million for scientific experiments for first High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao), scheduled for launch in 1975. Receiving awards were Columbia Univ., $8 929 059; Massachusetts Institute of Technology, two awards of $7 821 720 and $5 357 245; Univ. of California at San Diego, $5150 000; California Institute of Technology, Washington Univ. of St. Louis, and Univ. of Minnesota, $6 198 683 for joint experiment; Naval Research Laboratory, $7 919 000; and Goddard Space Flight Center, $8 250 000. (nasa Release 72-145)
nasa TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed 31st flight from Flight Research Center. Primary objective was to evaluate aircraft’s longitudinal stability with augmentation off at altitudes from 11300 to 13 700 m (37 000 to 45 000 ft) and mach 0.8 to 1.0. Survey equipment was removed. Angles of attack up to 17° and normal accelerations as high as 3.7 g were covered, (nasa proj off)
Airborne laser system developed by NASA’s Wallops Station and Langley Research Center was being used to measure presence of drifting plankton in offshore areas of Chesapeake Bay, Md., and Chincoteague Bay, Va. System, mounted on helicopter, used orange light flash from laser to induce fluorescence in plankton. Fluorescence then was measured and recorded through telescope on helicopter. Test results had confirmed feasibility of using laser system on low-flying aircraft or surface vessel for observation of chlorophyll-bearing marine microorganisms. (Wallops Release 72-6)
Ultrasonic wrench developed by NASA to connect tubing in Saturn boosters was available to private industry for possible commercial use, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Wrench induced flexuous vibrations in nut being tightened and guaranteed calibrated tension. It could be used by industry on conventional nuts and bolts, which could replace expensive lock nuts and bolts that changed color as tension increased. Ultrasonic tightening also could remove normal friction forces and ensure proper tension by preselected torque dial, (msfc Release 72-10)
