President Nixon signed H.R. 7528 into Public Law 93—74, NASA’s $3.065billion FY 1974 authorization. Approved by the House-Senate Conference Committee June 28, by the House May 23, and by the Senate June 19, the bill provided $2,246 billion for research and development, $112 million for construction of facilities, and $707 million for research and program management. (PD, 7/30/72, 936; P.L. 93—74)
NASA-developed spacecraft sterilization technology was being used by the Bird Co. to produce a breathing machine that could be sterilized entirely by dry heat to prevent transfer of infectious organisms, Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced. A jpl team had worked with industry to produce a sterilizable ventilator to aid surgical patients and sufferers from respiratory diseases. Ventilator prototypes would be field-tested in at least one Los Angeles area hospital, (jpl Release 654)
Cochairman of the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation—the National Science Foundation Director, Dr. H.	Guyford Stever, and Soviet Academician V. A. Trapeznikov—met with President Nixon at the White House. Dr. Stever told the president: “The signing of the agreement on science and technology, plus the other initiatives that you have taken, have triggered a great amount of cooperation in science and research, exchange of technical data with firms. And I think the progress is excellent.” (PD, 3/26/73, 288)
Lewis Research Center Director Bruce T. Lundin announced appointment of Harold Ferguson as Equal Employment Opportunity Officer. Ferguson was a physicist with 17 yrs experience in fluid mechanics and electric propulsion at LeRC. (LeRC Release 73-6)
California Lt. Gov. Edwin Reinecke and Dr. Hans M. Mark, Ames Research Center Director, had concluded an agreement under which arc would assist the California Office of Emergency Services in developing a system for rapid evaluation of emergency situations, NASA announced. The agreement was part of an arc pilot program to develop disaster-assessment systems for regional or Federal agencies, arc would provide high-altitude multispectral photography, thermal infrared imagery, and radiometric surveys using earth resources research techniques to survey fire, flood, earthquake, landslide, oil spill, air pollution, or other disasters. (nasa Release 73-157)
Langley Research Center scientists had redesigned a Cessna Cardinal aircraft with a smaller, experimental wing in a research program to apply advanced aerodynamic technology to small general-aviation aircraft, NASA announced. Renamed the Redhawk, the experimental aircraft had been flown across the U.S. and operated by aviation writers and pilots from general-aviation companies. LaRC research pilots had praised the aircraft’s low response to air turbulence and the control made possible by spoilers and flap systems on the wings. In the program’s second phase, a Piper twin-engine Seneca aircraft was being converted to study a new airfoil section developed by Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, Jr., Head of the 8-Foot Tunnels Branch at LaRC. (nasa Release 73-197)
The Nixon Administration’s proposed Criminal Code Reform Act of 1973 contained language that could make it a felony for aerospace industry representatives in Washington to notify their companies of potential business until the Government officially permitted them to do so, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The broadly worded bill would make it illegal “to knowingly communicate information relating to the national defense to a person not authorized to receive it.” (Av Wk, 4/16/73, 11)
President Nixon announced 1973 recipients of the National Medal of Science, including Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, Jr., Head of the 8-Foot Tunnels Branch at NASA’s Langley Research Center. Dr. Whitcomb was cited for “his discoveries and inventions in aerodynamics which have provided and will continue to provide substantial improvements in the speed, range, and payload of a major portion of high performance aircraft produced throughout the country.” The other recipients were: Dr. Daniel I. Arnon, Univ. of California at Berkeley physiologist; Dr. Carl Djerassi, Stanford Univ. chemist; Dr. Harold E. Edgerton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Professor Emeritus of electrical engineering; Dr. William Maurice Ewing, Univ. of Texas at Galveston scientist; Dr. Arie Jan Haagen-Smit, Cal Tech biochemist; Dr. Vladimir Haensel, Vice President for Science and Technology, Universal Oil Products Corp.; Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of Rockefeller Univ.; Dr. Earl W. Sutherland, Jr., Univ. of Miami biochemist; Dr. John W. Tukey, Executive Director of Bell Telephone Laboratories, Inc., Research Communication Principles Div. and Princeton Univ. statistician; and Dr. Robert Rathbun Wilson, Director of the National Accelerator Laboratory at Batavia, 111. {PD, 10/8/73, 1224)
President Nixon issued Executive Order 11712 establishing a Special Committee on Energy and a National Energy Office in the Executive Office of the President. In a message to Congress on U.S. energy policy, he said: “If we are to be certain that the forward thrust of our economy will not be hampered by insufficient energy supplies or by energy supplies that are prohibitively expensive, then we must not continue to be dependent on conventional forms of energy. We must instead make every useful effort through research and development to provide both alternative sources of energy and new technologies for producing and utilizing this energy. For the short-term future, our . . . strategy will provide technologies to extract and utilize our existing fossil fuels in a manner most compatible with a healthy environment. . . . from 1985 to the beginning of the next century, we will have more sophisticated development of our fossil fuel resources and . . . full development of the Liquid Metal Fast Breeder Reactor. Our efforts for the distant future center on the development of technologies—such as rfuclear fusion and solar power—that can provide us with a virtually limitless supply of clean energy.” (PD, 4/23/73, 389-406; 412-3)
Samples from three materials-processing experiments performed during the Skylab 2 mission (manning the Orbital Workshop May 25 to June 22) had been turned over to the principal investigators at Marshall Space Flight Center, msfc announced. The small metallic spheres and welding specimens represented the first effort to obtain basic engineering and scientific data for materials processing in space. The samples would be analyzed and the results compared with similar data from earth-processed samples to learn how to fabricate and repair structures in space, develop unique or improved materials for use on the earth, and provide new knowledge of material properties and performance. (msfc Release 73-96)
The U.S.S.R. had fired nine intercontinental ballistic missiles within two weeks over its Asian territory north of the People’s Republic of China, the New York Times reported. Nixon Administration officials had said this suggested a step-up in Soviet training of crews for missiles with potential targets in China. (Beecher, NYT, 2/\l/12>, 4) February 19:	NASA was measuring aerodynamic noise made by aircraft in unpowered flight, to solve noise problem in communities surrounding airports. Lockheed-California Co. studies made for NASA and the Navy had indicated that aerodynamic (nonengine) noise might be a significant portion of total aircraft noise. Knowledge of sources could aid in designing quieter aircraft. Tests had been made with twin-engine, propeller-driven aircraft at Flight Research Center. Flights with twin-engine jet aircraft were planned for late January; flights with four-engine jet aircraft were being considered, (nasa Release 73-22)
President Nixon announced the designation of Dr. H. Guyford Stever, National Science Foundation Director, as Chairman of the Federal Council for Science and Technology. Dr. Stever, who had been Acting Chairman since May 14, would also serve as Presidential Science Adviser, pursuant to the President’s Jan. 26 Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1973, which abolished the Executive Office of Science and Technology effective July 1.	A former President of Carnegie-Mellon Univ., Dr. Stever had been nsf Director since 1972. The Federal Council for Science and Technology had been established by Executive Order 10807 of March 13, 1959, to recommend measures for effective implementation of Federal policies on the administration and conduct of Federal programs and science and technology. (Off of White House Press Secy Press Notice)
Federal support to universities and colleges rose $643 million, or 18%, to $4.1 billion from FY 1971 to FY 1972, the National Science Foundation reported. Federal academic science funding increased by $256 million, or 11%, to $2.6 billion. Federal support of academic research and development activities rose by $302 million, or 19%, to $1.9 billion. The life sciences received $896 million in 1972—21%, more than in 1971; environmental sciences received $187 million, up 38%; and engineering received $193 million, up 22%. (nsf Highlights, 8/1/73) August 1-10:	Two Soviet research ships and one U.S. and one Mexican vessel participated in the GARP International Sea Trial (gist) project, part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program to improve weather forecasting. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s research vessel Researcher met Soviet ships Academician Korolev and Ernst Krenkel in the Atlantic Ocean east of the Virgin Islands to make a series of simultaneous instrumented observations of the atmosphere and the ocean. The 10-day project would be followed in June 1974 by a 100-day effort in which research ships from 11 countries, 11 aircraft, and 5000 scientists would participate, (nsf Release 73-174; NSF pio) August 2:	A Today editorial commented on energy conservation efforts at Kennedy Space Center, while the Skylab 3 astronauts, in orbit since July 28, coped with a reaction-control-system oxidizer leak in the command module. Newspaper readers—noting that lights at Launch Complex 39 had remained on throughout July 28, Skylab 3 launch day—had questioned NASA’s compliance with the Nixon Administration’s energy conservation edict. One caller had queried all-night lights at the Manned Spacecraft Operations Building parking lot. “A call to Kennedy Space Center confirmed our suspicion: they are human and at times forgetful.” But KSC had reduced July energy consumption by 7%, “and it was done very simply: air conditioning equipment was turned off at the end of the working day and one half of the electric light bulbs in halls, corridors and lobbies were removed.” ICSC had said they would check launch pads and parking lots “to determine if a few hundredths of a percentage point can be added to the seven already realized.” (Today, 8/2/73)
A Federal court in New York began hearing $2-million libel suit brought by Dr. W. Ross Adey, Univ. of California at Los Angeles brain research specialist, against the New York-based animal welfare organization United Action for Animals. Dr. Adey accused the organization of publishing “false, scandalous, defamatory statements” in an article in its bulletin on a NASA- and Air Force-funded Biosatellite 3 experiment (launched June 28, 1969). The organization had criticized Dr. Adey’s treatment of Bonny—an instrumented monkey that had been orbited to measure functions of central nervous, cardiovascular, and metabolic systems under weightlessness. Bonny had died shortly after its return to the earth. (Burks, NYT, 1/20/73, 27; 1/25/73, 45) January 23:	At a Marshall Space Flight Center Space Science Seminar, Dr. Maurice M. Shapiro, Naval Research Center chief scientist for cosmic ray physics, said studies had shown cosmic rays were fast atomic nuclei trapped in the Milky Way’s magnetic fields. After acceleration, the rays diffused into the interstellar medium, where many underwent violent collisions and transformations. Surviving particles leaked out of the galaxy, (msfc Release 73-3; nrl pio)
An earthlike atmosphere, 70% oxygen and 30% nitrogen, would be used for the first time in a U.S. manned spacecraft on the Skylab mission, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Pure oxygen had been an acceptable atmosphere for relatively short U.S. flights, but long-term breathing of pure oxygen might cause the red blood cells to become fragile. Three tons of breathing oxygen and three fourths^ ton of nitrogen would be launched aboard Skylab and combined into) atmospheric distribution, circulation, and control systems at a nominal pressure of 3.45 newtons per sq cm (5 psia). (msfc Release 73—5,7)
The U.S.S.R. intended to purchase 10 Apollo extravehicular spacesuits of the kind used on the Apollo 15, 16, and 17 missions to use in a comparative study with its own suits, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported, icx—International Computer Exchange, Inc., had been negotiating the terms of the purchase between ilc Industries, Inc., which manufactured the spacesuits, and the U.S.S.R. State Committee for Science and Technology and the Institute for Medical Biological Problems of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. A contract could be signed within 30 to 60 days and the suits delivered during the last quarter of 1973 if icx could obtain an export license from the U.S. Department of State. (Av Wk, 3/26/73, 17-18)
Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., issued its semiannual analysis of aerospace employment. Continued restraints in Government spending and an increase in foreign competition for existing markets were cited as causes of an expected continued decline in aerospace industry employment through June 1974. Employment had dropped by 33% since 1968. Nearly 950 000 persons had been employed in June 1973, but by June 1974 payrolls were expected to have been cut by about 32 000. The most significant decline would be among scientists and engineers— a reduction of 6000, 3.6% below December 1972. Employment of production workers was expected to decline by 13 000 jobs, leaving 460 000 employed by the end of FY 1974. Missiles and space employment was expected to decline by 28 000 workers between December 1972 and June 1974. Aircraft group employment faced a similar period of decline, from 556 000 to 533 000. Employment in the helicopter and general-aviation field was expected to increase 500 from June 1973, resulting in a work force of 22 500 by June 1974. Employment in the general-aviation aircraft field alone was expected to rise more than 20% during FY 1974. (Text)
Lewis Research Center received two Industrial Research Magazine IR-100 Awards for 1973 at ceremonies in Chicago’s Museum of Science and Industry. The Center also was presented a special award acknowledging that NASA had accumulated 10 or more IR—100 awards—prizes given by the magazine for what it deemed the 100 most significant new products developed during the year. LeRC had won 9 out of the 12 awards presented to NASA and had earned at least one IR—100 Award every year except one since first entering the competition in 1966. LeRC 1973 awards were for an x-ray photographic system with potential application for industry and basic research and for a shaft seal for very-highspeed turbines and compressors. (LeRC Release 73—39)
Award by Lewis Research Center of a $2 833 780 contract to General Electric Co.’s Gas Turbine Products Div. for two gas turbine assemblies was reported by Lewis News. The turbines were for a new test facility to bench-test advanced turbines and combustors for future aircraft. (Lewis News, 5/4/73, 4)
Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey A. Gromyko signed new U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreements on cooperation in transportation and ocean studies and a General Agreement on Contacts, Exchanges, and Cooperation in the Fields of Science, Technology, Education, and Culture, during State Dept, ceremonies attended by President Nixon and visiting Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev. The General Agreement reaffirmed commitments for cooperation in environmental protection, medicine and public health, space exploration and the use of outer space for peaceful purposes, and science and technology signed during the May 22-29, 1972, U.S.—U.S.S.R. summit meetings in Moscow. (PD, 6/25/73, 791-800)
The Institute for Advanced Computations at Ames Research Center held a press seminar on the illiac iv computer, illiac iv, developed and funded by the Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa) under a contract with Burroughs Corp., had been installed at ARC under a 1970 joint nasa-arpa agreement and the Institute for Advanced Computations had been established to operate the system, illiac iv was being integrated into a larger remote-access computer system being developed at arc as a process and data-storage resource on the nationwide arpa computing network, accessible to universities and Government agencies. illiac IV would make applications in global climate dynamics, distant seismic-event detection, multisensor processing, fluid dynamics, and simulation and optimization problems in logistics and economics, (arc Releases 73-88, 73-89; arc pao)
The 1973 Nobel Prizes in physics and in chemistry were awarded in Stockholm. The $122 000 physics award went to two Americans and one Briton for step-by-step proof of how electrons tunneled through conductors to form superconductors of electricity. The winners were Japanese-born Leo Esaki, International Business Machines Co. scientist; Norwegian-born Ivar Giaever, General Electric Co. scientist; and Brian Josephson of Cambridge Univ. in England. The $120 000 chemistry award went to Ernst 0. Fischer, Munich Technical Univ. scientist, and Geoffrey Wilkinson of London’s Imperial College of Science and Technology for “pioneering work, performed independently, on the chemistry of the so-called sandwich compounds” which attached rings of carbon compounds to transitional metals like titanium and vanadium. (O’Taole, W Post, 10/24/73, A19; FonF, 10/21-27/73, 882)
Ames Research Center biologists Paul H. Deal and Kenneth A. Souza had discovered an earth organism that could survive and grow in an environment resembling that of the outer planets of the solar system, NASA announced. The rod-shaped bacteria were swimming, growing, and reproducing in a highly alkaline solution of sodium hydroxide. The atmospheres of Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus were believed by some scientists to be highly alkaline. The discovery renewed questions of possible life on Jupiter, since the planet’s extreme alkalinity had been cited as a major deterrent to life. (NASA Release 73-238)
A full-scale mockup of the Skylab Orbital Workshop— shipped from McDonnell Douglas, Huntington Beach, Calif.—arrived at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center. It would be combined with other Skylab hardware and used for system engineering and integration support to Skylab earth orbital missions scheduled to begin in May. (msfc Release 73-14)
The U.S.S.R. was beginning a new major program to strengthen its underground missile silos against nuclear attack, according to senior U.S. officials quoted by the Washington Post. The unidentified officials thought the U.S.S.R. might be planning to use a new “popup” missile-launching technique as part of this effort. (Getler, W Post, 9/22/73) September 23:	Japanese amateur astronomer Tsuomi Seki reacquired and photographed Comet Kohoutek at his specially designed comet observatory in Tokyo. The comet—last observed by its discoverer, Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, May 5—was falling toward the sun almost exactly as predicted and was approaching the earth and the sun in a long, sweeping orbit. (Am Mus—Hayden Planetarium Release, 10/1/73)
President Nixon submitted nominations to the Senate: Howard A. Callaway to be Secretary of the Army succeeding Robert F. Froehlke, whose resignation he had accepted May 1; Amrom H. Katz to be Assistant Director for Science and Technology of the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency; and Robert M. Behr to be usacda’s Assistant Director for Weapons Evaluation and Control. (PD, 5/7/73, 441, 444, 454)
Discovery of huge, shallow craters at the near-equatorial zone of Venus was announced by Jet Propulsion Laboratory radar astronomers headed by Dr. Richard A. Goldstein. The team had produced a map showing a 1500-km (930-mi) section of Venus, about the size of Alaska, that showed 12 craters up to 160 km (100 mi) across. The discovery had been made with high-intensity radar beams from Goldstone Tracking Station in the Mohave desert. The resolution, about 10 km (6 mi), was five times better than previously obtained, (jPL Release 665; NASA Release 73-145)
The “spreading Watergate scandal”—arising from investigations of alleged White House implication in the burglarizing and electronic surveillance of Democratic National Committee Headquarters by members of the Committee to Reelect the President—had slowed down Administration research and development decision making, a Science & Government Report editorial said. The subsequent disintegration of presidential staff had created “a decision-making paralysis that is subtly but steadily spreading to agencies far remote from current headline events.” The editorial quoted an Office of Science and Technology staff member as saying that “just about every thing that the President set out in his Science and Technology message 14 months ago requires some sort of approval at the White House level now and then, and there’s no one to talk to there.” The newly created White House National Energy Office had “already received some shock waves from the scandal through the resignation of presidential assistant John D. Ehrlichman,” who had been appointed by President Nixon to a three-man Special Committee on Energy to “give political weight” to neo decisions. Difficulties flowing from Watergate were aggravated by the impending transition in management of the Science-Government relationship. Many OST responsibilities would shift to the National Science Foundation Director, Dr. H. Guyford Stever, when the OST was abolished June 30. “Whether for good or ill, the change is a change, and necessarily involves the dissolution of longstanding relationships, some of them dating back to early post-Sputnik days.” {Sci & Gov Rpt, 5/15/73, 7)
Soviet helicopter designer Nikolay I. Kamov died at age 71, He had received the title of Hero of Socialist Labor for his services in the development of Soviet helicopter design and construction. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 10/28/73, Ul) November 25:	Compelling evidence of the existence of a previously predicted black hole in space had been discovered by a Univ. College team in London, using nasa’s Oao 3 Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (launched Aug. 21, 1972), NASA announced. The scientists, headed by Dr. R. L. F. Boyd with Dr. Peter Sanford, had tied the binary supergiant star system HDE 226868 to the x-ray source Cygnus X-l and had detected evidence of the structure of the star system’s gas clouds swirling around and into the x-ray source, or black hole. Using Oao 3, they had also observed extended x-ray sources identified with clusters of galaxies like those in the Perseus, Coma, Virgo, and Centaurus constellations. They believed enormous upheavals in the nucleus of the Seyfert galaxy were affecting the entire Perseus cluster of several thousand galaxies. They also believed the x-ray emission detected in the Seyfert galaxy might be associated with the inverse Compton effect, in which high-velocity electrons traveling near the speed of light collided with radio and optical photons. Their conclusions suggested that x-rays originated in the most active galaxies of the cluster, (nasa Release 73251)
Pioneer 10—launched March 2, 1972, toward Jupiter—had traveled farther into space than any man-made object, NASA announced. The spacecraft, when it swung hy Jupiter on Dec. 3 to give man his first closeup look at that planet, would set a speed record of 132 000 km (82 000 mi) per hr, breaking its own earlier mark of 51683 km (32 116 mi) per hr set at launch. After the Jupiter encounter, Pioneer 10 would be hurled by the planet’s gravity beyond the solar system toward the red star Aldebaran in the constellation Taurus. It was expected to cross the orbit of Pluto in 1987 still transmitting scientific data to the earth. The onboard experiments had been designed to yield useful data as far as 30 to 40 astronomical units, 4.5 billion—6.0 billion km (2.8 billion—3.7 billion mi), away. The spacecraft had been tracked and controlled so precisely that it would arrive at Jupiter within less than a minute of the time predicted at launch. NASA had submitted three applications to the National Aeronautic Association and the Federation Aeronautique Internationale for Pioneer .70’s unmanned interplanetary space flight records: maximum distance traveled from the sun, maximum distance of communications from the earth, and duration of the mission during which the spacecraft had been functioning, (nasa Release 73-183)
Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.), with 27 cosponsors, introduced S. 1283, to establish an interagency “Earth Management Project” for research, development, and demonstration in fuels and energy for the coordination of and financial supplementation of Federal energy research and development. The bill would include an assistant administrator from nasa. (CR, 3/19/73, S5021-37)
A model for the interaction of the solar wind with very thin hydrogen gas in deep space, developed by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration geophysicist Dr. Thomas E. Holzer, would aid future space flight planning and provide data on the origins and fate of universe, NOAA announced. The presence of thin hydrogen gas in interplanetary space had been observed by Ogo 5 (launched by NASA March 4, 1968). Interaction of the solar wind and interstellar hydrogen could become important at astronomical units from the sun. Neutral hydrogen could become charged and associated with the solar wind. Some solar wind energy would be converted to random motion or heat. At the same time, the velocity of the solar wind would be diminished. Neutral hydrogen could act as gentle, penetrable barrier to the solar wind, (noaa Release 73-7)
A Science editorial criticized the Nixon Administration’s abolition of the post of Presidential Science Adviser and the Office of Science and Technology: The deed had been done in a way “not worthy of a great nation.” The office had first been abolished, “then someone woke up to the fact that it served important functions. After scrambling around, someone had the inspiration to transfer the functions of the office to the National Science Foundation (nsf) and appoint [Dr. H.] Guyford Stever (head of the nsf) as science adviser. The solution has merit. However, if it is to represent more than a gesture, Stever and the NSF will be overloaded with conflicting responsibilities.” (Abelson, Science, 2/16/73, 641) February 17:	The nasa-U.S.S.R. joint mission to measure ice, surface, and atmospheric conditions in the Bering Sea began, following arrival at the experiment site of the U.S. Coast Guard ship Staten Island, NASA instrumented Convair 990 Galileo aircraft, and Soviet weather ship Priboy and 11—18 aircraft. (fbis-Sov, 3/6/73, LI)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory staff changes were announced by the Deputy Director, Gen. Charles H. Terhune, Jr. Geoffrey Robillard, Manager of the Applied Mechanics Div., had been appointed Deputy Assistant Laboratory Director for Technical Divisions. His successor was Glenn E. Vescelus, who had joined jpl in 1969. (jpl Release 654)
The National Academy of Sciences released Plans for U.S. Clear-Air Turbulence Research in the Global Atmospheric Research Program. The report of a panel of the U.S. Committee for the Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) recommended that increased Federal logistic support be provided for clear-air turbulence studies in planning, because of importance to aviation safety and to understanding effects of small-scale motions on large-scale dynamics of atmosphere. The Dept, of Defense should make available additional C-130 and RB57 aircraft for vertical-motion measurements in Project Wamflex (wave-induced momentum flux experiment) of the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s continuous-wave radar should be modified to detect clear-air turbulence in the tropopause. And NASA should provide additional instrument support including scaning lidar. (Text)
NASA research to improve general-aviation-aircraft flight control systems and increase the use of new flight equipment was described by Flight Research Center and Langley Research Center engineers at the Society of Automotive Engineers Business Aircraft Meeting in Wichita, Kan. frc flight tests of a new attitude-command-control system aboard an experimental aircraft had shown that a flight-path control system similar to an automobile’s steering system was a great improvement over conventional control systems. Use of the new system, plus an improved flight display tested by frc, could reduce the general-aviation workload throughout most flights. Astronautics Corp. of America was developing a low-cost flight director under NASA contract. The Univ. of Kansas would evaluate its economical, separate, surface-stability-augmentation flight control system on a modified commuter aircraft under a NASA grant. LaRC was developing structural design technology to provide the greatest chance of pilot and passenger survival in a crash. Full-scale aircraft crashes were simulated by using a 60-m (200-ft) pendulum to swing instrumented aircraft into the ground at controlled angles and speeds. Resulting data were used to design aircraft to absorb more of the crash forces without destroying the cabin areas. NASA stall and spin studies at LaRC used a vertical wind tunnel, unique in the U.S., to develop data for designing aircraft with improved spin recovery characteristics, (nasa Release 73-63; frc Release 7-73)
President Nixon announced he would add $115 million to the FY 1974 budget for energy research and development. The increase would raise total energy r&d funding for FY 1974 to about $1 billion, a 37% increase over FY 1973. He said, “Our hopes for advancing research and development also rest upon my proposed legislation to create a Department of Energy and Natural Resources and an independent Energy Research and Development Administration.” (PD, 10/15/73, 1239-40)
Sen. Peter H. Dominick (R-Colo.) introduced S. 1686 to authorize the National Science Foundation to facilitate the application of science and technology to civilian needs and to assist in establishing civilian research and development priorities. The bill would seek to place a science and technology adviser in each governor’s office and enable states and localities to participate at the Federal level in establishing r&d priorities. (CR, 5/2/73, S8159)
Findings that solar power held vast potential to supplement energy needs were presented at Marshall Space Flight Center by university faculty fellows in an msfc Systems Engineering Design Program. The joint MSFC-Auburn Univ. program was to provide information and experience for developing multidisciplinary systems engineering design courses and programs. The fellows had made a systems approach study of the application of solar technology and research to meet the energy crisis. (msfc Release 73-109; msfc pao)
A helmet designed by Ames Research Center and Aerotherm Corp. to keep the heads of helicopter pilots cool had been tested successfully by stock car racing driver Richard Petty, NASA announced. The helmet, lined with polyurethane through which water circulated, kept the pilot’s head cool, lowering heat stress on his entire body. (NASA Release 73-120)
The House passed H.R. 9430, a bill naming a Federal building and carrying an amendment that repealed the 1972 naming of Jet Propulsion Laboratory after former Rep. H. Allen Smith (R—Calif.). (CR, \2/1>/13, H10468)
The Air Force announced the award of a $1 058 685 contract to PhilcoFord Corp. for feasibility demonstration of an aerial observation designator system for remotely piloted vehicles, (dod Release 258-73) May 22:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, established the Skylab 1 Investigation Board to determine why the micrometeoroid shield was lost following May 14 launch of the Orbital Workshop and why the solar panels failed to deploy. Dr. Fletcher named Director Bruce T. Lundin of Lewis Research Center Chairman of the Board. Lundin appointed nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science Vincent L. Johnson Vice-chairman, (nasa Notice 1154; nasa Release 73-112)
NASA announced selection of United Aircraft Corp. Sikorsky Aircraft Div. for negotiation of a $25-million cost-reimbursement contract to design, fabricate, flight-test, and deliver two rotor systems research aircraft (rsra) . The aircraft, helicopters with wings and auxiliary engines, would be used as flying laboratories to develop advanced rotor system technology and flight-testing of new rotorblade concepts in a jointly funded NASA and Army research program, (nasa Release 73—165)
Aerospace industry sales increased to an estimated $24.9 billion, more than 10% above 1972’s $23.5 billion. Commercial aerospace sales increased 43.1%, to $5.8 billion, reflecting deliveries of wide-bodied transports, helicopters, and general-aviation aircraft. Major aerospace sales included $13.8 billion to the Dept, of Defense, up from $13.2 billion; missile sales at $5.6 billion, up from $5.2 billion; and aircraft sales at $13.4 billion, up from $11.6 billion. Sales in the space area alone declined to $2.9 billion, from $3.0 billion in 1972. Executive and utility aircraft sales increased from $558 million in 1972 to $826 million—up 48%. Units delivered increased 39.1%. Civilian helicopter sales increased from $90 million in 1972 to $121 million in 1973, a gain of 48%. Aerospace export dollar value rose 27.6% because of two U.S. dollar devaluations, to a total of $4.9 billion; aerospace imports increased 37.5% to $777 million. Aerospace industry profits were expected to increase by 2.7% of sales after taxes. The 1973 profit rate for all manufacturing industries was expected to be 4.6%. (Aerospace, 2/74, 3)
Langley Research Center and the Virginia Institute of Marine Science (vims) were using aerial photography to identify Tidewater Virginia vegetation in a project to aid Virginia in using its marshlands. High-resolution photos from helicopters would provide accurate knowledge of vegetation species to enable VIMS to classify plant life in specific marshes. VIMS also was working with Wallops Station to use multispectral aerial photography to identify features of specific vegetation by low-resolution photos, (nasa Release 73-146)
A team of Ames Research Center scientists, headed by Dr. James B. Pollack, had discovered that the upper levels of Venus’s brilliant clouds consisted of droplets of sulfuric acid more concentrated than the acid in an automobile battery, arc announced. The team had measured the infrared “color” of Venus from a Lear jet aircraft and compared results with a computer simulation of the color properties of various substances. (arc Release 73-128)
The House passed H.J.R. 5 to designate the week of April 23 as Nicolaus Copernicus Week, marking the quinquicentennial of the pioneer astronomer’s birth. (CR, 3/22/73, D286) March 23:	NASA and the Army Air Mobility Research and Development Laboratory had requested contract bids for design, construction, flight-test, and delivery by mid-1976 of two rotor system research aircraft (rsra) , NASA announced. The rsra would be used in the joint nasa-Army advanced rotor concepts program to develop technology for increased performance, safety, reliability, and strength and for reduced noise, maintenance, and vibration of rotary wing aircraft. The rsra would be based at Langley Research Center as flying laboratories to test new rotary wing concepts for civil aviation, (nasa Release 73—49)
The Navy F—14B swing-wing supersonic fighter aircraft flew its first test flight from the Grumman Aircraft Corp. facility at Calverton, N.Y. The F-14B reached mach 0.8 during a 67-min flight. (Av Wk, 9/17/73, 23)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.) introduced S. 2819 to establish an Office of Solar Energy Research within the Atomic Energy Commission to conduct research and development to ensure the use of solar energy for national energy needs. (CR, 12/17/73, S23017-24)
The National Science Foundation published NSF Forecasts Rise in Company-Funded, Research and Development and R&D Employment (nsf 73-301). Company-funded R&D expenditures were projected to increase by 22% between 1972 and 1975, to a record level of $14 billion annually by 1975. A moderate upswing in employment of scientists and engineers on company r&d programs was anticipated. Industrial firms had spent estimated $11.4 billion on R&D during 1972, 7% more than in 1971. Between 1970 and 1971 company-financed r&d rose 4%. Between 1970 and 1972 the number of scientists and engineers employed on company r&d programs rose slightly, to 240 000; an increase to 260 000 was anticipated by 1975. Aerospace firms foresaw future r&d growth below the rest of the industry. The downward trend of employment on company-supported basic research had stabilized; it was expected to rise 10% between 1972 and 1975. (nsf Highlights, 2/28/73) During February:	Instrument technicians from Flight Research Center removed transducers from the XB-70 experimental aircraft on static display at the Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, for installation in the YF-12 triple-sonic aircraft shortly to participate in a flight research program. Use of XB-70 transducers in the high-temperature environment to be encountered by new YF—12 aircraft would save Government more than $950 000 in instrument development and production costs, (frc Release 3-73)
The Rev. Walter J. Miller, Fordham Univ. astronomer and former assistant papal astronomer at the Vatican Astronomical Observatory, died in New York following a heart attack, at age 69. He had specialized in the study of faint variables, pulsating stars that varied their apparent magnitude periodically. He was known particularly for his observations of Cygnus in the Milky Way galaxy. (NYT, 12/2/73, 85)
Unidentified astronomers were quoted as saying Comet Kohoutek was not likely to become visible to the naked eye for at least another week. After it rounded the sun Dec. 28, it would appear in the evening sky after sunset. It might be fragmented by solar gravity and solar radiation with the comet and its tail becoming more brilliant. A Naval Observatory astronomer predicted the comet would be no brighter than Comet Ikeya-Seki in 1965 or Comet Bennett in 1970. Smithsonian Astrophysi-cal Observatory astronomers did not expect Kohoutek to be visible without binoculars during the current week. (AP, NYT, 12/13/73)
Lewis Research Center scientist Stanley G. Young had applied cavitation— erosion of metal by tiny cavities formed by uneven pressure gradients in liquids—to restoring serial numbers obliterated by filing or grinding, NASA reported. In the process, of use to police in identifying stolen property, an ultrasonic vibrator generated very-high-frequency vibrations in water, creating millions of microscopic bubbles. The bubbles struck the metal surface on which serial numbers had been erased, weakening particles that filled the serial number grooves. Conventional methods of restoring serial numbers used chemicals or mechanical processes that might obliterate remaining traces of the numbers. (NASA Release 73-216)
Cosmos 585 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into an orbit with a 1407-km (874.3-mi) apogee, 1375-km (854.4-mi) perigee, 113.5-min period, and 74.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/73; SBD, 9/13/73, 55) September 9:	Publication of Nondestructive Testing, a Survey (nasa SP—5113) was announced by NASA. The survey summarized NASA-developed methods and techniques to determine the integrity, quality, durability, and effectiveness of a material or product and to maintain quality control over products mass-produced by automation, (nasa Release 73-172) September 10:	President Nixon sent a message to Congress on national legislative goals. Of defense spending he said: “I continue to be adamantly opposed to attempts at balancing the overall budget by slashing the defense budget. ... In constant dollars, our defense spending in this fiscal year will be $10 billion less than was spent in 1964, before the Vietnam war began. . . . Further cuts #would be dangerously irresponsible and I will veto any bill that includes cuts which would imperil our national security. . . . The arms limitation agreement signed with the Soviet Union last year has at last halted the rapid growth in the numbers of strategic weapons. Despite this concrete achievement, much needs to be done to ensure continued stability and to support our negotiation of a permanent strategic arms agreement. A vigorous research and development program is essential to provide vital insurance that no adversary will ever gain a decisive advantage through technological breakthrough and that massive deployment expenditures will therefore not become necessary. Yet the Congress is in the process of slashing research and development funding below minimum prudent levels, including elimination of our cruise missile and air defense programs. The Trident and B—1 programs, which are critical to maintaining a reliable deterrent into the next decade, are also facing proposals to cut them to the bone.” The President reiterated his request that Congress authorize creation of Dept, of Energy and Natural Resources and “a new, independent Energy Research and Development Administration so that we can make the very best use of our research and development funds in the future.” r&d efforts could produce “the most helpful solutions to the energy problem.” He called for a separate and independent Nuclear Energy Commission. (PD, 9/17/73, 1074-9)
A Soviet delegation of aviation and aerospace industry officials, headed by First Deputy Minister of the Ministry of Aviation Industry Stephan I. Kadishev, had completed a three-week tour of major U.S. air transport and engine manufacturers, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The visit had been “smooth” despite strained relations between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. occasioned by the Middle East war. (Av Wk, 10/29/73, 24)
The discovery that Saturn’s rings appeared to be made of solid chunks rather than of gas, ice crystals, or dust had been made by Jet Propulsion Laboratory astronomers, NASA announced. Dr. Richard M. Goldstein and George A. Morris, Jr., had made the first successful radar probes of Saturn, using NASA’s 64-m (210-ft) antenna at Goldstone Station, and had received much stronger bounceback signals than expected. “From our radar results,” Dr. Goldstein had said, “the rings cannot be made up of tiny ice crystals, dust, or gas. Our echoes indicate rough jagged surfaces, with solid material 1 meter (3.3 feet) in diameter or larger. Possibly much larger.” The rings could be a great hazard to any spacecraft sent into them, (nasa Release 73—37)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced two contract awards. A $1 176 872 extension was made in a $5 188 357 contract with Bendix Corp. to provide management, sustaining engineering, and logistics support for the ST—124M stabilized platform for the July 1975 mission of the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. The contract extension, bringing the total contract value to $6 365 229, was from May 1, 1974, through July 31, 1975. A $160 000 contract was awarded Norman Engineering Co. for architect-engineering services to modify a test stand for space shuttle testing, (msfc Releases 73-190, 73-191) December 6:	Concorde 201—Air France’s first Concorde supersonic airliner, the first production Concorde and the fifth Concorde to fly—made its maiden flight, from Toulouse, France, including 45 min supersonic flight. The aircraft reached mach 1.57, more than 1600 km (100 mi) per hr, at 1280 m (42 000 ft) during its 2-hr 50-min flight. Command pilot was Aerospatiale’s Andre Turcat. (Concorde Bull 12, 1/1/74)
The U.S. aerospace industry had “weathered the economic storms of recent years” to emerge “a leaner and tougher competitor,” an Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial said. For the first time in years, the industry was seeing “some of the government shackles that restricted its efforts abroad loosened and even active support forthcoming in certain key areas. The sad story of the balance-of-trade deficits and the decline of the dollar have finally shaken the U.S. government out of its economic isolation, and the aerospace industry will benefit accordingly in its increasing export campaign.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 5/28/73, 9)
Infrared photos were made from a leased aircraft by Marshall Space Flight Center’s Environmental Applications Office during an Alabama flood emergency. Photos—for analysis of flooded areas, water sources, flow patterns, and runoff routes—had been requested by the U.S., Geological Survey. They would be used also by civil defense organizations, the Tennessee Valley Authority, Redstone Arsenal engineers, and the North Alabama Regional Council of Governments, (msfc Release 73-35)
Ames Research Center earth resources survey aircraft were monitoring tussock moth damage to Douglas fir trees in Washington and Oregon at the request of the Washington State Dept, of Natural Resources. Two flights over the Blue Mountain area, covering parts of each state, would help determine damage done by the moths, which also attacked Ponderosa trees, (nasa Release 73-149)
Pascagoula, Miss., Sheriff Fred Diamond told the press that two local shipyard workers had reported being taken aboard a glowing blue spacecraft by buzzing creatures with silvery, wrinkled skin. Workers Charles Hickson and Calvin Parker had said they had seen the spacecraft approaching as they fished off a pier Oct. 11. (upi, W Star-News, 10/13/73, A3) October 13:	The work of Abe Karen, nasa physicist and consultant to New York City’s Budget Dept., was described in a New York Times article. Karen worked under a “one-man program called the NASA/New York City Applications Project,” administered by nasa’s Office of Technology Utilization. Karen, paid by NASA, had introduced Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Silent Communication Alarm Network (scan) security system to protect life and property in two crime-ridden New York high schools and an Ames Research Center device to detect heroin in urine samples. He was eying other NASA-funded innovations for road-patching, bridge structural testing, fire warning, and removing graffiti from public buildings. (Darnton, NYT, 10/13/73, 37; nasa Off TU)
General Dynamics Corp. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer David S. Lewis told the press in St. Louis, Mo., that he had signed an agreement with Dzherman M. Givishiany, Vice-chairman of the Soviet Committee for Science and Technology, for scientific and technical cooperation. The agreement covered commercial shipping, telecommunications equipment, asbestos mining, aircraft, computer-operated microfilm equipment, and navigation and weather buoys. (AP, Today, 9/28/73)
Office of Management and Budget Director Ray L. Ash said in a letter to Rep. Ralph S. Regula (D—Ohio) that immediately upon the establishment of the proposed Energy Research and Development Administration, omb would urge the erda Administrator to undertake “a thorough review of all NASA personnel and facilities that might be closed because of NASA’s post-Apollo ‘scaling down.’ ” Ash said he had been “concerned for some time about the possible loss from government service of these valuable skills and resources.” (CR, 12/14/73, E8084)
NASA and the Environmental Protection Agency signed an agreement to participate in a three-year Automotive Gas Turbine Technology Program to develop and demonstrate a car powered by a gas turbine engine that met or bettered the 1976 Federal emission standards, was economical to run, and performed well. The agreement was signed by Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, and Robert L. Sansom, epa’s Assistant Administrator for Air and Water Programs. Lewis Research Center would manage the program for nasa. (nasa Release 73-123; nasa nmi 1052.179)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the selection of the Avco Electronics Operation of Avco Precision Products Div., Avco Corp., for negotiation of a $3 252 845, 23-mo contract for modifications to the MSFC Structures and Mechanics Laboratory. The work would provide a data-acquisition system for space-shuttle-hardware structural and fatigue tests, (msfc Release 73—141) October 4:	President Nixon issued a statement about NASA’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1] : “At mid-twentieth century, the United States found itself drawn by international necessity, and driven by national pride and pioneering instinct to view the heavens no longer as the stuff of romance, but as a practical environment for the extension of man’s dominion over the earth. Since then, four administrations have committed our industrial resources, our technological and scientific capacities and the national will to the proposition that America can and must play a role in outer space equal to its responsibilities as a great nation.” People of all nations stood in awe of NASA’s accomplishments. “The men of NASA have undertaken one of the greatest human adventures with such consummate skill, cool exactness in the face of untold dangers, and professional disdain for the sensational that we have come already to take for granted the legitimacy of man’s place in an environment entirely alien to him. But neither the courage, skill and devotion of the men of NASA, nor the benefits of their efforts, should be taken for granted. In every phase of our national life, new products, new techniques and new understanding have resulted from our efforts in space. And in relations between nations, the prospects for a lasting peace have been enhanced by the now absolute awareness that the primary interests of mankind are identical and shared in common. On the fifteenth anniversary of NASA, we look ahead to the same ordered progress into our space future which has characterized our first tentative steps into space.” (Text)
Skylab backup hardware was being stored in plastic tents with controlled environments at Marshall Space Flight Center for later "use or disposal. (msfc Release 73-193)
Signing of a $17.9-million, three-year, fixed-price-incentive contract with award fees with LTV Aerospace Corp. for complete system management of the Scout launch vehicle was announced by nasa. Work would be performed by ltv Vought Systems Div. with Langley Research Center monitoring. Processing of 6-12 Scout launches of U.S. and foreign payloads was to be included in the system management. LTV, Scout contractor since 1958, had built some 80 Scout vehicles for nasa. (nasa Release 73-231)
A Chicago Sun-Times editorial praised the “mapmaking” of the Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28 to man the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop launched May 14) : “We were particularly impressed to read about their assigned job of photographing a swamp in southern Sudan as they zipped over North Africa.” Such tasks “point up the way in which a space shuttle can be used to facilitate jobs on Earth and, no less important, encourage co-operation between nations.” (C Sun-Times, 9/4/73) September 5:	President Nixon submitted to Congress Science Indicators, 1972, the fifth annual report of the National Science Board of the National Science Foundation. The proportion of the gross national product spent for research and development 1963—1971 declined in the U.S., France, and the United Kingdom, but increased in the U.S.S.R., Japan, and West Germany. By 1971, U.S. r&d expenditures were 2.6% of GNP, Soviet 3.0%, U.K. and West Germany 2.0%, and Japan and France 1.8% each. The number of scientists and engineers engaged in r&d per 10 000 persons declined in the U.S. after 1969, but continued to increase in the U.S.S.R., Japan, West Germany, and France. All countries reduced the national defense proportion of their R&D expenditures significantly between 1961 and 1969. U.S. defense expenditures dropped from 65% to 49% of total Government R&D spending. Increases in the U.S. and most other countries occurred in space, community services, and economic development. The U.S. had a favorable but declining “patent balance” between 1966 and 1970, with a reduced number of patents of U.S. origin in France, West Germany, and the U.K. and increased U.S. patents of Japanese origin. The U.S. had an increasingly favorable position in the sale of “technical know-how”—including patents, techniques, formulas, franchises, and manufacturing rights—during 1960-1971; Japan was the major purchaser, surpassing all of Western Europe after 1967. The favorable U.S. balance of trade in technology-intensive products grew 1960-1971, but was increasingly negative in nontechnology-intensive areas. Within technology-intensive areas, products with the fastest rising trade surplus were aircraft, computers, and plastics. (PD, 9/10/73, 1069; Text)
The Naval Research Laboratory was converting a number of Minuteman I missile 2nd stages into large-payload-capacity, high-performance sounding rockets for x-ray astronomy research, Naval Research Reviews reported. The surplus 2nd-stage motors were being adapted with specially designed nosecones and scientific payload's for forthcoming experiments. Instruments aboard the new sounding rockets, named the Aries, would be used by nrl scientists to determine ultraviolet background levels of the stars from above the earth’s atmosphere. (Naval Research Reviews, 8/73, 27-8)
Langley Research Center had purchased a 737-100 aircraft from Boeing Commercial Airplane Co. for research on advanced flight systems for future air terminal environments, NASA announced. The twin-jet transport, the first 737 built, would be delivered to Langley in January 1974. The $2-million contract with Boeing included modification, refurbishment, and NASA pilot and ground crew training. Special equipment would permit study of efficient air paths, aircraft performance requirements, automatic systems, displays, and pilot workloads. (NASA Release 73-57)
A Navy F—14 jet fighter aircraft shot itself down over the Pacific with a Sparrow air-to-air missile launched erratically from its mount beneath the aircraft. The two Grumman Aerospace Corp. crewmen ejected and were rescued unharmed by a Navy helicopter. The F-14 had been flight-testing the missile’s ability to drop clear of its mount before firing, the Navy explained in a statement issued June 21, but the missile failed to clear, struck the fuselage, and exploded. It was the third loss of an F—14 since the swing-wing aircraft’s December 1970 maiden test flight. (Witkin, NYT, 6/22/73, 8)
The National Science Foundation released Graduate Student Support and Manpower Resources in Graduate Science Education (nsf 73—304). Graduate science enrollment in doctorate departments applying for nsf traineeships declined 3% from 1970 to 1971 in all scientific areas except psychology and the social sciences. The number of students enrolling for the first time dropped 4% in 1970 and 8% in 1971. Graduate enrollment of foreign students declined 2% in 1971, after having increased 10% from 1967 to 1968 and another 11% by 1969. The enrollment dropoff of nearly 2% in full-time graduate science students was attributed to an acute financial squeeze, during which several leading universities began restricting enrollment, and to student disenchantment with science and technology because of rising unemployment among scientists and engineers. (Text) July 31—August 1:	A five-member Universities Scientific Research Assn, committee to advise on the production of glass in space held a meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center. The committee discussed an msfc study dealing with the basic phenomena of glass production and toured msfc facilities. (Marshall Star, 8/1/73, 2) During July:	Ames Research Center and Hersh Acoustical Engineering Co. began wind-tunnel experiments to test the effect of serrated rotor edges on the noise level of a simulated jet engine compressor. The concept had been inspired by observations of the owl. A British naval officer had theorized that the owl’s unique serrated wing might help explain the bird’s quietness in flight. ARC engineer Paul Soderman had discovered through five years’ study and testing that comb-like edges did reduce noise at low tip speeds, but the tests had been limited because they were made only statically to simulate a helicopter’s hover. (NASA Release 73-144)
Dr. Charles A. Lundquist, Assistant Director of the Smithsonian Institution’s Astrophysical Observatory, had been named Director of Marshall Space Flight Center’s Space Sciences Laboratory, Msfc announced. Before joining the Smithsonian, Dr. Lundquist had been Chief of the Physics and Astrophysics Branch in msfc’s former Research Projects Div. He had been transferred to msfc in 1960 from the Army Ballistic Missile Agency, (msfc Release 93-99)
The “much vaunted European challenge” to U.S. aerospace industry would “remain a myth,” an Interavia editorial said. Recent agreements for U.S. companies to provide European manufacturers access to their high technology might seem against U.S. interests, but “such agreements are in fact usually followed by orders for U.S.-designed aircraft.” It was “not simply that the currency crisis has made the US product much cheaper than the competitive European design, but also that the Americans are in a position to contract out production work on a proven sales success.” European commercial aircraft industry products would “never achieve the success expected of them.” Europe’s total share of the Western market for commercial aircraft—just over 9%—was “steadily dropping as the early model bac Ills and Caravelles are withdrawn from service and there are no advanced versions to replace them.” However tempting technologically the advanced commercial aircraft offered by European industry might be, “they are not what many airlines want in the present economic climate.” There “seems little or no inclination in Europe to accept inter-dependence in high technology areas. There is apparently more of a readiness to cooperate across the Atlantic than across the European frontiers. If the European aerospace industry wishes to remain a viable, independent force on the world scene, then the time has surely come when something more than lip service must be paid to the European ideal.” (Interavia, 9/73, 939)
The National Science Foundation released Research and Development in Industry 1971: Funds, 1971; Scientists & Engineers, January 1972 (nsf 73—305). Industry spent $18.3 billion on r&d activities in 1971— a gain of 1% over the 1970 level. Company r&d funds increased by 4% 1970-1971, with the companies financing 58% of total U.S. R&D effort; r&d decreased only in the aircraft and missiles industry. Aircraft firms spent 6% less on r&d in 1971 than in 1970. The ratio of R&D spending to net sales had declined steadily from its 1964 peak. In 1971 the ratio was 3.5%—the lowest since 1957. The number of r&d scientists and engineers in industry also continued to decline. Between January 1969 and January 1972 the number decreased by 9%, to 325 200. During this period r&d professionals in the aircraft industry dropped by 27%. (Text)
Ames Research Center light aircraft and various ground stations were being used to document air pollution in the San Francisco Bay area under a two-year National Science Foundation project, arc, the Bay Area Pollution Control District, and the Atomic Energy Commission’s Lawrence Livermore Laboratory were collaborating in the project, arc would make atmospheric measurements and computer studies in photo-chemisty to determine how sunlight affected pollution. The Livermore Laboratory, operated by the Univ. of California, would use weather and pollution data to verify a model under development. Radiosonde balloons launched by students at San Jose State Univ. also would gather data under an arc grant. Another grant, with the Statewide Air Pollution Research Center at the Univ. of California at Riverside, would analyze hydrocarbons, (arc Release 73-90)
President Nixon announced the appointment of the National Science Foundation Director, Dr. H. Guyford Stever, as Acting Chairman of the Federal Council for Science and Technology. (PD, 5/21/73, 681)
The U.S.S.R. Tu-144 supersonic transport had reached a speed of 2100 km per hr (1300 mph) during a test flight, Tass reported. It had carried Soviet journalists to an altitude of 17 km (11 mi) on a 90-min flight between Moscow and Saralov. The designer, Gen. Aleksey A. Tupolev, had said new design changes included extendable wings on the front that improved aerodynamic performance. The engine and landing gear had also been improved. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 6/1/73, L4)
The National Science Foundation released Immigrant Scientists and Engineers in the United States (nsf 73-302). A mid-1970 survey of characteristics and attitudes of foreign scientists and engineers who had immigrated to the U.S. between 1964 and 1969 showed most had come seeking a higher standard of living. Nearly 6 of every 10 held a Ph.D. or Master’s degree. One of every five had continued graduate training. More than 90% were employed in professional positions, and more than one half were in research and development. Although the majority were under 40 yrs of age, 35% had authored scientific papers in the U.S. and 8% held U.S. patents. (Text) August 7:	The earth had passed between NASA’s Pioneer 10 (launched toward Jupiter March 2, 1972) and the sun for the second time during its 1-billion-km (620-million-mi) journey, Ames Research Center announced. Pioneer 10 was 850 million km (530 million mi) from the earth and was scheduled to make history’s first visit to Jupiter in December. When the spacecraft, the earth, and the sun were aligned in inferior conjunction, Pioneer 10’s sun sensor would look almost directly at the sun, interfering with the sensor’s count of the spacecraft rotation rate. To avoid the problem, arc flight directors were keeping the pointing direction of the spacecraft’s radio beam and sun sensor 1.5° from the sun and 1° from the earth. Pioneer 11 (launched toward Jupiter April 5, 1973) was 150 million km (93 million mi) from the earth. Both spacecraft were functioning well, (arc Release 73-84)
The April 12 loss of NASA’s instrumented Convair 990 aircraft Galileo would have “very serious effects” on NASA’s research programs, Dr. Hans Mark, Ames Research Center Director, told the press in Mountain-view, Calif. The $5-million aircraft had been carrying more than $l-million worth of equipment when it and a Navy aircraft collided and crashed in flames. The Galileo had participated in the Feb. 17-March 8 U.S.—U.S.S.R. survey of the Bering Sea and was scheduled to chart the patterns of whales and other sea mammals. “It was one of the major programs at Ames.” Dr. Mark said. “We do not have another aircraft to carry on its work.” It would be “impossible” to go ahead with the project. A joint NASA-Navy investigation would try to determine the cause of the collision, r/a Herbert S. Ainsworth (usn) told the press that human error was responsible. (W Post, 4/14/73, A3)
Soviet cosmonaut Mrs. Valentina Nikolayeva-Tereshkova—on tour in Cacolla, India—told the press she was preparing for another space flight. “I am working for it and am keen on it because it is my work, but no date has yet been fixed for it.” Mrs. Nikolayeva-Tereshkova, wife of Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev, had made her first space flight June 16-19, 1963, on Vostok 6. (AP, W Star & News, 1/29/73, A3)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Marshall Space Flight Center Director, announced personnel actions to reduce the Center’s total Civil Service personnel to 5214 by June 30. Separation notices had been given to 108 employees—87 at Huntsville, Ala., and 21 at msfc installations elsewhere. A total of 67 MSFC employees would receive notices of change to lower grade, with 15 losing some salary. Reassignment of 57 would be made concurrently with the reduction in force, (msfc Release 73-45)
A Science editorial commented on the altered structure of Federal science advisory apparatus arising from the demise of the Office of Science and Technology and the July 10 appointment of the National Science Foundation Director, Dr. H. Guyford Stever, as Presidential Science Adviser and Chairman of the Federal Council for Science and Technology. Dr. Stever had met with presidents or principal officers of most of the major scientific and engineering organizations and had indicated “that he would welcome policy advice and recommendations concerning personnel. As specific problems arise, the appropriate organizations will be tapped. Thus it seems that a major difference between the new and the old apparatus will be the replacement of a small, formal, elite group by more broadly based ad hoc groups. The concept is worth a try. Whether it will be viable will depend on how effectively it is implemented by both sides.” (Abelson, Science, 10/5/73, 13)
President Nixon transmitted The World Weather Program. Plan for Fiscal Year 1974 to Congress. U.S. participation in the world program, coordinated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, included the Depts. of Defense, State, and Transportation; Atomic Energy Commission; Environmental Protection Agency; National Science Foundation; and NASA. In addition to programs presented in noaa’s Federal Plan [see July 11], the Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) would conduct the garp Atlantic Tropical Experiment (gate) June 15-September 1974 to study tropical atmosphere meteorology and its effects on circulation of the earth’s atmosphere. And the first garp Global Experiment, scheduled for 1977, would include two polar-orbiting satellites, one provided by the U.S. and one by the U.S.S.R., and five earth-synchronous spacecraft—two operated by NOAA for the U.S., one over the Indian Ocean by the U.S.S.R., one over the western Pacific by Japan, and one over Africa and the eastern Atlantic by the European Space Research Organization (esro). (noaa Release 73-168; PD, 7/16/73, 900)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory astronomers—using the 610-mm (24-in) telescope and coude spectrograph at Table Mountain Observatory, Calif.— had found that a 20% fluctuation in carbon dioxide absorption was a recurring four-day phenomenon in the thick Venus cloud bank, NASA announced. The top of the cloud deck might move up and down more than one kilometer (two thirds mile) in a constant wave motion. The astronomers had said the observation was “a fundamental feature of atmospheric dynamics that is not explained by current theories of atmospheric circulation on Venus.” (NASA Release 73-97)
Flight Research Center Director Lee R. Scherer had been named senior NASA representative on the Navy-NASA accident board investigating the April 12 mid-air collision of nasa’s instrumented Convair 990 aircraft and a Navy P-3 Orion aircraft, frc’s X—Press reported, frc’s 990 cockpit simulator had been set up to assist the board in determining the specific visibility available, (frc X-Press, 4/27 /73, 2)
Thomas J. Lee had been named Manager of the Marshall Space Flight Center Sortie Lab Task Force by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director, the Marshall Star announced. Lee succeeded Jack Trott, who had retired April 30. (Marshall Star, 2/5/73, 1)
The Senate passed S. 1283 by unanimous vote of 82. The Energy Research and Development Policy Act would provide support for programs in r&d of fuels and energy. {CR, Y2J1/1Z, S22190)
Dr. Margaret Burbidge, Director of the Royal Greenwich Observatory in England, would resign in November to return to the U.S. as a Univ. of California astronomy professor, the Chicago Tribune Press Service reported. Dr. Burbidge would be succeeded by Dr. A. Hunter, Royal Greenwich Observatory Deputy Director. Announcing Dr. Burbidge’s resignation, the British Science Research Council had said she preferred to return to her own research rather than devote a major share of her time to administrative matters. Dr. Burbidge had criticized the Royal Observatory telescope at Herstmonceux, England, because cloudiness made it almost useless. (C Trib, 10/23/73)
