Scientists using the 305-m dish antenna at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico had discovered a pulsar—a pulsating radio source—orbiting a companion celestial object in the constellation Aquila, the New York Times reported. Both pulsar and the object weighed as much as the sun but were only a few kilometers in diameter. It was the first pulsar discovered circling another object, a phenomenon which made it possible for scientists to estimate its mass. Its orbit had been calculated from the slight variations in its pulse rate. While it was possible that the companion was a black hole, scientists thought it more likely that both were neutron stars and a search was continuing to find out if the companion was a very weak pulsar. (Sullivan, NYT, 5 Oct 74, 50)
The Senate Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Reorganization, Research, and International Organizations favorably reported S. 2744 to the full Committee. The bill would split the Atomic Energy Commission into two agencies, the Energy Research and Development Administration (erda) and the Nuclear Energy Commission (nec) . (House, Bill Status Off, interview, 24 Jan 75)
Widespread material and component shortages—increased by the oil embargo imposed by oil producing countries during the October 1972 Middle East war—were causing severe problems for the aerospace industry, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Suppliers found it easier and more profitable to supply material such as aluminum to nonaerospace industry, which placed quantity orders without specific deadlines and rigid specifications. Government price controls had encouraged some suppliers to halt production or divert supplies to export markets, where profits could be two to three times above the domestic. A Hughes Aircraft Co. survey showed that reasons for shortages included a diminished supply of petrochemicals, which were the basis of most plastics and synthetic rubbers, and the curtailed production of materials requiring large amounts of energy for fabrication. (Av Wk,
A high-temperature metal alloy and a self-lubricating' bearing material, both developed at Lewis Research Center, had been chosen by Industrial Research magazine as 2 of the 100 most significant products of the year, NASA announced. Composed principally of tungsten, nickel, and aluminum, the alloy was three times stronger at 1480 K (2200°F) than any existing commercial cast-nickel-base alloy. The bearing material—a product of glass, metal, and calcium fluoride—functioned at temperatures up to 1170 K (1650°F). Both products would be used for more efficient and cleaner turbine engines, electric-power generating systems, and other high-temperature devices. (LeRC Release 74-51; Industrial Research, Oct 74) The spacecraft did not pass through either sun or earth occultation, and communications with the Deep Space Network stations were uninterrupted. The second flyby was adjudged successful 3 Oct. A third flyby was planned for March 1975. Preliminary results, presented at a 23 Sept, press briefing at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, indicated that scarps and evidence of volcanism observed on the first flyby were pervasive and not localized. The scabby hills detected on the first encounter in an area opposite the Caloris Basin did not reappear, suggesting that such terrain was peculiar to that site. (nasa mor, 3 Oct 74; NASA Release 74-248; NASA proj off, interview, 30 June 75; Sullivan, NYT, 24 Sept 74)
Reduction-in-force notices were delivered to 397 employees at Marshall Space Flight Center. Another 250 employees received notices that they would be reduced in grade. Earlier, msfc officials had projectd a personnel reduction of about 500 employees, but retirements and attrition since then had reduced the number required, (msfc Release 74-68)
Large numbers of scientists and engineers trained in a variety of traditional and interdisciplinary fields would be required over the next several years by increased energy research and development efforts, a Science editorial said. Numbers of graduating scientists and engineers were dropping each year and some signs of a shortage were appearing already. Top-level representatives from r&d agencies—including NASA, the Federal Energy Office, Office of Management and Budget, National Science Foundation, and the Atomic Energy Commission—should examine manpower needs and set up or fund a program for continuing assessment over the coming decade. “Dollar budgets can be changed quickly. Manpower budgets require longer planning time if both dollars and manpower are to be used wisely.” (Vetter, Science, 5 April 74, 11)
Total employment in the aerospace industry was expected to drop back to 948 000 positions in June 1974 after a temporary increase during the last quarter of 1973, according to the semiannual forecast released by the Aerospace Industries Association. September 1973 payrolls had been up 4000 positions over the June 1973 level of 949 000; December employment had added another 9000 positions; end of the year employment totaled 962 000 workers, the highest level since 1970. (aiaa Release, 29 April 74)
NASA and the National Science Foundation announced the award of two contracts of about $500 000 each to General Electric Co. Space Div. and Kaman Aerospace Corp. for preliminary design of very large wind systerns for generating electricity. Windmills from 100 to 3000 kw would be examined by each company in a project managed by Lewis Research Center for nsf as part of the program for Research Applied to National Needs (rann). A 100-kw system with vanes more than 37 m in dia, already under design and construction, would be erected at LeRc’s Plum Brook test area. (LeRC Release 74-73) During November: Marshall Space Flight Center awarded McDonnell Douglas Corp. a $299 454 contract for the Spacelab Payload Utilization and Planning Study for the space transportation system, (msfc Release 74-243) December 1974
First evidence of water molecules in a comet had been identified in the tail of Comet Kohoutek by Canadian scientists Dr. Gerhard Herz-berg and Dr. Hin Lew, both of Canada’s National Research Council, NASA announced. Dr. Herzberg and Dr. Lew identified the molecules by analyzing emissions of light at five wavelengths in the red region of the comet’s spectrum, where the positively charged molecules, ionized by solar radiation, were pushed by the solar wind. Data had been collected by telescopes at Asiago Astrophysical Observatory in Italy and Univ. of California’s Lick Observatory in October and November 1973. The discovery of hydrogen in the comet supported the “dirty snowball” theory that comets might be composed of an icy nucleus, various other frozen gases, and tiny dust particles as proposed by Dr. Fred L. Whipple, retired Director of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and principal consultant to NASA on comets, (nasa Release 73 [74]—13)
A United Air Lines, Inc., 747 airliner carrying instruments to monitor pollution in the upper atmosphere for NASA’s Global Air Sampling Program completed flight testing and was certified as airworthy. Managed by Lewis Research Center, gasp would eventually use four 747 jets measuring dust particles and gases at altitudes of 6000 to 12 000 m to study the effects of emissions from jet aircraft and other pollution sources on the earth’s atmosphere and weather. (LeRC Release 74-80; Lewis News, 27 Dec 74)
NASA had applied for a patent on a special absorptive coating developed by a Marshall Space Flight Center engineer. It would be applied to aluminum panels used in the construction of the solar heating and cooling system being demonstrated at msfc. The coating absorbed 93% of the total solar heat, which was transferred to water circulated through flow passages to a storage tank for use in heating or cooling; it reradiated only 6% of the infrared heat, (nasa Release 74-96)
A galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe had been discovered by an international team of astronomers using The Netherlands’ Westerbork radio telescope, the Washington Post reported. Named 3C 268, the galaxy was 18 million light years in length and 1.8 billion light years from the earth. It was composed of an optical galaxy—a group of stars emitting visible light—at the center, with enormous gaseous radio components spreading like giant propeller blades on either side. (AP, W Post, 31 Aug 74, A13) During August: Flight Research Center began wake vortex studies with a Boeing 747 to test different configurations and mechanical devices for suppressing the formation or reducing the strength of vortices. Wind-tunnel and water-channel tests had indicated that engine-induced turbulence and span-load tailoring by flap modification would permit reduction of standard separation distances between aircraft. Removing the outboard flap on a model of a Boeing 747 and adding a trailing spline reduced the wing-tip vortex so that the separation between a Boeing 747 and a following Lear jet or DC-9 could be reduced from 8 to less than 3 km. During inflight tests, lowering the inboard flap 30° dissipated the normal wing-tip vortex as a second vortex flowing in a counter direction formed. Flight testing would continue into September, (frc X-Press, 13,27 Sept 74; NASA Release 74-230)
A helical rotary-screw expander that could he used to tap geothermal energy of hot aquifers under deserts for low-cost energy was described at a National Science Foundation conference at California Institute of Technology. The invention of Pasadena engineer Roger S. Sprankle was the first electrical power-generating system to use the entire amount of energy available in geothermally heated water and might reduce production costs 50%. Tested by Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Hydrothermal Power Co., the Sprankle system’s rotary screws filtered impurities to make maximum use of the steady flow of pumped water. Once the geothermally heated water flowed through the screw expanders, the liquid dropped in pressure and temperature as water vaporized. The increasing mass flow of vapor turned rotors with an output shaft linked to an electric generator. (Caltech-JPL Release, 25 Sept 74)
Lewis Research Center awarded an $800 000 cost-sharing contract, of which the Government would supply $500 000, to Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft Corp. in NASA’s experimental clean combustor program. Pratt & Whitney was to maintain the already low smoke emissions of its JT8D (Class T4) aircraft engine, while reduc
NASA had designated Marshall Space Flight Center as lead Center for NASA activities under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act signed into law 3 Sept., msfc announced. The Center would work under the direction of the NASA Hq. Office of Energy Programs, (msfc Release 74-175)
Ames Research Center’s C-141 airo (Airborne Infrared Observatory) aircraft was officially transferred to operational status for research development. A total of 26 research programs had been approved for C—141 participation, using its 91-cm ir telescope—18 from universities, 5 from NASA or other Government agencies, and 3 from foreign countries. airo also was to participate in studies of Comet Kohoutek. (arc Astro-gram, 18 Jan 74,1,4) ^
Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, Head of Langley Research Center’s Transonic Aerodynamics Branch, had been selected to receive the 1974 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for development of the area-rule concept of aircraft design and invention of the supercritical wing, the National Aeronautic Assn, announced. Dr. Whitcomb would receive the award 13 Dec. (naa Release, 19 Sept 74)
A New York Times editorial commented on the Atomic Energy Commission report The Nation’s Energy Future, submitted December 1973 to President Nixon: The report, which was the basis for Administration policy, would allocate more than half the proposed energy research and development budget to nuclear projects. More than 25% of nuclear funds would be spent on the fast-breeder reactor. Three critical questions were in need of answers: risk of accident, security against theft, and the relative merit of alternative forms of energy. An AEC environmental impact statement issued in response to a court order in a 1971 suit by a group of scientists failed, the Times said, to weigh objectively the possible alternatives that might be environmentally less damaging, particularly solar energy. “But in making the choice between nuclear fission and solar energy, Congress and the public have to weigh the alternatives carefully. The a.e.c. can contribute to that decision by offering the nation a more careful and disinterested impact statement.” (NYT, 23 May 74, 38) r
Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, former Langley Research Center Director, had been selected to receive the Society of Automotive Engineers’ 1974 Daniel Guggenheim Medal, the Langley Researcher reported. He would receive the award for his “farsighted development of men and facilities, and for decisive leadership of research that provided technological foundations for manned flight beyond the speed of sound, safe reentry of spacecraft, and successful exploration of space.” (Langley Researcher, 19 July 74,1; A&A, Dec 74,72)
Pioneer 11, launched 5 April 1973 toward a December 1974 encounter with Jupiter, was retargeted to pass within 42 000 km of Jupiter and then, with a gravity assist from the planet, fly on to Saturn in 1979. Ground controllers at Ames Research Center commanded the spacecraft’s onboard thrusters to fire for 42 min 36 sec, increasing velocity 230 km per hr. On its new course, Pioneer 11 would pass Jupiter nearer the south polar region, intersecting the planet’s equatorial plane at 55°, and come three times closer than Pioneer 10 had during its 3 Dec. 1973 encounter, (nasa mor, 5 Nov 74; NASA Release 74-94; arc Release 74-10)
NASA’s report on emergency preparedness and defense mobilization activities for FY 1973 was issued £y the Senate in the 23rd annual report of activities of the Joint Committee on Defense Production. NASA had revised emergency plans at field installations for increased readiness for a broader range of emergencies. The agency’s contract policies had contributed to maintenance of a broad industrial base of small businesses to meet conditions of a national emergency. Research and development programs contributing to energy solutions included studies of new aeronautical technology, solar and wind energy, clean fuel production, improved use of coal, and more efficient fuels. Technology utilization teams were applying aerospace technology to public problems in medicine, urban construction, law enforcement, mine safety, air and water pollution, and transportation. (Sen Rpt 93-683)
Boeing Co. and the U.S.S.R. State Committee on Science and Technology signed an agreement on aviation cooperation, including exchange of information and technology and eventual commercial exchange, (fbis-Sov, 11 June 74, B8)
NASA was negotiating two 11-mo study contracts for assessing methods of producing electric power from coal. Funded by the National Science Foundation, Dept, of Interior, and NASA, the program would compare costs and impact on the environment of such energy systems as a potassium Rankine topping cycle, advanced steam plants, open and closed cycle gas turbine systems, supercritical carbon dioxide systems, magnetohydro dynamic systems, and fuel cells. Westinghouse Corp. and General Electric Co. had been selected to make the studies, to provide data for a Lewis Research Center energy systems model for evaluating variables, (nasa Release 74-273)
Preliminary results of the 18—26 Dec. 1973 Soyuz 13 mission were published in Izvestiya. The two crew members of the “orbiting astrophysical observatory” had made 10 000 spectrograms with the Orion 2 telescope, recording emissions of stars in ultraviolet. Remote luminaries up to 12th stellar magnitude had been recorded. The biomass of the microbe culture in the Oasis 2 experimental closed-cycle biological system had increased more than 35 times during the mission. [Izvestiya, fbis—Sov, 5 March 74, U1)
Industrial research and development spending had totaled $19.4 billion in 1972, an increase of 6% over 1971, National Science Foundation report Research and Development in Industry 1972 (nsf 74-312) revealed. Company r&d funds had increased 7% and Federal R&D support registered a 6% gain after three years of decreases. The full-time-equivalent number of R&D scientists in industry had increased to nearly 360 000 between January 1971 and January 1972, the first increase since January 1969, when the total was 386 000. Dept, of Defense and NASA had provided 87% of the Federal r&d funds to industry in 1972 and supported 88% of the industrial R&D scientists and engineers working on Federal programs. (Text) August 1974
Interstellar space flight appeared possible, British Interplanetary Society engineers and scientists concluded after the first 15 mos of a study to establish the feasibility of flight outside the solar system. Costs would be high, but so far none of the engineering difficulties seemed insoluble. The chief limitation that might delay such a project was the low natural abundance of helium 3 for the nuclear microbombs proposed for propulsion. The Project Daedalus study had taken the star Barnard, six light years away, as a theoretical target. The journey was to be limited to 3040 yrs, a working lifetime. To achieve the necessary 51 000-km-per-sec velocity, bis scientists proposed a starship driven by a series of controlled nuclear explosions—each equivalent to 90 tons of TNT—occurring at the rate of 250 per sec. Microbombs, small pellets of nuclear fuel, would be compressed and heated to detonation point by electron beams. The rocket-powered boost phase would last 5 yrs, followed by a 35-yr coast. During flyby of Barnard, 10-20 probes would be released to search for inner planets and moons, sending back information to the mother ship for transmission to the earth. NASA had studied the nuclear-pulse propulsion concept for interplanetary exploration through a General Dynamics Corp. contract in 1963, but had suspended the study because of costs and the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. (Gatland, SF, Sept 74, 356-358; A&A 1963,1964,1965) October 1974
Operation of a demonstration solar heating and cooling unit was begun at Marshall Space Flight Center, using three house trailers to simulate a residence. Continuing studies would combine NASA and industry capabilities to improve efficiency and minimize cost. Efforts included development of a computer-simulation procedure for technical and economic evaluation of the systems, studies to explore mass-production effects on solar-collector costs, definition of a commercially practical absorption-cycle air conditioner that could be operated with water at 353 K (176°F) to 357 K (183°F), verification of the absorptive coating stability and application of coatings to lower-cost materials, and evaluation of other thermal storage techniques, such as melting and freezing waxes, as used in spacecraft, (msfc Release 74-77)
DeElroy E. Beeler, Flight Research Center Director for Center Development, left NASA to join private industry after 28 yrs of service. Beeler had joined the National' Advisory Committee for Aeronautics in 1941, specializing in high-speed aeronautics. He was appointed project engineer for the X—1, the world’s first aircraft to reach supersonic speeds, and transferred in 1946 to what was to become FRC. There he was instrumental in research planning, design, and flight investigations of advanced research aircraft projects through X-15 and XB-70. In 1954 Beeler was named frc’s first Director of Research and in 1958 he became Deputy Director, a position he held until 1973. (frc X—Press, 27 Sept 74, 2; nasa biog, 25 July 63)
A modified Piper Seneca aircraft completed the first test flight of a new general-aviation wing, the GAW-1 developed at Langley Research Center. A derivative of the supercritical airfoil, also developed at LaRC, the new wing showed potential for lift increases up to 30%. The lift-to-drag ratio was increased about 50%. In addition to the low-speed airfoil, the new wing design had a 25% reduction in area, tapered planform, full-span Fowler flaps, and spoilers for roll control instead of conventional ailerons. (Mgr, NASA Gen Aviation Tech Off, interview, 25 July 74; NASA Release 74-227)
Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director of the National Science Foundation and Chairman of the President’s Advisory Committee on Energy Research and Development, predicted that solar heating and cooling systems would be commercially available in five years. Following a speech at the Edison Electric Institute’s annual convention in New York, Dr. Stever said the technology would be ready before “society is ready to solve the economic issues surrounding it.” A choice would have to be made between “building a lower priced house with added cost for a solar heating-cooling system, or spending more on higher fuel prices in a conventional house.” (Smith, WSJ, 5 June 74, 65)
NASA’s Plum Brook Station had tested an experimental hypersonic ramjet engine in a hypersonic wind tunnel with simulated flight conditions of mach 5, 6, and 7, Lewis Research Center announced. The water-cooled ramjet engine, a cooperative effort of LeRC and Garrett Corp., was designed to operate efficiently from mach 4 to mach 8 by using hydrogen fuel, a translating spike inlet, and both subsonic and supersonic combustion modes. The tests had yielded valuable basic information for possible future aircraft development. (LeRC Release 74-14)
The backup Skylab Orbital Workshop was loaded for shipment by sea to Marshall Space Flight Center for long-term storage, (msfc Release 74-56)
The Global Atmospheric Research Program Atlantic Tropical Experiment (gate) ended its operations off the coast of Senegal [see 15 June-23 Sept.]. (noaa Release 74-154)
NASA announced the appointment of Dr. David L. Winter as Director of Life Sciences succeeding Dr. Charles A. Berry, who had announced his retirement 21 Dec. 1973 but remained with NASA until April. Dr. Winter would manage programs in biomedical and bioscience research, medical aspects of manned space flight operations, man-machine integration, life science applications, aeronautical life sciences, extraterrestrial life research, and occupational medicine. He had been Deputy Director of Life Sciences at Ames Research Center, (nasa Release 74—118)
The French aerospace industry was reported as recording $1.07 billion worth of exports delivered in 1973. About 15%—$170 million—was in cooperative European aircraft programs. Missiles and space deliveries amounted to $79 million. New missile and space orders totaled $169 million. . British aerospace exports were later reported at almost $1.3 billion for 1973, a 25% increase over 1972 and nearly twice 1970 exports. The leading British market was the U.S., with $360 million worth of deliveries. (Av Wk, 8 April 74, 23; Interavia, April 74, 275)
Wallops Station, Wallops Island, Va., was renamed Wallops Flight Center to describe its mission and operations more accurately. The Center had responsibility for development and launch of scientific payloads, using boosters ranging from the small Areas to the four-stage, solid-propellant Scout. The installation had been established in 1945 as the Pilotless Aircraft Research Station of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics and had served as a base for launching small rockets. After NASA had been established in 1958, it became known as Wallops Station and assumed an expanded mission in support of space flight programs. (nasa Ann, 25 April 74)
The prototype Mini-Sniffer, a small 55-kg radio-controlled aircraft equipped to test pollution in the upper atmosphere, made the first of a series of eight flights from Flight Research Center. The vehicle, powered by a 9-kw gasoline engine, maintained an altitude of 15-30 m and performed well at 55-87 km per hr. The purpose of the flight was to test airworthiness at lower altitudes and speeds. Another series of flights would check out the auto-pilot system at low altitude and then the aircraft would be taken to 6100 m, using radar and a long-range radiocontrol system. The Mini-Sniffer would eventually be fitted with an 11kw engine which would carry it up to 21 000 m. (frc X-Press, 2 Aug 74, 30 Aug 74; frc proj off, interview, 24 July 75)
Experiments had been approved for the first High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) mission, to make an x-ray survey of the sky from low earth orbit in 1977, NASA announced. Contracts totaling $23 349 266 had been let for a large-area x-ray survey experiment to map the celestial sphere for x-ray sources; a cosmic x-ray experiment to measure emissions and absorptions of diffuse x-rays and correlate results with radio and visible-light-ray emission; a scanning modulation collimator experiment to determine precisely the celestial position, size, and structure of selected cosmic x-ray sources; and a hard x-ray and low-energy gamma ray experiment to determine the intensity and other properties of certain x-rays and gamma rays, (nasa Release 7479)
In an effort toward accurate earthquake prediction, antennas at Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Goldstone Tracking Station—200 km apart and on either side of the San Andreas Fault—were receiving radio signals from quasars outside the galaxy. As part of jpl’s Astronomical Radio Interferometric Earth Surveying (aries) project, techniques developed for spacecraft navigation could measure the precise distance between the antennas by monitoring the arrival times of identical radio signals, accurate to one tenth of a billionth of a second. Changes in the times could indicate three-dimensional shifts in the earth’s crust up to an initial accuracy of 10 cm, with an eventual accuracy goal of 2 cm. Scientists hoped that ARIES techniques would help prove the theory that earthquakes were preceded by a swelling of the earth’s surface up to one meter over hundreds of square kilometers and provide a maj or new tool in earthquake research and prediction, (jpl Release 710; jpl proj off, interview, 3 Dec 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center requested bids on constructing an x-ray telescope test facility for NASA’s High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) program. Bid opening was scheduled for 27 Nov. and contract award by 9 Dec. The facility was to be used for x-ray verification testing and calibration of x-ray mirrors, telescope systems, and instruments. (msfc Release 74-211)
New synthetic materials developed from advanced aircraft research at Ames Research Center could be applied to civil aircraft tires and automobile brakes to improve wear and performance, NASA announced. A new polymer, resistant to heat buildup and the Consequent frictional deterioration, promised up to 10 times the normal wear for braking systems. And another new polymer, with unique molecular properties, might provide aircraft tires that could make as many as 200 landings, instead of the customary 100, before retreading was necessary. The new materials would be tested in fleets of hard-use Government trucks and in commercial airline service using Boeing 727 aircraft. (NASA Release 74-117; arc Chem Research Proj Off, interview, 12 March 74)
A vertical-axis windmill was under study at Langley Research Center as a potential source of nonpolluting energy. The windmill, based on a 1927 principle, had two four-meter curved blades attached at the top and bottom to a five-meter vertical shaft, set on a simple gear system, and a generator that converted wind power to electricity. The airfoilshaped blades rotated in almost any wind and were expected to achieve enough revolutions per minute to provide the energy requirements of a single-family house at an estimated construction and installation cost of $500 to $1000. A much larger windmill project at Lewis Research Center, for the National Science Foundation, was studying large concentrations of windmills for industrial use [see 11 Jan.]. (NASA Release 74r-33)
The first phase of the Pioneer direct-mode command system, which would permit Ames Research Center to control its spacecraft directly, became operational. The Pioneer command (pcom) system would permit direct control without depending on Jet Propulsion Laboratory computer systems. Committed operational use of pcom would begin on Pioneer 10 (launched 2 March 1972) on 1 Sept., followed by Pioneer 11 (launched 5 April 1973) on 15 Jan. 1975. (arc Astrogram, 6 June 74,1)
Edwin C. Kilgore, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Center Operations, had been named Director for Management Operations, Langley Research Center, effective 1 March 1975, NASA announced. Kilgore would assume the functions of LaRC Director for Administration Raymond G. Romatowski and most of the functions of Director for Center Development and External Affairs T. Melvin Butler. While at NASA Hq., Kilgore had served as Acting Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology and also as Deputy Associate Administrator (Management) in the same office. In 1973 Kilgore had been awarded NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal for developing an improved system for managing advanced technology programs. Romatowski had accepted the position at NASA Hq. of Assistant Administrator for Personnel Programs. Butler would retire in December. (nasa Release 74-324A)
Facilities at Marshall Space Flight Center were being modified to consolidate Concept Verification Test (ctv) simulation in a central location. The CTV project would determine by testing in simulators whether concepts generated during definition studies for space activities, especially Spacelab experiments, were valid, before* commitments to proceed with final design and hardware fabrication, (msfc Release 74-178)
President Ford signed H.R. 11864, the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974, into P.L. 93-4-09 and signed H.R. 14920, the Geothermal Energy Research, Development, and Demonstration Act of 1974, into P.L. 93—410. P.L. 93-409 provided for demonstration within three years of the practical uses of solar heating technology and for development and demonstration within five years of the practical use of combined heating and cooling technology. It amended the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to direct NASA to carry out solar heating and cooling research but provided that, within 60 days of a law creating the Energy Research and Development Administration or other energy r&d agency, functions given to NASA and the National Science Foundation could be transferred to the new agency. P.L. 93^110 authorized guaranteed loans to finance commercial ventures in geothermal energy and provided for coordination of Federal activities in the development of geothermal energy. {PD, 9 Sept 74, 1099; texts)
Science and technology might be stepping into a more important role in the conduct of foreign policy, a Science article said. During an April speech before the United Nations Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State, had urged that we “now apply science to the problems which science has helped to create.” He proposed international action in four areas: agricultural technology, birth control, energy, and weather. The Science article noted that access to U.S. technology had been a major inducement toward detente for the U.S.S.R. and the People’s Republic of China. Although the speech had made no specific commitments, the proposals, announced by the Secretary of State, became U.S. Government policy. By calling on science to help solve the world’s problems, “Kissinger clearly has the monster in his sights . . . but whether a coherent science policy will emerge is not yet evident.” (Wade, Science, 17 May 74, 780781)
A 6.4-cm underwater borehole TV camera to provide geologists views of the earth’s interior layers had been developed from Skylab technology, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The camera, designed for msfc by Sperry Support Services of Alabama, would permit geologists to study geological formations from the interior of a 7.6-cm-dia survey borehole drilled to a depth of 490 m. Images received by the remotely controlled camera would be transmitted along an armored cable to a standard vidicon receiving tube on the surface, (msfc Release 74—138)
The European Space Research Organization ^ejected a plan to install a launch pad for the McDonnell Douglas Thor-Delta launch vehicle at the Kourou Space Center in French Guiana. The ESRO decision, which followed a four-month feasibility study, cited the high cost of installing the pad—set at approximately $50 million—as the reason for the rejection. The press speculated that, although proponents of the proposal contended the Thor-Delta launch capability would complement the European Ariane launcher under development, the plan might have run into opposition from Ariane supporters who feared competition. NASA, when queried by ESRO officials, had voiced no objections to. the plan even though the equatorial launch site would have increased the vehicle’s orbital weight capacity by about 20% over launches from the U.S., making the site an economical alternative for commercial customers. (Av Wk, 4 Nov 74, 21; gsfc Delta Proj Off, interview, 5 Dec 75)
An omnidirectional wheel that could change a vehicle’s direction of movement without changing the direction it was facing had been developed by Marshall Space Flight Center engineer Josef F. Blumrich, MSEC announced. The rim of the wheel consisted of several barrel-shaped segments that rotated independently when in contact with the ground. The wheel, which would be strong enough to negotiate rough terrain, could be used on a planetary explorer vehicle or on wheelchairs, (msfc Release 74-53) _
NASA’s newest space communications facility was dedicated in a ceremony at the station site at Robledo de Chavela, Spain. The facility, equipped with a 64-m antenna—one of the world’s largest and most sensitive—joined two other Deep Space Network facilities of the Madrid Space Communications Complex. Construction of the installation had begun in 1969 and became operational in the fall of 1973. The Madrid stations were operated for NASA and Jet Propulsion Laboratory by the Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aerospacial under continuing agreements between Spain and the U.S. (nasa Release 74-119; NASA otda, interview, 17 March 75) pheric pressure, temperature, humidity, and wind speed and direction. (msfc Release 74-76; msfc proj mgr, interview, March 75)
The Senate passed, by a unanimous vote of 60, H.R. 15572, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans FY 1975 appropriations bill. The bill was passed as reported out by the Senate Committee on Appropriations 15 Aug. plus an amendment to permit NASA to transfer up to 0.5% of its funds between research and development and research and program management programs. The bill appropriated $3,207 billion to NASA, $36 million below the f’Y 1975 budget request and $60.2 million below the FY 1975 authorization signed 22 June. An additional $4,435 million was appropriated in a Special Energy Bill. NASA r&d funds totaled $2,327 billion, construction of facilities $140.2 million, and r&pm $740 million. The Senate approved all budgeted R&D items, including $6.2 million for the Large Space Telescope and $8.0 million for seasat, both of which had been cut from the House appropriation 26 June. A reduction of $15 million from r&d funds was not directed to any specific program because the Committee suggested that NASA was better able to apply this reduction with a minimum disruption in its priorities. Agreeing with the House, the Committee had urged NASA to reprogram funds to begin work on erts-c and said that further reprogramming of funds for Viking would be considered only with the greatest reluctance. Funds for construction of facilities were up $4.5 million from the House appropriation and down $4.3 million from the authorization. The $740 million for r&pm equaled the House appropriation and was down $9.6 million from the authorization. H.R. 15572 had been reported out of the Senate Committee on Appropriations for a first time 1 Aug. with a total NASA appropriation of $3,243 billion. It was returned to the Committee 5 Aug. by the full Senate for additional cuts. The Senate requested a conference with the House to resolve differences in the passed versions. (Sen Com Rpts 93—1056, 93—1091; CR, 5 Aug 74, S14313-40; 16 Aug. 74, S15161-5)
Post-storage checkout was proceeding at Marshall Space Flight Center on the first propulsive stage and instrument unit of the Saturn IB launch vehicle (SA-210) for the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Fin-mounting brackets on the stage, taken out of storage 27 Nov., had been rod-peened (pounded with a small bundle of rods to place compressive stresses in the surface of the material) to avoid the stress-corrosion problems that had delayed the Skylab 4 launch in November 1973. Bolt holes for the fins had been rounded to eliminate stress points. The complete Saturn vehicle was to be stacked in January 1975. (msfc Release 74—241; Spaceport News, 12 Dec 74)
The Senate by voice vote passed H.R. 11864, the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974, as amended by the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs and the Committee on Labor and Public Welfare 14 May. The Senate bill would authorize $5 million to nasa and $5 million to the Department of Housing and Urban Development in FY 1975 for development of new or existing solar technology and $40 million to hud over the next four years to carry out the demonstration. The development and demonstration were to be carried out within five years. NASA functions and funds could be transferred to the Energy Research and Development Administration if erda was established. (CR, 21 May 74, S8761-77)
A portable, remote, patient-monitoring device called the Vitasign Attendant Monitor had ben developed by a NASA Biomedical Application Team at Southwest Research Institute, San Antonio, Tex., using monitoring techniques developed for manned space flight, nasa announced. The monitor, commercially available at a moderate cost, operated by three electrodes placed on the patient’s chest. A sudden change in the electrocardiogram signal or the respiration rate automatically alerted medical attendants. (nasa Release 74—64)
A National Academy of Sciences panel report to President Nixon recommended that the White House create a Council for Science and Technology. The Council would recommend how science and technology could be most effectively incorporated into the policy-making process. Three full-time members—drawn from the sciences, engineering, and related fields—would be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate. A Chairman, who would also serve as a member of the Domestic Council, would report to the President, and a staff of 25—30 experts would attack special problems, nas also recommended that the Council actively participate in the work of the National Security Council and play a role in areas of foreign policy affected by science and technology. (Dr. H. Guyford Stever, National Science Foundation Director, had been assigned the role of Science Adviser to the President following the abolishment of the Office of Science and Technology by President Nixon in mid-1973.) (Sullivan, NYT, 27 June 74)
The NASA Aircraft Office was established under the Associate Administrator for Center Operations to provide a focal point for aircraft operations and management activities. The Flight Activities Office, Flight Research Center, was abolished, and the Administrative Standardization Office at Langley Research Center would report directly to the NASA Aircraft Office. Robert W. Sommer, former Director of the Flight Activities Office, was appointed Acting Director of the new office, (nasa Ann, 29 Aug 74)
NASA announced the appointment of J. Lloyd Jones as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics Technology in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. Jones had been Director of the Aerodynamics and Vehicle Systems Div. in OAST since 1972, when he had come to NASA Hq. from Ames Research Center. He had been at arc since 1954. In an OAST reorganization providing for two deputies instead of one, Deputy Associate Administrator for Technology Robert E. Smylie became Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Technology, (nasa Release 74—187)
Trace materials in Cleveland’s airborne particulate matter were not present in dangerous levels, but lead might approach these levels, scientists from Lewis Research Center reported at the Earth Environment and Resources Conference in Philadelphia. With the City of Cleveland’s Air Pollution Control Division, LeRC had conducted a two-year study using neutron activation and gas chromatography to determine levels of 60 trace materials. Processed by computer, levels of trace materials were related to wind direction in the form of maps. Sources of pollution could then be established by knowing which industry produced which elements and compounds and in what ratios. (LeRC Release 74-54)
Deferral of $72 million in nasa FY 1975 r&d funding was proposed by President Ford in a message to Congress. Aeronautical research and space support activities would be deferred by $36 million, affecting advanced systems for space exploration and aeronautics, analysis of data in the space science program, and maintenance and upgrading of equipment for the tracking and data-acquisition program. In manned space flight, $20 million in astp funds would be deferred. And in space science and applications, deferral of $16 million in no-year (not designated for a specific year) funds would delay the rate of buildup of Pioneer-Venus, seasat-a, Nimbus-G, Tiros-N, and the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission. These deferrals were parts of a $4.6-billion budget outlay reduction asked by the President. (PD, 2 Dec 74, 1500-1; CR, 26 Nov 74, S20096-7; Federal Register, 5 Dec 74,42519-667)
President Nixon, in his message transmitting the U.S, budget for FY 1975 to Congress, said the budget emphasized fiscal balance and continued “moderate restraint” on the economy to curb inflation, a strong defense force, a comprehensive energy program to “reestablish our ability to be self-sufficient in energy,” the “New Federalism philosophy of strengthening the role of State and local governments,” and a “more intensive focus on the tangible results that programs achieve.” The $304.4-billion budget proposed an increase for defense from $79.5 billion in FY 1974 to $85.8 billion, “so that we can increase our defense preparedness and preserve present force levels in the face of rising costs.” Despite dollar increases caused by rising costs and by pay raises accompanying transition to an all-volunteer armed force, the President said, the proportion of defense costs to the total budget had fallen from 44% in 1969 to an estimated 29% in 1975, after the end of U.S. combat in Vietnam. Project Independence, to reestablish U.S. self-sufficiency in energy, would require about $10 billion for accelerated energy research and development over the next five years and would encourage an even larger private R&D investment. Higher prices would be necessary to stimulate development of fuel supplies, but the emergency windfall profits tax had been proposed to curb excessive profits. The national energy policy included reorganization of Federal administrative machinery, stringent energy conservation measures, mandatory allocation of petroleum products, mandatory reporting on oil production and inventories, modernization of railroad regulations, accelerated development of domestic oil and gas reserves, increased use of coal reserves, development of a fast-breeder nuclear reactor, faster approval of energy facility sites, faster construction of nuclear power plants, and increased research into advanced energy sources, including fusion power and geothermal and solar energy. . Shortages of clean fuels would mean “some temporary variances from air quality plans” would be necessary to meet high-priority energy needs. “The progress we have made in pollution control in recent years, however, along with reductions in energy consumption, should insure that overall air quality will continue to improve.” (CR, 4 Feb 74, H407-14; PD, 11 Feb 74,161-70)
NASA and the National Science Foundation announced an agreement to design, construct, and test an experimental 100-kw wind turbine generator at Lewis Research Center. The large windmill would be tested to determine performance and characteristics of systems for future commercial production of electric power [see 11 Jan]. (NASA Release 74-63)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences reported out H.R. 11864, Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974. The Committee amended the bill, which had been passed by the House 13 Feb., to delineate agency responsibility more specifically. NASA would have responsibility for the necessary system research, development, hardware procurement, and delivery. The Dept, of Housing and Urban Development would develop dwelling and system performance criteria, construct the dwellings, and install the solar heating and cooling systems. Transfer of responsibility to the Energy Research and Development Administration, should it be established, was authorized but not mandatory. (S Rpt 93-734)
Preliminary reports for Skylab principal investigators indicated that large-scale zero-g production facilities in space could manufacture alloys, composites, and crystals of a homogeneity and perfection far greater than that obtainable on the earth, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. A sample from a Skylab brazing experiment demonstrated an almost perfect brazed joint, suggesting that it would be possible to assemble large facilities in space using welding and braizing techniques. Two ends of 2.5-cm tubes of nickel or steel joined with a sleeve by brazing with a silver-copper alloy showed a metallic structure that could not form under gravity conditions. Crystals of germanium selenide, typically 2 to 3 mm on the earth, were grown in zero g to a length of 25 mm with straight edges and no surface structure defects. A mixture of metals that would not form alloys under gravity conditions showed at least some alloying under zero g. A strengthening fiber of silicon carbide whiskers introduced into composite materials was uniformly distributed, suggesting a potential for space production of materials of greater strength and lighter weight, (msfc Release 74-33)
The refanned JT8D jet engine successfully completed its first test at full power, at Lewis Research Center. The engine, part of NASA’s program to reduce jet engine noise, was run through its complete operating speed range and achieved a thrust value above takeoff thrust. Built by United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., the JT8D was used in a major portion of the U.S. narrow-body commercial air fleet. Modified by replacing the two-stage fan with a larger, single-stage fan, the engine could reduce the noise footprint areas of these aircraft by 75%. (nasa Release 74-57; LeRC pio, interview, Oct 75)
Ames Research Center scientists had found more evidence that life on primitive earth might have been triggered by chemical evolution of nonliving matter, NASA announced. Seventeen varieties of fatty acids, similar to those used by plants and animals to produce more complex biological molecules, had been discovered in two meteorites. The family of simple carbon-hydrogen acid molecules found in the meteorites had counterparts in biologically formed earth materials, but had not been found in nonorganic sources before, (nasa Release 74-16)
Flight Research Center’s highly instrumented F—111 aircraft, to he used to test the integrated propulsion control system (ipcs) , made its first baseline flight to gather data on the engine’s inlets and exhaust controls. Data would be used by NASA in support of the program and by Boeing Co., which would build the system, (frc X—Press, 27 Sept 74, 2; frc Pio, interview, 17 June 75)
A robot with an artificial intelligence for making independent decisions in environments hostile to man was being developed at Jet Propulsion Laboratory and California Institute of Technology to prove the feasibility of using robots for planetary exploration. The planned rover would be equipped with metal arms and hands, a visual system of two TV cameras and a laser, wheels for legs, and thousands of instructions programmed into its computer brain. It would be able to analyze a scene, extract information from it, make some choices, and move around obstacles, (nasa Release 74-260)
Ames Research Center controllers of Pioneer 11—launched 5 April 1973 and now 85 000 000 km from Jupiter—increased the spacecraft’s spin rate to improve measurements of Jupiter’s radiation belts during the flyby, scheduled for December, (arc Release 74-41)
Aerospace industry employment would reach 968 000 by December—the highest level since May 1971—but then drop by 8000 by June 1975, the Aerospace Industries Assn, of America predicted in its semiannual survey. The increase over previous estimates was attributed to an unexpected rise in production and delivery of aircraft, while the missile and space sectors of the industry remained essentially constant. Commercial transport deliveries were expected to slow down in the first half of 1975. (aia Release 74-16)
Marshall Space Flight Center had requested proposals for two space tug studies, msfc announced. The first study was to develop schedules, controls, and planning data for the space tug program from initial flight readiness to long-term mission operations. The second study was to recommend a space tug avionics system, with emphasis on rendezvous and docking avionics and data-management-subsystem requirements and configuration. (msfc Release 74-79)
The House of Representatives passed the special energy research and development appropriations bill, H.R. 14434, by a vote of 392 to 4. The bill appropriated funds to various agencies, including $8.9 million to NASA, for energy r&d in FY 1975. Of the NASA total, $4.5 million would be to implement the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act if enacted. An amendment to appropriate an additional $1 million to NASA was defeated by voice vote. (CR, 30 April 74, H3350-84)
A solar energy recorder to evaluate the solar energy available in any area of the world with an ambient temperature range of 233 K (—40° F) to 325 K (125° F) was being developed by International Business Machines Corp. Federal Systems Div. under contract to Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC announced. The recorder would measure and store sunfall data while simultaneously measuring direct and total (direct plus diffuse) solar radiation. MSFC engineers said the measurements were vital to efficient development of solar energy converters before any large-scale construction, (msfc Release 74-98)
Aircraft stalls and spins, greatest cause of fatal general-aviation accidents, had been intensively studied for the past 18 mos, NASA said in a report on its general-aviation technology program. More than 1000 spin tests had been made in Langley Research Center’s spin tunnel; designs for test aircraft were nearly complete. Airport traffic flow and pilot ap-proach-and-landing performance also were under study, and a program offering more precise flight path control and reduced pilot workload had significantly improved pilot landing ability. A five-year program was developing better training methodology to reduce pilot errors. (nasa Fact Sheet) May 1974
President Nixon signed nasa’s authorization bill, H.R. 13998, into Public Law 93-316. The $3.267-billion act authorized $2.37 billion for research and development, $144 million for construction of facilities, and $750 million for research and program management. (PD, 1 July 74, 726)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had awarded a $169 000 contract for the study of hydrogen as a possible energy source, to the Institute of Gas Technology, Chicago, 111. The 10-mo study was to evaluate methods of producing large quantities of hydrogen and select a few of the most promising for follow-on studies. It was also to identify industrial and residential uses and estimate costs of developing technology. (msfc Release 74-207)
A New York Times editorial noted that, within a matter of hours, instrument readings from Mariner 10’s 29 March close flyby of Mercury had “made all previous scientific writing and theorizing about Mercury obsolete. Where nearly complete ignorance had existed earlier, there is now a large, diverse and important body of hard information. . . . Even if the crippled spacecraft is unable to continue to transmit data it will have earned an indelible place in the history of space exploration.” (NYT, 1 April 74,30)
Effects of the shapes of trucks on air drag and fuel consumption were being studied by NASA and the Department of Transportation, NASA announced. Trucks traveling 80 km per hr used more than half their engine horsepower to overcome drag. Preliminary tests had shown that a rectangular vehicle with rounded corners had 30% less air drag at 90 to 95 km per hr and used 15% less fuel. Other configurations would be tested at Flight Research Center and dot’s Transportation Systems Center using technology and instrumentation developed in FRCs aeronautics flight-test program, (nasa Release 74-152)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $5 986 930 contract modification to Chrysler Corp.’s Space Div. for stage and system engineering for the 1st stage of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Saturn IB launch vehicle. The modification, effective 1 May 1974 through 31 July 1975, brought the existing cost-plus-award-fee contract total to $64 455 696. (msfc Release 74-104)
A House-Senate Conference Committee favorably reported a compromise version of H.R. 15572, the FY 1975 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans appropriations bill that included a $3.207-billion NASA appropriation. NASA funds were $40,394 million below the budget request and $60,194 million less than the FY 1975 authorization. An additional $4,435 million for energy research and development was appropriated separately. The compromise appropriation was close to the one passed by the Senate 16 Aug. and $3,685 million above the $3,203 billion approved by the House 26 June. (NASA Off Budget Ops, Chron History; CR, 21 Aug 74, H8787-90; H Rpt 93-1310)
