NASA announced that General Counsel R. Tenney Johnson would leave NASA to become general counsel of the Energy Research and Development Administration, effective 16 Feb. Johnson had been With NASA since May 1973. NASA Deputy General Counsel S. Neil Hosenball had been named acting General Counsel. (NASA Release 75—32)
NASA announced completion of a program conducted by Jet Propulsion Laboratory to measure the constituent gases of the stratosphere to help determine the effects on the earth’s ozone layer of gases released from aerosol spray cans. Using a Fourier interferometer onboard a U—2 aircraft, JPL scientists had measured the distribution of hydrogen chloride molecules at altitudes between 10 and 21 km during 6 separate flights in May. Hydrogen chloride—produced by the breakdown of aerosol gas molecules in the upper atmosphere and released naturally, in small amounts, from the ocean surface and volcanic eruptions—was one of several trace gases thought to play a major role in controlling the equilibrium of the protective ozone layer. JPL had found traces of the chloride beginning at 15 km, and reaching a maximum of almost 1 part per billion at 20 km. Although the results did not represent a direct effect of aerosol gas, or Freons, on stratospheric ozone, JPL scientists recommended continuing measurements to detect any future buildup. The ozone measurements, part of NASA’s Stratospheric Research Program, had begun when a JPL-designed instrument was flown on the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport in 1973. Data collected on these flights included the first detection of nitric oxide, along with new information on the geographic and vertical distribution of water, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and methane, and furnished a base for the 1975 study. (NASA Release 75—223; Miles, LA Times, 21 Aug 75)
The Energy Research and Development Administration had awarded a 45-mo $i7 736 000 contract to General Electric Co. Space Div. to provide nuclear generators for NASA’s two Mariner—Jupiter—Saturn missions scheduled for launch in late 1977. GE would build seven radioisotopic thermoelectric generators for use during the mission; three of the nuclear generators—each providing 150 watts—would be used for each spacecraft, and the seventh would serve as a spare. (ERDA Release 75— 79)
Lewis Research Center was testing a version of an ipn-thruster engine with reduced propellant requirements that would permit payload increases of up to 20% on future spacecraft, NASA announced. The ion-thruster propulsion system used solar cells to convert solar energy into electrical power, tailored to the current and voltage necessary for the ion thruster. The propellant—mercury, cesium, or relatively stable gas—was ionized in the engine and electrically exhausted to produce thrust. During the tests the NASA version of the engine had become the first electric propulsion system to exceed 10 000 hr of operation. LeRC was continuing the testing toward an endurance goal of 15 000 hr. The engine was the second of its kind to be tested by NASA. The first had experienced internal sputtering and erosion which had degraded performance. Testing had been stopped at 9715 hr for modifications. (NASA Release 75—150)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory had proposed some economically sound and technically feasible alternatives to the automobile industry’s inefficient and polluting internal combustion engine [see 3 Sept.], a Los Angeles Times editorial said. Development of a new economical and pollution-free engine on a mass-production basis would take time and money but “the auto industry can well afford the $150 million a year that would be needed.” The JPL report voiced skepticism that industry could do the job alone. “Additional funding from the federal government is required, as well as a commitment that introduction of an alternative engine by 1985 is a national goal. JPL makes a persuasive case that all this is feasible and in the national interest. Given the potential in fuel savings and reduced air pollution, the money. . .would be a solid investment.” (LA Times, 5 Sept 75)
A digital Stoland navigation, guidance, control, and display system in an augmentor wing aircraft (a modified C —8A Buffalo) guided the aircraft to an automatic landing at the short-takeoff-and-landing (STOL) test facility at Crows Landing, near Patterson, Calif. The automatic landing, first for a STOL aircraft, was a milestone in the flight acceptance of the Stoland system being developed by Sperry Flight Systems under contract to Ames Research Center. The system would be tested on other STOL aircraft. (ARC Astrogram, 17 July 75, 2)
Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. was studying the economic and technical feasibility of using a rotating flywheel for electrical storage in commercial, utility, and transportation applications. The 9-mo study for the Energy Research and Development Administration was based on technology developed for a prototype spacecraft energy-momentum flywheel that Rockwell had built for NASA’s Langley Research Center. The small prototype spinning at speeds up to 35 000 rpm could provide 2500 w of electrical power as well as spacecraft attitude control. In the flywheel concept, electric motor generators would spin up specially constructed flywheels which kinetically stored energy by their rotation. When electrical power was needed, the rapidly spinning flywheels would drive generators. A significant application of the flywheel would be to store energy for electric utility companies; the flywheels, spun up during off-peak hours, would drive power-producing generators during peak-demand periods. (Rockwell Int’l Release SP—18)
Langley Research Center was flight-testing a new-generation light twin-engine Piper PA—34 Seneca aircraft—called ATLIT (Advanced Technology Light Twin)—fitted with several improvements using NASA advanced aerodynamic technology. One important new component, the GAW—1 (General-Aviation-Whitcomb) airfoil, was 27% smaller than the original wing but was expected to be safer and more efficient, and to reduce fuel consumption by as much as 10%. (NASA Release 75 —84)
NASA, in cooperation with the Dept, of Transportation, was investigating aircraft wake vortices—turbulent air trailing from an aircraft’s wing-tips and swirling at velocities up to half the flight speed of the aircraft. Safety required an aircraft to travel far enough behind a preceding airplane to permit the vortices to dissipate, adding to congestion at already busy airports. NASA’s objective was to develop methods to reduce the intensity of the vortices and render them harmless 3 km behind the aircraft. This would decrease the amount of fuel wasted and the pollution produced when aircraft were subjected to holding patterns and waits to taxi to a runway, and would permit aircraft to land and take off at a faster rate. Engineers and scientists at Ames and Flight Research Centers were investigating the vortices by flying an instrumented Leaijet and a T—37 jet trainer through wakes created by larger aircraft. Data collected during these flights, checked against wind-tunnel data, suggested several possible ways of alleviating the wake-vortex problem, including tailoring the lift across the aircraft wings, modifying engine placement, and adding wing spoilers and drag devices. (NASA Release 75—136)
President Ford told a group of eight congressmen at a White House meeting that he would work to reestablish the Office of Science and Technology as a permanent part of the White House organization, the New York Times reported. Tbe office had been abolished by President Nixon 1 July 1973. The Times quoted Director of the Domestic Council James Cannon as saying that President Ford would propose legislation creating the post of science advisor with a staff of 10 to 15 persons and an annual budget of $1 million to $1.5 million. (NYT, 23 May 75, 14)
Energy Research and Development Administration announced the award of a $2 612 000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Hughes Research Laboratories to develop a new mercury valve for use in high-voltage direct-current transmission. The liquid-metal plasma valve was a spinoff from a spacecraft ion engine developed by Hughes for NASA. The valve, a single-anode device that fired a vacuum arc on signal, would be used to convert between alternating current and direct current at the terminals of high-voltage direct-current transmission lines. (ERDA Release 75—25)
Formation of a Federal interagency group—the Federal Interagency Task Force on Inadvertent Modification of the Stratosphere (IMOS)—to investigate the relationship of freons (fluorochlorohydro-carbons) to ozone reduction in the stratosphere was announced by the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality, Dr. Russell W. Peterson, and the Chairman of the Federal Council for Science and Technology, Dr. H. Guyford Stever. The group included representatives from NASA; the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Justice, and Transportation; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; Energy Research and Development Administration; Environmental Protection Agency; National Science Foundation; and Interdepartmental Committee for Atmospheric Sciences. IMOS would prepare a report summarizing atmospheric, medical, and ecological information on the freon/ozone relationship. The report would also evaluate possible economic impacts and alternatives to industry, consider what Federal action could be taken, and propose a Federal program to resolve the issues. (Fed Council for Sci and Tech Release 1)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio) introduced H.R. 9058, a revised bill to establish national science policy and organization, incorporating the most promising features of H.R. 4461 [see 6 March] and the Administration bill H.R. 7830 [see 9 and 11 June]. The proposed bill included a statement of national policy similar to that in H.R. 4461, but with language recommended during an earlier 3 wk of hearings. The proposal to establish an Office of Science and Technology Policy was based on the Administration bill with three major changes: First, H.R. 9058 would give the President the power to appoint up to four assistant directors, giving him the potential of a three- to five-man council as he chose; this would give later Presidents more flexibility of organization. Second, the President-appointed Director and assistants would be subject to confirmation by the Senate. Third, H.R. 9058 described the duties and functions of the new office more precisely than had the Administration biU. H.R. 9058 would establish, within the Executive Office of the President, a Federal Science and Technology Survey Committee to survey the Federal science effort, including missions, goals, personnel, funding, organization, facilities, and general activities. The 5 to 12 committee members would report findings and recommendations to the director of the new advisory office, with particular attention to organizational reform, science information systems, technology innovation and transfer, Federal-state and Federal-industry liaison and cooperation, and improved science budgeting process. Upon completion of the report, the committee would cease to exist. (CR, 30 July 75, E4265)
Flight Research Center announced the award of a 30-mo costplusfixed-fee contract, valued at $13 million, to Rockwell International Corp. to design and build two subscale model aircraft for NASA’s Highly Maneuverable Aircraft Technology Program. The two-phase contract called for an initial 60-day effort for detailed program planning; upon satisfactory completion of phase 1, NASA would approve the final design and fabrication. The two vehicles were scheduled for delivery to FRC late in 1977 for flight-testing, using the Remotely Piloted Research Vehicle test technique [see 3 March] developed by FRC. Air-launched from a carrier aircraft, the vehicles would be flown through maneuvers by a ground-based pilot using TV, telemetry, and radar. (FRC Release 7-75)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it would distribute the first NASA Standard Parts List (NSPL) to all NASA centers and contractors in Jan. The NSPL was to include electronic parts selected from experience in flights, tests, failure analyses, and recent plant surveys, to ensure reliability. The standardization had been undertaken to solve problems of small-quantity buying, high cost, long delivery schedules, market fluctuations, 'part failures, and extensive rework. The cost of correcting problems resulting from failure of parts had been estimated as 100 times the cost of preventing the use of poor-quality parts to begin with. The NASA Standard Parts Lead Office, located at MSFC because of its experience in parts management developed during the Saturn program, would establish requirements for parts, coordinate the effort with all NASA Centers, and issue and maintain the list. (NASA Release 75— 303; MSFC Release 75—259)
NASA announced approval of Rockwell International Corp. to begin final design and construction of two subscale models of highly maneuverable aircraft. The construction would be completed under an $11.3-milfion contract awarded earlier. The Rockwell design called for a 6.3-m-long 1260-kg model with a “coke bottle” fuselage and two large canards mounted on each end of the 2.5-m wing. The model would be powered by a General Electric Co. supersonic J85 supersonic jet engine. The two unmanned models would be flown from NASA’s Flight Research Center in a joint NASA—Air Force program to develop advanced technology in high-maneuverability aircraft. The models would be air-launched from large carrier aircraft and maneuvered by a pilot in a ground cockpit, using test techniques developed during NASA’s Remotely Piloted Research Vehicle program. (NASA Release 75- 279)
Marshall Space Flight Center was requesting proposals—due 22 Sept.—from the aerospace industry for a study leading to design and development of an Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) as a payload aboard Spacelab, MSFC announced. ACPL experiments would give scientists a knowledge of weather processes important for long-range weather prediction and weather modification. After evaluating the proposals, MSFC would award two parallel 12-mo firm-fixed price contracts. (MSFC Release 75—192)
Does not include a supplemental request for pay increases, introduced as H.R. 13172 and signed into P.L. 94— 303 on 1 June 1976. The committee also recommended denial of $1 000 000 of the $5 000 000 request for continued studies of the LST, and reduction to $2 000 000 of the $3 000 000 requested for the transition period. The remaining amounts were judged sufficient to complete LST studies. Within the Construction of Facilities category, the committee denied funds requested for construction of the Lunar Curatorial F acil-ity. No funds were to be used for modifying the 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel at Ames Research Center until the committee had reviewed a formal budget request. Reduction in the Research and Program Management request reflected a 10% reduction in the payment of General Services Administration space-rental charges. The committee also recommended language in the bill to permit the replacement of five older aircraft with more modern aircraft for greater efficiency and safety. This would reduce operating costs by $1 300 000 annually. The committee recommended a total appropriation of $925 028 000 for the transition period 1 July through 30 Sept. 1976. This total was $33 872 000 under the total budget request and $122 111 less than the authorization. NASA Transition Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and House-Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) H.R. Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 730.6 700.6 (-30.0) 700.6 (-30.0) Construction of Facilities 14.5 10.8 (-3.8) 10.8 (-3.8) Research & Program Management 213.8 213.8 (0) 213.7 (-0.1) Total 958.9 925.2 (-33.8) 925.0 (-33.9) (H.R. Com Rpt No. 94—313; Budget Chron Hist FY 1976, NASA Ofc of Budget Operations, 16 June 75)
NASA announced the beginning of a cooperative NASAuniversityindustry program to flight-test a low-cost flight-control system that would improve ride quality, reduce pilot workload, and improve flight safety. The control system—developed and ground-tested by the Univ. of Kansas—was being installed on a Beechcraft 99 commuter airliner for a flight-test program under the direction of NASA’s Flight Research Center. Nearly a third of the aircraft’s control surfaces were controlled by the new automated avionics system, with two-thirds remaining under direct control of the pilot. Any failures in the automated control system could be easily overridden by the pilot, eliminating the need for redundancy in the attitude-control system and permitting mechanization at a much lower cost. With automated controls off, the separate surfaces responded to the pilot’s commands and the control system was essentially that of the Beechcraft airplane. The flight-test program would include functioned tests, envelope expansion, system optimization, and quantitative and qualitative evaluation by the three test pilots. (NASA Release 75—207; FRC Release 22—75)
A NASA-developed low-cost highly efficient solar thermal-energy collector and a ball bearing design with a life expectancy 20 times greater than that of present ball bearings had been selected to receive Industrial Research magazine’s award for two of the 100 most significant new products developed during the year, NASA announced. Developed at Lewis Research Center in cooperation with Honeywell, Inc., the solar collector absorbed 20% more solar-radiated energy and produced a greater flow of high-temperature fluids. The flat-plate collector combined an efficient flow scheme, insulation, dual antireflective glass covers, and black chrome absorption coating to provide heating and cooling, with low cost and low pollution, for both commercial buildings and homes. LeRC developed the bearing with General Electric Co. and Industrial Tectonics, Inc., using computer analysis for maximum performance and reliability. Advanced techniques for producing and melting steel provided a cleaner, longer lived material for the bearing, and advanced fabrication and machining methods contributed greater accuracies and surface finishes to the bearing rings. The bearing was lubricated through holes in the bearing’s split inner ring rather than by a conventional lubricant jet pointed at the bearing rings. This advanced bearing design was expected to replace mainshaft-thrust ball bearings presently used in large turbine engines, pumping systems, electric utilities, and petroleum pipeline operations. (NASA Release 75—258)
Marshall Space Flight Center plans for the FY 1975 reductioninforce had been revised, MSFC announced. The target date for issuance of RIF notices to MSFC employees had been delayed from mid-January to 29 Jan. with an effective date of 14 Mar. The 2-wk delay resulted from the need for an additional decrease in the end-of-FY 1975 personnel ceiling, from 4145 to 4113. This further reduction was MSFC’s share of the government-wide reduction of 40 000 employees called for by President Ford in 1974. (MSFC Release 75—6)
Marshall Space Flight Center issued a request for quotations from industry for development of a flat conductor-cable wiring system suitable for use in residences and commercial establishments. Surface mounting, a feature of the flat cable System originated by NASA to reduce the size and weight of wiring harness in space capsules, would eliminate the need for routing wires in walls, ceilings, and floors because it could be covered by paneling, tile, or even wallpaper. Use of the flat wiring would reduce costs of wiring new construction and permit savings in renovating, remodeling, and rewiring of existing buildings. The successful proposer would develop a surface-mounted baseboard system using a cable 63.5 mm wide; total thickness of the baseboard—channel, airspace, and cover— would be about 11 mm, thickness of the thinnest lumber baseboard strips in use. (MSFC Release 75—257)
A terrestrial solar-energy recording system now installed at Marshall Space Flight Center would provide accurate data on sunfall for use in developing solar-energy measuring systems, MSFC announced. Designed and built by International Business Machines Corp. as part of the center’s earth-based solar-power activities, the monitor would use a sun tracker and stationary sensors to measure and record solar energy. The 203-cm by 178-cm instrument included a pyrheliometer to measure energy coming directly from the solar disc and 2 pyranom-eters to measure direct and scattered energy from any direction in its hemispheric field of view. The system could also evaluate the ability of developmental devices to convert or reflect solar energy. Collected data were recorded on tape for computer analysis. (MSFC Release 75-168)
Total does not include a supplemental authorization for increased pay costs introduced and considered as H.R. 13172. For the transition period 1 July to 30 Sept. 1976, the committee recommended decreasing NASA’s total budget request of $958 900 000 to $929 900 000. The requested $730 600 000 for research and development was reduced to $704 600 000, leaving NASA management to apportion the $26 million reduction. The committee reduced funds requested for construction of facilities from $14 500 000 to $11 500 000 in a series of minor economies. (Sen Com on Aero & Space Sci Rpt 94-103)
A telescope aboard NASA’s Oao 3 Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (named Copernicus and launched 21 Aug. 1972) was observing three nearby stars—epsilon Eridani, tau Ceti, and epsilon Indi—-for signs of other civilizations that might be trying to contact earth with laser beams. The telescope had scanned the first star in November 1974 for 14 orbits while the spectrometer scanned the ultraviolet spectrum for potential laser signals to earth. The data were being analyzed and scientists were planning to scan tau Ceti and epsilon Indi again during the summer and fall of 1975. (NASA Release 75—130)
The Vertical Motion Simulator (VMS), an aeronautical facility designed to reproduce up-and-down and sideways motions of aircraft during takeoff and landing, was being built at Ames Research Center, NASA announced. Costing about $3.5 million, the VMS would move as much as 18 m in height and 12 m sideways, accurately simulating flare and touchdown. Practice in the simulator would enable pilots to cope better with the complexities of flying sophisticated aircraft such as short takeoff and landing (STOL) and vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) types. (NASA Release 75—224)
Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded contracts worth $500 000 each to Martin Marietta’s Denver Division and to TRW Systems Group, to define the Spacelab payload called AMPS (atmospheric, magnetospheric, and plasmas in space). The definition studies would emphasize flexibility, low cost, and an evolutionary approach to environmental research. One of the first payloads considered for Spacelab, AMPS had been conceived as a manned orbiting scientific laboratory to study the nearspace environment of earth and the effects on it of changes in incident solar energy and of emissions from earth. Instrumentation would include a laser beam to define the composition of the various constituents of earth’s atmosphere. Missions would last from 7 to 30 days, with extensive involvement of the scientist crews in conducting the experiments. (MSFC Release 75— 239; SBD, 20 Nov 75, 108)
Flight Research Center was investigating the use of TV to provide visual information to pilots of future aircraft and spacecraft, NASA announced. TV might enhance target visibility for pilots of high-performance aircraft that might have to approach and land at high angles of attack with reduced window area, and for unmanned remotely piloted research vehicles that would augment flight instrumentation with visual. For testing, FRC had installed a TV camera on top of a Piper PA—30 aircraft with a 12.5- by 17.5-m TV screen installed on the instrument panel. A curtain would restrict the test pilot’s view through cockpit windows with a safety pilot riding in the right seat of the aircraft. Besides demonstrating use of TV for approach and landings, the first phase of the program would evaluate the pilot’s ability to judge altitude using TV. The second phase would aim at optimizing the TV system for landing maneuvers. (NASA Release 75-11) •
The Soviet Academy of Sciences chose Anatoly Alexandrov, a 72-yr-old nuclear physicist, as its new president, the Tass news agency reported. Peter Osnos commented in the Washington Post that the main speaker at the Academy meeting—Mikhail Suslov, the Communist Party’s chief ideologist, who is not even a member of the Academy— made the only speech on Alexandrov’s behalf. This, said Osnos, showed the extent to which the choice was determined by Kremlin leadership and the Party’s growing influence over the once-autonomous scientific establishment. Academy members traditionally had voted in secret ballots and had maintained their own organizational structure in running the country’s important research facilities; Alexandrov was chosen on a secret ballot, but apparently there were no other candidates. Alexandrov, head of the atomic research institute in Moscow, was one of the few Academy members also a member of the Party central committee. (W Post, 26 Nov 75, A8)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a request for proposals for a 10-mo study of a space-based power-conversion and power-relay system, MSFC announced. The proposed study would examine alternate means for generating electrical power in space, with emphasis on identification and delineation of problem areas and new technology required for these power systems. (MSFC Release 75—90)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a request for proposals for a study of alternative means for generating electrical power in space and relaying the power to earth, with emphasis on problem areas and new technology, the Marshall Star reported. Previous studies had defined concepts for the use of large solar-cell panels to generate power in geosynchronous orbit and transmit it to earth via microwaves; also studied had been the transmission via an orbital microwave system of power generated at a remote location on earth and transmitted long distances to the user location. (Marshall Star, 21 May 75, 1)
NASA announced the appointment of Dr. JohnE. Naugle, Deputy Associate Administrator, to be Acting Associate Administrator until a replacement was named for Dr. Rocco A. Petrone. (NASA anno, 30 April 75) During April: Soviet spending for research and development had risen 50% between 1968 and 1973, representing an increase of from 2.5% to 3.8% of the Soviet gross national product, the Air Forces Journal International quoted a Dept, of Commerce report as saying. During the same period, outlays for U.S. R&D had fallen from 3% to 2.4% of the GNP. The number of Soviet scientists and engineers working in R&D functions nearly doubled in the period, from 594 000 to 1 069 000; by contrast, the U.S. technological pool had risen from 454 000 to 531 000. The growth stemmed from a Soviet decision, announced in 1968, to increase Soviet expenditures for science and technology by more than 60%. The report estimated that 90% of the Soviet technical workforce was in the military and space fields. (AF Joum Int, April 75, 20)
The launch of Viking A had been postponed for the second time [see 11 Aug.] when Jet Propulsion Laboratory technicians discovered that the batteries had dropped from their normal charge of 37 volts to 9 volts. The batteries had been drained because a motorized rotary switch that should have remained off until 7 min before launch had accidentally turned on. The dangerously low voltage decided officials to remove the entire spacecraft from the launch vehicle and return it to the spacecraft assembly and encapsulation facility for troubleshooting. At the same time, the Viking-B spacecraft, in a planned holding mode before mating with its launch vehicle, would be moved to the launch complex to replace its ailing sistercraft and become the Viking-A mission. The launch had been rescheduled for 20 Aug., with the launch window opening at 5:22 pm. (Viking Status Bulletin No 10, 20 Aug 75; NASA Audio News, 14 Aug 75; O’Toole, WPost, 14 Aug 75, A23; McElheny, NYT, 14 Aug 75)
S. Neil Hosenball, NASA’s Deputy General Counsel, had been appointed General Counsel, effective immediately, replacing R. Tenney Johnson, who had been named General Counsel of the Energy Research and Development Administration in February. Hosenball, who had been Deputy General Counsel since 1967, had been Assistant General Counsel for Procurement from 1966 to 1967 and previously had served for 4 yr as Chief Counsel at Lewis Research Center. (NASA Release 75—173)
The National Research Council, in its program of conducting technical studies on behalf of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering, had mailed out announcements to more than 5000 individuals and organizations inviting statements on the role of nuclear power in the context of alternative energy systems. Hearings in five major cities had been scheduled for January and early February 1976 to obtain the broadest possible perspective for a comprehensive study. The Energy Research and Development Administration had asked the academies to conduct a 2-yr study, and the announcement represented the first time in the 112-yr history of the National Academy of Sciences that such an extensive effort had been made to solicit the views of the informed public on a projected study. The committee conducting the study would attempt to set forth the current and probable states of energy technology through the year 2010, various policy options, and consequences of each. (NRC Release 24 Dec 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a request for proposals for an x-ray source system for the x-ray telescope facility being constructed at MSFC for use in the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) project, MSFC announced. The proposed contract would include design, fabrication, assembly, preliminary in-plant checkout, installation, and verification. The contractor would also have the option of building a cover for the system. Under the terms of the contract, the x-ray source system would be installed on a 40.6-cm-by-39.3-cm steel flange by 20 Feb. (MSFC Release 75—93)
A new computer-controlled tracking device for telescopes, called VIP (video inertial pointing), had been developed at Ames Research Center to improve the aim of balloon-borne, airborne, and space telescopes. The two main functions of VIP were to help the astronomer steer the telescope, and to continuously update the automatic stabilization system that holds the telescope steady during viewing. Automatically stabilized telescopes heretofore had used gyroscopes to keep the telescope aimed at a point in space and counteract the rotation of the earth and other disturbances; gyroscopes had been found subject to drift, causing the telescope to wander off target. VIP, using a single video sensor, could generate the signals required for all three control axes—roll, pitch, and yaw—and could use the visual information to point at nonvisible (infrared) sources. Previous systems using star trackers had needed from two to six conventional sensors to do the same job. Development of VIP had made use of several state-of-the-art devices: the microprocessor, a complete digital computer on a single printed circuit card, was the computer inside the VIP electronics. Two types of video sensors used by VIP were the solid-state imaging device called a CCD (charge-coupled device) that incorporated a matrix of light-sensitive elements on the surface of a silicon chip measuring 0.01 mm on a side, and an advanced vidicon tube for night vision called an ISIT (intensified-silicon intensified-target) camera. By reducing the amount of hardware required for good performance, use of these new instruments had lowered the cost of the system. Ames would use VIP to provide accurate automatic pointing of the Space-lab Infrared Telescope Facility for the Shuttle that was under development at Ames and on contract. (Ames Astrogram, 9 Oct 75, 1)
States from New England to California had joined the competition to be selected as the site of a proposed Federal Solar Energy Research Institute that might be spending up to $50 million annually within 3 yr after its establishment. Competition had begun even before issuance of formal criteria describing the center’s mission and needs, expected later in November. A report on the center by a special committee of the National Research Council—an agency of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering—had forecast a staff of about 800 professionals and 800 support people. The committee had recommended a single institute administered by a nonprofit corporation, like those that govern many other large national laboratories; geographical location had not been considered as important as “intellectual atmosphere, technical suppliers and availability of services for a substantial laboratory.” Issuance of criteria by the Energy Research and Development Administration would call for proposals early next year, with site to be chosen in April or May 1976 by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Administrator of ERDA. Among those already in competition were the state of N. Mex., which had put a proposal for the solar center in Feb. 1975 when ERDA . was a month old; a consortium of universities and industries on Long Island, N.Y.; the governors of six New England states, sitting as the New England Regional Commission, who voted to “work as a regional force” to get the center for New England; and the state of N.Y., which had designated a coordinator to work on getting the center, including “assembling the necessary real estate” from various areas of the state. (NYT, 9 Nov 75, 33)
Reduction-in-force and reduction-in-grade notices were sent to 213 Civil Service employees at Marshall Space Flight Center as a result of the reduction in the end-of-FY 1975 personnel ceiling. In addition to the 93 persons separated and the 120 persons reduced in grade, 191 MSFC employees received reassignments as part of a reclassification survey conducted during the summer of 1974. (MSFC Release 75—24)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists had released “Automobile Power Systems Evaluation Study,” urging adoption of a billion-dollar program to mass-produce, by 1985, a fuel-saving pollution-free replacement for the standard internal combustion engine, Richard Witkin reported in the New York Times. Funded by a $500 000 grant from the Ford Motor Co. with the understanding that the study would be independent and unbiased, JPL’s report recommended accelerated, parallel development of the Brayton gas turbine and Stirling external combustion engine until a clear choice could be made between them. The study found that either engine not only was virtually pollution-free and cut fuel consumption by 30 to 45% but also could be mass-produced at a cost differential small enough to be easily recovered through fuel savings by the first owner. The JPL engineers defined the fuel economy, emissions, and costs of vehicles powered by nine other engines as well as by improved versions of the conventional internal combustion engine. Six sizes of cars were analyzed, covering the range of consumer preferences. Electric and hybrid power systems were also evaluated. Aside from development of the Brayton and Stirling engines, the report recommended other programs to reduce fuel consumption 15 to 35% by improved vehicle packaging, weight reductions, and transmission improvements. The report also recommended that the U.S. work in the interim to improve the fuel economy and emissions level of conventional car engines. (JPL Laboratory, 1975/5, 21; Witkin, NYT, 4 Sept 75, 18)
Dr. Philip Handler, 18th president of the National Academy of Sciences, had been elected for a second 6-yr term, NAS announced. Dr. Handler had served as NAS president since 1 July 1969. Before that he had been chairman of the Department of Biochemistry at Duke Univ. Medical Center. NAS, established in 1863 by an act of Congress, was a private organization of over 1000 scientists and engineers frequently called upon to advise the Federal government on policy questions related to science and technology. (NAS Release, 21 Feb 75)
Space expenditures resulted in tangible economic benefits, according to a report, “The Economic Impact of NASA R&D Spending,” being prepared for NASA by Chase Econometric Associates, Inc., the Philadelphia Inquirer reported. Using methods developed for regular national economic forecasts, Chase predicted that, if NASA’s research and development budget were increased by $1 billion for the 1975—84 period, the U.S. gross national product (GNP) would swell by $23 billion or 2% over the normal rate of growth. Labor productivity in the nonfarm areas of the economy would rise more than 2% over the normal growth rate, and more than one million jobs would be created, reducing the unemployment rate by nearly 0.4% by 1984. According to Chase, the key to NASA’s domestic economic importance was in the agency’s widespread technological advances that benefited a wide range of industries. Although the technological benefits were readily visible, NASA’s influence on the nation’s economy was more subtle, taking about 5 yr to work its way through the system. (Text, NASA Final Rpt, CR 144351, April 76; Holland, PInq, 3 Aug 75)
Dr. Wernher von Braun—German-born rocketry pioneer and former Marshall Space Flight Center Director and NASA Deputy Associate Administrator—had undergone successful surgery at Johns Hopkins University Hospital in Baltimore for removal of a malignant tumor, the Washington Post reported. (AP, W Post, 13 Aug 75)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists reported that a joint JPL—Univ. of Texas astronomy team had detected carbon monoxide in the atmosphere
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio) introduced H.R. 7830, the President’s bill [see 9 June] “to strengthen staff capabilities for providing advice and assistance to the President with respect to scientific and technological considerations affecting national policies and programs.” The bill was referred to the Committee on Science and Technology. H.R. 7830 called for establishing an Office of Science and Technology with a director who would be the Presidential science adviser, a deputy director, and a 15-member staff. The office would have a budget of $1.5 million. H.R. 7830 was the second bill concerning Presidential science advice introduced by Reps. Teague and Mosher; H.R. 4461 had been introduced 6 March to establish a national science and technology policy. It also included provisions for a council of science advisers and a cabinet-level Dept, of Research and Technology. (CR, 11 June 75, H5346; 6 March 75, H1464)
Flight Research Center’s F—111 Integrated Propulsion Control System (IPCS) aircraft had made its first flight with the new system operating, FRC’sX-Press reported. The IPCS used digital electronics instead of conventional hydromechanical controls for actuating the aircraft’s supersonic jet engine and engine inlet. The new system was expected to allow aircraft to fly at full high-speed performance limits without adverse interaction among the engine, the inlet, and the aerodynamic flow over the fuselage. During the 1-hr flight, the modified inlet and engine were operated entirely under computer control, with routine test transfers between digital and hydromechanical control at all flight conditions. (FRC X-Press, 12 Sept 75, 2)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued requests for proposals for development of solar-energy cooling and heating systems for both residential and commercial applications. The RFPs had been issued in five areas of procurement: firms already producing and marketing solar heating and cooling subsystems; firms developing marketable subsystems and needing government assistance; firms with complete systems under development; firms designing innovative complete systems; and firms to compete for test and evaluation of the subsystems procured under the first two RFPs. The Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974, which requires demonstration of the practical use of solar heating in the U.S. within 3 yr and of combined solar heating and cooling within 5 yr, made the Energy Research and Development Administration responsible for managing and coordinating the national program. ERDA assigned MSFC the responsibility for developing solar heating and cooling systems in an all-out effort to create a viable industrial and commercial capability of producing and distributing such systems. (NASA Release 75— 284)
Bills were introduced in the Senate (S. 573) by Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), and in the House of Representatives (H.R. 2931) by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), “to authorize appropriations to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration for research and development, construction of facilities, and research and program management, and for other purposes.” Bill S. 573 was referred to the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Bill H.R. 2931 was referred to the Committee on Science and Technology. {CR, 5 Feb 75, H659, S1430)
A vertical motion simulator to reproduce the critical maneuvers of aircraft during takeoff and landing was being built at Ames Research Center. Costing $3.5 million, the VMS would use an existing cab and computer system, but would have new hardware to provide large-scale vertical motions. It would move as much as 18 m vertically and 12 m horizontally and would accurately simulate flare and touchdown of such aircraft as the short takeoff and landing (STOL) and vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL). (FRC X-Press, 26 Sept 75, 4)
A Senate and House of Representatives conference committee reported out H.R. 8070, appropriating FY 1976 funds for the Department of Housing and Urban Development and sundry independent executive agencies, after resolving the disagreements of the two congressional bodies. Total NASA FY 1976 appropriation recommended by the committee was $3 551 822 000, changed only with respect to funds allotted for research and development. The FY 1976 NASA Budget Appropriation Congressional Adjustments to Budget Request Program Budget Request House Changes Senate Changes Conference Changes Total Conference Recommendation Research & Development 267B.4 -49.4 + 7.0 -1.0 2677.4 Construction of Facilities 84.6 - 2.5 -2.5 -2.5 82.1 Research & Prog Management 776.0 +0.5 -0.5 -0.5 775.5 Totals 3539.0 -52.4 +4.0 -4.0 3535.0 (H.R. Comm Rpt 94—502; CR, 23 Sept 75, H9035 —38) committee appropriated to NASA $2 677 380 000 for R&D, $48.4 million more than the $2 628 980 000 proposed by the House [see 19 and 24 June] and $8.0 million less than the $2 685 380 000 proposed by the Senate [see 24 and 26 July]. The conference committee agreed that NASA could reprogram $7 000 000 from the R&D total for an upper atmospheric research, technology, and monitoring program. The committee also agreed that $1 000 000 of the total funding of $48 400 000 proposed for a Pioneer-Venus mission might be reprogrammed for further planning of the Large Space Telescope, though not beyond evaluation of phase B studies. Appropriations for construction of facilities and for research and program management had been previously agreed on and remained unchanged.
Radio transmissions from Mariner 10 ceased after attitude-control gas was depleted and flight controllers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory sent the command for the spacecraft to stop operations at 8:20 am EDT. Before shutdown, spacecraft engineering tests were conducted to try to open the stuck door on the plasma science experiment, rotate the solar panels to various positions, stow the scan platform at 18(f, operate the stuck tape recorder, and provide data for future spacecraft design. During its more than 16 mo in heliocentric orbit, Mariner 10 (launched 3 Nov. 1973) had traveled more than 1.6 billion km and made four planetary encounters, one of Venus and three of Mercury. It had passed within 5800 km of Venus 5 Feb. 1974, and transmitted to earth the first closeup photographs ever taken of the cloud-shrouded planet. Mariner 10 had confirmed the high-speed circulation of Venus’ upper atmosphere and revealed circulation patterns that swirled from the equator toward the poles. It had also revealed a long tail of charged particles trailing behind the planet and away from the sun; verified the presence of a bow shock wave created by the solar wind acting upon the dense atmosphere; detected hydrogen, helium, and argon in the Venusian atmosphere; and discovered temperature-inversion zones suggestive of deeper stratiform cloud layers. First spacecraft to use the technique, Mariner 10 used the gravity of Venus to speed it on toward Mercury. The probe flew by that planet three times, on 29 March and 21 Sept. 1974 and 16 March 1975. At Mercury, Mariner 10 photographed a highly cratered lunar-like surface with large scarps hundreds of kilometers long and over 1.6 kilometers high. Mariner 10 data also revealed the existence of a chemically differentiated light crust, lunar-like near the surface and earth-like at its interior, and an unexpected magnetic field 100 times smaller than earth’s. A slight but measurable atmosphere was found, in addition to streams of high-energy electrons and protons on the planet’s dark side. On its last encounter with Mercury [see 16 March] Mariner 10 came within 327 km of Mercury to take the closest photographs ever made of another primary planet. (NASAMOR, 7 April 75; VASA Activities, April 75, 12—13; NASA Release 75—59; A&A 1974)
A new medical diagnostic system known as time-delay spectrometry, using high-frequency sound waves, had been developed by scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The new technique passed continuous, varying high-frequency sound waves through the body; the waves were received and displayed as pictures on a cathode-ray-tube screen. Existing ultrasound systems had operated less effectively, sending into the body a pulse of sound waves and timing the echo after the waves were reflected from the body’s various internal organs. A picture from the JPL system looked like an x-ray and took shape in 2 to 4 min. Bones, muscles, organs, and differences in soft tissue could be clearly seen. The varying pitch of the sound waves and the differences in frequency response and absorption properties of various body tissues would aid the diagnostician in discriminating between, for example, a cyst and a tumor. JPL researchers were planning to evaluate the system’s usefulness in hospital applications, first by demonstrating its ability to detect and identify tumors in the female breast. (NASA Release 75—162)
The Senate Committee on Appropriations reported out H.R. 8070, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development—Independent Agencies Appropriations Bill for FY 1976. NASA FY 1976 Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and Senate Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) Senate Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 2678.4 2687.2 (+8.8) 2685.4 (+7.0) Construction of Facilities 84.6 99.1 (+14.5) 82.1 (-2.5) Research & Program Management* 776.0 776.0 (0) 775.5 (-0.5) Totals* 3539.0 3562.3 (+23.3) 3543.0 (+4.0)
The Soviet Union had landed Arctic explorers on an ice floe 600 km from Chukotka to set up Severny Polyus—23, a drifting observatory to study weather and ice conditions in the Arctic Sea, Tass announced. Air search last spring had discovered a flat berg 7 km long and 3 km wide about 500 km from Wrangel Island north of the eastern tip of Siberia. N. Blinov, head of the Soviet high-latitude expedition Sever-27, called this a rare find because the ice appeared to be 20 m thick. Research stations on such floating islands made it possible to trace circulation of Arctic ice over many years; the Severny Polyus—22 station operating in the Arctic for 3 yr had moved in a clockwise anticyclone circular drift and “repeatedly found itself in both the eastern and western hemispheres.” The new station, larger than its predecessor, was expected to last longer. (Tass, in FBIS No. 240,4 Dec 75) ,
NASA’s Oso 5 Orbiting Solar Observatory began its 7th yr in earth orbit. Launched 22 Jan. 1969 to study the sun and its influence on earth’s atmosphere, Oso 5 had completed more than 34 000 orbits. It was the fifth of eight spacecraft launched in the OSO program to observe the sun during most of its 11-yr solar cycle. Oso 5 had been shut down 3 yr after launch but was reactivated in July 1974 after decay of the orbit of Oso 7 (launched 29 Sept. 1971). Oso 5, which had a planned lifetime of 6 mo, was obtaining data on the frequency and extent of eruptions on the sun’s surface. (NASA Release 75— 46)
Efforts to charge batteries on the Viking 2 lander faded for unknown reasons, but controllers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory were confident that time would allow them to solve the problem. Both Viking 1 and 2 were launched with their lander batteries essentially uncharged to prolong their lives; the batteries aboard the Viking 1 lander were charged without difficulty 2 wk ago, and the same procedure had been scheduled for Viking 2. The spacecraft carried a backup as well as a prime battery charger, but NASA had not attempted to use it in case the problem had originated outside the charger system. Use of the backup before the problem had been identified might have damaged it as well as the prime charger. Viking 2, originally scheduled to be launched first, had been pulled back for repair after its orbiter batteries had been accidentally drained; officials said there was no connection between prelaunch orbiter problems and the lander situation. (NASA Release 75—288; Aero Daily, 4 Dec 75, 10; SBD, 4 Nov 75, 16)
For coating solar collectors that heat and cool homes and buildings, black chrome had been demonstrated by a Lewis Research Center scientist to be some 20% more efficient than current coatings. Being “solar selective,” black chrome allowed absorption of sunlight but prevented the ensuing heat from radiating out of the collector. Because of this, black chrome would raise the temperature of water in the system as much as 5°C (40PF) over the 95°C (200fDF) provided by current coatings. A system with hotter water would require fewer collectors to heat or cool an area. (NASA Release 75 — 55)
Two Ames Research Center research aircraft would be stationed in Hawaii for scientific research missions. A U—2 earth-resources survey aircraft would probe the stratosphere up to 20 km to measure the distribution and extent of ozone, nitric oxide, and aerosol particles in the area between the equator and 4(F N latitude. Conducted by ARC to aid a national study, the sampling program was part of a semi-globed study of the effect of ozone and nitric oxide on the world’s climate over a long period of time. Similar missions had been flown over higher latitudes and polar regions. Another objective of the U—2 flights was to collect remotely sensed data on the Hawaiian Islands in support of several investigations, including one of the decline and die-back of Ohia and Manami trees in the forested areas of Hawaii. NASA’s Kuiper Airborne Observatory, a C—141 jet aircraft equipped with a 91.5-cm infrared telescope, would make 16 flights to collect previously unobtainable data from the region of the galactic center, a highly complex intense source of infrared emission. (ARC Astrogram, 17 July 75, 1)
Water vapor was detected for the first time deep in the atmosphere of Jupiter in October 1974 by a group of Univ. of Arizona scientists aboard NASA’s C—141 Airborne Infrared Observatory, Ames Research Center announced. The data, combined with data gathered by the Pioneer 10 and 11 flybys of the planet in 1973 and 1974, added to the speculation that organic compounds being formed in Jupiter’s atmosphere might account for the red, brown, and orange coloring of the planet’s clouds. The discovery was made with a 91.5-cm infrared telescope, newly installed aboard the C—141, which was flying above virtually all the water vapor in the earth’s atmosphere. Scientists would use the new data to predict Jupiter’s temperature and pressure, develop a structural model of the planet’s atmosphere, and determine Jupiter’s character at the time of its formation. (ARC Release 75—3; ARC Airborne Astronomy Prog Mgr, interview, 26 July 76; Larson et al., Astrophysical Journal, 1 May 75, L137— 40)
Evidence that aerosols from spray cans had damaged earth’s ozone layer had been under study by an independent scientific panel that would make its report early in 1976, the Wall Street Journal said, but Federal action against fluorocarbons was not considered likely before that time, and foreign governments were considered unlikely to act before the U.S. did. Fluorocarbon manufacturers and users had insisted that the ozone-depletion theory had not been proved, and warned of damage to an industry that had made products worth $400 million to $450 million a year, with manufacturing facilities worth $300 million. U.S. producers had accounted for about half the world’s production of fluorocarbons, which was approaching about 0.9 billion kg a year. Two Univ. of Chicago chemists—Mario J. Molina and F. Sherwood Roland—had advanced a theory 18 mo ago that fluorocarbons used in spray containers and in refrigerators and air conditioners were getting into the upper atmosphere, encountering ultraviolet fight (more intense at high altitudes) that split the fluorocarbon molecules to release highly active chlorine. The chlorine had depleted the atmospheric ozone by converting it to ordinary oxygen. The theory had been partly confirmed in the laboratory by National Bureau of Standards chemists who showed that ultraviolet lamps would split fluorocarbons to produce either one or two chlorine atoms, depending on the ultraviolet wavelength used. However, no one had discovered a way to measure the ozone to tell whether it had been affected by chlorines from fluorocarbon dissociation. Another clue had been to search for chlorine products such as hydrochloric acid in the stratosphere; tests conducted by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory using U-2 flights and balloons had Confirmed the presence in the stratosphere of hydrochloric acid that had not originated from the earth. Granting the effect of aerosols, opinions had been divided upon the significance of ozone depletion: possible consequences of additional ultraviolet radiation impinging upon earth included increased incidence of skin cancer, harmful effects on animal and plant life, and alteration of temperature patterns in the stratosphere with resulting alteration of weather patterns on earth. Even without proof of damage, public apprehension of risk had increased pressure for a ban on the suspect chemicals, especially in aerosols. (Tannenbaum in WSJ, 3 Dec 75, 1)
High-speed computer techniques were producing profiles of giant red stars, in a NASA-sponsored research project conducted by California Institute of Technology scientist Dr. Juliana Christy-Sackmann at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Analyzing high-resolution infrared data on successive star flashes representing from a fraction of a year to a million years in the evolution of a red giant, Dr. Christy-Sackmann found that the violent combustion of helium in the heart of the stars, releasing heat up to 260 million°C, produced a predominance of carbon. She stressed the convective role of helium and hydrogen in fueling the stellar fires: A convective tongue of helium was driven through layers of burning shells toward the outer envelope of hydrogen. Hydrogen might also drop down to overlap, giving extra energy to an old star. The release of energy from the interior of the stars varied, apparently because of convective zones that seemed to come and go. Although each flash produced extreme interior disruption, surface changes in most cases were minor. The length of time required for computation had prevented previous investigators from following and analyzing more than a few of the hundreds of successive flashes occurring in a star; using the new computer technique, Dr. Christy-Sackmann planned to analyze hundreds. (JPL Release, 2 Feb 75)
Aerodynamically designed wind-flow aids could reduce wind resistance to tractor-trailer trucks by up to 24%, NASA announced. In a series of tests conducted in 1974 at Flight Research Center, NASA and the Department of Transportation evaluated performance gains of a 15-m trailer outfitted with five different commercially available drag-reduction devices and two different trailer-cab spacings. The tests had been conducted without and then with the devices, at speeds from 45 to 30 km per hour, to evaluate changes in fuel economy resulting from reductions in air drag. (NASA Release 75—39) During February: NASA biochemist B. C. Walverton began planting large quantities of water hyacinths as part of a study to determine the plant’s ability to absorb and concentrate toxic metals and to metabolize various other chemical pollutants. Scientists at NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories had been experimenting since 1971 with vascular aquatic plants, which are equipped with a system of vessels to carry nourishment from the roots to the leaves. Results of the experiments were so promising that NASA, in cooperation with Mississippi state officials and the city of Bay St. Louis, had installed a special system using water hyacinths as a final filtration to remove nitrates, phosphates, and other chemical pollutants from the 245-sq-kmBay St. Louis, Miss, sewage lagoon. The water hyacinths would be harvested and analyzed to determine the amounts and kinds of impurities assimilated; saturated plants would then be recycled , using one of two methods being developed by NASA, into a mixed hydrocarbon fuel similar to natural gas. (NASA Release 74—332) March 1975
Pioneer 10 (launched 2 March 1972), on its way out of the solar system 1.2 billion km from earth and halfway between the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, was making unexplained orientation changes, Ames Research Center announced. The spacecraft’s axis of rotation was changing by 1° every 2 wk. Project officials had said that the changes could be caused by a slight malfunction or by some interplanetary phenomenon, but evidence was contradictory. Further tests were planned to find the cause of the change. (ARC Release 75—30)
Marshall Space Flight Center had opened for competition a research and development program to develop and demonstrate cryogenic components for the Space Tug vehicle. Work would include design of a reusable cryogenic storage system, and fabrication and evaluation of a testing system. Proposals were to be submitted by 31 October. (SBD, 1 Oct 75, 159)
Pioneer 11 had been scheduled to take its first look at Saturn, according to controllers at Ames Research Center. Upon its encounter with Jupiter on 2 Dec. 1974, Pioneer’s trajectory was altered by the gravitational effects of Jupiter to one that would take Pioneer to Saturn on or about 1 Sept. 1979. The spacecraft had returned the only pictures ever taken of Jupiter’s polar regions and probed the planet’s intense inner radiation belts for the first time, attaining the highest speed ever attained by a manmade object (171 000 km per hr). Pioneer was still more than 1287 million km from Saturn, but in a position to observe the ringed planet at a phase angle 4 times larger than the largest angle at which Saturn could be seen from earth. The total amount of light and the polarization of sunlight reflected from a planet’s atmosphere at different angles could reveal the composition of the atmosphere; scientists would watch Saturn throughout Pioneer’s approach to note changes in intensity and polarization of light reflected from the planet with changes in phase angle. The viewing angle would also permit study of the light-reflecting characteristics of Saturn’s rings in large areas of shadow from the planet, an effect not visible from earth. Pioneer was headed upward out of the plane containing the sun’s planets, and in 1977 would attain a distance above this plane of about 161 million km, allowing it to measure phenomena coming from higher latitudes on the sun than previously observable. (ARC Release 75—53; MOR S—811—73—07, 19 Nov 75)
The first 10 automatic landings of a powered-lift shorttakeoffandlanding (STOL) aircraft equipped with a STOLAND automatic flight-control system had been completed by Ames Research Center personnel at the Naval Auxiliary Landing Field in Calif. The STOLAND system, a versatile onboard digital computer, provided the pilot with navigation, guidance, and control information. Automatic controls, including control of the aircraft’s lift with automatic flaps and augmenter nozzles, permitted steeper climbouts, approaches, and landings, offering potential relief for airport traffic congestion. Half the aircraft’s lift was provided by engine thrust, permitting flight dt much lower speeds than conventional aircraft. The STOLAND system was developed by Sperry Flight Systems for use in the joint NASA—Dept, of Transportation operating experiments program and the augmentor-wing handling qualities and flight-control programs. (NASA Release 75— 226)
A new antireflection-coated metal oxide semiconductor (AMOS) solar cell developed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists might have potential use in the nation’s solar energy program, JPL scientist Richard J. Stem reported at a Photovoltaic Specialists Conference in Phoenix. The solar cells, made from oxidized gallium arsenide with an extremely thin nearly transparent film of gold on the surface, had demonstrated an efficiency of about 15% in terrestrial sunlight, better than the average silicon solar cell now in standard use. The new cell also had superior resistance to radiation, promising a longer lifetime in space. Dr. Stern said that the technology was potentially adaptable to very low-cost polycrystalline thin films, with only a modest reduction in efficiency. (NASA Release 75—133)
Langley Research Center announced the appointment of Robert E. Smyhe as Director for Space, replacing Eugene S. Love, who was retiring. Smylie had been in NASA Hq as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space, Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. In his new position he would direct Langley’s work in space systems, space applications and technology, environmental quality programs, and the Scout launch vehicle. (LaRC Release 75 — 11)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio) introduced H.R. 4461 “to establish a science and technology policy for the U.S. to provide for scientific and technological advice and assistance to the President, to provide adequate administrative organization to assure effective Federal support and utilization of research and development, to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, to amend the National Science Foundation Act of 1950, and for other purposes.” The bill was sent jointly to the Committees of Science and Technology and on Government Operations. The legislation proposed the establishment of a new cabinet-level Dept, of Research and Technology Operations to bring together Federal research-related activities through a unified and efficient governmental structure; a five-member Council of Advisors on Science and Technology to help form and implement policy at the highest levels of government; and a Science and Technology Information and Utilization Corp. to assure the widest possible dissemination of scientific and technological information. The proposed legislation would administratively relocate NASA, Energy Research and Development Administration, National Bureau of Standards, National Science Foundation, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration within the new department, but would not alter the basic mission and purpose of each agency. (CR, 6 March 75, H1464; House Com of Sci & Tech Print 48— 694)
A giant 283 200-cu-m balloon carrying a Marshall Space Flight Center gamma ray detector was launched from Palestine, Tex., by the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The balloon reached an altitude of 40 km and traveled 800 km before touching down near Ft. Stockton, Tex., 23 hrs later. The purpose of the flight was to detect the sources and determine the nature of sudden bursts of gamma rays coming from various directions in space. (MSFC Release 75100)
Flight Research Center pilot Einar Enevoldson, in a ground-based instrumented cockpit, guided the remotely piloted research vehicle (RPRV) to its first unpowered landing, at FRC. Following air-launch from a B—52 aircraft flying at 14.6 km, the 7.3-r.i three-eighths-scale vehicle performed maneuvers to measure control effectiveness during spinning flight. The spin was continued until 4.6-km altitude when Enevoldson deployed the landing gear and performed a series of stability and control maneuvers. He initiated final approach at 1524-m altitude. The RPRV landed on the dry lakebed using small steel skids individually mounted on the ends of three conventional automobile shock absorbers installed inside the aircraft’s fuselage. The RPRV had been developed by FRC to provide a more economical and far less hazardous means of flight-testing new vehicles. Earlier versions of the RPRV had been recovered in midair using a parachute and helicopter. (FRC Release 26—75; FRC Proj Off, Rezek, interview, 12 Sept 75)
Prof. Hyron Spinrad, Univ. of Calif, astronomer, had photographed a galaxy 5 to 10 times larger than the Milky Way. Prof. Spinrad photographed the galaxy, designated 3C123, using the 120-in telescope at Lick Observatory and a new device that filtered out backlighting. The huge galaxy was moving away from earth at a speed of about 4.3 trillion km per year. (AP, B Sun, 2 July 75, A3)
The recent detection of water vapor, and therefore oxygen, on Jupiter by Univ. of Arizona scientists aboard NASA’s C—141 Airborne Infrared Observatory [see 12 Feb.] could stimulate additional support for a probe mission to obtain more detailed information, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Scientists had already known that the proportions of helium and hydrogen on Jupiter were approximately the same as on the sun. The additional information that oxygen existed on Jupiter would strengthen the belief that the planet’s composition was similar to that of the sun, and that the sun and the planet had been formed from the same raw material. The conclusion was important to many scientists who believed that earth’s atmospheric composition had evolved from one similar to Jupiter’s. If this were true and if Jupiter’s atmosphere had changed little from its primitive state, then the Jovian atmosphere could serve as a laboratory for studying the evolution of life on earth. This new information could influence NASA scientists charged with making recommendations for new starts. (Av Wk, 24 Feb 75, 58)
Flight Research Center announced the award of a $146 000 costplusfixed-fee contract to LTV Aerospace Corp.’s Vought Systems Div. to study the possibility of flight-testing the oblique wing on an F—8 jet aircraft. LTV would investigate technical and mechanical problems in modifying the test aircraft and would estimate the cost of modifications. , The oblique wing, developed by Dr. Robert T. Jones of Ames Research Center, was a conventional straight wing mounted on top of an aircraft so that it could be swiveled around a central pivot point. The wing could be fixed at zero degrees—perpendicular to the fuselage— for takeoff and landing, and moved to various sweep positions at different speeds for the best performance. Wind-tunnel tests had indicated the new design could operate with maximum efficiency over a wide range of flight conditions, offering either increased speed or significant fuel savings. (FRC Release 17—25)
The Skylab program was closed out at Marshall Space Flight Center and personnel assigned to the program had been reassigned, the Marshall Star announced. Responsibility for the deactivated offices, including storage of hardware and phaseout of remaining contractual and documentary activities, was assigned to the Administration and Program Support Directorate’s Logistics Office. (Marshall Star, 2 July 75, 4)
A metering truss made of graphite—one of the few materials that expands with cold and contracts with heat—and epoxy, which expands with heat and contracts with cold in the usual way, had been designed to hold stable the mirrors of NASA’s Large Space Telescope without being distorted by temperature changes. Built by Boeing Aerospace Co. under a $185 000 contract with Marshall Space Flight Center, the structure had been subjected to a 2-day vacuum-chamber test at Boeing’s Space Center in Seattle under temperatures ranging from —84°C to +21°C without suffering lens-limiting thermal distortion. (Huntsville Times, 25 Nov 75; Boeing Release A—0459)
Defense, space, and energy accounted for most of a record increase in Federal research and development funding in FY 1976, the National Science Foundation’s report An Analysis of Federal R & D Funding by Function, Fiscal Years 1969— 76 stated. The largest dollar increase, $1860 million, was for national defense; the second and third largest increases, $343 million each, were for space and energy. Relative increases in FY 1976 were largest for education, 102%; energy, 37%; national defense, 20%; and space, 13%. Total Federal obligation for R&D in the 1976 budget of $21.7 billion was a record high. The $2.7-billion increase over FY 1975 was also a record increase for any one year, enough to indicate a real rise in R&D activity, allowing for a reasonable inflation factor. The upward change contrasted with an average annual decline of 2.7% in constant dollars over the period 1969— 75. (NSF Highlights, 25 Aug 75, 1)
NASA announced award of a $1.5 million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Rockwell International Corp. for development of a solid-state bubble-memory data recorder to meet spacecraft data-storage requirements. The recorder, which would have no moving parts, would offer a capacity of 100 million bits, serial or parallel data input/output operation, user-selected data rates, and direct access to the memory. Rockwell would complete the work in two phases: A prototype would be completed by early 1977, and a flight-qualifiable model would be produced by early 1978. Langley Research Center would manage the contract for NASA. (NASA Release 75—272)
The Ancient Mariner—a power package built as a backup for the unit flown past Venus on Mariner 5 in 1967—was still going strong after more than 5 yr of operating in a space environment, the Boeing Space Center at Kent, Wash., said. Function of the package had been to transform raw power collected by solar panels into electric current acceptable to the spacecraft. NASA had asked Boeing to find out if electronic units like this could stand the rigors of long-distance space flights such as a 12-yr Grand Tour of the outer planets. Boeing put the Mariner instrument in a test chamber—part of an extensive vacuum and space simulation facility—in which temperature had been fixed at 1.6°C and other conditions had been made to conform with those in space. The duplicate had performed perfectly, outlasting much of its ground-support equipment and all but one of the technicians originally assigned to the experiment. The test had proved that flight hardware could stand temperatures as much as 3(^0 cooler than those encountered on missions already completed, and that similar electronic packages had a life expectancy of more than 5 yr, far longer than the period for which they had been designed. (Newport News Times-Herald, 16 Oct 75, 15)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of three contracts, part of a program to design, fabricate, test, and demonstrate a low-cost aesthetically appealing solar collector for residential heating and cooling. Chamberlain Manufacturing Corp. was awarded $72 621 and Honeywell, Inc., was awarded $104 255 to deliver a low-cost collector based on existing technology and the requirements of the solar heating and cooling demonstration. A third contract was awarded to PPG Industries which would furnish collector panels from off-the-shelf hardware at essentially no cost. (MSFC Release 75—22)
An interagency agreement between NASA and Department of Interior to use NASA technology for mineral extraction was announced by Secretary of the Interior Rogers C. B. Morton. Funded and directed by Ddl and combining efforts of NASA and contractor scientists, the project Would apply NASA experience in developing of systems for manned and automated operations in hostile environments to demonstrate new coal-mining technology. NASA has designated Marshall Space Flight Center as the lead NASA Center. (NASA Release 75-H) _ _
President Ford sent a $349.4 billion FY1976 budget request to Congress, an increase of $45.0 billion over the FY 1975 request. The recommended deficit of $51.9 billion was a peacetime record high designed to help revive the Nation’s sagging economy. In his budget message to Congress, the President said that his recommendations provided for fiscal policy actions to increase purchasing power and stimulate economic revival; a major new energy program to hold down energy use, accelerate development of domestic energy resources, and promote energy research and development; an increase in outlays for defense to maintain preparedness and preserve force levels in the face of rising costs; a 1-yr moratorium on new Federal spending programs other than energy; and a temporary 5% ceiling on increases in pay for Federal employees and on individual benefits tied to changes in consumer prices. Proposals included a one-time $16-billion tax cut— $12 billion for individual taxpayers and $4 billion for business—to stimulate economic recovery. Energy: The President specifically requested that no new Federal spending programs be initiated in FY 1976 except in the field of energy, which had a total recommended budget authority set at $2,491 billion. Federal energy functions were divided into three broad categories: general operating programs (analysis and development of energy policy), regulatory programs, and research and development programs. General operating programs, with a recommended budget authority of $548 million, would be administered by the Federal Energy Administration (FEA), Dept, of the Interior, and the new Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA). Federal energy regulation, with a recommended budget authority of $178 million, was managed by FEA, Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), and Federal Power Commission. Although the new budget called for support from NASA and the National Science Foundation (NSF) for energy R&D, ERDA would have the major responsibility. The proposed energy program called for an increased fee on imported oil and an excise tax on domestically produced petroleum and natural gas. The proposal also called for decontrol of oil prices—coupled with a windfall profits tax—and deregulation of prices on hew natural gas. (in millions of dollars) 1974 1975 1976 Recommended budget Program or agency actual estimate estimate authority for 1976 General operating programs 223. 152. 498. 548. Regulation 90. 171. 164. 178. Research and development 739. 1131. 1577. 1764. Total energy 606. 1454. 2240. 2491. The Federal government had further expanded its research and development program to provide new and improved technologies necessary to increase domestic energy resources. Outlays for energy R&D would be $1.7 billion in FY 1976, an increase of 36% over FY 1975 and 102% over 1974. Budget recommendations continued a vigorous nuclear R&D program and accelerated non-nuclear energy R&D, particularly in coal and solar energy. General Science, Space, and Technology (in millions of dollars) 1974 1975 1976 Recommended budget Program or agency actual estimate estimate authority for 1976* Space research and technology: Manned space flight Space science, applications, and technology Supporting space activities Subtotal General science and basic research: National Science Foundation Energy Research and Development Administration Earth Sciences: Geological Survey Deductions for offsetting receipts
