NASA was beginning to make headway in efforts to solve basic problems of U.S. aircraft manufacturers caused by a long-term dearth of low-speed aeronautical research, reported Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine. Industry engineers reporting on discussions at a recent Wichita meeting of the Society of Automotive Engineers said use of the workshop technique had been effective in uncovering primary problem areas by crosstalk with such specialized segments as aerodynamicists and propulsion engineers. NASA research being further refined in industry product development included general-aviation aircraft airfoils, aircraft drag reduction, propeller efficiency, and reduction of airflow separation on wing trailing edges. Lewis Research Center had begun exploration of alternatives to conventional reciprocating engines, such as diesel and rotary concepts. NASA had also begun studying the application of advanced technology to agricultural aircraft, said to be responsible for increasing farm production by about $10 billion annually, to solve problems such as corrosion of aircraft structures by agricultural chemicals and control of chemical drift. (Av Wk, 26 Apr 76, 56)
The Natl. Science Foundation announced that employment of academic scientists and engineers had increased 3% in 1976; the increase had cut across all major fields of study, from 1% in life sciences and engineering to nearly 7% in social and environmental sciences. The number of full-time scientists and engineers at academic institutions went from 224 800 to 230 500, or 3%, and the number of those employed part time went from 55 900 to 58 700 (5%). Over the period 1965 to 1976, there was a significant shift to teaching. Scientists and engineers employed primarily as teachers increased 223 200 from 1975 to 1976 (3%); those working primarily in research and development increased 51 000 (2%). The number of women employed full time as scientists and engineers increased 5% from 1975 to 1976, a rate more than double that for men. (NSF Highlights, 2 Dec. 76, 1)
The price of solar cells had come down, the Energy Research and Development Administration announced. Cells that would have cost about $210 ($21 a watt) 6 mo ago today cost $155 ($15.50 a watt). “This 26% price drop in just 6 mo shows that our research and development program is making significant progress,” said Dr. Henry H. Marvin, director of ERDA’s division of solar energy. “However, we have a long way to go to meet our 1986 goal of 50<t a peak watt.” At the goal price, Dr. Marvin said, solar cells could compete with electric power from conventional sources; even at the present high cost, solar cells were competitive for special uses, such as recharging batteries at remote microwave stations operated by railroads and highway departments in southwestern states. Manufacture and sale of solar cells for such uses doubled in the past 18 mo, and the price during that period had dropped almost 50%. NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory would manage solar-cell purchase contracts for ERDA, the announcement said, to establish technical feasibility of uses ranging from remote power sources to integration with existing power systems. (ERDA Release 76-290)
Louis Mogavero was appointed Director of NASA’s Technology Utilization Office in the Hq Office of Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, the agency announced. Mogavero, who joined NASA in 1966, had held management and planning positions in the former Office of Manned Space Flight, and in 1972 had worked with a White House study group evaluating new opportunities in technology. Before joining NASA he was operations manager for new product development with the Boeing Co., and received a master’s degree in engineering administration in 1970 from George Washington University. (NASA Hq announcement, 12 Apr 76)
Dr. James B. Pollack, research scientist at Ames Research Center, had been named to receive the H. Julian Allen award for 1975, for major findings about the atmosphere of Venus. Dr. Pollack and coworkers used airborne infrared telescope observations in 1974 to show that the top 20 km of Venus’s heavy cloud cover consisted of a water solution of concentrated sulfuric acid. The heat absorption peculiar to sulfuric acid might account for conditions of extreme heat near the surface of Venus. Dr. Pollack would share honors with 8 other Ames employees; the award, given for outstanding papers written by members of the Ames staff, would be accompanied by an honorarium of $1000. (ARC Release 76-11)
Federal agencies allocated $4.5 billion to institutions of higher learning in FY 1975, the Natl. Science Foundation reported, a level of support about the same as the previous year’s but representing an 8% decline when converted to constant (1972) dollars. HEW allocated the largest amount, $3.2 billion, or 70% of the total; the NSF supplied the second largest, $491 million or 11%. Other sponsoring agencies were the Dept, of Agriculture, DOD, ERDA, and NASA. Of the $2.2 billion earmarked for research and development (about half of all allocations to academic institutions), researchers in life sciences received $1.2 billion, more than half of all federal R&D funds; research in physical sciences received $307 million, about 14%, and engineering and environmental sciences each received about 9%. All other fields together received only about 13%. (NSF Release PR76-91) .
A new comet now approaching the sun—named Comet West, after Richard M. West of the European Southern Observatory at Geneva, Switzerland, who discovered it in Nov. 1975—would be the object of extensive space and ground-based study to identify and measure its constituents, NASA announced. Comet West would come closest to the sun on 25 Feb., but would not be readily visible until about 2 March because of solar brightness; it would provide the first opportunity for extensive comet study since the appearance in 1973 of Comet Kouhoutek (a “visual disappointment” from which more had been learned about comets than in all the time that had gone before). NASA would participate in the study along with the Naval Research Laboratory, and with the Univ. of Colo, at Boulder and the Johns Hopkins Univ. (NASA Release 76-31)
An unusually high loss of total blood hemoglobin after the first 16 days of flight was one of the medical findings from the Salyut 4-Soyuz 18 mission reported by Cosmonauts Vitaly I. Sevastyanov and Lt. Col. Pyotr Klimuk to the 19th annual meeting of the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) of the International Council of Scientific Unions. If valid, the Soviet data would represent a “significant departure” from earlier data on body mechanisms governing red cells in zero gravity, said Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine. Klimuk told the Phila. meeting that hemoglobin had decreased 16% in his blood and 25% in Sev-astyanov’s by the 16th day of the flight; although past data showed hemoglobin loss averaging 1% daily, Sevastyanov must have had a mechanism that “destroyed more cells than normal” to achieve the 25% deficiency. U.S. Skylab missions reported that crewmen normally recovered their ability to produce red blood cells with more time in orbit; the cosmonauts did not discuss their recovery from the hemoglobin deficiency, but reported that nothing medical had ben discovered during their 63-day flight to prevent increased duration of Soviet space flight. (Av Wk, 5 July 76, 49)
New federal policies deriving from the Occupational Health and Safety Act and. the National Environmental Policy Act would affect about 30% of the USAF’s Aerospace Medical Division investment in biotechnology research and development, said an article in Aviation Week magazine. “USAF has yet to appreciate...how important these two laws are going to be. The day is rapidly coming when even major weapons systems will never get through [a Defense System Acquisition Review council] without having to come to grips with...the occupational safety of the people that have to work around the system and the impact of...noise, electromagnetic radiation effects and toxic effluents,” said Col. George C. Mohr, director of AMD research and development. Among items of special interest were the rocket fuels—unsymmet-rical dimethylhydrazine and monomethylhydrazine—and the hydrochloric-acid fallout expected from Shuttle motor exhaust during launches at Vandenberg AFB; effects of laser exposure on eyes and skin; effects of multiple stress, including that caused by locating or operating equipment; and development of hardware, such as a lightweight 1-kg helmet to replace the standard 2-kg helmet that caused “high moment” effects on the wearer during sustained high-gravity maneuvers in the new generation of fighter aircraft. Another environmental-safety hardware item was a new 9-layer 25-mm windshield for planes to overcome the bird-strike problem, in place of the standard 2-layer 8.5-mm-thick windshield. A major problem, Col. Mohr said, has been that biotechnology standards and criteria often were not considered until after the system concept had been finalized; another problem is the DOD policy of tri-service planning, an attempt to ensure that the services do not duplicate research. Use of mathematical modeling in biotechnology had tended to “drive aerospace medicine research toward an engineering discipline,” the article said; the data output is usable by design engineers, while new legislation prevents use of humans in hazardous testing, and cost of laboratory animals has soared. (Av Wk, 19 July 76, 219)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced development of a solar concentrator-collector that would use a large plastic Fresnel lens to focus sunlight on a tube containing heat-transport fluid, for use in constructing or converting cooling systems in large buildings or in manufacturing processes requiring heat in the 200-370°C range. A Fresnel lens, consisting of a thin transparent material grooved on one surface, would serve the function of a heavier ordinary curved lens in focusing incoming light in the desired direction. MSFC’s lens, thought to be the largest tried in a solar-energy application, was assembled from multiple lens panels and measured 1.8 by 3.6 meters; it had been undergoing tests at Wyle Laboratories in Huntsville since July 1976. It would be moved to MSFC and integrated into a solar test bed for further analysis of performance. Primary advantage of the Fresnel lens would be its adaptability to mass-production techniques, permitting low cost; besides the light weight and space saving of the acrylic plastic, MSFC cited durability and mechanical strength, as well as ease of cleaning, of lenses exposed to weather. The test article, to minimize technology requirements and to interface with existing systems, used off-the-shelf materials and hardware as fully as possible. MSFC findings would be made available to industry after further testing and evaluation. (MSFC Release 76-169)
NASA announced that the U.S. Government Printing Office had published the 3-volume English edition of the joint U.S.-USSR Foundations of Space Biology and Medicine, summarizing biological and medical results of the first 15 yr of space flight. The work was produced by a joint editorial board on space biology and medicine formed in Oct. 1965 by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences; the USSR had published a Russian-language edition in Moscow. The text consisted of 45 chapters, 19 authored by U.S. scientists, 20 by USSR scientists, and 6 by teams of authors from both nations. Volume I was called “Space as a Habitat”; Volume II, “Ecological and Physiological Foundations of Space Biology and Medicine,” responses of man, plants, and animals to space flight; Volume III, “Space Medicine and Biotechnology,” technology and procedures needed to sustain life and permit living creatures to function in space. (NASA Release 76-135) 4-member crew of Da Vinci III included 3 who manned both the Da Vinci 1 flight in Nov. 1974 and the Da Vinci 11 flight in June 1976: Dr. Rudolf J. Engelmann of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; pilot and project originator Ms. Vera Simons; and pilot Jimmie Craig of the U.S. Naval Weapons Center. The new member of the crew was Preston B. Herrington of Sandia Laboratories, Energy Research and Development Administration, which would collect and analyze the flight data as well as conduct all flight operations. Da Vinci was a joint project of ERDA, NOAA, and the Environmental Protection Agency. (ERDA Releases 76-211, 76-245)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that Barbara S. Askins, a chemist in MSFC’s Astronomy Branch, had applied for patent on an improved process, autoradiographic film intensification, that would improve photographic images after films or plates had been developed. Exposing silver or other imaging material on a developed film or plate to a radioactive environment would convert the material to a radioactive compound; placing the radioactivated material in contact with a receiver emulsion on an unexposed film or plate would reproduce the original image with increased contrast and density. The hazards and complexity of handling radioactive material had limited the use of such a process, but the new process did not require special training, expensive equipment, or extraordinary safety precautions, as it used an isotopic organo-sulfur 35 compound and could be adapted easily to an ordinary photographic laboratory. Askins said the process would be used in astronomy and other scientific research where low light levels were encountered. (MSFC Release 76-13)
Ames Research Center announced that a NOAA scientist, Dr. Peter M. Kuhn, had discovered a way to give airplane pilots up to 12 min. warning of air turbulence ahead, during his investigation of infrared radiation emitted from atmospheric water vapor using ARC’s Convair aircraft. While measuring background infrared radiation in the atmosphere to define sources of astronomical infrared, Dr. Kuhn had seen sudden drastic changes in water-vapor content followed closely by turbulence. A radiometer in the aircraft wheel well of the Galileo II flying laboratory could detect atmospheric infrared from water vapor, and predict accompanying turbulence with an 81% reliability. Experiments with varying infrared wavelengths had permitted detection of turbulence more than 100 km ahead of the plane. The water-vapor anomalies resulted from wave motions in the atmosphere caused by lee waves over high terrain or by sudden shifts in wind speed or direction with resulting friction between adjacent streams of air. Although water-vapor content would usually be fairly constant, the wave motions would thin the vapor in one place and concentrate it in another, making the turbulence detectable. (ARC Release 76-80; Av Wk, 15 Nov 76, 25; NOAA Release 76-251)
NASA announced appointment of Jerry Hlass, Director of Space Flight Facilities at NASA Hq, as Manager of the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Mo., effective 1 Sept. Hlass came to Hq from GSFC, where he was head of the Data Acquisition Facility Section between 1961 and 1963. He received a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering in 1949 from N.C. State Univ., and a master’s in engineering administration from Geo. Washington Univ. in 1971. As manager of NSTL, Hlass would report to the Hq Associate Administrator for Center Operations. (NASA anno. 18 Aug 76; NASA Release 76-147)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) had joined in research in Antarctica on stratospheric pollution with a team from the Univ. of Wyo. supported by the National Science Foundation. NOAA’s Aeronomy Laboratory would launch 2 balloons carrying probes with containers that would open at different altitudes to collect a vertical profile of fluorocarbons and nitrogen oxides in the relatively clean stratosphere over Antarctica. The measurements would be used in testing two theories of ozone destruction in the stratosphere, the first being the production of destructive chlorine through breakdown of manmade fluorocarbon aerosols migrating into the upper atmosphere. The other theory posed a natural ozone-limiting cycle, involving dissociation in the stratosphere of bacterially produced nitrous oxide that became nitric oxide harmful to the ozone layer. The Antarctic launches would help to explain variations in nitrous oxide measurements as a function of latitude, season, or some other cause. (NOAA Release 76-17)
The Energy Research and Development Administration requested proposals for what the Wall Street Journal called a “scaled-down” Institute for Solar Research, a modest facility with a budget of $4 to $6 million in its first year. The National Academy of Sciences months ago recommended an institute with a wide research role, a staff of about 1500, and an annual budget of $50 million; unsolicited proposals had been arriving from nearly every state, with many politicians interested in having the institute locate in their constituency. ERDA would operate the facility through contracts with any organization, including nonprofit groups, corporations, universities, or state or local governments, and operations should begin by early 1980, according to Robert Hirsch, an acting assistant administrator of ERDA, at the press conference. The institute was a requirement of a 1974 law calling for various solar-energy demonstrations to be financed by the federal government; ERDA wanted initial proposals for a 5-yr operation, with future functioning dependent on performance and availability of funds. As ERDA currently contracted out most of its solar research to private facilities, a reporter asked why its work called for a special institute instead of expanding the current research program; Hirsch responded, “because the law requires it.” {WSJ, 16 Mar 76, 3)
The Energy Research and Development Administration announced plans to launch a giant manned and instrumented balloon, Da Vinci II, between 24 May and mid-June to determine physical and chemical changes in air pollutants over distances of several hundred km from their source. The helium-filled ballopn more than 70 m high—equaling, with its gondola, the height of a 15-story building, and carrying the same crew of 4 that flew on Da Vinci I in November 1974—would fly for up to 36 hr at altitudes from 3 to 9 km from St. Louis, Mo., to a point in 111., Ky., or 0. Da Vinci I flew from Las Cruces to Wagon Mound, N.M., in 12 hr to prove the feasibility of using a manned instrumented balloon for lower atmosphere research. Crew members were Dr. Rudolf J. Engel-mann of NOAA; Otis Imboden, photographer from the National Geographic Society; Jimmie Craig, pilot from the U.S. Naval Weapons Center; and Mrs. Vera Simons, project consultant and experienced balloonist, who originated the idea for the project. The crew would use a variety of instruments to conduct more than 20 experiments to show what happens to a plume of polluted air as it moves across several states. (ERDA Release 76- 128)
NASA announced selection of a team consisting of General Electric Co. and Hamilton Standard Division of United Technology Corp. for negotiating with NASA and ERDA a $7-million contract to design, build, and test by 1978 a 1.5-Mw wind-turbine electricity-generating system, biggest in history. The experimental system, a windmill with 2 horizontally rotating fiberglass rotor blades about 61m long mounted on a 45-m tower, could produce annually enough energy to supply more than 500 homes at a site with average winds of 29 kph. Located at a utility-company site, the NASA-ERDA system would supply electricity to the local utility for public use, to determine the economics and operating characteristics of large wind turbines coupled to conventional power plants. Utility companies had proposed 17 sites across the U.S.; ERDA would measure their wind characteristics over the coming year and would choose the site late in 1976. Lewis Research Center would manage the project for ERDA. The new system would be bigger than the 1.25-Mw system, 53 m in diameter, built near Rutland, Vt., in the 1940s; that project could not compete economically with the then low cost of fossil fuels, and had been abandoned. (NASA Release 76-136)
NASA announced issuance of a patent to Richard T. Whitcomb, an aerospace technologist at Langley Research Center, for an aircraft wing to be used at subsonic speeds. The new wing, called a supercritical or “upside down” wing, was described as increasing speed without need for additional power and as suitable for any aircraft flying near the speed of sound. Whitcomb last year received $25 000 for the invention from NASA’s Inventions and Contributions Board. (ATT, 1 May 76, 31)
The Marshall Star reported that a former student research assistant at MSFC, now a member of the faculty at Alabama A&M Univ., would be principal investigator in a study to develop remote-sensing applications for resources study and management, under a $35 000 grant from NASA and MSFC. The research effort would catalog the transportation network of Ala., including highways, railroads, water systems, and airports, and would devise a system for storing information in quickly retrievable form that could readily be updated. Dr. Oscar Montgomery, who had worked on the study at the outset, had graduated from A&M and had received a Ph. D. from Purdue Univ., returning to A&M in the department of natural resources and environmental studies. He and other researchers at A&M would identify and assist users of remotely sensed data in Ala., develop university facilities and skills to handle, process, and interpret such data, and support “ground truth” and related activities of the Earth Resources Office at MSFC. The grant, part of the Minority Institutions Research Program, would provide remotely sensed data obtained by aircraft or spacecraft to the Ala. Development Office and other state agencies. (Marshall Star, 10 Nov 76, 4)
A team of engineers and scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had devised a way to transfer blood without contamination and lengthen its safe storage time, NASA announced. Using a concept developed in spacecraft sterilization, the team—under contract to the National Heart and Lung Institute of the National Institutes of Health—worked out an aseptic fluid-transfer system on which patents had been applied for by the Calif. Institute of Technology, which operates JPL for NASA. Two dualwalled tubes, fused and penetrated by heat, would permit clean transfer of blood from one container or bag to another; the unique connector would be manufactured as part of the container. Outer portions of the tubing would be polyvinyl chloride, and the inner parts of heat-resistant kapton; application of heat at 200° C through a metal clamp to the flat end links of each tube would effectively fuse the tube and sterilize the adjoining areas. Heat could be applied by a portable device no larger than an ordinary hair dryer. The method was reported to kill 99.999% of all bacteria and spores, even when surfaces had been purposely contaminated. (NASA Release 76-20)
NASA announced award of a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to evaluate a fuel-saving concept applicable to commercial subsonic transport aircraft. The three companies selected were Boeing Co., McDonnell Douglas Corp., and Lockheed Aircraft Corp.; each company estimated its portion of the contract to be about $1.6 million. The 24-mo contract, to be managed by Langley Research Center, would be for a study of laminar flow control by use of an air-suction system built into aircraft skin surfaces to remove boundary-layer air before it could cause drag and air turbulence that would reduce aircraft speed. (NASA Release 76-161)
ESA’s Science Program Committee announced that it had unanimously approved two new scientific projects at its sixth meeting held 4 and 5 Oct. in Paris. The committee approved participation in the Space Telescope, planned by NASA for launch in 1983, and agreed to finance a plan called GEOSARI (launching a Geos spacecraft into a different orbit on the second flight of the Ariane launcher, scheduled for Dec. 1979). The Space Telescope project depended on a favorable outcome of negotiations with NASA and approval of the project by U.S. authorities in 1977. The committee considered an additional ESA-NASA cooperative project, the Out-of-Ecliptic (OOE) mission to fly two spacecraft around the sun at its north and south poles in a first exploration of the solar system’s third dimension; the committee agreed to continue negotiations with NASA and to join in an announcement of opportunities for the mission if necessary before the committee’s next meeting, in the spring of 1977. (ESA release 6 Oct 76)
The Smithsonian Institution awarded its Langley gold medal for aeronautics to James E. Webb, former head of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the late Grover Loening. Webb was cited for management skills in leading the U.S. to “pre-eminence in space flight research and development.” Loening [see 29 Feb.] was honored as “a pioneer aeronautical inventor” who developed the Loening amphibian plane and the design of the strut-braced monoplane. (W Post, 8 May 76, E—3)
Third Century America, the bicentennial exposition on science and technology that opened in May at KSC, closed its gates with a ceremony that included music, fireworks, and cannon salutes. More than 600 000 visitors had seen displays prepared by government agencies, educational institutions, and industry firms, many of which had representatives on the outdoor stage during the closing exercises. A time capsule dedicated during the ceremony would remain on display at the visitor center with duplicates of the items contained in the capsule: 1976 coins, stamps, and medals; items representative of 1976 technology and lifestyle, including space-related materials; newspapers, letters, and a mailorder catalog. The stainless steel cylinder, enclosed in a stainless steel cube with a lexan plastic top, would be opened in 99 yr (on 4 July 2075) in preparation for the U.S. Tricentennial. (Spaceport News, 3 Sept 76, 8; 17 Sept 76, 4)
The Energy Research and Development Administration announced plans to build a “power tower” in 1978 and put it in operation by 1981. Plans called for a large number of sun-tracking mirrors, called heliostats, to reflect sunlight on to a boiler located at the top of a tower; water in the boiler, superheated by concentrated sunlight, would produce high-pressure steam to drive a turbine. ERDA was seeking a utility company to construct and operate the pilot plant: the utility would provide the site, install a conventional turbine and generator, and distribute the power to its customers over existing lines. ERDA would provide the solar portions (tower, boiler, heliostats, and storage) and charge the utility for the electricity. Sites proposed for the pilot plant were in Ariz., Calif., Fla., Miss., P.R., R.I., and Tex. Three teams—headed by Honeywell Inc., McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., and Martin Marietta Corp.—were working on designs for the pilot plant, and Boeing Engineering and Construction Corp. was developing a design for the heliostat only. ERDA would choose the best design and test it at a facility under construction at the Sandia Laboratories of ERDA in N.M. (ERDA Release NF-76-12)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that 3 different solar collectors procured from industry in an ERDA-sponsored program on technical management and support of solar-energy development were undergoing tests of efficiency versus cost. The collectors, after exposure to weathering, were put into an active situation in which the heat-transfer medium (usually water) passed through them, and measurements were made to determine their efficiency. At the same time, 4 low-cost collectors developed by MSFC were being tested to evaluate the thermal performance of black-nickel and black-chrome absorber coatings that could reduce the amount of collector area required, and thereby lower the cost of a specific application. (MSFC Release 76-121)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had used aerial thermalscanning techniques to locate high heat-loss areas as part of its energy resources management program to reduce energy consumption agencywide. The Lewis Research Center had made thermal scanning flights for all NASA centers, and MSFC had been scanned twice, once in October 1975 and again in February 1976, using a C-47 aircraft with onboard scanners that recorded on digital tape the average temperature of each area covered. Fed into a computer, the digital tape produced printouts and live mosaic maps projected on a television monitor to show areas where excessive steam-line losses occurred and to identify buildings losing excessive heat through roof structures. The MSFC facilities office validated the data through visual inspection of steam lines and roof insulation, and issued work requests for repair and replacement of insulation in 88 steam-line locations. Longer range action was planned to repair and replace deteriorated roofing and replace sections of the steam lines. (MSFC Release 76-104)
ERDA conducted a demonstration at Ft. Belvoir, Va., for military decisionmakers on the use of solar cells by the armed forces. Arranged in cooperation with the U.S. Army’s Mobility Equipment Research and Development Command, the exhibit would show the advantages of solar cells over conventional sources of electricity in applications such as communications and surveillance. Increased purchase by the military could improve availability of solar cells to the general population, ERDA said, by stimulating mass production and thereby lowering costs. (ERDA release 1 Nov 76)
Dryden Flight Research Center announced it would begin a series of YF-17 test flights in mid-May to aid designers of future highly maneuverable aircraft. The YF-17, built by Northrop Corp. for the Air Force’s lightweight fighter program, is a twin-engine aircraft incorporating many innovations to give it high performance and maneuverability. Objectives of the NASA research program would be to collect in-flight data on pressure around the engine nozzles and afterbody, for comparison with wind-tunnel data to improve prediction techniques for future fighter-aircraft design; and to continue NASA studies on improved maneuvering for fighter aircraft in the areas of buffet, stability and control, acceleration, and handling. Under a $255 000 contract funded jointly by NASA and the U.S. Navy, the YF-17 would be flown for about 8 wk by Gary Krier, DFRC’s YF-17 project pilot. (DFRC Release 7-76)
The jumbo jet—“a revolutionary class of elephantine airliner” carrying twice as many passengers as the biggest narrowbodied aircraft—was a jumbo bust, said the Wall Street Journal reporting on declining business in the aircraft industry, especially on a 3-way battle among U.S. manufacturers for British Airways orders. The government-owned British airline would buy 6 widebody jet liners valued at about $165 million with possible options on 3 more, to replace an aging fleet of Boeing 707s and Vickers VClOs on its long-distance routes, and there was no British-made aircraft of the size British Airways needed. McDonnell Douglas had been advertising in London papers “the difference to Britain” of $537 million and 13,000 jobs if the DC-10 were chosen, because it would use the Rolls Royce engine now used in Lockheed’s slightly smaller TriStars. Lockheed, also competing for the order, said the engines on its L—1011 TriStars had already provided more than $750 million of business for Britain, and buying a long-range version of the TriStar for overseas routes would be simply an extension of a proven relationship. The Boeing Company had also been competing for the order, although its 747 was said to be too big for the British Airways’ long-distance routes: it would carry about 400 passengers, compared to 260 for the DC-10 and 240 for the L—1011. Boeing, however, had been talking with Aerospatiale of France on a smaller version of the latter’s widebody twin-engine jet, to be marketed in the U.S. with a revised Boeing-built wing in return for French participation in a bigger version of Boeing’s 737; the French were reported wary of Boeing and leaning toward an agreement with McDonnell Douglas on a modification of the French 150-seat Mercure. The WSJ reported 10 Aug. that U.S. manufacturers’ sales of widebody aircraft had fallen “billions of dollars behind original projections.” McDonnell was producing DC-10s at only 20% of capacity; Boeing had cut output of 747s from 84 a yr to 18; and Lockheed’s production of L-101 Is was “even lower.” U.S. airlines, for which the widebodies were originally designed, had not placed a single new order for passenger jumbos since 1973, and planned to buy “only a handful” before 1980. The jumbo was industry’s answer to the problem of carrying the passenger load predicted for 2 decades without clogging runways, skyways, and airports; the traffic growth had been curtailed by economic recession and the oil embargo that increased fuel prices unexpectedly. Also, the rise in nonstop service between medium-size cities whose traffic formerly was funnelled through major airports had cut into the traffic of the jumbo jets. Makers of the widebodies were far from breaking even on their design and development costs, which had run over $4 billion; about 1200 planes would have to be sold to cover that investment, the WSJ said, and so far the 3 makers reported only about 700 firm orders and deliveries, with another 80 options that might or might not materialize. (WSJ, 6 Aug 76, 12; 10 Aug 76, 1)
NASA launched the Gravitational Probe-A (GP-A) from Wallops Flight Center at 7:41 am EDT on a Scout vehicle into a trajectory with peak altitude of 889 km and total flight time of 6960 sec. The 102.5-kg probe was designed to measure the gravitational red shift predicted by the equivalence principle laid down by Einstein in 1907 as the cornerstone of the general theory of relativity: GP-A would directly determine the effect of gravitation on time by comparing the rate of a rocket-borne clock to an identical clock on earth. During the flight, the probe clock would be in a weaker gravitational field than the identical clock on earth; as the probe clock rose through increasingly weaker gravity to its maximum altitude, it would appear to run increasingly faster, and its rate would slow as it returned to the stronger gravity at lower altitudes. The experiment required not only extremely accurate telemetry throughout the probe’s ascent and descent, but also an extremely accurate set of clocks; those used were atomic-hydrogen masers of extraordinary stability, according to Dr. R.F.C. Vessot of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, principal investigator. (“Maser” is an acronym for microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.) The clocks were expected to provide measurement accuracy within 5 thousandths of 1% (5 x 10 5) of the predicted effect. The experiment and its support systems performed normally, but Dr. Vessot said that 1 to 3 mo of data reduction would be needed to determine whether the scientific objective had been met. (NASA Release 76-106; MOR S-879-76-01 [prelaunch] 14 June 76, [postlaunch] 23 June 76; MSFC Release 76-113)
The Natl. Science Foundation announced that federal funding for research and development would increase in FY 1977, ahead of expected inflation. The long-term trend of the R&D portion of the budget had been downward, with a steady decline from 1967 to 1971; a slight rise in 1972 preceded another decline to a 1975 low that represented the smallest federal support for R&D for the 10-yr period. The estimated increase for FY 1977 would restore “real performance” to a level close to that of 1972, although about 20% below that of 1967. Estimated shares of the FY 1977 total would be 11% for basic research, 23% for applied research, and 66% for development. (The NSF noted that most major NASA projects had been categorized as development, as they primarily generated outer-space transport technology. Substantial parts of these programs were classified in former years as basic or applied research. The shift in NASA categories resulted in lower shares of federal R&D funding for basic and applied research, and a larger share for development.) About 60% of development funds would be accounted for by DOD, which with NASA and ERDA would account for more than 90%. NASA’s $99-million increase put its share of the total 1977 R&D budget at about 15%; DOD accounted for an estimated 48% of the federal R&D total in 1977, and ERDA would account for 14%. HEW would account for about 11%, NSF 3%, and USDA about 2%. The next 4 agencies in size of R&D support—DOT, Dept, of Interior, EPA, and Dept, of Commerce—all showed decreases in their federal R&D funding from the 1976 level. (NSF, Science Resources Studies, 10 Aug 76, 1) September 1976
NASA announced plans to roll out the first of 2 rotor systems research aircraft (RSRA) 7 June at the Sikorsky Aircraft Division in Conn. The RSRA, capable of conventional cruise flight as well as typical helicopter performance, was the product of a joint NASA-Army research program to reduce rotor noise and vibration—with attendant high maintenance costs—and improve performance and cruise speed of future civil and military helicopters. The RSRA was the first helicopter designed with research capability in mind; devices in the main rotor-support structure would permit accurate measurement of rotor forces in flight, and force-measurement systems were also incorporated in the wing, tail rotor, and auxiliary engine to permit measurement and control of the lift and drag of the rotor system. The Army, world’s leading user of helicopters, would make the RSRA available to the U.S. helicopter industry for rotor-systems tests; most of the technology would also be applicable to civil vehicles. NASA’s goal would be to meet predictions of increased usage in the civil helicopter industry to enable the U.S. to compete favorably in the growing world market. (NASA Release 76-105)
Scientists attempting to find a source of unlimited energy like that which powers the sun had taken two potentially significant directions, Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times, Soviet researchers had shifted from emphasis on laser beams for crushing nuclear fuel to superdensity, to use of electron beams for that purpose. Although 90% of U.S. effort had been on converging pulses of laser light, a new system of using ion beams had shown advantages over the electron-beam method from which it evolved: the apparatus would deliver a vast amount of energy to a fuel pellet, causing the shell to explode both inward and outward. The inward blast, crushing the pellet core to 1000 times its original density, would produce a fusion reaction resulting in helium, and a small amount of mass would be converted into a large amount of energy. The U.S. electron-beam study was based at Sandia Laboratories, in N.M., one of three research centers operated by the Energy Research and Development Administration. Although the U.S. use of ions was the chief novelty in the fusion-energy field, laser fusion was still the front runner, Sullivan noted. (NYT, 15 Jan 76, 22)
NASA announced selection of the Roeing Commercial Airplane Co. of Seattle for award of a $20-million contract to build an experimental flight research aircraft for use in noise-reduction technology. Roeing would modify a government-furnished C-8 Ruffalo transport aircraft into a quiet short-haul research airplane (QSRA) for the Ames Research Center’s noise-reduction research program, aimed at reducing aircraft-noise impact on U.S. communities and congestion at major airports. The redesign to meet QSRA concepts would enhance aircraft performance and control at low speeds, and would demonstrate propulsive-lift technology that would permit civil transport aircraft to achieve a short takeoff and landing (STOL) capability. STOL aircraft could use runways at existing smaller airports to relieve traffic at large metropolitan airports, as well as to reduce noise impact. (NASA Release 76-33)
Lewis Research Center announced the first of a number of solar-cell demonstrations it would conduct as part of the national photovoltaic conversion program directed by the Energy Research and Development Administration: a solar-powered refrigerator, standard-size camper’s model, fitted with 3 panels of photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy. Designed for use in remote locations, the solar cells would run the refrigerator during daylight hours and charge conventional automobile batteries located under the unit; the batteries would power the refrigerator during darkness and on overcast days. With the cooperation of the Interior Department’s National Park Service, the refrigerator was being used for perishable foods at a trail-construction camp at Isle Royale National Park in Michigan, a roadless area near northern Lake Superior accessible only by boat or floatplane and typical of places that have no regular electric power. The solar-cell arrays, although relatively expensive, cost less to use in remote locations than the fuel and transportation would cost for alternative power sources. (NASA Release 76-110)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that the Space Div. of Rockwell Inti. Corp. at Palmdale, Calif., had received delivery of three dummy main engines for the Space Shuttle—known officially as flight mass simulators—for mounting on Shuttle Orbiter 101, which would be used for approach and landing tests at Dryden Flight Research Center and for ground vibration tests at MSFC. The simulator engines, resembling the real main engines in size and weight, could be adjusted in weight and center-of-gravity and gimballed to provide various positions for testing. Orbiter 101, after vibration testing, would be returned to Palmdale for replacement of the simulators with flight engines and placed in flight status. (MSFC Release 76-162)
NASA was preparing to issue requests for proposals in Jan. 1977 for the Large Space Telescope, resulting in contractor selection during the next year if Congress approved the fiscal 1978 funding requested, said Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine. NASA also hoped to issue an announcement of scientific opportunity to the scientific community in Feb., asking for scientific instruments to be carried on the first mission of the 2.4-meter telescope. (Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 9)
The concept of a “science court’”—an impartial quasi-judicial body of scientists to conduct inquiries into conflicting scientific claims— was advanced by Dr. Arthur Kantrowitz, director of Avco-Everett Laboratories, a high-technology industrial firm in Mass. The proposal would be a means of assuring a rational and orderly assessment of scientific facts underlying highly complex issues of public concern. Although hearings had been held by Congress and federal agencies on issues such as radiation, automotive safety, air pollution, drugs, and pesticides, these had frequently been superficial and led to no resolution of facts. A recent Harvard University book on the subject said in part: “The principal shortcoming of such hearings can be revealed simply by asking how ‘adversary’ these adversary hearings are . . . direct battle over facts, if it occurs at all, takes place as a free-for-all in the mass media.” Conflicting statements by experts had added to confusion and paralyzed decision-making processes. A test of the “science court” concept had been recommended as part of the new White House office of science and technology policy. {NYT, 29 Feb 76, 8)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $209 368 contract to a small business firm, Northern Research and Engineering Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., for designing, assembling, and demonstrating a portable self-contained firefighting module conceived as a joint effort of NASA’s Technology Utilization Office and the U.S. Coast Guard. The module would be a lightweight unit complete with pump, hose, firefighter suits, and other equipment that could be transported by helicopter to the deck of any medium-sized boat in the area of a shipboard or dock fire; it would be able to pump about 5700 liters of sea water per min for an uninterrupted 3 hr. (MSFC Release 76-116)
Images from 2 Landsats circling the earth 912 km up had helped the state of Md. monitor strip-mining damage and inventory its surface coal-mining activities, NASA announced. The state did not know the location or extent of orphan mines—those abandoned before 1967—and began a mapping program to determine the extent of the disturbed land and the procedures and expense that would be required to reclaim it. A 1967 law required private companies to operate under state-approved reclamation plans; acreage disturbed before 1967 would be reclaimed by the state. The Landsat images showed from 25 to 30% more acreage affected by the mines than anyone had realized. Arthur T. Anderson of Goddard Space Flight Center’s information transfer laboratory compared Landsat images taken over a 3-yr period ending in 1974 to identify and measure effects of strip mining in Western Md. with an accuracy better than that obtainable from aerial photography or field-inspection techniques. Other states using Landsat imagery for reclamation projects were Ohio, Tenn., W. Va., Ky., Pa., S.C., Fla., and the Great Plains states. (NASA Release 76-134)
NASA would appeal a decision of the U.S. District Court ordering the agency to rehire all Marshall Space Flight Center civil service employees laid off since 1967 as the result of awarding support-services contracts to private business, Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported. The court had ruled that all such contracts awarded at MSFC since 1967 were illegal. NASA spokesmen estimated that up to 1500 contractor employees now at MSFC could be fired as a result of the ruling, and that 17 000 contractor employees throughout the agency might be affected by the decision, which ordered NASA to rehire the civil service personnel with back pay in amounts depending on the period of unemployment. Had all the employees affected been unemployed for the full 10 yr (the “worst-case situation”), necessary back pay might go as high as $ 150 million, NASA said, although the actual funds required would be less. An appeals court had already granted NASA a stay until 1 Feb. 1977 before the district court’s ruling became effective, so that the agency could ask Congress for supplemental funds to cover the back-pay requirements. (Av Wk, 1 Nov 77, 22)
Oso 8, an orbiting solar observatory launched 21 June 1975, had performed without failure of any subsystem except a redundant solar sensor, and was judged successful, according to a postlaunch mission operations report. Primary mission objectives were high-resolution spatial and spectral observations of the solar chromosphere and transition regions, obtained by the pointed experiments aboard the observatory; secondary mission objectives were met with “substantial numbers” of observations of solar x-rays, earth airglow, and cosmic x-ray background radiation. At launch, Oso 8 carried the most comprehensive package of cosmic x-ray experiments ever included in a single payload, including the first satellite instrument containing large-area thin plastic window detectors to measure ultrasoft x-rays; the first high-sensitivity crystal spectrometer flown to measure cosmic x-ray sources with extremely high spectral resolution; and the first satellite experiment flown to measure x-ray polarization of cosmic sources with high sensitivity. (MOR S82175- 09 [postlaunch], 10 May 76)
One of the environmental disasters of the century” was the appearance of water hyacinth in the Sudan’s Nile river basin, reported an international conference of scientists representing the U.S., the Democratic Republic of the Sudan, Egypt, Ethiopia, the Federal Republic of Germany, Indonesia, and Mozambique, after a meeting sponsored by the Natl. Academy of Science’s Board on Science and Technology for International Development, and by the Sudan Agricultural Research Council. Besides choking watercourses and interfering with fishing and navigation, water hyacinth flourishing in warm river waters around the world had proved to harbor carriers of bilharzia and malaria. Measures suggested for control included herbicides, biological intervention, exchange of information and trade restrictions, and stimulation of economic incentive to harvest the plants. The report cited a NASA discovery that water hyacinth was a possible source of biogas production, and recommended harvesting to exploit this resource as well as using the plant for water-buffalo fodder. (NAS News Report, Dec 76, 2)
Soon after Rockwell International Corp. was named prime contractor on a $5-billion Space-Shuttle program, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, had accepted an invitation for a trip to Rockwell’s resort in the Bahamas. Teague’s name was added to a list of senators and representatives who had accepted invitations from Rockwell, a prime government contractor; most went to hunt at the company’s lodge in Maryland. Three Senate staff members had accepted invitations to hunt at the Maryland lodge of another contractor, Northrop Corp. During the previous week, the Pentagon had rebuked 38 civilian and military officials, including admirals and generals, for accepting similar invitations from Northrop. House rules prevented members, officers, or employees from accepting gifts “of substantial value, directly or indirectly, from any persons, organization, or corporation having a direct interest in legislation before the Congress;” the Senate had no similar written regulation. (IF Post, 29 Jan 76, F-5)
The National Science Foundation reported that U.S. spending for research and development (R&D) would reach $38.1 billion in 1976, 8% above the 1975 level. R&D expenditures would account for 2.2% of the gross national product in 1976, down from 2.3% in 1975. Of the total R&D spending, federal agencies would account for $20.1 billion; industry, about $16.6 billion; universities and colleges, about $800 million; and other nonprofit institutions, about $600 million. The figures appeared in a NSF report, National Patterns ofR&D Resources: Funds and Manpower in the United States 1953-1976, updated annually in a continuing analysis of the nation’s scientific and technological resources. (NSF Release PR76-68)
Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the first hitch in operations of the Viking 2 lander—trouble with its digging arm—had been solved: the problem turned out to be in a microswitch. Ground control at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Calif, had commanded the lander’s computer to ignore signals from the malfunctioning switch in future digs. If the corrective commands freed the arm for duty, the experiments needing soil samples would begin receiving them and results would become available within a week or 10 days. Viking 2's lander cameras had returned excellent pictures of the Utopia terrain around the landing site; the meteorological experiment was collecting and returning weather data regularly; and the seismometer (whose parallel on Viking 1 was never uncaged) was ready to monitor marsquakes, the magazine said. (Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 25, 58-61)
Pluto—outermost of the 9 planets circling the sun—might have a surface of frozen methane, putting its temperature in its near-vacuum environment at close to absolute zero (total absence of heat) and indicating that never since the ice formed had the sun’s heat been able to boil off the covering, according to a team at the Kitt Peak National Observatory in Ariz. Dr. David Morrison of the University of Hawaii said that Pluto might look and behave just the way it did when it was formed during the creation of the solar system; nowhere but on Pluto had methane been found as a solid, and nowhere else was it present in such abundance. The frozen surface also meant that astronomers might have been fooled since Pluto’s discovery in 1930 into thinking it larger than it really was; instead of being the size of the earth, Dr. Morrison said, “it might he only half our size or even smaller.” Pluto, 4.8 billion km distant, was the last planet to have scientists define its surface composition. (NYT, 2 Apr 76, 37; W Post, 2 Apr 76, A—1; Science, 23 Apr 76, 362)
INTELSAT announced plans to conduct a 1977 program of research and development costing more than $5.4 million, to advance technology for its global comsat system. The R&D yearly budget, approved by the recent meeting of the board of governors, would consist of $1.3 million for research to identify technology that appeared promising for the future INTELSAT projects; $2.2 million for contract authority for projects with near-term applications; and $1.9 million for in-house support of such projects. Areas of exploratory research would include spacecraft and microwave technology, communications processing, analysis of propagation and transmission, and studies of materials and devices. Near-term projects would include development of antennas, transponders, and other components; investigation of cross polarization; development of NiH batteries, voice-channel decoders, high-power transistors, and improvement of techniques. (INTELSAT Release 76-33-M)
A “house of the future” incorporating technology from aerospace research would be open to the public at Langley Research Center after July 1, NASA announced. The Tech House, a project of NASA’s technology utilization program, would demonstrate how an average family could cut fuel consumption by two thirds and water consumption by one half, using innovative energy and water management systems integrated with building designs and materials. Building started in late Jan.; all equipment and features in the house would be available to the public within 5 yr, or are available now. A family selected by NASA would live in the house for at least a year, beginning early in 1977; a systems engineer would monitor all use of the systems in the normal life of the family and record day-to-day savings. The contemporary one-story house would have an enclosed living space of about 500 sq m; its major feature combined solar collectors with night radiators and heat pump for one of the most cost-effective heating and cooling systems now available. Contributing to the NASA project were the National Association of Home Builders, the National Bureau of Standards, and the Department of Housing and Urban Development. (NASA Release 76-26)
One of the first in a group of 32 commercial solar heating and cooling systems in ERDA’s nationwide solar-energy demonstration program went into operation in Lynchburg, Va., NASA announced. Local and state government officials attended an open house at the office of Terrell E. Mosely, Inc., where the system is installed, to view the equipment together with businessmen, engineers, architects, and federal representatives. The 32 pilot projects, selected from 308 proposals submitted to ERDA, include ten office buildings, four schools, three hotels or motels, two fire stations, two factories, one hospital, one laboratory, one library, and some miscellaneous buildings. NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center provided technical management for the installations in support of the ERDA program. (NASA Release 76-163; MSFC Release 76-177)
MSFC announced selection of two NASA payload specialists and a backup for ASSESS II, a Spacelab simulation project to be flown in May 1977 in a four-engine jet aircraft. ASSESS II, a joint mission of NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), would use the two U.S. payload specialists and two selected by ESA [see 27 Aug.]. The two selected, both of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, were Dr. Robert T. Menzies and David S. Biliu; Leon B. Weaver of MSFC was chosen as the backup. Dr. Menzies would be principal investigator (Pi) for the laser absorption spectrometer experiment; Biliu was a member of JPL’s synthetic-aperture radar research team; Weaver, a veteran of the ASSESS Lear 4 mission of Oct. 1974 and presently assistant mission manager, would represent MSFC’s Spacelab Payload Projects Office, and was selected from a group already involved in ASSESS II whose experience would permit training at minimal cost. The ASSESS II payload would include both NASA and ESA experiments in earth resources, monitoring of atmospheric pollution, and infrared astronomy. (MSFC Release 76-170; Marshall Star, 22 Sept 76, 4)
Reviewing the Energy Research and Development Administration’s first year of operation, ERDA Administrator Robert C. Seamans Jr. said the U.S. had taken major steps to assure adequate energy supplies in the future. Establishment of ERDA on 19 Jan. 1976, bringing together energy research functions formerly located in other agencies, was itself a milestone. Specific steps cited by Seamans included a major solar-heating demonstration and completion of two heating-and-cooling projects; development of a national energy R&D plan emphasizing conservation of energy and development of new sources; demonstration and testing of more efficient recovery and use of coal, oil, and shale; biohazard screening of 150 compounds in fossil fuels to determine which might cause cancer or genetic mutations; and identifying problems in the nuclear-fuel cycle, including reprocessing of fuel and disposal of wastes. Describing fossil and nuclear energy as the near-term and midterm resources of the nation, Seamans said that conservation should enable them to carry the U.S. into the next century, when essentially inexhaustible energy sources should be available: solar electricity, breeder reactors, and fusion power. (ERDA Release 7 6—5)
A NASA earth-survey aircraft—one of two U-2 high-altitude research planes flown by the agency—had been studying the stratosphere over Central America, South America, Canada, the Caribbean, and the Pacific Ocean to measure ozone, nitric oxide, and manmade pollutants as part of a long-term global effort to understand the effects of pollutants on global climate over a long period of time. The data flights used 4 scientific instruments: a stratospheric air sampler, to measure ozone and nitrogen ozide; an aerosol particle sampler, to measure minute aerosols; a stratospheric cryogenic sampler to measure halocarbons (freons) and methane levels; and a foil sampler, to measure aerosols and trace gases for the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The other 3 studies were under the direction of NASA’s Ames Research Center. Data from the flights would be available to the other governments involved in the studies. (NASA Release 76-60)
The European aerospace industry was frustrated in attempting to increase its share of commercial and military aircraft sales, said Robert B. Hotz, editor-in-chief, in an editorial in Aviation Week magazine. Although maintenance of a viable European aerospace industry would be in the best interest of the Western world, Hotz said, attempts to organize it on a truly international competitive scale had emphasized inherent weaknesses and failed to achieve fiscal success. Recent developments— nationalization of the British aircraft industry, and French moves toward a transatlantic rather than a cross-channel cooperation—had intensified the problems, characterized by higher wage scales and lower productivity. Suggestions for improvement included organizations based on commercial and technical considerations, rather than on political boundaries and restrictions; marketing goals based on the broadest markets possible, rather than on narrow domestic requirements; and controlling labor costs that had priced European products out of the export market and had held production to a rate below that needed to fill international market requirements. (Av Wk, 3 May 76, 5)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a contract to Ivey’s Plumbing and Electrical Co. of Kosciusko, Miss., for construction of a test facility at MSFC for the solar heating and cooling development program MSFC is directing for the Energy Research and Development Administration. The $647,243 contract was awarded by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which would monitor construction activities; completion date set by the contract was 1 Nov. 1976. The facility would be located in an area formerly used as a swing-arm test facility for Saturn; data-acquisition equipment—instrument terminals and cabling from pad to blockhouse—used for Saturn would be available for the heating and cooling tests. The facility would consist of 4 test areas, 2 designed for complete system or subsystem tests; a third would be used to test liquid energy storage subsystems, and the fourth for passively testing solar collectors. A solar simulator constructed in a nearby building would be linked to the test facility for data collection. Subsystems and components to be tested would include solar collectors, thermal-energy storage equipment, and solar heating and cooling devices. Testing the hardware against predetermined performance standards would produce data for input to analytical programs; the analyses in turn would be used to evaluate total systems performance under environmental conditions other than those simulated during tests. Components of the facility—heat exchangers, cooling towers, chillers, fans, pumps, and control valves—would be arranged to permit maximum flexibility for future modifications and use of other test positions or procedures. (MSFC Release 76-59)
Establishment of an Office of Science, Engineering, and Technology Policy in the White House, a goal of U.S. scientists since 1973, would become effective within 6 wk or so, the New York Times reported. Since President Nixon had abolished a similar office, the scientific community had been concerned over the lack of provision at the top level of government for sophisticated advice on science and technology affecting U.S. policies on world food supplies, environmental pollution, energy, transportation, disarmament, and similar problems. The Ford Administration had encouraged Congress to establish such an office by law rather than set one up by executive order, and the House of Representatives had passed an Administration-backed bill in Nov. 1975. A Senate bill, “roughly comparable” according to the NYT, had been agreed upon by several committees and was on its way to passage; this measure would establish a White House office with a director and as many as 4 associates, who would work closely with the Office of Management and Budget on science and technology budgets and would prepare an annual report for the President to send to Congress on science, engineering, and technology, with options on federal investment and priorities in the three related fields. The Senate bill would also call for authorization of funds to establish science and technology offices in each state; the House bill did not have similar provisions. (NYT, 25 Jan 76, 26)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced development of a solar-simulator test facility, believed to be the largest of its kind in existence, to compare the efficiency of solar-energy collectors in MSFC’s program of assisting the Energy Research and Development Administration in its solar energy program. Designed to provide variable levels of energy similar to ground-level solar radiation, the simulator contained a lamp array with 405 tungsten halogen 300-watt lamps paired with the same number of Fresnel lenses to provide an illuminated area for solar collectors up to 1.2 by 2.4 meters. After a 6-wk checkout of the lamp array, power equipment, and solar-collector fluid-flow systems, the simulator would serve to test solar-energy collectors that used either air or liquid as the heat-transfer medium. (MSFC Release 76-111) ,
The Energy Research and Development Administration announced that a nuclear explosion reported by the Peoples Republic of China 17 Oct. had been detected by the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission’s detection system. The explosion, which occurred underground at 1 a.m. EDT at the Lop Nor test area in western China, was in the low-yield range, ERDA said. (ERDA Release 76-320)
Successful completion of the Da Vinci 11 scientific balloon flight by 4 crew members was announced by the Energy Research and Development Administration. Launched west of St. Louis on 8 June, the balloon had flown over the city during the day and moved eastward across the Mississippi River toward evening; it had flown across 111. and landed near Griffin, Ind., a distance of more than 240 km in 24 hr. Purpose of the flight—a joint project of ERDA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the Environmental Protection Agency—was to follow industrial and urban air pollution across the surrounding countryside and to record its changing concentration and chemistry. The crew reported excellent scientific data, especially on concentrations of sulfur dioxide. The crew, its 3m-square gondola, and more than 900 kg of scientific equipment landed safely and in good condition. (ERDA Release 76-170)
The Energy Research and Development Administration announced selection of 2 firms, one in Mass, and the other in Calif., to study potential wind-power use by utilities to generate electricity in their own localities. The JBF Scientific Corp., a small research company in Wilmington, Mass., would study potential wind-power use by the Cambridge Light Co. and the New Bedford Gas and Edison Light Co. in New England; the utilities would provide information about their power needs and other data. The Aerospace Corp. of El Segundo, Calif., would assess potential wind-power use by the Hawaiian Electric Co., which serves most of that state; the Univ. of Hawaii would also participate in the study. Besides examining the utilities and their power needs, the contractors would study other ways of generating electricity (such as coal and nuclear plants), comparing them with wind energy to see if conversion would be practical and economical. The regional studies would last 1 yr each and would cost about $500 000 overall. The resulting data would supply a model for utilities throughout the country to assess the use of wind energy in their own regions. (ERDA Release 76-180)
Atmosphere Explorer D, second in a series of 3 maneuverable unmanned spacecraft designed to explore a specific area of earth’s outer atmosphere, had ceased functioning, spacecraft controllers at GSFC said. AE—D had stopped working 29 Jan. when a power-supply electronics malfunction disabled its solar array. Launched 6 Oct. 1975, AE—D had transmitted important data on energy transfer in the upper atmosphere and on processes critical to the atmospheric heat balance; although it did not last its design lifetime of 1 yr, it did transmit a full set of lower thermosphere data on the daylight side from North to South Pole at constant times during its 4—mo operation. AE-C, launched in 1973, was still functioning normally, returning upper-atmosphere data in the region above 128 km; AE-E, launched in Nov. 1975, had a payload similar to that of the others but also carried equipment to measure earth’s ozone layer between 20 °N and S. (NASA Release 76-24)
A new research aircraft combining the precision hover and low downwash of a helicopter with the long range and high speed of a fixed-wing aircraft made its debut at rollout ceremonies in Arlington, Tex., marking “a major milestone in the joint NASA-Army tilt rotor program,” according to a NASA announcement. The Bell Helicopter Textron’s XV-15 would undergo a 2-yr flight-testing program scheduled by Ames Research Center and the Army’s Air Mobility Research and Development Laboratory. The XV-15 was a 12.8-m-long 9.7-m wing-span aircraft with win grip-mounted engines, transmissions, and 7.6-m propeller rotors that could tilt from the helicopter position for vertical takeoffs and landings and for hovering, to a horizontal position for forward flight at speeds up to more than 482 kph. The tilt rotor would operate with less noise than conventional helicopters or turboprop aircraft of comparable size. The first XV-15 would undergo ground and hover tests, then go to ARC for testing in that center's wind tunnel; the second XV-15 would undergo initial envelope-expansion flight tests at Bell’s Arlington, Tex., facility beginning late in 1977. (NASA Release 76-169; W^Siar^ 24 Oct 76, A-2)
Eighty percent of the 114 federal research laboratories had not adopted cost-cutting activities recommended 6 yr ago by the General Accounting Office. A new GAO survey found that agencies had not made periodic inspections of equipment to find unused items that could be sold; had not established equipment pools to eliminate duplication and underuse of costly scientific tools; and had not started using “time meters” as a check on how often the equipment was used. Agencies following the three recommendations could save millions of dollars, said Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.) in releasing the GAO report, citing an atomic research facility that saved $24.2 million by disposing of unneeded equipment. Aspin also referred to purchases of expensive sophisticated equipment for a single experiment that was never used again, when it could have been sold or passed along to another agency. (W Star, 13 Jan 76, C8)
First flight tests of a unique oblique-wing aircraft model designed for future supersonic use would begin early in Aug. at the Dry den Flight Research Center, NASA announced. The remotely piloted research vehicle (RPRV) to be tested had a wingspan of 6.7 m, weighed 400 kg, and was powered by a 4-cylinder 90-hp engine; its wing angle relative to the fuselage could be varied during flight, and angles up to 45° would be tested. The RPRV would be flown by radio control from a ground cockpit, with a TV camera in the aircraft nose giving the ground controller a pilot’s-eye view. Use of the oblique wing was a proposal of Dr. Robert T. Jones, senior scientist at Ames Research Center, to alleviate sonic boom and increase energy effectiveness of supersonic aircraft; positioned at right angles to the fuselage in slower flight, the wing would allow landing and takeoff with minimum power and less noise, but rotated with respect to the fuselage it would provide the high speed possible with the swept-wing design. Studies indicated possible fuel savings even at speeds up to 1600 kph. (l)FRC Release 13-76)
A program conducted jointly by NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center and Langley Research Center had been trying literally to work the bugs out of aircraft, by studying materials and methods to keep insects from sticking to the leading edge of aircraft wings. The study was part of NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program, aimed at developing an advanced long-range aircraft with possible savings of 20 to 40% in fuel consumption. The laminar flow-control technology on which the advanced craft would depend for savings required smooth airflow over the wings; impacted insects sticking to the leading edge of the wing could interrupt the airflow and cause turbulence. The test planes used at LaRC and DFRC had variously coated panels installed on the leading edges, with instrumented probes above them to register airflow changes resulting from adherence of insects and monitor differences attributable to the panel coatings. After a low flight over areas where insects would impact the wing surfaces, the aircraft would land for preliminary measurements and then fly at high altitudes and speeds to measure the effects on airflow. (DFRC Release 20-76; LaRC Release 76-41; NASA Release 76-190)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that about 80 scientists from universities, medical facilities, and industry, serving as the Universities Space Research Association, would meet at Huntsville 26-30 July to evaluate experiments proposed for the first Spacelab mission. NASA’s Space Science Steering Committtee would use the evaluations in selecting experiments to be carried on Spacelab 1, scheduled for launch in the 3rd quarter of 1980. The 10 categories in which experiments were proposed were: astrophysics, upper atmosphere, space plasma, biomedicine, atmospheric observations, biology, technology/behavior, communications/navigation, drop dynamics/atmospheric cloud physics, and technology experiments. MSFC was assigned management responsibility for defining, integrating, and operating the payloads for the first 3 Spacelab missions. (MSFC Release 76-130)
A nickel-zinc battery improved by space technology, installed in a utility van and tested against a regulation lead-acid battery, ran the delivery vehicle nearly twice as far at a constant speed of about 32 kph, Lewis Research Center announced. The improved battery would be able to meet the needs of 95% of the nation’s drivers for a full-service urban vehicle and could help to reduce dependence on petroleum. The improvement consisted of an inorganic separator adapted from space battery technology. L<RC planned further studies of the battery’s life, performance, and competitive cost, using sample batteries in mail pickup and delivery vans with the cooperation of the U.S. Postal Service. (NASA Release 76-155)
Two engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center had developed a solarenergy collector using air rather than water for heat transfer; this might be the key to low-cost solar-energy systems. The collector consisted of 3 parts: a rigid foam structure, a metal collector plate, and a transparent cover. The device needed no tools or fasteners, but could be fitted together, and required no insulation; it measured 1 by 2 m and weighed about 17 kg. The inventors said their collector had shown itself in tests to be as efficient as other more costly and complicated collectors, and the chief patent counsel at MSFC was considering it for patenting. An average house of about 140 m“ would require about 67 m" of collector area, or a 40-collector system, to provide sufficient heating. A solar-energy system could save a household about 75% of its normal winter heating expense, and could be modified to heat water year round. (NASA Release 76-56)
NASA’s Wallops Flight Center received a National Safety Council award for its performance in on-the-job safety. The Council selected Wallops for a third-place award in its annual contest honoring the lowest disabling-injury frequency achieved by NSC member organizations. Wallops qualified for its award with a recorded rate of zero lost-time injuries per million man-hours worked, as compared to a rate of 1.4 injuries for all competing units in the Aerospace Section, Research and Development Division. (WFC Release 76-4)
Ames Research Center had contracted with Goodyear Aerospace Corp. of Akron, 0., for studies of 2 lighter-than-air vehicle concepts for civilian use, NASA announced. New requirements for transporting heavy loads in power-plant construction, transferring ship cargoes to shore points, and providing quiet energy-saving intercity transportation had revived interest in lighter-than-air vehicles, formerly the only means of nonstop rapid travel across the world’s oceans. Use of airships for military missions also had come under consideration; principal potential use was transport of ship cargoes over a beach to shore points. NASA, in conjunction with the U.S. Navy, was also studying military applications for conventional airships that would use the great endurance potential of the airship in activities such as antisubmarine warfare and sea control. One of the concepts under study, a feeder airliner 60 m long carrying 80 passengers, would be used as a short-haul transport system, landing and taking off vertically and cruising at 160 knots. The other concept, a vehicle to transport large heavy payloads over comparatively short distances, would combine features of large dirigibles and helicopter rotors to provide lifting capacity far beyond that of either type of vehicle alone; the dirigible buoyance would lift the empty weight of the vehicle, and the total lifting capacity of the rotor system would lift and support the payload. The heavy lifter would be most likely to have immediate application, NASA said, because of the need for transport of heavy powergenerating equipment or other outsize industrial equipment to a remote destination not served by any other heavy transport systems. Increased engineering knowledge and better understanding of weather phenomena, as well as substituting inert helium for the volatile hydrogen used in German airships of the 1920s, would make a modern airship safe. (NASA Release 76-93)
