The eighth annual session at JSC of the Lunar Science Conference had discussed the possibility of mining asteroids for the raw materials of space industrialization, the Chicago Tribune reported. Dr. David Criswell, associate scientist at the Lunar Science Institute, said that two developments would make asteroid mining feasible: an engine capable of towing an asteroid, and a method of locating asteroids rich in needed resources. Materials from asteroids would be 1000 times cheaper than materials launched from earth into orbit. (C Trib, Mar 24/77, 4-11)
The Natl, Science Foundation reported that research and development spending in the U.S. would reach an estimated $40.8 billion in 1977, 9% more than the 1976 level of $37.3 billion. The federal government expected to increase its R&D outlay from $19.8 billion in 1976 to $21.8 billion in 1977, emphasizing defense, space, and energy. (NSF Release PR77-73)
NASA announced that LeRC had supplied news media in the Cleveland area with readings of daily solar energy available for use during the winter. Using a pyranometer, a device to record total solar energy reaching a surface, LeRC staff measured the kilowatt hrs of solar energy received on a 150m2 surface facing south at a 37° angle. Other NASA centers had made similar measurements, all related to solar energy research being pursued by the Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA). (NASA Release 77-49)
Kitt Peak astronomers had suggested designs for a telescope 5 times larger than the 4.5m telescope at Mt. Palomar, Calif., to complement the Very Large Array radiotelescopes in New Mexico and the planned Space Telescope, the NY Times reported. An instrument using multiple-mirror technology (several mirrors connected by laser, aligned by computer to within an eighth of the wavelength of the observed light) would have the light-gathering potential of a huge single mirror without the high cost of manufacture or maintenance. The resolution possible with such telescopes would permit observation of weather patterns on other planets. (NYT, Apr 9/77, 22)
NASA announced it had awarded Boeing Commercial Aircraft Co. of Seattle a contract to design and ground-test composite structures for the Boeing 727 aircraft. NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program to decrease transport-aircraft fuel consumption by 50% had included contracts with several manufacturers to reduce aircraft weights by using composites (high-strength filaments in a polymer matrix, lighter than metal structures). Boeing would build five shipsets of composite elevators (five right- and five left-handed) using manufacturing techniques that might become standard procedure. Costs would be shared, $8 100 000 contributed by the government and $890 000 by the contractor. Langley Research Center would manage contractor effort over 3.5yr. (NASA Release 77-139; LaRC Release 77-27)
Political interference had delayed development of science and technology in China, according to Chien Hsueh-shen, director of the mechanics institute of the PRC Academy of Sciences. The W. Post quoted his statement in the journal Red Flag that China would “catch up with and surpass the world advanced levels.” Chien, now China’s “top missile scientist” according to the Post, had been a colonel in the U.S. Army Air Corps before returning to China in 1955. Meanwhile, provincial radio reports monitored in Hong Kong said that “political infighting” at a PRC base for nuclear weapons and missiles had “crippled defense construction” for months in 1976. (WPost, July 12/77, A-15)
NASA announced it and ERDA had contracted with Boeing Engineering and Construction Co. to design and build on a utility company site chosen by ERDA the largest windmill in history, a 2500kw generator with 300ft blades, to provide data on such systems coupled with conventional power plants. Lewis Research Center would manage the project for ERDA. (NASA Release 77-141)
NASA announced development of ultrathin large-area silicon solar cells thinner than a sheet of newspaper for increasing the power-to-weight capability of solar arrays, considered a major breakthrough in applying solar energy to missions requiring multikilowatts, even millions of watts, of electricity. The Solarex Corp. of Rockville, Md., had made the thin cells some 40 to 50 microns thick (only one-sixth as thick as cells in present solar arrays) in sizes up to 38cm2, proving both structurally flexible and less fragile than expected. Energy conversion of the new cells virtually equaled that of conventional cells, 11% compared to 12 or 13% for the thicker cells. Lightweight cells would mean larger solar arrays for ion-propulsion systems in extended space exploration, and could supply power for platforms and remote-satellite power stations in the future. Solarex had delivered hundreds of the new cells to JPL at Pasadena, Calif., for test, evaluation, and design-application studies. (NASA Release 77-31)
MSFC reported results of a gamma-ray detector launched on a balloon May 11 from the Natl. Scientific Balloon Facility at Palestine, Tex., to study sources of bursting and pulsating x-rays and gamma rays during an 18hr flight. MSFC scientists headed by Dr. Charles Meegan, principal investigator and associate of the Natl. Research Council, had sent a 420 000m3 (15 million ft3) balloon carrying an array of 12 large-area detectors with total payload weight of 590kg (13001b) to an altitude of 39km (126 000ft) to transmit data back to the launch site for recording. High winds had interrupted the successful mission and brought the balloon down with some payload damage. Investigators would use the data for the scheduled June 30 launch of NASA’s high-energy astronomy observatory (HEAO). (MSFC Release 77-93)
Marshall Space Flight Center reported it had coped with the threat of a serious power shortage when maintenance and emergency shutdowns dropped the Tennessee Valley Authority’s generating capacity by a third at the same time that severe cold weather moved into the area. On Friday, Dec. 9, TVA had asked NASA and the U.S. Army to reduce power use by half, as it expected the shortage to continue for some time. C. Horton Webb, director of MSFC’s facilities office, said the plant maintenance division had worked around the clock turning heat on and off to keep buildings from freezing, and had asked employees to help in minimizing use of electrical equipment. Security guards helped by closing blinds and turning off lights and equipment wherever possible. Webb said the combined effort had reduced power use by 50% on Saturday and 65% by Sunday morning. (Marshall Star, Dec 14/77, 1)
NASA announced it had investigated a unique propulsion system for sending a spacecraft to rendezvous with Halley’s Comet in 1986. The comet had made some 30 visits since 467 B.C., and its next appearance would offer NASA an opportunity to find out more about the origin of the solar system. A device using solar electric propulsion, suggested by MSFC and tested for several yr at Lewis Research Center, would aim solar energy concentrated by reflectors at conventional solar cells to provide electric power for a system of 8 ion engines capable of taking a spacecraft to an encounter with the Halley comet around Christmas Day 1985 just outside earth’s orbit. The spacecraft would reach the comet during its most active state as it passed near the sun, and could send pictures of the comet to earth, possibly sending a probe through the comet’s tail toward its nucleus to define its properties. NASA would decide in August 1977 whether to use the solar electric system, or a solar sail being developed by JPL, in its rendezvous with Halley’s Comet. (NASA Release 77-97; MSFC Release 77-87)
WFC announced it would receive this week the first of two rotor-systems research aircraft (RSRA) for contractor flight tests. Sikorsky Aircraft, which would conduct the tests, had designed the RSRA (a joint project of NASA and the U.S. Army) to fly as a regular helicopter, as a compound helicopter (both rotors and wings), or as a conventional fixed-wing aircraft. As the RSRA’s engines or wings were changeable, NASA planned to use it as a “flying wind tunnel” for trying out various rotor systems: articulated, hingeless, or gimbaled, or with variable geometry, variable diameter, or controllable twist. (WFC Release 77-7; NASA Release 77-149)
The new federal Dept, of Energy opened its doors with Secretary James R. Schlesinger promising “to resolve our energy problems . . . through the effective work of all the people of this department.” Proposed by President Carter March 1, the department had become a reality Aug. 4 upon signing of its organization act and Schlesinger’s confirmation as secretary the following day. The department inherited nearly 20 000 employees and had a first-yr budget of about $10.4 billion. Programs it would administer included conservation, resource development and production, research and development, data management, environment, and regulation. (DOE Release R-77-001)
New infrared detectors at Kitt Peak Natl. Observatory might have detected frozen methane on the surface of Pluto, AvWk reported. If verified, the observations would indicate a smaller size for Pluto and would change current theories of Pluto’s interaction with other planets. {AvWk, Mar 7/77, 11)
Dryden Flight Research Center announced it had commenced studies on turbulence caused by insects sticking to aircraft wings. It would use a small jet transport flown at low altitudes to collect insects on the wings, in turbulence tests at higher altitudes and greater speeds. The Johnson and Kennedy Space Centers would assist the studies aimed at developing high-speed fuel-efficient aircraft, by taking advantage of their differing insect populations. (DFRC Release 13-77; KSC Release 93-77)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award to Inti. Business Machines of a $1 344 950 contract for 134 site data-acquisition subsystems to monitor performance of ERDA’s solar heating and cooling demonstration program at sites throughout the U.S. The IBM machines would provide data on solar energy at each site, amounts used for heating, cooling, and hot water, and other areas of performance, efficiency, and fuel saving. Each site would feed data to a central computer in Huntsville, Ala., for compilation of reports to business, industry, and the general public on the most economical and practical systems tested. (MSFC Release 77-184)
President Carter would propose budget changes to reduce emphasis on nuclear power and increase research on energy conservation, predicted Les Gapay in the Wall Street Journal. Sources in and out of the Carter administration said that Carter would amend the Ford budget for FY 1978 by cutting money for two major nuclear-power research projects: a multimillion-dollar program to develop a fast-breeder nuclear reactor that would produce more fuel than it consumed, and research on nuclear fusion, a new technology intended to provide commercial electrical power within several decades. Fusion was said to be more environmentally acceptable than other nuclear programs, and the U.S. had been spending several hundred million a yr on this research. Funds cut from the Energy Research and Development Administration would go toward research on energy conservation; ERDA had been studying ways to save fuel in building, transportation, and industrial processes. The Ford budget had asked for a 28% increase in energy research for FY 1978 (from $2.9 billion to $3.7 billion), most of it for ERDA and for nuclear power studies. (WSJ, Feb 17/77, 3)
Langley Research Center announced award of a 5yr $23 million contract to Wyle Laboratories for electronic instrument support to test and research facilities at the center. The contract, running from Oct. 1977 through Sept. 1979 with options to extend for another 3yr, covered inspection, calibration, maintenance, and satisfaction of measurement requirements on some 30 000 instruments and transducers valued at more than $50 million; also, design, modification, and maintenance of hardware and computer programs associated with digital data systems and special purpose computers used in the research facilities. (LaRc Release 77-15)
MSFC announced that NASA had invited researchers to propose materials-processing experiments to be performed on the Space Transportation System (STS), as the Shuttle missions would be called. The experiments, basic or applied research projects in materials science, would exploit the weightless and ultra-high vacuum conditions of space to demonstrate their applications in materials science and technology. (MSFC Release 77-52)
LaRC announced it would open a major educational exhibit on energy Sept. 22 through 29. Assembled by the Energy Research and Development Administration, the exhibit in two 50-ft trailers would include films, animated sections, and visitor-operated consoles describing all types of energy now in use and possible future energy sources. Operating the displays for ERDA on the U.S. energy situation and what could be done about it would be Oak Ridge Associated Universities, a nonprofit educational and research organization of 45 colleges and universities in the southeast. (LaRC Release 77-41)
A native New Yorker, Dr. Frosch had earned A.B., A.M., and Ph.D degrees from Columbia Univ. From 1973 to 1975 he was asst, secretary general of the United Nations and assistant head of its environmental program. From 1966 to 1975 he was asst, secretary of the Navy for research and development, working on naval-research projects at the Hudson Laboratories of Columbia Univ. where he had been director from 1956 to 1963. Dr. Frosch had received the Arthur S. Flemming award in 1966 and the Navy’s distinguished public service award in 1969. (NASA release 77-107; NYT, May 24/77, 19)
Threats to the earth’s ozone layer remained a matter for concern, Walter Sullivan reported in the NY Times, especially fluorocarbons widely used as aerosol propellants and accumulating as chlorine byproducts in the atmosphere where they would break down ozone and expose the earth to more ultraviolet light. Health records from the United Nations had shown that people living in low latitudes where the ozone layer was thinner and sunlight more abundant had a markedly higher rate of skin cancers, especially of the often fatal melanoma. Although some scientists noted that atmospheric ozone would normally vary with latitude, season, and even with the sunspot cycle, public health officials said any total increase in ultraviolet exposure would probably increase the incidence of cancer. Other dangers to the ozone layer included supersonic planes and other high-flying aircraft, nuclear explosions, and the heavy use of nitrogen fertilizers. The Natl. Academy of Science had proposed outlawing fluorocarbon gases as propellants except in medical products. (NYT, May 15/77, 4-9)
ARC announced that a team of scientists using the 91cm (36in) infrared telescope on the Kuiper Airborne Observatory and the ground-based 230cm (90in) infrared telescope at Steward Observatory, Univ. of Arizona, had made the first discovery of planet formation in process and the first identification of a flat disc-shaped luminous stellar object. The object, MWC 349 in the constellation Cygnus, exhibited a surrounding mass of intensely glowing gas with a diameter 20 times that of the central body, emitting 10 times as much light; the luminous area would disappear in about a century as disc material spun into the central body. The End had been significant because it might show how planets had been formed in earth’s solar system. Members of the team were Drs. Rodger Thompson and Peter Strittmatter of the Steward Observatory, and Drs. Edwin Erickson, Fred Witteborn, and D.W. Strecker, all of ARC. Infrared instruments could view the object through dust shrouding the disc: the Kuiper telescope had detected infrared spectra that could not penetrate earth’s atmosphere, and the Steward telescope could offer higher resolution. (ARC Release 77-33; NASA Release 77-119; NYT, June 16/77, A21; W Post, June 16/77, B-ll)
MSFC reported that Corning Glass Works, Canton, N.Y., had begun work on a huge primary mirror blank for NASA’s Space Telescope, designed to give astronomers a view to the edge of the universe. Corning would work under a $1.74 million subcontract from Perkin-Elmer Corp., which would be responsible for assembling the optical telescope. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. would build the spacecraft and support system and integrate the telescope into it. Scientists expected the space telescope to detect light from objects 14 billion light-years from earth; it might, therefore, be able to provide views of the first galaxies at the time they were formed. The Hale telescope at the Mt. Palomar observatory in Calif, could penetrate only about 2 billion light-years because of the optical degradation from earth’s atmosphere. The space telescope would be carried by the Shuttle to an orbit more than 300mi above earth to avoid that interference. Corning would deliver the first of two 8ft discs to Perkin-Elmer within a yr and the spare by April 1979, for the process of grinding the blanks to an optical curvature. The blank would be 1ft thick with a 2ft-diameter center hole, and would consist of solid inch-thick top and bottom plates separated by a weight-saving structure of open cells lOin long and 4in square. It would carry a thin metal film constituting the mirror or reflective surface; glass had long served as best mirror material because its shape would change only slightly with changes in temperature, so that it maintained image quality. More than 40yr ago Corning had made the 200in blank for the Hale telescope out of borosilicate glass, having an expansion of 32.5 on a scale used by physicists; the material it would use for the space telescope blank would have an expansion of zero. Corning had chosen the new material, a titanium silicate called ULE (ultra-low expansion) first formulated in 1967, for ease of handling and ultrasonic testing. (MSFC Release 77-233)
The Energy Research and Development Administration reported that its scientists had developed a new way to reclaim used automotive oils, removing solid and liquid impurities in a solvent-and-distillation treatment. After heating the used oil to drive off volatile hydrocarbons and water, the process would add a solvent to make sludge of the contaminants; the remaining oil would go through normal processes of distillation, improvement of color and odor, and reformulation with additives. Iowa State Univ. had run a vehicle-fleet test for more than lOmo using the re-refined oils with no abnormal wear or performance; the product had not generated polluting byproducts. Most commercial rerefining had used an acid-based technology producing wastes more polluting than the used oil itself. (ERDA Release 77-14)
NASA announced it had named Dr. James J. Kramer associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology, effective Oct. 23. He had been acting in that capacity since Dec. 1976. Starting at Lewis Research Center in 1951, Dr. Kramer had come to NASA Hq in 1971 as chief of OASTs noise and pollution reduction branch. (NASA anno Oct 21/77; NASA Release 77-227)
NASA reported that MSFC had awarded a lyr $150 000 contract to the Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (IITRI) in Chicago to set up a team to find uses for aerospace technologies in manufacturing. The team would work with U.S. industries, industrial associations, and professional groups in areas related to machine tools, electronics assembly, and light fabrication and assembly. The team would be another of the groups created by NASA’s technology-utilization office to expand the use of aerospace technology on earth. (NASA Release 77-57)
NASA reported that Dr. Lo I. Yin, x-ray researcher at GSFC, had invented a hand-held device producing an instant x-ray image from a small source of radioactive material. The lixiscope (low-intensity x-ray imaging scope) had resulted from research on space energy sources that converted their x-rays to visible images; Dr. Yin said the idea had not been feasible until the Army declassified an image intensifier produced at its Ft. Belvoir night vision laboratory. Cost of the unit, not yet on the market, might be less than $5000. Using no new technology, it contained off-the-shelf items such as the radioactive source and an x-ray phosphor screen besides the intensifier. Pulling a trigger unshielded the source, sending through the object being examined a low x-ray dose which the phosphor screen converted to visible light. The unit’s high intensification would allow use of a small radiation source of 10 to 20 millicuries resembling a pen-size battery; an attached camera could produce instant x-ray pictures with exposure 1000 times weaker than that of a conventional x-ray machine. Dr. Yin said a device invented for x-ray astronomy “where there is a scarcity of x-rays should [be] of obvious value in medical fluoroscopy where there are many x-rays.” Cooperating in evaluating the device would be the National Institute of Dental Research, Howard Univ.’s College of Dentistry, Howard’s cancer research center, and the Duke Univ. Medical Center at Durham, N.C. NIDR researchers had already worked up a configuration of the lixiscope for use in dentistry, and the cancer research center would compare it with existing techniques for detecting soft-tissue tumors or foreign bodies and for looking at bone fractures. Prime advantage of the unit would be for emergency and other field use requiring quick fluoroscopy (NASA Release 77-238) •
NASA reported that an F-8 aircraft using the digital fly-bywire control system would simulate the Space Shuttle’s flight-control system during a series of 3 flights at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center. The flights, simulations of orbiter maneuvers after separation from the Boeing 747 Shuttle-carrier aircraft, would determine the thresholds of sensor failure and would test the programming of the Shuttle’s flight-computer system. (NASA Release 77-53; DFRC X-News, Mar 25/77, 2)
KSC Emnounced award of a $25 970 contract to the research institute at the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta to develop an automatic manatee-tracking system for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Attempts to track the manatee, Em endEmgered aquatic mammal, had failed because of poor monitoring systems. Tracking the movements of about 100 mEmatees in the Banana and Indian Rivers and Mosquito Lagoon nesir KSC would provide scientists with data on their living habits. (KSC Release 77-77)
NASA reported it had begun working on its plan to make Ames Research Center the lead center for helicopter research. Approved last summer, the plan resulted from NASA’s assessment of its research to see where realignment would improve effectiveness and reduce costs. As lead center, ARC would do research on small- and large-scale helicopter hardware using its aeronautical facilities such as the 40 x 80ft wind tunnel and flight-simulation equipment, and flight-test items like the tilt-rotor and rotor-systems research aircraft. A helicopter program office at NASA Hq would direct the overall helicopter program and coordinate research between ARC and the Langley and Lewis Research Centers. LaRC, working mainly on helicopter structures, would continue its studies of acoustics, airfoils, aeroelasticity, and avionics. LeRC would continue to emphasize propulsion, its first task being a proposed new program in helicopter transmission technology leading later to work on helicopter engines. NASA estimated that over the next 3yr the change would result in adding 72 positions to the ARC staff; LaRC helicopter work would phase down during that period but would continue to employ 72. The expected growth in long-haul aircraft technology at LaRC would add up to little long-term impact on that center’s manpower or the local economy. (NASA Release 77-8; ARC Release 77-19)
Langley Research Center announced award of a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract worth about $1.8 million to Vought Corp. for design, development, and qualification of a Scout launch-vehicle guidance system. Teledyne would do the designing under subcontract and Vought would integrate the system into the Scout. Work would proceed at the Vought plant in Dallas and Teledyne’s plant in Northridge, Calif., under LaRC direction. (LaRC Release 77-3)
WFC announced it had completed tests using rockets, balloons, and supporting ground observations to obtain data on the natural state of earth’s ozone layer and on stratosphere pollution. As part of the joint WFC-GSFC applications sounding-rocket program (ASRP), the tests July 19-22 had measured daylong variations in the vertical distribution of ozone to establish a model for studying the effects of pollutants. (WFC Release 77-11)
MSFC reported that the Energy Research and Development Administration had selected 80 new projects for installing solar heating and cooling, on 27 of which MSFC would monitor technical design and construction. MSFC was already monitoring 32 commercial demonstration projects selected by ERDA in April 1976 as the first of a series; ERDA would issue a third solicitation for proposals later this summer, the announcement said. Dr. Henry H. Marvin, director of ERDA’s division of solar energy, said cooperative agreements negotiated by MSFC with the 27 proposers of projects would be signed within approximately 3mo. Government funding on a cost-sharing basis would cover only the solar portions of the projects; more than 90% of the funds would go to projects with substantial small business participation, and more than half the awards would go to teams using solar energy systems supplied by small businesses. (MSFC Release 77-89)
The new administration of President Carter would not initiate a working Landsat earth resources monitoring system until it found out how much money Landsat data users would invest in such a system, AvWk reported. The president’s science adviser Frank Press, director of the White House office of science and technology policy, would set up a committee to study the user-cost question. Press had told the Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space that it would be “premature to commit the federal government” to support of an operational system because of many uncertainties about remote sensing; he said that development of a sector to be served by Landsat data had not evolved “as rapidly as some anticipated several years ago,” and that “no comprehensive assessment” had been made “of the overall market structure for Landsat data applications. . . .” The subcommittee was considering a bill cosponsored by Sen. Wendell H. Ford (D-Ky) and former astronaut Sen. Harrison M. Schmitt (R-NM) that would establish an operational Landsat system, the space segment to be run by NASA and the ground data distribution by the Dept, of the Interior. AvWk noted, however, that the Interior testimony had been altered at the last minute to deny support of the bill. {AvWk, June 13/77, 91)
Pioneer 11 had covered two-thirds of its 2.3-billion-km (1.5-billion-mi) journey from Jupiter to Saturn; passing Saturn, it would head out of the solar system in the direction that the solar system takes through the galaxy, nearly opposite the path of Pioneer 10, now between the orbits of Saturn and Uranus, also on its way out of the solar system. Ames Research Center had managed the Pioneer project for NASA’s Office of Space Science; TRW Systems, Inc., had built the spacecraft. (NASA Release 77-112; ARC Release 77-33)
Science magazine carried an article by Drs. T.B.H. Kuiper of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and M. Morris of the Calif. Inst, of Technology on the search for extraterrestrial intelligence, based on extrapolations of known physical processes and known behaviors of terrestrial animals and humans. Concluding that interstellar travel would be practicable and that advanced beings might have reasons for making contact with humans, the authors reviewed the options and the interstellar-beacon frequencies proposed for use in such contact. (Science, May 6/77, 616)
Langley Research Center announced that 21 area high school students had completed a 4wk hands-on career exploration program at the center, applying classroom concepts to actual situations. Each student had been assigned to a sponsor in science, computers, engineering, or mathematics to supervise the unpaid 8hr workdays. (LaRC Release 77-34)
The W. Post reported that the U.S. Naval Observatory had honored the memory of its astronomer Asaph Hall with a 2:30am party attended by Hall’s descendants (“a fine crop of teen-agers and young adults”) on the 100th anniversary of his discovery of the moon of Mars, which he had named Deimos (flight) and Phobos (fear) after the horses that drew the war god’s chariot. “It now turns out,” the Post added, that the little moons would crash into Mars within the next 70 million yr [see During June]. Other Naval Observatory observances honoring Hall included a reception, a group of technical meetings, a dinner, and a 100th anniversary memorial entry in the logbook of the observatory’s 26in refracting telescope. [W Post, Aug 13/77, Bl)
NASA announced it had invited scientists to submit proposals for use and development of the unfunded Space Telescope [see Feb. 1]. Capable of holding five different instruments at the focal plane of its 2.4m mirror, the Space Telescope would expand the volume of observable space 350 times beyond that of the largest ground-based telescope, offering new information for astronomers and other scientists interested in fundamental questions of cosmology and astronomy. GSFC would manage operations of the telescope’s missions and develop its instrumentation; MSFC would be responsible for overall management of the telescope system. (NASA Release 77-58)
NASA announced that the Arizona Dept, of Transportation and 2 federal agencies had demonstrated solar energy potential by using an array of solar cells to power a dust-storm warning system in central Ariz. The state had installed the system over an 80mi area on Interstate 10 between Phoenix and Tucson, and west on Interstate 8 near Casa Grande, to help motorists avoid accidents in low-visibility conditions resulting from blowing dust. In normal mode, the signs would display directional information; when dust storms struck, the message would change to give motorists the radio frequencies on which storm-alert instructions would be available. The state agency (working with LeRC, which had managed the applications project for the Energy Research and Development Administration) would replace propane-fueled 60w generators at 40 signs in the system with solar arrays, halving the cost. Each sign would use solar electricity to power the lighting, changeable-message feature, and radio communications activated by a link from Phoenix when dust storms were imminent. (NASA Release 77-106)
The Natl. Science Foundation reported that federal funding for research and development had risen significantly between fiscal yrs 1974 and 1978, having shown only slight growth in the 1969-1974 period. Total federal R&D funding for FY 1978 was about $26.3 billion, $8.9 billion more than for FY 1974. For the 1974-1978 period, 6 functional areas accounted for nearly all the increase in federal support: defense, 44%; energy, 25%; space and health, 7% each; environment, 5%; science and technology base, 4%. (NSF Release PR77-93)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had awarded a $634 250 contract to Grumman Aerospace Corp. to design, build, and test a machine that would demonstrate, on earth, the automatic fabrication of beams for space construction. Ground demonstration would be needed to develop a safe and efficient facility for use in space. Beam fabrication, part of the Space Industrialization Program, would be the first step in building large space structures. (MSFC Release 77-33)
Scientists at the McDonald Observatory in Los Alamos, N.M., had discovered that the red-giant star Betelgeuse, familiar feature of the constellation Orion, was 3 250 000 times larger than earth’s sun. Pictures taken at the observatory, using a new process with a special one-of-a-kind television camera tube produced by RCA, had shown the star expanding and throwing off matter into space at a prodigious rate; the photographs for the first time had viewed and measured the shell of matter around a red giant. Betelgeuse and its shell had proved to be 400 times larger than the orbit of Pluto; it had measured nearly 3 trillion miles across (2800 billion miles). Earth’s sun in comparison was 864 000 miles in diameter at its equator, and earth itself was only about 8000 miles in diameter at the equator. The pictures had verified a theory that red-giant stars were a primary source of raw material for making new stars, according to astrophysicist Maxwell Sandford of McDonald laboratory. The red giants would routinely lose matter to relieve internal pressures built up by consumption of nuclear fuel, and the pictures had shown the loss to be much greater than previously thought. (Today, June 3/77, 11 A)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch announced reorganization of the agency effective Nov. 8 “to strengthen NASA organization and improve our effectiveness ... we will reduce the number of staff offices reporting directly to the Administrator.” Headquarters operations would consist of 3 functions: the office of the Administrator, for general management; the chief scientist, chief engineer, and 5 program offices for program planning, management, and review; and 8 staff offices to give program, staff, and functional support. Each of the 5 program offices would have an associate administrator to manage aeronautics and space technology; space sciences; space and terrestrial applications (formerly applications); space transportation systems (formerly space flight); and space tracking and data systems (formerly tracking and data acquisition). (NASA Release 77-228)
NASA announced that the launch of HEAO-A (the high-energy astronomy observatory) originally scheduled for April 1977 had been set for Aug. 12. Problems with the spacecraft’s gyroscopes, required for attitude control, had caused the delay. Analysis and testing had produced design changes to improve gyroscope reliability for the expected 6mo mission lifetime. HEAO-A would be first of three astrophysical observatories orbited over the next 3yr to study radiation from stellar sources throughout the universe. (NASA Release 77-156)
Lewis Research Center announced it would participate in programs to demonstrate the feasibility of using an airborne infrared scanner to pinpoint residential heat loss. The cities of Cleveland, Ohio, and Springfield, 111., would reimburse the center for its services. A NASA C-47 aircraft, flown over areas designated by Cleveland’s city council as eligible for low-interest winterizing and rehabilitation loans from the U.S. Dept, of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), would record on magnetic tape the images of rooftops showing hot areas as white, warm areas as gray, and cool areas as black. Homeowners in the target areas could view the results at community centers and apply for block grant money from HUD as necessary. The city of Springfield had requested similar assistance for a HUD loan program. LeRC had used a thermal infrared technique in 1975-76 to scan NASA centers for energy loss, saving the agency about $350 000 in the first yr of the program. (NASA Release 77-13; Lewis News, March 11/77, 3)
NASA announced that the Jet Propulsion Laboratory had negotiated contracts with 5 firms for enough silicon (photovoltaic) solar cells to supply a combined total of 190kw of power for use by the federal government. JPL would manage the contract for the Dept, of Energy (DOE), sponsor of the program to reduce the price of the cells below 504 per peak watt by the end of 1986, while raising production capability to 500,000kw annually. The DOE program, besides reducing costs, would study the use of solar-cell materials potentially less expensive than silicon crystals and of alternatives such as optical concentrators. Firms receiving contracts were ARCO, 20kw, $321 950; Motorola, 50kw, $676 614; Sensor Technology, 40kw, $643 907; Solarex, 30kw, $559 454; and Solar Power, 50kw, $757 665. Panels of solar cells previously purchased under the program were powering an irrigation system in Nebr., a test system for residential use at MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory in Mass., a dust-storm warning system in Ariz. [see May 23], automatic weather-reporting systems in 6 states, and other remote uses. (NASA Release 77-246)
Ames Research Center reported that on May 10, 10 female volunteers would complete a month-long test [see March 24] to set standards for passengers on future spaceflights. The test included 9 days of total bed rest, to simulate effects of weightlessness, and centrifuge rides to simulate reentry into earth atmosphere. ARC had scheduled a press conference to announce and discuss the results of the test; Dr. Harold Sandler, principal investigator, would attend with members of his staff and the volunteers. (ARC anno May 4/77)
NASA announced that biologists working for it and the Natl. Science Foundation had identified a “new” form of life that might date back to earth’s first billion yr: a methane-producing organism representing what might be the oldest form of life as well as a line of evolution totally separate from the two traditionally recognized lines of bacteria, and animals and plants. A research team headed by Dr. Carl Woese of the Univ. of Ill.-Urbana, described as a world expert on the genetic code, said the organisms were a distinct class no more related to typical bacteria than to higher forms. Biologists working with a group of methane-producing organisms had assumed they were ordinary bacteria; however, analysis of ribosomal RNA had shown the genealogy of the new form to be distinct from those of both bacteria and the animals or plants. Dr. Woese said the study might shed light on a missing stage of evolution, the chemical stage that immediately preceded identifiable life on earth. (NASA Release 77-229)
The Wall St Journal reported that the government of France had announced plans for a major overhaul of its “financially troubled aerospace industry,” that would include partial nationalization of Avions Marcel Dassault-Breguet, maker of the Mirage jet fighter. A sharp drop in orders for civilian and military aircraft had forced companies to dismiss workers and cut down operations; the government hoped to introduce new products, step up sales, and increase cooperation with other European aircraft firms. (WSJ, June 9/77, 13)
Dryden Flight Research Center announced it had developed an autopilot device during flight tests of the YF-12 aircraft that would enable future high-speed planes to fly closer to the preset flight path. Experience gained from aircraft cruising at high speeds and high altitudes had shown deviations up to ± 4000ft in altitude and more than 30mph in speed from those planned. An aircraft flying across the country at Mach 3 could encounter normal changes in temperature and pressure as rapid changes that could affect the Mach number; conventional techniques to correct for those changes had caused large altitude deviations and poor-quality passenger comfort. The deviations could degrade aircraft performance or overrun the plane’s operating limitations. The new control system combining surface motion and throttle motion, Hot previously used together, with newly developed data sensors, had kept the YF-12 on a highly precise flight path even at high-speed conditions over extended periods of time. (DFRC Release 19-77) ____
