NASA launched from Cape Canaveral the high energy astronomy observatory Heao 2 on an Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle [see Nov. 3]. This was the second in a series of three NASA high energy astronomy observatories designed to survey the entire sky for x-ray sources, make measurements of the gamma-ray flux, determine source locations and line spectra, and examine the composition and synthesis of' cosmic-ray nuclei. The 20ft 70001b Heao 2 was equipped to provide precise pointing capability of 1 arc-minute or better, and would focus on specific x-ray sources for detailed examination. Orbiting the earth at 290mi altitude, Heao 2 had a design life of lyr. Nicknamed “Einstein” by project scientists, the mission would operate under a consortium representing the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Mass. Inst, of Technology, Columbia Univ., and GSFC. The spacecraft was built by TRW, Inc., under NASA direction. (NASA MOR S-832-78-02 [prelaunch] date?; NYT, Nov 14/78, C-3)
NASA announced that MSFC had developed a teleoperator-retrieval system (TRS) vehicle for first use in late 1979, either to boost the Skylab orbiting space laboratory to a higher orbit or to deorbit it in a remote ocean area. The decision to reboost or deorbit was expected early in 1979. Concept of the system evolved from teleoperator supporting research and development under way since the mid-1960s. Anticipated long-range usefulness of the TRS for payload survey, stabilization, retrieval, and delivery missions; its recovery and reuse capability; and its adaptability for the Skylab reboost/deorbit mission had led to its further development. The TRS had a central-core propulsion system accommodating strap-on kits for additional propulsion. A 24-nozzle attitude-control system on the core provided 6 deg of freedom for control of the vehicle during rendezvous, docking, and initial orientation. Although thrusters originally used cold-gas propulsion, designers were studying use of low-cost hydrazine (hot gas). Preprogrammed instructions in the vehicle’s core and computer, or a Shuttle crew member, would control guidance and attitude maneuvers. The TRS and orbiter structure were new designs; other systems would be fabricated almost completely from either off-the-shelf components or those being developed under NASA contracts. (NASA Release 78-49)
MSFC announced NASA had extended the mission lifetime of the first earth-orbiting high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 1, originally scheduled to end Feb. 12, to at least mid-November when the second of the series was due for launch. The high quality of scientific data received from Heao 1 had prompted the decision to extend the mission. Launched Aug. 12, 1977, Heao 1 had been the first of three planned large unmanned orbital observatories managed by MSFC; the third would be launched in 1979. Heao 1 had been a scanning mission for fully mapping the celestial sphere; the second Heao mission would point very precisely at x-ray sources identified by Heao 1, which had already significantly advanced knowledge of celestial x-ray and gamma-ray sources. By extrapolating these results, the scientists expected to increase the number of x-ray objects identified by the first 6 mo of data from 200 to 1000 or more, with further increases during the extended operation. Heao 1, although basically a scanning instrument, had been versatile enough to stop its rotation and point briefly at items of particular interest; resolution and sensitivity would increase tremendously in the pointing mode. Heao 1 was performing about 5 daytime pointings lasting about 3hr during a week; extended mission lifetime would enable the mission-control crew to add night pointings. Dr. Fred Speer, mission director, explained: “Astronomers would like to have their optical viewings and optical photography of stellar objects—which of course can only be done at night with optical telescopes—coincide with our pointings with the X-ray sensors aboard Heao 7, so that data can be correlated.” (.Marshall Star, Feb 15/78, 1)
Dryden Flight Research Center reported that the KC-135, testbed aircraft to be modified with winglets in early 1979, had made its first flight at DFRC as a fully instrumental research aircraft. The data package would be ferried by air to Tinker AFB where it would undergo fatigue inspection. The transport-sized aircraft would return to DFRC in mid-Nov. for reinstallation of the data package. Baseline-data flights with the conventional wing would begin in 1979, followed by installation of the winglets for full-data flights. (DFRC X-Press, Sept 22/78, 2)
Sixty-five percent of the food carried on Shuttle missions would be cooked, packaged, and tested in a new JSC food lab, JSC reported. Or-biter menus would be standardized on a 6-day cycle. About 15% of Shuttle food—mainly flexpacks and thermostabilized food items—would be supplied by the U.S. Army’s Natick Research and Development Command in Mass. Another 20% would be off-the-shelf items, from chewing gum and snap-top puddings to peanut butter. The orbiter’s lower deck would contain a galley with an oven, serving trays, water dispensers, and other serving equipment. When the galley was installed and operational (about mission SS-7), an hr before meal time the crewperson cooking would spend about 5 min rehydrating dehydrated food items, loading meal trays, and placing them in the galley oven. After meals, trays and silverware would be cleaned and sterilized for reuse. JSC nutritionist Rita Rapp, who has seen space-food technology evolve from bland squeeze-tube pastes carried on Mercury spacecraft to the electrically-heated food trays in the Skylab wardroom, said, “We try to present foods in a normal way, more like people are accustomed to eating on earth. Operational experience permitted us to add new food items—wider selection and better packaging—as we learned weightlessness did not cause the problems everyone anticipated.” (JSC Roundup, Oct 13/78, 4)
The latest in a family of small-diameter 8-bladed propellers had completed wind tunnel testing at Lewis Research Center, the Lewis News reported. Third in a series tested and designed for new high-speed fuel-conservative aircraft, these propellers had unique extreme curve to the blades designed to improve performance and minimize cabin noise during flight. At simulated cruise conditions of 855km/hr (530mph) and 9145m altitude (30 000ft), the propellers proved less noisy and more efficient than previous models tested. NASA estimated that, at those cruise conditions, an advanced turboprop engine using the propellers could save 20 to 40% in fuel over current turbofan engines and 10 to 20% in fuel over advanced turbofan engines. LeRC work on the propellers was part of a NASA-wide effort toward 50% fuel savings in future U.S. aircraft, with testing expected to be completed in later 1980. Hamilton Standard Division of United Technologies Corp. had been contractor for design and fabrication of the advanced propellers. (Lewis News, Sept 1/78, 1)
FBIS reported that Oleg Gazenko, director of the USSR’s Manned Spaceflight Institute of Medico-Biological Problems, said in an interview that cosmonauts Vladimir Kovalenok and Alexander Ivanchenkov were physiologically “as healthy as they were before the [Soyuz 29] spaceflight” [see Nov. 2]. The record 140-day flight had caused some functional changes: . . . “the cosmonauts lost a part of the muscle mass, which they have now restored. They returned to earth with erythrocytes that were born in space. The average life span of erythocytes is 120 days, and they are fully renewed during this period.” Gazenko said that the cosmic erythrocytes tended to be smaller, though they fully retained the main function of carrying oxygen to the tissues. “As time passes, the erythrocytes that were born in weightlessness will perish. But what will those that will replace them be like? Identical to those that were born before the space flight? Apparently yes, because our organism is a wonderful instrument of self-regulation; it excellently arranges all the processes taking place in it in such a way that they would meet the demands made by those conditions in which man is staying.” Gazenko had directed research that substantiated the possibility of manned spaceflight, and had received the 1978 USSR state prize for studies of ways to counteract unfavorable effects of weightlessness on the human organism, making lengthy manned spaceflights possible. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 12/78)
Science Indicators 1976, ninth annual report of the National Science Board recently transmitted to Congress by the President, noted an increase in U.S. research and development expenditures during 1976 to an estimated $38.1 billion in current dollars; however, constant-dollar spending of $28.5 was only 2.5% above the 1974 level. Measured in current dollars, federally supported R&D expenditures in 1976 had climbed to an estimated new high of $20.1 billion; however, constant-dollar levels stood at $15 billion, 18% below the peak reached in 1967. National spending for basic research in current dollars had climbed substantially since 1960, to a new high in 1976. However, estimated constant-dollar expenditures in 1976 had advanced only about 2% above the 1975 level, remaining nearly 11 % below the peak year of 1968. The federal government was the source of most support for basic research in 1976, as it had been in past years. The federal share amounted to 68% of the total since 1971, compared with approximately 60% in 1960, whereas industry’s share had remained stable at approximately 15% throughout the 1970s, in sharp contrast to its 28% share in 1960. (NSF report, Feb 78)
LaRC announced selection of Telos Computing, Inc., Santa Monica, Calif., for negotiations leading to award of a contract to develop software for the Natl. Transonic Facility (NTF) wind tunnel at LaRC that would allow networking of four medium-sized computers to be the nucleus of NTF’s instrumentation complex. The contract would cover collection and display of all research measurements, as well as automatic control of many wind-tunnel test parameters. Telos estimated the value of the cost-plus-fixed-fee contract at $1.2 million. Work would be performed at LaRC over a 3-yr period. (LaRC Release 78-86)
The Marshall Star announced that the most extensive study ever made of Venus had begun with the arrival at the planet of Pioneer Venus 1, the orbiter half of the two-spacecraft Pioneer Venus mission. It went into orbit Dec. 4 and was scheduled to take pictures and make measurements for one Venusian yr (225 earth days) or more. On Dec. 9, the four probes and transporter bus of Pioneer Venus 2 would plunge into the Venusian clouds at widely separated points to measure the dense atmosphere in detail from top to bottom. A spokesman at Ames Research Center, manager of the project for NASA’s Office of Space Science, reported Dec. 4 that Pioneer Venus 2 was on course and on schedule. (Marshall Star, Dec 6/78, 2)
Representatives of LeRC, ARC, LaRC, other government agencies, and industry had met at Dry den Flight Research Center for what was probably the final symposium on NASA’s YF-12 aircraft program begun in the late 1960s, the Lewis News reported. The airplanes would be mothballed by March 1979. DFRC’s Dr. James Albers, symposium chairman, said the symposium was to “disseminate recent research findings and stimulate exchange of information among participants engaged in design or research related to high supersonic flight.” The YF-12 had given NASA an opportunity for research on sustained supersonic flight. Several NASA centers had investigated propulsion-system performance and the dynamics of mixed compression inlets; aero-elastic effects and thermal problems of high Mach number flight; and techniques of measuring aerodynamic data and operational parameters in extreme temperatures. Researchers had conducted a parallel series of laboratory experiments to augment the findings of the flight program. The symposium ended with an industry-government panel on “Future Perspectives in Supersonic Flight.” {Lewis News, Dec 8/78, 7)
Fifteen scientists who would manage earth-orbital investigations for the third Spacelab in mid-1981 had met at Marshall Space Flight Center to discuss preparations for the mission, the Marshall Star reported. Known as the investigators’ working group for Spacelab mission 3 (IWG-3), the group would work with NASA mission management to develop a payload offering the greatest possible scientific return and to select payload specialists who would perform experiments aboard Spacelab 3. Those at the meeting agreed on professional qualifications for payload specialists and on criteria for their selection, beginning in the second half of 1978. Sponsored by the NASA Hq Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications, Spacelab mission 3 would include materials processing in space, the atmospheric cloud-physics laboratory, the drop-dynamics module, and vestibular-function research. Experiments would obtain basic knowledge about crystal-growing processes in earth orbit, mechanisms for generating small latex spheres, dynamic behavior of free-floating drops of liquid, cloud formation in the atmosphere, red blood cell aggregation, and adaptation of life forms to space. MSFC would manage integration and operation of the scientific payloads flown on the first 3 Spacelab missions. CMarshall Star, Feb 1/78, 1)
ESA reported it had scheduled 3mo of propellant-mockup tests of the European launcher Ariane to begin at the French Guiana Space Center launch site [see June 16]. Tests would check general conditions for launcher-assembly compatibility of ground facilities (platform, tower, etc.) with the vehicle, and for technical functioning of the fueling and draining facilities and systems both on the ground and on the vehicle. Thejatter three of four qualification flights scheduled from June 1979 to Oct. 1980 would launch Amsat (telecommunications for international radio amateurs), Firewheel (science/Germany), Meteosat-2 (meteorology/ESA), APPLE (communications/India), and Marots-A (maritime communications/ESA). (ESA newsletter Aug/78, 3)
AvWk reported that the high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 1 was each day discovering about three new x-ray sources in deep space. NASA expected that by the end of the mission in early 1979 the spacecraft would have found more than 1000 new sources. Heao 1 data had also revealed a new black-hole candidate in the constellation Ara, bringing to four the number of such candidates identified. (AvWk, Oct 9/78, 13)
NASA announced that the two Pioneer spacecraft en route to Venus—the orbiter and the multiprobe—had passed major operations tests. Tests of orientation, timing, and separation systems aboard Pioneer Venus 2 for split-second release of three probes 9600km (6000mi) apart over Venus’s earth-facing hemisphere, and of systems on Pioneer Venus 1 (orbiter) controlling retrofire and injection into orbit (to take place behind the planet and out of reach of earth communications), had been satisfactory. Separate operations teams at Ames Research Center had sent 6400 commands to the orbiter since its May 20 launch and 3600 commands to the multiprobe craft since its Aug. 8 launch. Virtually all experiments and systems (including thermal, orientation, command, communications, and data-return and power systems) on each of the multiprobe’s five entry craft had been operated and were working well. The orbiter’s instruments had been checked and calibrated, including systems for insertion into Venus orbit Dec. 4. Twenty days and 13 million km (8 million mi) from Venus, the multiprobe would split into a transporter bus and four probes, the bus serving as fifth probe. The multiprobe had covered 140 million km (87 million mi), the orbiter 325 million km (202 million mi). Both spacecraft still had about 180 million km (112 million mi) to travel to Venus. (NASA Release 78-153; ARC Release 78-48; ARC Astrogram, Oct 19/78, 1)
Two experiments for HEAO-C had been delivered to the prime contractor, TRW, Redondo Beach, Calif., and the third was expected the following wk, MSFC reported. Scheduled for launch in late 1979, HEAO-C would survey gamma-ray emissions and study cosmic-ray particles from space. Like the first high-energy astronomy observatory launched in 1977, HEAO-C would be a scanning mission to perform sky surveys. The HEAO-B scheduled for launch in November 1978 would be a pointing mission, focusing on selected X-ray sources. The two delivered experiments were a high spectral-resolution gammaray spectrometer (experiment C-l) and a heavy-nuclei experiment (C-3). Arriving Oct. 23 would be C-2, the European-produced experiment on isotopic composition of primary cosmic rays. Mechanical integration of the experiments would begin as soon as KSC returned mechanical ground-support equipment it was using to prepare for HEAO-B’s launch. Meanwhile, TRW would check out individual experiments to assure the devices had arrived in good working condition. Following mechanical integration, TRW would make individual data runs through late Nov. Electrical integration would begin after KSC returned the computer equipment now supporting the HEAO-B launch. (Marshall Star, Oct 18/78, 1)
Despite tight new restraints on federal spending, President Carter had instructed his aides to give special protection to R&D programs — currently scheduled to get $28 billion—in the FY80 federal budget, the Washington Post reported. This came a day after the President had announced an anti-inflation program that included spending cuts plus reduction of the FY80 budget deficit to $30 billion or less, a goal at least $3 billion tighter than his previously announced target. In a handwritten note Carter instructed his aides: “I want to maintain our strong support for R&D as (percentage) of budget.” This meant high priority for spending consideration in a field usually considered a prime target for any budget-cutting program. One White House aide indicated Carter’s instructions meant that R&D would be virtually exempt from new federal spending constraints; another said that R&D might still face some restraints if inflation did not ease. The President had previously expressed special concern that basic research (which accounted for $3.5 billion of the total R&D budget and had been dwindling until the Ford Administration reversed the trend) be protected from any budget-cutting considerations. Frank Press, Carter’s science adviser, said Carter’s decision constituted the nation’s “first presidential expression of an overall science and technology policy.” (W Post, Nov 1/78, A-6)
Lewis Research Center announced that NASA Hq had joined with the FAA in sponsoring a 3-day aircraft-icing workshop at LeRC. Attended by more than 100 icing specialists, sensor/instrument specialists, meteorologists, and weather forecasters, the workshop had assessed fixed-wing and rotocraft operational icing, evaluated facilities requirements for R&D and certification, examined ways to improve icing forecasts, and identified gaps in knowledge of aeronautical icing. LeRC had been chosen for the conference because its research on icing in the 1940s and 1950s was still important in aircraft certification; it also had the largest icing-study facility currently actively operating in North America. As a result of needs defined at the workshop, LeRC would begin a new program of research on icing. (Lewis News, Aug 4/78, 2)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that Corning Glass Works, Canton, N.Y., had begun work on a foot-thick primary-mirror blank for the Space Telescope, for which the center would have overall management responsibility. The telescope had been scheduled for launch in 1983. Corning would deliver two 8ft,discs to Perkin-Elmer Corp. for grinding and polishing and telescope assembly; Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. would build the primary spacecraft and support system, and integrate the complete telescope. Glass had been used for the mirror blank as it would change shape only slightly with temperature changes during viewing; the titanium-silicate mirror blank would have zero expansion on a scale used by physicists. Aperture of the mirror blank was about 94in; diameter of the center hole was about 2ft. (Marshall Star, Jan 11/78, 4)
NASA announced that two radio astronomers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory had discovered major changes deep in the atmosphere of Uranus. Dr. M. J. Klein of JPL and Dr. J.A. Turegano, a visiting research associate from the Univ. of Zaragoza, Spain, found that radio emissions from Uranus had become 30% stronger over the past lOyr. Klein and Turegano, who had used NASA’s 64m (210ft) radio antenna at Goldstone, Calif., explained that radio waves emanating from dense clouds on Uranus had originated deep in the atmosphere, where pressures might be more than 10 times greater than at earth’s surface. Observations in the spring of 1978 had confirmed the two astronomers’ discovery a yr earlier; the atmosphere of Uranus could be either warming or becoming clearer to the passage of radio waves, although the investigators doubted that temperature so deep in a planet’s atmosphere could warm more than 30% in only lOyr. They thought the change was more probably caused by the planet’s unique orientation: Uranus, unlike any other planet, spun on its side as it orbited the sun, and every 84yr (the length of one Uranus yr) the sun would shine directly on the North Pole. Forty-two yr later, the northern hemisphere would be dark with the South Pole pointed sunward. Ammonia gas in the planet’s atmosphere probably blocked radio emissions from Uranus’s deep interior. The scientists suggested that ammonia might have been preferentially depleted in the planet’s polar regions, either by convection currents or chemical reactions. If so, then the radio telescopes would be registering hotter temperatures deeper in the atmosphere than those recorded lOyr previously when the planet had a different orientation to the sun. Theoretical studies to discover the relationship of the radio measurements to global changes in Uranus’s climate, weather patterns, and atmospheric chemistry would help in drawing general conclusions about planetary atmospheres applicable in turn to specific studies of earth’s atmosphere. (NASA Release 78-130)
NASA announced that the Jupiter-bound Voyager 2 was having problems with both its radio receivers that prevented Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineers from sending commands to the spacecraft. Early spacecraft data had indicated failure of one receiver, and the backup receiver might have had trouble receiving commands from earth; the spacecraft had continued sending information to earth. The Voyager had been designed to switch radio receivers if it had not received earth command for 7 days; the receiver that appeared to have failed had been the one on-line, and in 7 days the spacecraft computer should automatically switch to the backup receiver. Engineers would then attempt to reestablish communications by sending commands to the spacecraft. (NASA Release 78-56) The Voyager 2 spacecraft had accepted a command, the W Star reported, ending a week-long radio failure that had threatened its mission to Jupiter and Saturn. To protect the mission, engineers at JPL had begun reprogramming the spacecraft’s onboard computer “so it will still do its science when it passes Jupiter and send back the results whether we can talk to it or not,” said JPL spokesman Frank Bristow. Earlier in Apr., the spacecraft had automatically switched from the primary to secondary receiver because Voyager had not received an uplink from tracking stations for 7 days; the commands had not been sent because controllers had been preoccupied with scan-platform problems on Voyager 1. Controllers were reviewing their activities to pinpoint why they had overlooked an uplink, to ensure the lapse would not recur during the mission. (W Star, Apr 14/78, A-7; AvWk, Apr 17/78, 20)
Decisions not yet made by the U.S. government would determine the U.S. aerospace industry’s fate for years to come, said Aerospace Industries Association president, Karl Harr, Jr., in the AIA’s Aerospace Review and Forecast, 1977. Aerospace-industry sales in 1977 had increased appreciably, if not dramatically, in comparison with the previous year. Profit as a percentage of sales had climbed half a percentage point but remained below the average for all U.S. manufacturing. The industry had anticipated similar sales gains in 1978 and expected space activity to continue at approximately the same rate. Military sales should top those of 1977. The aerospace industry had pressed for elimination of barriers to “free and fair trade” in the General Agreement on Tariff and Trade (GATT) negotiations; foreign-government subsidy of their manufacturers had made them highly competitive. The U.S. government’s attempts to control export of “strategically critical” technology could severely impact sales abroad. Other issues of concern to the aerospace industry were capital formation and dealings with the government such as renegotiation, overregulation, expanding paperwork, and government competition with industry. Harr said that negative decisions could lead to “forfeiture of the pre-eminent position the U.S. has long held in high technology.” (Aerospace, Spring 78, 3)
LaRC announced it had awarded General Electric Company, Newport News, Va., a contract to provide rigid closed-cell foam-insulation material for use in the National Transonic Facility (NTF), a cryogenic wind tunnel under construction at LaRC. The insulation would be installed on the internal surface of the tunnel’s cylindrical pressure shell. The contract, managed by LaRC and estimated by GE at approximately $1.4 million, covered just over lyr; work would be performed at GE’s Thermal Systems Programs plant in Tacoma, Wash. (LaRC Release 78-81)
AvWk reported U.S. avionics manufacturers were sure that a NavStar receiver suitable for general aviation use, with features comparable to those of a VOR omnirange distance-measuring equipment and area-navigation computer, would be available for under $5000 by the late 1980s. AEL, Inc., which had designed a microwave landing receiver that could sell for less than $1500 through normal distribution channels, said the price of a NavStar receiver in 1978 dollars could eventually be as low as $2000. The role of NavStar (DOD’s satellite-based navigation system) in civilian aviation would depend on availability of inexpensive receivers at least as accurate as the present VOR/DME navaids. The potential market for civilian NavStar receivers had aroused considerable interest among civil-avionics manufacturers, resulting in Langley Research Center’s receiving a number of bids in a recent competition for a technology/design study of a low-cost NavStar receiver. Magnavox Government and Industrial Electronics Co. had won the contract. (Av-Wk, June 5/78, 91)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that its test engineers had successfully completed the first series of live firing tests of the Space Shuttle’s main propulsion system, with all major test objectives achieved. Rockwell Intl.’s Space Systems Group had conducted the test program for MSFC. The test version of the propulsion system had consisted of three Shuttle main engines mounted on an orbiter aft fuselage with a flight-type external propellant tank and associated systems. The first series of tests (Apr. 21, May 19, June 15, and July 7, 1978) had recorded systems operation at thrust levels from 70 to 90% of rated power for up to 100 sec; in the final test, engines were throttled down from 90% thrust to 70% and back up to 90%. The Shuttle would be the first spacecraft with throttleable engines. After removal from the test stand at the National Space Technology Laboratories, the engines had undergone modifications for more firings later in 1978. The next test series would run the engine at rated power levels (357 0001b, or 1.67 million newtons at sea level) for more than the 500sec required to lift the Shuttle into orbit. Results of the tests would verify main propulsion system operation before the first manned orbital flight, scheduled for 1979. (Marshall Star, Aug 2/78, 1)
Using the space environment for materials processing had limited application, and should be considered only on a case-by-case basis, according to a report by the Natl. Research Council’s committee on materials processing in space, which had studied NASA’s program. The committee said the early NASA program had used poorly conceived and designed experiments, often with crude apparatus, from which weak conclusions had been drawn and in some cases overpublicized. However, meaningful science and technology could result from experiments in space if the problems to be investigated in space were soundly based in terrestrial science or technology, and if the proposed experiments addressed specific problems instead of being scheduled to take advantage of flight opportunities or space-facility capabilities. The committee said it had not found economically justifiable reasons for producing materials in space, and recommended that NASA deemphasize this area of technology. (NRC News Report, Sept 78, 7)
NASA announced that an Ames Research Center scientific team led by Univ. of Chicago astronomer Dr. Richard Miller and ARC astrophysicist Dr. Bruce Smith had been pioneering in computer simulations of cosmic events that might alter traditional ideas of how galaxies formed, what shapes they assumed, and what happened when they collided. Using ARC’S ILLIAC IV, world’s most powerful computer, the researchers had recreated the birth and evolution of stars and galaxies, compressing 200 million yr into several hr of computer time and reducing the distance light traveled in 100 OOOyr to the length of a television screen, to witness galaxies colliding and gas clouds begetting embryonic1 stars. Computer simulations had shown elliptical galaxies, thought to be oblate (shaped like a frisbee), to have a 3-dimensional prolate shape (oblong); astronomers had found observational evidence confirming the computer discovery. The researchers had instructed the computer to create swirling systems of 100 000 computer points, each point representing the mass of about 1 million suns to give the simulated galaxy a realistic total mass. Each point had felt the gravitational pull of its neighbors and had absorbed energy from exploding supernova. Furnishing a computer with the power of ILLIAC IV with a detailed program on formation and dynamics of galaxies had proved computer simulation to be a useful approach to explaining basic astrophysical processes. ARC scientists had filmed several computer simulations showing results unexpected in light of traditional astrophysical theories. For example, vast congregations of computer-generated stars had repeatedly evolved into stable prolate bars that rotated end over end to form what was perhaps the true shape of elliptical galaxies. When Miller and Smith had set two simulated 50 000-star galaxies on a collision course, the colliding galaxies had exhibited much greater interaction than was forecast. First they contracted, their gravitational fields reinforcing each other, then they bounced back in violent expansion flinging hundreds of stars out of the galaxies, resulting in merged galaxies containing considerably fewer stars. The two researchers’ most recent efforts had centered on tracing simulated masses of gas as they coalesced and formed stars. (NASA Release 78-108)
The Aerospace Industries Assn, announced that industry sales, earnings, backlog, export performance, and contribution to the U.S. balance of trade had improved substantially in 1978. Sales, at $37.3 billion, were up almost $5 billion over 1977; the major gain was in commercial sales. The high inflation rate had distorted sales data, but 1978 sales had increased about 15% above 1977, well in excess of the inflation rate. Industry profits as a percentage of sales rose half a percentage point to 4.7%. Aerospace exports had reached an all-time high of $9.3 billion, $1.8 billion more than in 1977. At a time when export sales were important to the U.S. economy, the aerospace industry recorded an international trade surplus of nearly $8.4 billion, leading all U.S. manufacturing industries in contributing to the nation’s balance of trade. Industry backlog at year-end, estimated at $51.4 billion, was a sharp increase over $44.3 billion in 1977, resulting mostly from a surge of new orders for commercial transports. (.Aerospace, Winter 78, 2)
After a flawless launch from KSC on an Atlas-Centaur at 12:24a.m. EST Nov. 13, Heao 2 was functioning satisfactorily in a near-perfect earth orbit, the Marshall Star reported. The observatory was expected to become fully operational by Nov. 16. First steps in orbit were to open the solar arrays and to separate the launch vehicle, both of which happened exactly on time. Ground stations were receiving and evaluating engineering data, as one by one each instrument was turned on to low power and checked out. All leftover gas had to be purged from the spacecraft before high voltage could be turned on to avoid electrical arcing or damage to delicate onboard instruments. MSFC was in control of Heao 2 together with TRW flight-control engineers operating at GSFC. (Marshall Star, Nov 15/78, 1)
LaRC announced it had begun a research program on problems of agricultural aircraft. Beginning in 1921, airplanes for agricultural use had required conversion from some other purpose; in 1950, the first aircraft was designed specifically for agricultural use. Agricultural aircraft had improved since then, but still relied on 1940s technology. The aerial-applications industry had recognized this, and asked NASA to study drift, swath guidance, liquid and dry material-distribution systems, and aircraft-handling characteristics causing pilot fatigue. The NASA study would also attempt to make the wake vortex of an airplane work for, rather than against, aerial applications. Aerodynamic concerns involved reducing drag for better fuel efficiency and developing appropriate high-lift concepts to improve takeoff, landing, and turning performance. LaRC would conduct the study at its vortex-research facility, its full-scale wind tunnel, and in actual flight tests. The vortex-research facility would test small-scale models of the agricultural aircraft for interactions of the aircraft wake with dispersed spray and granular materials. The full-scale tunnel and flight tests would use an Ayres Thrush S2R-800, one of the largest agricultural aircraft. (LaRC Release 78-130)
Ames Research Center Director C.A. Syvertson announced appointment of A. Thomas Young, director of the planetary program in NASA’s Office of Space Science, as deputy director of ARC effective Feb. 1, 1979. Young, who had held his current position since Nov. 1976, had served as missions operations manager and missions director of Project Viking as well as of other projects at LaRC, which he had joined in 1961. Young had received LaRC’s sustained superior performance award in 1967 for contributions to the lunar orbiter project and in 1977 for his work on Viking. In 1977 he received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for contributions to Viking. (ARC Release 78-53)
Two National Academy of Sciences committees, those on space physics (of the Space Science Board) and on solar terrestrial research (of the Geophysics Research Board), would meet for the first time at MSFC, the center announced. The former was developing for NASA a strategy for a 1980s research program in solar system space physics. Committee members would include 35 top-level scientists from government, industry, and universities throughout the U.S. (Marshall Star, Oct 4/78, 2)
NASA reported that the Natl. Business Aircraft Association at its annual convention in St. Louis Sept. 13 would present to Dr. Richard Whitcomb, aeronautical scientist at Langley Research Center, its Meritorious Service to Aviation Award for 1978. Whitcomb would be honored for “significant contributions to the field of aviation.” Among those contributions were the area-rule design (a “Coke bottle” airplane shape that reduced drag and increased aircraft speed without the need for additional power, incorporated in every U.S. supersonic airplane now flying); and the “supercritical” wing developed during the 1960s to increase the speed and range of subsonic aircraft without an increase in required power or fuel consumption. Whitcomb had begun his career in 1943 with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor, and was head of LaRC’s Transonic Aerodynamics Branch. (NASA Release 78-119)
NASA announced award of a contract to Boeing Commercial Airplane Company, Seattle, Wash., for development and evaluation of selected advanced aerodynamics and active-control concepts for commercial transport aircraft. The contract, to be managed by LaRC, would be part of the second phase of energy-efficient transport (EET) work that had begun in early 1977 under two NASA contracts. The second phase would concentrate on ways to improve energy efficiency and operational economy for subsonic long-haul commercial transport aircraft, including wingtip extension or winglets, surface coatings for drag reduction, wingload alleviation systems, and active controls/guidance systems. Boeing estimated the contract value at $17 million. (LaRC Release 78-65) During October: NASA issued a press kit in observance of its 20th anniversary, having opened for business October 1, 1958. To commemorate the anniversary, NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch wrote: “By the time a man or a woman has lived for 20 years, a new individuality has been established, physical maturity has been achieved, important experiences have been undergone and digested, there have been some triumphs and some tragedies, the outlines of the individual’s role in society are beginning to come into focus, and it becomes possible to do some sensible planning and make some educated guesses about the future. Most importantly, a unique new entity with largely undetermined potential has come to exist in the world. “On its 20th anniversary, NASA—composed of some 23,000 men and women—is just such an entity. We are a unique agency, mandated by the people of our country through their elected representatives to develop and utilize space technology both for immediate practical application and to expand our knowledge of the earth, its environment, the solar system and the universe. We are charged with assisting the Department of Defense in the use of space to maintain the security of our nation, and with the promotion of international cooperation in space for peaceful purposes. An important part of our charter calls for research and development to maintain U.S. leadership in aeronautics, and to improve civil and military aeronautical vehicles while minimizing their energy consumption and environmental degradation. We are further charged with the dissemination to all potential users of new knowledge and technology acquired in the course of all these activities, and, alone among Federal agencies, we are required by law to ‘provide for the widest practicable and appropriate dissemination of information concerning (our) activities and the results thereof.’. . . “We have, after all, in just two decades, for the first time ever, put life from the planet earth on another body of our solar system, and in our explorations of the moon learned more about the nature and origins of that system than humanity was able to determine in all the centuries that went before. “In those two eventful decades we have landed extensions of our intelligence on Mars, begun an automated investigation that will eventually extend to all the planets orbiting the sun, achieved significant increase in our knowledge of sun-earth interactions and relationships, and through remote sensing satellites made order of magnitude improvements in how we view the natural and manmade phenomena of the whole earth, as a first step on the way to better management of all our resources. And we have put astronomy observatories into orbit above the obscuring atmosphere, which are beginning to supply data that may well change our conception of the universe. “Closer to home we have initiated a communications revolution. Though barely begun, the communications satellite program has tied the nations and peoples of our planet together in a way never before possible, and it promises the benefits of intercommunity contact to the most remote and isolated areas. . . “In our 20th year, we are deeply involved in solving the primary problems of our time—through remote sensing, helping to locate new sources of fossil fuels while working with the Department of Energy to develop alternate energy resources. “With passenger cars alone burning almost a third of all petroleum products used in this country each year and causing most of the air pollution that blights our metropolitan areas, we are applying our scientific and engineering expertise to improving auto efficiency, economy, and environmental acceptability and to developing advanced auto propulsion systems. “Finally, exactly as is true of a man or a woman, the future from the perspective of 20 years is full of challenge, excitement, and opportunity. Consider, for example, that the 12 months following our 20th anniversary will see, among other events: —launch of the second HEAO to follow up the major astronomical discoveries of its predecessor; —arrival of the Pioneer orbiter and probes at Venus; —exploration of Jupiter and its moons by both Voyagers; and — first orbital test flight of the Shuttle. “Beyond our 21st year, we can see the Shuttle evolving as the major factor in all our operations in space, facilitating and accelerating progress toward nearly all our goals. . . “In short, on our 20th anniversary we at NASA can take pride in what we have already accomplished, satisfaction from the knowledge that we are doing useful work on the frontiers of science and technology for the benefit of our people and our country, and exhilaration at the prospects which lie ahead for the continued expansion of human knowledge and the improvement of the condition of mankind on the planet earth. “Truly a unique new entity has come to exist in the world, an entity of which each one of us can be proud to be a part.” Also included in the press kit was a chronology of major NASA milestones, descriptions of all NASA centers, and NASA’s major launch record. (NASA Release 78-133)
MSFC announced that its Boeing 747 modified for Shuttle-orbiter transport had arrived at Redstone Army Airfield in Fla. for a dry run in preparation for its March landing with an orbiter atop. Crews from MSFC, KSC, and Dryden Flight Research Center had checked out handling gear and procedures to be used at MSFC for receiving the orbiter and offloading it from its carrier. MSFC had installed a large lifting derrick at the airfield with lateral-restraint and other devices needed to lift the Enterprise clear of the 747 and position it on a trailer-like transporter. When the 747 had departed, handling crews at the airfield would continue verification of the mate-demate device, using the orbiter ground transporter and a full-size orbiter simulator. (Marshall Star, Feb 8/78, 1)
Flight testing of the Space Shuttle’s microwave scanning-beam landing system (MSBLS) had begun at KSC, Today reported, with pilots and technicians using a specially equipped Jetstar aircraft operated by Dryden Flight Research Center to conduct the tests. The system-verification tests would be the initial checkout of the airborne MSBLS/ Jetstar system and the ground stations with their laser systems to verify compatibility, and to check out the system processing test data. KSC had scheduled 5 test flights lasting a toted of about 12hr. {Today, Apr 7/78, 12A; DFRC X-Press, Apr 7/78, 2)
NASA announced it had flown its quiet short-haul research aircraft (QSRA) to Ames Research Center to begin a flight-research program on design and operation of future quiet short-haul transport. The QSRA [see July 27] had been the first to achieve truly quiet operation of jet aircraft, through high-performance special treatment of the engines and nacelles to restrict landing and takeoff noise to relatively small areas. Operating less noisily than most small private aircraft, the 4-jet QSRA had a 90-decibel noise-impact area, smaller than 1.3km2 (0.5mi2). Scaled up to the equivalent of a 150-passenger aircraft, the 90-decibel noise-impact area would be less than 2.6km2 (lmi2), compared to the approximately 78km2 (30mi2) noise impact of comparable-size aircraft. High performance of the QSRA resulted from a design concept in which four jet engines mounted on top of the wing directed fan air from the engines across the upper surface of the wing and flaps, significantly increasing lift, particularly at lower speeds. Compressed air from the engines, fed through an ejector system, provided boundary-layer control-blowing at the wing leading edges and ailerons, further enhancing lift and control. Future QSRA-derivative aircraft the size of the Boeing 727 transport could carry the same payload at the same speeds but could operate from small airports with short runways (about 1/2 to 1km [1500 to 3000ft], compared to current requirements for lengths of 1.6km [lmi] or more) and could operate without disturbing surrounding communities. (NASA Release 78-126; DSFC X-Press, Aug 11/78, 2; AvWk, Aug 14/78, 20)
NASA announced receipt of the first 2 HiMAT (highly maneuverable aircraft technology) prototypes from the builder, Rockwell Inti., which developed the 0.44-scale version during a joint NASA-USAF multiphase competitive program. Flights of the subscale models at Dryden Flight Research Center would use the remotely piloted research vehicle (RPRV) technique developed there to test advanced aerodynamic technology for enhanced aircraft maneuverability. The RPRV offered a highly cost-effective means of flight testing advanced, high-risk technology without associated risks to test pilots. A pilot in a ground cockpit using telemetry, television, and radar air-launched unmanned craft from a carrier aircraft to fly them through maneuvers. (DFRC X-Press, Mar 10/78, 2; AvWk, Mar 20/78, 17)
Dr. Frank Press, director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, had launched a campaign to reduce paperwork required by the government from university scientists receiving federal support, Nature reported. Press said money saved in this way might mean millions of dollars for every university, and wrote to NASA and NSF asking what steps they could take to reduce paperwork and to streamline grants regulations. Press added that, although there was little support in the administration for a Dept, of Science, interest was growing in establishing a Dept, of Technology and Industrial Development. {Nature, Feb 9/78, 497)
Langley Research Center announced it would host Mar. 7-9 an advanced technology airfoil research conference offering the aviation community a comprehensive review of the latest technical developments in airfoil computational analysis and design methods, airfoil test facilities and techniques, and various applications of new airfoil technology. Presented by NASA, supporting contractors, and university grantees, the technical sessions would cover progress in mathematical codes for use in electronic digital computers for airfoil analysis and design, coupled with progress in analog computers through wind-tunnel test facilities and special techniques of investigation; general aviation aircraft; transports; rotorcraft; propellers; windmills; and agricultural aircraft. (LaRC Release 78-12)
LaRC announced award to Micro Craft, Inc., Tullahoma, Tenn., of a contract to design and build precision models for wind-tunnel tests at the center. The small-scale models of controlled shape and finish, designed specifically for research and development projects, would consist of metals, moldable or formable materials, fiberglass-reinforced resins, woods, or combinations. The contract might also require specialized model-support equipment and other unique items needed for model tests. Micro Craft estimated the value of the 3-yr, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract at $2.8 million. (LaRC Release 78-14)
The USAF reported that a wind-tunnel test at Arnold Engineering Development Center using a new type of model and new testing techniques had demonstrated selection of an optimum aircraft-wing shape. Previous efforts to determine the best wing shape for a particular aircraft had compared features of several (sometimes many) models representing educated guesses; even after selecting one shape, testers could not be certain there was not another more efficient. The latest test had used simulated flight conditions with a new computer-controlled wing model able to change shape automatically. Three-dimensional images made by a stereophotographic technique defined the actual wing shape during each flight change, making it possible to consider numerous shapes. The model, one of the most complex tested in AEDC’s 16-ft transonic wind tunnel, was a product of General Dynamic’s Convair Division, San Diego, that had been redesigned and reassembled by AEDC’s operating contractor ARO, Inc., after its arrival at AEDC. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug/78, 12)
NASA announced it had tentatively selected five scientific experiments for its gamma ray observatory, a planned 1984 mission to explore a variety of the most energetic forms of radiation known: very high-energy gamma rays from pulsars, nuclear gamma rays, and gamma-ray bursts. Observatory data should provide a much better understanding of the nature of supernovas, pulsars, quasars, radio galaxies, the character of the early universe, and the possible existence of antimatter in the universe. Scientists also hoped to learn more about incredibly dense matter composing objects such as neutron stars, matter so compressed that a teaspoonful would weigh millions of tons. Data from the GRO might also tell more about gamma-ray bursts, erratic gamma-ray pulses of unknown origin that flashed across the solar system every month or so. Although Congress had not yet approved GRO, early solicitation of scientific participants and investigations would allow for mission definition and a prompt start after approval. GSFC would manage the observatory to be carried by the Shuttle into a planned orbit of 400 to 500km (250 to 300mi). NASA had selected principal investigators and experiments: Dr. James Kurfess of NRL, broad line gamma-ray spectrometer; Dr. Laurence Peterson of the Univ. of Calif., San Diego, narrow line gamma-ray spectrometer; Dr. Carl Fichtel of GSFC, high-energy gamma-ray detector; Dr. V. Schoenfelder of the Max-Planck Inst., Garching, W. Germany, medium-energy double Compton telescope; and Dr. Gerald Fishman of Marshall Space Flight Center, transient gamma-ray monitor. (NASA Release 78-140)
NASA reported that the 200kw experimental wind turbine generator managed by Lewis Research Center had completed more than lOOOhr of operation for DOE in Clayton, N.M., and was ready for checks to verify design-life estimates. Twin rotor blades and other dynamic components that had rotated at 40rpm or more (making more than a million cycles) since the machine began operating in January had developed loose or missing rivets and three small 3-in cracks, and would undergo more detailed inspection. Although DOE had shipped the blades to LeRC for detailed inspection and analysis of their wear and life potential, the turbine had continued operation using rotor blades from the prototype wind turbine operated on an experimental basis near Sandusky, Ohio, since October 1975. The first U.S. federally sponsored wind system to produce electricity directly for a community power system, the turbine had supplied more than 100 OOOkw-hr of electrical power to the Clayton-owned utility system. (NASA Release 78-97)
Under a cooperative agreement between NASA and the U.S. Navy, a Navy experimental plane would undergo in-place tethered-flight testing at LaRC’s Impact Dynamics Research Facility, the Langley Researcher reported. The Navy’s XFV-12A plane built by Rockwell Intl.’s Columbus Aircraft Div. was the only one of its kind, a prototype V/STOL aircraft designed to demonstrate the thrust-augmented wing concept in supersonic flight. The tests at LaRC had tethered the XFV-12A to the gantry by a single cable from a powerful winch mounted 210ft above ground. Static restraint tests kept the aircraft in place at various heights by ground cables attached to the nose and main landing gear, as its engines operated at full power. Using results of the static tests, LaRC had put the XFV-12A through dynamic tests, permitting greater freedom of motion, as the aircraft was not restrained by ground cables. The upper tether cable automatically reeled in as the aircraft maneuvered within the gantry, and a shock absorber on the winch cable guarded the airplane against loads greater than 2g. (Langley Researcher, June 16/78, 6)
A Senate operational remote-sensing bill introduced by Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) and a House space industrialization bill introduced by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) had increased pending legislation to carry civilian space policy beyond that outlined by President Carter, AvWk reported. Both bills called for formation of government corporations to expand benefits of space exploration beyond the R&D stage. AU the legislation would be reintroduced in the next Congress where, as a bloc, they would constitute the largest recent push for an expanded federal space effort. Other bills included a Space Policy Act introduced by Sen. Adlai Stevenson (D-Ill.), for extensive design and application of large space structures in orbit over the next lOyr; National Space and Aeronautics Act introduced by Sen. Schmitt, for a 30-yr planning process in U.S. space and aeronautics research; Earth Data and Information Service Act introduced by Sen. Stevenson, for an operational Landsat remotesensing system as a new division of NASA; Solar-Power Satellite Research Development and Demonstration Program Act introduced by Rep. Ronnie Flippo (D-Ala.), for $25 million in near-term funding to research technologies required for a solar-power satellite; NASA Solar-Power Satellite Program Act introduced by Sen. Schmitt, for greatly expanded work on solar-power satellite technology. (Av Wk, Oct 23/78,19; CR, Oct 13/78, S 19075; D/SBD, Oct 24/78, 234; Oct 27/78, 257)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced it had agreed to participate during May in an experiment called Avefria (Spanish for lapwing) to perturb the atmosphere so that scientists could study ionospheric irregularities and their effects on radio communications. The experiment would create a high-altitude barium-ion cloud in the ionosphere (an atmospheric layer 25 to 250mi above earth in which radio signals typically travel for long distances) by rocket-borne release of barium-metal vapor. Optical-observation and radio-communications stations in Nev. would make scientific measurements of the cloud and its interaction with the ionosphere. Major observation point would be the Tonopah (Nev.) Test Range; JPL would operate a second observation station at its Table Mountain astronomy site near Wrightwood, Calif. (JPL Universe, May 12/78, 1)
The USAF reported that the E-3A airborne warning and control system (AWACS), “leader” of the USAF command and control structure, had arrived at Wright-Patterson AFB for low-level flight tests conducted by the 6750th Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory to evaluate effects of aircraft noise. Tests with the E-3A would complete the 1978 measurement phase of NOISEMAP, a computer program to assess environmental impact of aircraft noise that had included the F-15, A-10, C-141, and KC-135. The assessments would serve in making alternative aircraft assignments and flight schedules, deciding on appropriate noise suppressors, and discovering potential noise problems for aircraft under design. Civil engineers had used the program in fixing sites for new buildings, determining requirements for adding noise-reduction materials to existing structures, and in orienting trim pads to minimize aircraft-noise impact on the community. AWACS was a modified Boeing 707 used as an airborne command post to coordinate fighters, close air-support aircraft, and strategic bombers in a combat arena. Its friend-or-foe antenna could identify enemy craft in a battlefield setting, allowing the 17-member AWACS crew to relay information to friendly aircraft. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug/78, 7)
A laser-heterodyne radiometer (LHR) developed by Dr. Robert Men-zies of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory had obtained evidence of ozone destruction in the upper atmosphere, JPL reported. The unique instrument, carried on a gondola suspended from a helium-filled polyethylene balloon, had gathered extremely accurate data by “looking” at the sun through the stratosphere during sunset at an altitude of 25km (120 000ft) where ultraviolet light breaks apart carbon molecules, releasing chlorine. Atoms of chlorine normally existed in quantities so small that their presence was difficult to detect; however, scientists had determined the effect of chlorine in destroying ozone, through a chain reaction that would form chlorine monoxide molecules. Later flights would measure the effect of seasonal variations and would look for other molecules responsible for ozone destruction. The research would assist federal regulators investigating danger from fluorocarbons used in refrigeration and air-conditioning; regulators might decide to ban aerosol propellants by June of this yr. (JPL Universe, Feb 17/78, 1)
Langley Research Center announced it had awarded SDC Integrated Services, Inc., McLean, Va., a contract for support services to operate the digital-computer complex at the center. All segments of the center would use the computer complex in analytical studies, real-time simulations, and experimental data reductions. Services under the contract would include operation of the computing and data-handling equipment, operational and performance analysis, and keypunch and auxiliary equipment operation, in addition to research-data reduction such as programming, nrocessing preparation, and data management. SDC had estimated the cost of the 2-yr base period of the contract at $5.7 million and a 1-yr option at $3 million; the cost-plus-award-fee contract also had two 1-yr unpriced options. (LaRC Release 78-17)
Lewis Research Center and Dryden Flight Research Center would conduct flight tests of advanced models of propellers, some with 8 or 10 blades, intended for new high-speed fuel-conserving aircraft, DFRC announced. LeRC had already measured aerodynamic performance of the approximately 1/7 scale (2ft-diameter) models in its wind tunnel, at a simulated cruise speed of 855kph (530mph) and altitude of 10 668m (35 000ft). NASA estimated that, in those cruise conditions, an advanced turboprop engine with the new-design propeller could save 20 to 40% in fuel over current turbofan engines and 10 to 20% over advanced turbofan engines. (DFRC Release 23-78)
LaRC announced it had selected Mercury Co., Tustin, Calif., to negotiate a contract for a pressure systems certification/recertification and configuration management program, including engineering evaluation of ground-based pressure systems to ensure a safe environment and to facilitate operation of the center’s unique high-energy research facilities. The contractor would make in-service inspection and certification of these pressure systems in accordance with NASA guidelines and In a ceremony at KSC marking NASA's 20th anniversary Oct. 1, President Jimmy Carter awards the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to six astronauts: Neil Armstrong (center), first man on the moon; Charles Conrad, Jr., commander of the second lunar landing and of the first crew to occupy the Sky lab space station, and Frank Borman, commander of the first manned spacecraft to orbit the moon (seated at left); also to Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; Virgil I. Grissom (posthumously), second American in space; and John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the earth. (NASA photo 78-H-610) OyRlGINAk PAGE IS, QE 0bR QUALITY would continue the existing configuration management program. LaRC would manage the approximately $1.15 million 2yr contract, which had a lyr option for extension valued at approximately $637 000. (LaRC Release 78-56) October 4\ Two U.S. payload specialists would join three Europeans at Porz-Wahn, W. Germany, Oct. 6 to begin training for Spacelab 1, first combined manned space mission of NASA and ESA, Marshall Space Flight Center reported. They would attend sessions in W. Germany and two other European countries conducted by the scientific investigators planning European-sponsored experiments to fly on Spacelab 1, the two NASA mission specialists assigned to the flight, with MSFC’s Charles Lewis and NASA training coordinator. Porz-Wahn was the site of ESA’s Spacelab payload integration and coordination in Europe (SPICE), which had coordinated European crew training. After the European trip, the group would begin a tour of U.S. scientific installations in Jan. 1979. (.Marshall Star, Oct 4/78, 1)
NASA announced that Heao 1, first of a series of observatories designed to study celestial x-rays and gamma rays, was officially a success. Primary objective of Heao 1 was to obtain highly detailed experimental data on astrophysical phenomena by measuring sizes and locations of x-ray sources and determining their intensity and time variation; according to Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA associate administrator for space science, the objective had been accomplished. NASA had authorized an extension of Heao l’s mission to a second scan of the celestial sphere, and would broaden scientific participation through a guest-investigator program. NASA planned to launch in Nov. 1978 a second high-energy astronomy observatory designed for detailed study of interesting sources pinpointed by Heao 1; a third would be launched in 1979. (NASA Release 78-80)
MSFC announced it had awarded contracts totaling $42 751 900 for scientific investigations in support of the Space Telescope project to five educational institutions: Research Foundation of the State Univ. of New York, Albany, Dr. J. J. Caldwell, Space Telescope interdisciplinary scientist, $126 000; Beloit College, Beloit, Wis., Dr. D. J. Schroeder, telescope scientist, $69 000; Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, N.J., Dr. J. N. Bahcall, interdisciplinary scientist, $257 700; Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore, Md., Prof. W. G. Fastie, telescope scientist, $151 300; Univ. of Texas, Austin, Dr. William Jefferys, astrometry science team leader, $1 862 500; and Dr. K. L. Lambert, interdisciplinary scientist, $285 400. The Space Telescope, planned for launch into earth orbit in the early 1980s, would permit scientists to see 7 times farther into deep space than before. MSFC had been lead center for the Space Telescope; GSFC had been responsible for scientific instruments and for planning telescope operations. (Marshall Star, May 10/78, 2)
NASA announced that scientists from NASA’s Ames Research Center and NOAA’s Environmental Research Laboratory in Boulder, Colo., had begun flight tests of an instrument designed by NOAA scientist Dr. Peter Kuhn to warn pilots of impending turbulence (see A&A 1976, Nov. 11, 277). Dr. Kuhn, an experimenter on NASA’s Gerard P. Kuiper Observatory (a C-141 aircraft equipped with a large telescope for astronomy research), had noticed that variations in atmospheric water vapor as measured by an infrared (IR) water-vapor radiometer had often accompanied extreme turbulence encountered by the aircraft; he had succeeded in using IR radiometer to define atmospheric conditions in the telescope’s field of vision. Dr. Kuhn then suggested mounting an 1R radiometer aimed forward in an aircraft; this system had successfully predicted occurrences of turbulence in clear air from 2.5 to 5.5min before encounter. However, researchers needed more encounters from various directions and altitudes to test the instrument, and wanted to experiment with filters and to fine-tune the instrument for optimum results. The joint NASA-NOAA program would consist of exhaustive tests using a NASA Learjet research aircraft to develop a low-cost system that would enhance flight safety and comfort, be suitable for any aircraft, be able to operate unattended and require minimum maintenance, and produce a cockpit visual alert 4 to 5min before a turbulence encounter. (NASA Release 78-15)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory reported that NASA and DOE had selected 10 companies to begin contract negotiations for projects to improve current methods of manufacturing modules of photovoltaic cells. The $4 million effort would focus on improving production methods to reduce costs in 1979-1981, and would supplement current DOE efforts to make solar energy economically competitive with conventional power sources. Firms selected were Arco Solar, Inc., Chatsworth, Calif.; Energy Materials Corp., Ayer, Mass.; Kayex Corp., Rochester, N.Y.; Kluicke & Soffa Industries, Inc., Horsham, Pa.; MB Associates, San Ramon, Calif.; Motorola, Inc., Semiconductor Group, Phoenix, Ariz.; RCA Corp., David Sarnoff Research Center, Princeton, N.J.; Sensor Technology, Inc., Chatsworth, Calif.; Siltec Corp., Menlo Park, Calif.; and Sollos, Inc., Los Angeles, Calif. In the specified time period, the firms would develop techniques for mass-producing large modules of silicon-based photovoltaic cells for use by industries producing flat (nonconcentrating) photovoltaic modules. Techniques would include new ways to slice silicon solar-cell material and to assemble photovoltaic modules. JPL would manage the effort (designated Low-Cost Solar-Array Project) for DOE. (NASA Release 78-151)
