NASA reported that its first high-energy astronomy observatory, Heao 1, had exhausted its attitude-control gas supply, ending a 17-month mapping of celestial X-ray sources. Launched August 12, 1977, and designed for a 6-month lifetime, Heao 1 had returned data of such quality that NASA had extended its mission. Its systems and experiments had functioned well throughout, though the primary mission ended in February 1978. Results included raising the number of X-ray sources from the 350 previously known to nearly 1,500; locating a new black-hole possibility near the constellation Scorpius, bringing the total to four; and discovering a universal hot plasma constituting a major part of the mass of the universe, as well as a dust and gas cloud with a mass probably sufficient to “close” the universe (prevent its perpetual expansion). The results had already engendered more than 160 technical papers and scientific presentations, and analysis of the Heao 1 data would require years of work by high-energy astrophysicists; the findings might change fundamental concepts of the universe, the NASA report said. Heao 1 would probably reenter Earth’s atmosphere in late March. (NASA Release 79-4; MSFC Release 79-3).
NASA adjudged the mission of Heao 2 successful. Launched November 13, 1978, the observatory had made more than 5,000 discrete observations and had worked well for more than 11 months, though design lifetime was only 9 months. On the basis of significant new findings (X-ray detection of more than 60 known quasars and discovery of more than a dozen previously unknown; the absence of hot neutron stars at the center of historic supernovas, calling for new theories to explain the remnant cores; X-ray emissions far more intense than predicted from main-sequence stars) and of “an active and enthusiastic guest observer program,” Dr. Thomas Mutch, associate administrator for space science, recommended extension of the mission. (NASA MOR [postlaunch] S-832-78-02)
NASA reported that improved components and techniques could lower the “now prohibitive” cost of using turbine rather than piston engines in small general aviation aircraft. If turbines cost only half again instead of three times as much as piston engines, small plane users could reap the advantages of one-third the weight, proven reliability and safety, multifuel capability, and less maintenance, vibration, noise, or pollution. A study by Lewis Research Center (LeRC) said that an advance turbine aircraft would be 25% cheaper to operate, would use 10% less fuel, and would cost 15% less to purchase than an equivalent aircraft powered by a typical reciprocating engine. Although only 8% of general aviation aircraft flying in the United States, were turbine powered, the study said that the market for PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED | tut-MUON WAV ***** 2i an advanced turbine engine could reach 25,000 units per year by the late 1980s. The general aviation field included 98% of U.S. civilian aircraft. (NASA Release 79-29)
ESA announced the successful launch of its Ariane LOl at 17 hours, 14 minutes, 38 seconds GMT from Kourou; all three stages functioned normally and the fairing was jettisoned as planned. Achieved orbit was close to planned orbit. Space center facilities and all downrange stations functioned “faultlessly” and permitted continuous tracking of launcher telemetry. (ESA Info Bltn 41)
NASA announced it would join Soviet scientists for the first time in a study of physiological changes due to simulated weightlessness. Tests in each country on 10 subjects aged between 35 and 40 would comprise two weeks of control observations, one week of bed rest, and two weeks of postrest measurements, including stress tests and blood and urine samples. Half of each group would be horizontal during the total bed rest, the others would rest with heads lowered 6° for horizontal. U.S. tests had kept subjects horizontal only, and the identical studies would indicate the best procedure. The program would begin in mid-May at the Moscow Institute of Medico-Biological Problems and continue at Ames Research Center (ARC) in July. Both NASA and USSR scientists would take part in each experiment. (NASA Release 79-46; ARC Release 79-17)
NASA reported results of a 22-month government-industry study of possible damage to electrical equipment from release of carbon fibers in fires after accidents to civil aircraft. R. R. Heldenfels, LaRC director for structure, told a conference at LaRC that public risk from use of carbon fibers on civil aircraft was so small as to be insignificant. The President in July 1977 had directed the Office of Science and Technology Policy to study potential problems of using carbon-composite materials and to provide a plan for federal action if needed. NASA got the assignment to assess risks of such use in civil aviation, with support from the National Bureau of Standards, some DOD laboratories, and private firms. Other federal agencies studying the problem were DOC, DOT, DOE, and EPA. The perceived risk was that breakdown of composite materials in burning would put into the atmosphere short lengths of carbon fiber thought to be hazardous to electrical equipment because of their high heat resistance and electrical conductivity; their extreme light weight would allow them to float for miles before touching electrical equipment, causing short circuits or malfunctions. (NASA Release 79-171; LaRC Release 79-85)
NASA announced preparations for Voyager 7’s encounter with the planet Jupiter about March 5. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) would provide television coverage of the event; employees at Langley Research Center (LaRC) would have a special 7 a.m. colloquium in the center’s cafeteria, complete with breakfast service and television monitors throughout the area. After 18 months of space travel, the encounter would take place at 7:42 a.m. EST at a distance of 278,000 kilometers (172,750 miles) from the planet’s cloud tops. Real-time images and live programming through Comsat 1 would continue for about two hours. (NASA Release 79-26; LaRC anno, undated)
NASA reported that LeRC engineers had worked for six years on perfecting a new power transmission system: the Nasvytis multiroller traction drive, capable of transmitting high-power loads at high-speed ratios without using toothed gears. Between 1879 and 1971 about 34 patents had been issued on various fixed-ratio traction-drive concepts; 8 of these were issued to Dr. Algirdis L. Nasvytis. NASA engineers working with Nasvytis had made key design changes in traction-drive roller geometries to produce a test rig that could operate in a 15-to-l speed ratio. LeRC had developed for an automotive gas-turbine engine a similar drive that could transmit 7 horsepower per pound compared to conventional gears with about 4 horsepower per pound. Stuart H. Loewenthal, lead LeRC engineer on the project, said the “quiet, almost vibrationless means of transmitting power [could aid in] minimizing the noise pollution that now surrounds us.” The device would be cheaper to make because it needed no gear-tooth design or cutting; it was lighter and smaller than conventional gearboxes; it had performed at 95% efficiency for 15-to-l ratios at speeds to 73,000 rpm, and was more reliable, being less susceptible to wear and breakdown. (Lewis RC Release 79-104)
