NASA announced that it would extend the mission of Heao 2, nicknamed Einstein, beyond its projected lifetime of 11 monllis. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, NASA associate administrator for space science, said Einstein, second of the three high-energy astronomy observatories, had not only produced significant results [see December ll, 1979] but had also lent itself to a guest-investigator program that had garnered about 400 proposals from 80 groups in the United States and other nations, including Great Britain, France, West Germany, Italy, the Soviet Union, India, and Japan. Heao 1, launched in 1977, had mapped about 1,500 X-ray sources and measured for the first time the uniform high-energy X-ray background of space. Heao 3, launched in September 1979, was making an all-sky survey of cosmic and gamma rays at higher energies and from a higher orbital inclination than the first observatory. (NASA Release 80-6)
LaRC announced an award to Dynamic Engineering Inc., Newport News, Va., of a three-year cost-plus-fixed-fee contract valued at $4.3 million for design and fabrication of dynamic models for NASA research and development programs. It would include personnel, equipment, materials, and facilities for feasibility studies, engineering design, and assembly and calibration of models.	. Used primarily in wind-tunnel tests, the models would be of three kinds: general-performance, holding a fixed geometry through a range of angle-of-attack and dynamic pressure; free-flight and spin models, simulating mass properties of aircraft; and aeroelastic models simulating configuration changes .with load, for performance and flutter investigations. The models would consist of fiberglass-reinforced resin, wood, metal, moldable or for-mable materials, or combinations of these. (LaRC Release 80-73)
NASA announced that it had signed a memorandum of understanding with TVA on NASA support of TVA programs in energy research, development, and demonstration. The two agencies were currently negotiating an agreement for TVA reimbursement of NASA for MSFC support of TVA’s coal-gasification project. NASA for some time had supported DOE and other agencies’ programs on energy research and development (R&D) because its facilities were adaptable to such research. TVA had requested NASA assistance because of the NASA staffs experience in engineering and scientific disciplines applicable to energy research and technology, as well as in managing such programs. (NASA Release 80-172; MSFC Release 80-145)
ARC would close the free world’s largest wind tunnel for an $85 million modification. The 40 x 80 foot (12 x 24 meter) tunnel, in continuous use since completed in 1944, would have a 600-foot (183-meter) addition to house a new test section 80 x 120 feet (24 x 37 meters) with an air intake 362 feet (110 meters) wide and 132 feet (40 meters) high. The six 6,000-hp electric motors used since 1944 would be replaced with 22,500-hp units, raising drive from 36,000	hp to 135,000 hp. (NASA Release 80-125)
Astronomer Robert Victor, a professor at Michigan State University, said that the Christmas season would be marked by a triple conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn “worth gazing at” that would not occur again until A.D. 2238 or 2239, The event had occurred in 7 B.C. and resembled a similar conjunction of Jupiter and Venus in 2 B.C., either of which could have appeared as the guiding light of the Magi or star of Bethlehem. (fV Star, Dec 1/80, A-2)
ARC said that it would test for the first time the ability of males aged 55 to 65 to withstand the physiological stress of weightlessness. Previous studies had tested males and females aged 35 to 45 and 45 to 55. Women aged 55 to 65 would be tested later in 1980 to complete the baseline data for use in establishing medical criteria for space flight. For the first briefing early in February, 46 volunteers reported and 20 were chosen for orientation March 24. The preliminary orientation and testing PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED would give researchers a chance to see how the subjects performed and allowed the subjects to decide whether they wanted to participate in the entire test. Two sets of four subjects would be selected: four would begin 9 days of controlled observation April 10 at ARC’s human research facility, followed by 10 days of bed rest and 5 days of recovery and tests of the cardiovascular system. Another group of four would begin the same series April 13. Dr. Harold Sandler, ARC project scientist, would supervise the tests. (ARC Release 80-7; NASA Release 80-43)
NASA announced that a joint government-industry team would design, fabricate, and test a solar-power 20-kilowatt generator for use by small communities, industries, farms, military bases, and similar users. Sponsored by the Department of Energy (DOE), the project would foster inexpensive ways to use solar energy to produce electric power and industrial heat. Under a $1.3 million Lewis Research Center (LeRC) contract, AiResearch Manufacturing Company would build the engine, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) would develop the solar power system including the solar mirror and receiver. (NASA Release 80-17)
LaRC reported award of a 3-year $4.6 million contract to Sperry Support Services for development, operation, and maintenance of flight simulators, including real-time digital programs for solving research problems and for aerodynamics and space flight. Sperry would design and operate flight simulators and would develop, integrate, and test electronic subsystems to use with existing data systems. (LaRC Release 80-9)
NASA launched at 10:57 a.m. February 14 the SMM observatory from Cape Canaveral on a Delta vehicle into a circular orbit 360 miles above the equator. The 5,200-pound spacecraft carried instruments to study solar flares [see February 8] over a period of 2 years; the 11-year cycle of solar activity was entering its most turbulent phase, with flares erupting on the Sun once or twice a day and superflares causing atmospheric disturbances on Earth once a month. The SMM launch cost the United States $99 million, including $20 million for the Delta. (W Post, Feb 15/80, A-7; NASA Release
The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) reported that NASA’s Heao 1 had detected “surprisingly intense” X-ray emission from a pair of common Sunlike stars in the constellation Cepheus. The pair formed a tight binary revolving around each other with a period of only six hours, in a rotary motion like “the twin blades of an eggbeater.” The gas in the intervening space would be stirred violently and the magnetic-field lines twisted, stretched, and tom in a furious turbulence, the resulting X-ray emission being “millions of times that expected from either star alone.” The Heao 1 discovery was recently confirmed by the large telescope aboard Heao 2 (Einstein), and other stars of that sort would be checked for X-ray emissions; two other binaries had been detected as X-ray sources. (NRL Release 3-1-80F)
LaRC said that NASA had awarded three major U.S. manufacturers contracts for 14.5-month studies of advanced supersonic transport aircraft. Boeing Company, Lockheed California, and McDonnell Douglas, each received a $1.15 million contract to work in the same discipline, but each on its own concept. Boeing’s was a 270-passenger delta-wing, cruise speed Mach 2.4; Douglas’s was an arrow-wing carrying 225-500 passengers, cruise speed Mach 2.2; Lockheed’s was an arrow-wing carrying 290 passengers, cruise speed Mach 2.5. Each firm would broaden its research in aerodynamics, lightweight titanium and composite-material structures, and variable-cycle engines for subsonic and supersonic operation. Past studies by these contractors on reducing fuel consumption and noise and on economic considerations needed updating. LaRC would manage the work at the contractors’ facilities. (LaRC Release 80-29; NASA Release 80-51)
Langley Research Center (LaRC) announced that it had awarded Computer Science Corporation a 3-year contract valued at $3 million for computational analysis and programming support services to basic and applied research at LaRC, including computer documentation, technical reports, program designs, training courses, and plans for follow-on work. (LaRC Release
DFRC announced plans for a ceremony at which ARC officials representing NASA and the Army’s Tilt Rotor Research Aircraft project would accept the first of two aircraft built under a joint program. One of the two planes built by Bell Helicopter Textron arrived at ARC in March 1978 for tests in its full-scale wind tunnel; the other arrived at DFRC August 13 for followup of tests by Bell. So far, two contractor pilots, two NASA pilots, one Army pilot, and one Marine pilot had tested and evaluated the aircraft. (DFRC Release 80-28)
The U.S. Coast Guard signed an agreement with NASA April 29 for work leading to an operational lighter-than-air machine that might constitute a fleet of blimps by the early 1990s, according to the New York Times. Coordinating the two agencies’ research would reduce costs: NASA scientists had been studying use of lighter-than-air craft to lift heavy equipment and would now work on developing stronger synthetics and better adhesives for the blimp bag, more sophisticated electronics, and more automated procedures for ground handling to do away with the need for large ground crews. Lt. Cdr. Kenneth Williams, chief of the Coast Guard technology branch, said that they sought a vehicle for use in “search and rescue, law enforcement, and other patrol functions.’’ The Navy had abandoned its airship program in the early 1960s because fuel was cheap; it “costs a heck of a lot more today,” Williams said, and a Coast Guard-Navy study had found fuel-efficient airships operationally and technically feasible for maritime patrol work in combination with cutters and conventional aircraft. (NY Times, May 4/80, 56)
The European Space Agency (ESA) reported that detailed evaluation of records from the Ariane’s first test flight December 24, 1979, confirmed that it was a complete success. Each of the three powered stages had performed better than predicted, and the results would allow integration of the second launcher to proceed without change except for a pogo-correction device not used on the first flight. The second flight was set for late May or early June 1980.	(ESA Info Bltn 1)
NASA said that it would launch seven sounding rockets February 15 and 16 from the San Marco platform off the coast of Kenya to study a total solar eclipse visible in that area but not in North America, recording changes in the electrical structure of Earth’s middle atmosphere and temperature distribution in the solar corona during an eclipse. Two Astrobee D and three Super Areas rockets would carry payloads from Pennsylvania State University, and two Black Brant rockets would carry payloads from the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory in New Mexico. Piggyback on one of the Black Brants would be a Johns Hopkins University experiment to measure ultraviolet zodiacal light from the solar corona. Instrument packages carried to 330 kilometer (205-mile) altitude would make measurements during parachute descent. GSFC would manage the eclipse study with support from Wallops Flight Center (WFC) in rocketry, instrumentation, and range support. The mobile launch platform in the Indian Ocean was operated by the University of Rome’s center for aerospace research. (NASA Release 80-24; WFC Release 80-1)
