MSFC said that NASA’s third high-energy astronomy observatory, Heao 3, used the last of its attitude-control thruster gas and was powered down, completing a mission begun in September 1979 to study pulsars, quasars, exploding galaxies, and black holes in space, whose high energy output could not be studied with Earth-based telescopes due to atmospheric interference. With 20 mqnths of operation in orbit, Heao 3 was the third of its type to perform for more than twice its design lifetime. It would reenter and burn up later this year. (MSFC Release 81-69; NASA Release 81-77)
The House of Representatives passed NASA’s authorization bill by a vote of 404-13. The amount, the same that appeared in the amended budget request, was $6,122 billion for research and development, construction of facilities, and research and program management. One amendment was adopted, reducing the authorization for aeronautical research and technology by $11.2 million. (CR, June 23/81, D773; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 24/81)
MSFC reported the arrival from Europe of a jumbo jet carrying equipment to prepare Spacelab, the ESA reusable scientific research facility, for flight on the shuttle beginning in 1983. The gear for electrical ground support and mechanical servicing arrived at KSC after formal acceptance in early July by representatives of MSFC, which was responsible for monitoring Spacelab design and development and would manage the first three Spacelab missions. (MSFC Release 81-92)
NASA announced that Perkin-Elmer Corporation’s Danbury, Connecticut, facility had finished shaping and polishing the 94-inch (2.4-meter) diameter primary mirror for the space telescope, main optical component of the telescope assembly. Launched on the Shuttle early in 1985, the 12-ton unmanned telescope would orbit at 600 kilometers (370 miles) above the interfering haze of Earth’s atmosphere. It would be able to see objects 50 times fainter than observable from Earth telescopes, observing about 350 times more volume of space and 7 times further into space than now possible, up to 14 billion light-years. To make full use of this undistorted view of space, telescope parts had to be much more accurate than those in Earth telescopes. The mirror exhibited a deviation at any point on its surface of less than one millionth of an inch from an ideally perfect surface. Manufacture of the mirror blank began in October 1977 at Corning Glass Works, which delivered it to Perkin-Elmer in December 1978. The blank was made of a Corning product called ultra-low-expansion glass, which has extremely low thermal expansion properties. Optical fabrication began with rough grinding of front and back surfaces of the blank, followed in August 1980 by fine polishing of the front surface, using a computer-controlled polisher. The next stage of fabrication would be the application to the polished surface of two uniform extremely thin coatings, one a reflective layer of pure aluminum, the other a protective layer of magnesium fluoride to prevent oxidation of the aluminum. Coating would take place at Perkin-Elmer in the world’s largest vacuum chamber, which operates at a vacuum very near that of space. After coating, the mirror would be installed in the optical telescope and aligned to the secondary mirror, focal plane, scientific instruments, and guidance sensors. The completed optical telescope would then be integrated into a support-systems module, a major element of the space telescope, under construction by Lockheed. The space telescope project was managed by MSFC. (NASA Release 81-82)
MSFC reported a milestone in the development of the Space Telescope. Perkin-Elmer Corporation, contractor for design and production of the optical asembly, finished putting an aluminum coating 3 millionths of an inch thick on the 94-inch primary mirror, an 1,800-pound polished glass blank. Engineers from the firm and from MSFC verified that the coating adhered to the mirror and exhibited the proper reflectivity. The telescope would use two mirrors to focus light from stellar objects onto a group of instruments at the rear of the telescope assembly. Launched from the Shuttle into Earth orbit in the mid-1980s, the Space Telescope should allow astronomers to see seven times deeper into space than is now possible with ground-based telescopes. (MSFC Releae 81-148)
Ames Research Center (ARC) announced the completion of a flight program to evaluate the quiet short-haul research aircraft (QSRA). Twenty-two visiting pilots representing 16 organizations made 2 flights each in the modified deHavilland Buffalo (C-8A) with a new wing design and 4 Lycoming YF-102 engines mounted on the wing to provide propulsive lift. NASA offered the evaluation program to introduce QSRA technology to potential users, obtain feedback on the future of the program, and get an independent critique. Participating pilots and engineers represented ARC, Dryden Flight Research Center (DRFC), and Langley Research Center (LaRC), as well as the U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and companies including Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, Lockheed, deHavilland, Grumman, United Airlines, U.S. Air, Ran-some Airlines, and the Airline Pilots Association (APA). (ARC Release 81-01)
