Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) reported testing the thermal performance of a helium cooling system to be used on the large infrared telescope experiment planned for flight on Spacelab 2 in 1984. For the MSFC-managed experiment to work, the cooling system must keep the infrared detectors at a supercold temperature. The liquid-helium coolant stored during the mission in a 250-liter container would vaporize as withdrawn to circulate through telescope channels and keep the instrument near absolute zero, coldest possible temperature, at which all molecular action stops. One objective of the tests was to see how long the system could store the cold liquid; the container would be filled one or two weeks before launch, then undergo a seven-day mission. Tests would continue until March. (MSFC Release 82-2)
Ames Research Center (ARC) released new findings about Venus from 30 experiments of the Pioneer Venus missions and reported that the orbiter was still returning daily information. The data were available only now because of the complexity of the missions and the large amounts of data returned, combined with the value of comparisons with Soviet data on Venus. The new data included evidence for two major currently active volcanic areas on Venus; findings that Venus had a thicker crust than Earth and was a “one-plate” planet with little plate-tectonic movement; and models of the Venus cloud system and greenhouse effect that were complete and consistent. The research also found strong new evidence of former Venus oceans on the scale of Earth’s. Data indicated that the Earth would become “a virtual Venus if you stopped its rotation, removed the moon, and moved [it] slightly closer to the sun.” Although Venus’s atmosphere and environment might have been Earthlike during the solar system’s early history, evidence of the lost oceans remained only in the ratio of deuterium to hydrogen (100 times as much deuterium relative to hydrogen on Venus as on Earth). Earlier, abundant water could have sustained life; the greenhouse effect “wiped out most existing phenomena” on Venus, replacing them with the current furnace-like environment. (ARC Release 82-1; NASA Release 82-9)
The Space and Earth Science Advisory Committee, z. group of more than 80 scientists, met for the first time in Washington to discuss its role in advising NASA on science activities. Associate Administrator Dr. Burt Edelson told the committee of two recent changes in NASA: a reorganization that moved science and applications into the same department and the appointment of Dr. Frank McDonald as chief scientist, a position that had been vacant for a long time. (A/D, Nov 19/82, 107)
NASA reported that its Kuiper airborne observatory (a Lockheed C-141 Starlifter aircraft carrying a 36-inch infrared reflector telescope) had captured an image of Columbia’s reentry heating pattern at the end of its third spaceflight. The procedure, known as IRIS (infrared imagery of Shuttle), was part of an orbiter experiment program using the Shuttle to collect data of value in advancing aerospace technology. The Kuiper plane, operated by ARC, had taken off for observation without knowing whether the Shuttle would land at White Sands or KSC; an update 15 minutes before landing ensured success. A similar attempt on the first flight had failed. (NASA Release 82-56; ARC Release 82-14)
