NASA technicians at Cape Canaveral removed two of Challenger’s main engines for repairs; a third engine, on its way from Mississippi, would undergo similar maintenance. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, associate administrator for space transportation systems, told a House subcommittee on science and technology that discovery of the flaws while the Shuttle was still on the ground showed the agency’s conservative approach to safety. He blamed tight budgets in the past for a lack of spare parts. Delay from the original January 20 launch date had already cost NASA about $1.5 million; costs would increase later when crews would have to work overtime to meet program commitments. Challenger’s ffl engine was removed February 4 when a crack in a coolant line allowed inflammable gas to leak into the aft compartment. Then, the replacement engine was found to have an oxygen leak in its heat exchanger, a system to pressurize the external fuel tank. An inspection of the #3 engine revealed the same flaw. As Challenger’s engines were intended to handle heavier payloads than Columbia’s, a design change had added a metal sleeve over the fuel-supply tubes to absorb greater vibrations. Soldering apparently overheated and embrittled the underlying metal tubing. Welding new tubing would make the configuration like the old Columbia engines, and Challenger would not be able to run at full thrust. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Mar 2/83; NY Times, Mar 2/83, A-l; W Post, Mar 2/83, A-5)
A NASA board said that slippage of a mechanical adjustment caused a December 1982 accident at ARC during tests of the world’s largest and newest wind tunnel. The collapse of a structure smoothing airflow through the tunnel pulled debris through the power section and damaged the fan blades beyond repair. The damage cost more than $10 million and would delay completion by a year or more. No persons were injured. (NASA Release 83-96)
NASA announced the establishment of a Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science at ARC, to begin operations in June. Funded by NASA through the Universities Space Research Associations (USRA), the institute would be a place for the academic community to work in computer science, applied math, and computer applications to solution of scientific and engineering problems. Director of the institute would be Dr. Peter J. Denning, head of the computer sciences department at Purdue University. (NASA Release 83-38)
NASA announced that its scientists studying motion sickness were focusing on a chemical substance in the fluid core of the brain that might cause vomiting. The fact that there might be a chemical link in motion sickness was discovered through NASA’s research into the causes of space motion sickness. The research was being conducted at ARC in the Biomedical Research Division and at the new Biomedical Institute at JSC. Studies by Ames scientist Dr. Nancy Daunton and two colleagues at Wright State University in Dayton, Ohio, showed that blocking the flow of cerebrospinal fluid in the brain stopped motion-induced vomiting and that an incomplete block did not suppress vomiting. The scientists were attempting to isolate the responsible chemical from cerebrospinal fluid. When a person received sensory cues for motion, the brain responds with its normal, programmed responses to control eye, head, and body movements. But when the responses do not yield the expected results—especially when the visual image does not stabilize and posture control is not easily maintained— humans and animals often experience motion sickness. (NASA Release
Lewis Research Center’s (LeRC) basic organization was revised following a recent strategic planning session. The four research and technology (R&T) directorate (aeronautics, energy, science and technology, and space) were changed to aeronautics, spaceflight systems, space technology, and materials and structures. An office of comptroller was established to manage resources and budget. Other directorates affected were administration, engineering services, and technical services, (NASA anno Jan 14/83; LeRC Release 83-3)
