NASA announced that it awarded to the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colo., a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract of $7,076,741 for operation and maintenance of the National Scientific Balloon Facility (NSBF) in Palestine, Tex. The contractor would provide the personnel, materials, supplies, and services to manage, operate, and maintain the NSBF, including flight program operation, engineering activities, and research and developmnet. The NSBF would annually conduct 60 to 70 scientific balloon flights. GSFC’s Wallops Island, Va., facility would administer the contract. (GSFC Release 84-4) On this flight, Sharma would conduct medical experiments in which he would practice yoga as a possible means of coping with space sickness. Experiments would also include detailed space surveys of the Indian subcontinent. The Soviet Union and India televised the launch, and Tass quoted Prime Minister Indira Gandhi as saying that the joint mission gave a “new dimension” to friendship between India and the Soviet Union. The three returned to Earth April 11 in a perfect parachute landing of their Soyuz T-10 space capsule near the town of Arkalyk, 1,500 miles southeast of Moscow. Tass reported that the cosmonauts were “feeling fine.” The report continued, “New information on peculiarities of the human organism’s adaptation to space flight conditions was obtained.” Beyond stressing Soviet-Indian cooperation and friendship, the flight also demonstrated the peaceful uses of outer space, Soviet officials commented. (FBIS, USSR, Apr 4/84, Ul-4; FBIS, USSR, Apr 11/84, Ul-3; NY Times, Apr 4/86, A-16; W Post, Apr 12/84, A-33)
NASA announced that Dr. Richard J. Terrile of JPL and Dr. Bradford A. Smith of the University of Arizona, using a special electronic camera system at the Carnegie Institution’s Las Campanas Observatory in Chile, clearly photographed the rings of Uranus, showing them to be made of particles that were possibly the darkest found in the solar system. The camera used a charge-coupled device to record the image. Photographing the rings was difficult because they were darker than charcoal and very close to the much brighter Uranus. Special computer processing was performed on the images in order to make the rings visible. This processing created the false three-dimensional look of the images. Analysis of the photographs showed that the rings reflected back only about 2% of the sunlight falling on them, making them possibly the darkest material found in the solar system. This raised the question as to what the rings were made of, and two possibilities were suggested. Evidence from meteorites and astronomical observations of asteroids suggested that dark organic materials were prevalent in the outer solar system and could comprise the rings. Another possibility was that the rings were made of frozen methane, another common material in the outer solar system. Studies of the rings were important because they would contribute to preparations for the Voyager 2 encounter with Uranus in January 1986, the first opportunity to view the rings close up. (NASA Release 84-145)
