NASA announced that pilots flew the NASA/Army XV-15 tilt-rotor research aircraft with its stability control augmentation system (SCAS) both operative and inoperative. The SCAS reduced pilot workload, allowing the pilot to devote attention to other tasks; however, if the SCAS failed, the pilot had to provide stability and control commands. A primary question answered by the NASA research was whether a pilot could fly a tilt-rotor aircraft with a sidestick controller when the SCAS failed. The objective of the XV-15 tilt-rotor research aircraft program was to develop and evaluate tilt-rotor technology for civil and military applications. A tilt-rotor aircraft could lift off vertically like a helicopter and then, by rotating its rotor thrust from vertical to horizontal, fly like a conventional airplane at speeds up to 345 miles per hour. The sidestick control system evaluation provided data for the V-22 Osprey, a tilt-rotor aircraft NASA was developing for the Department of Defense (DOD). DOD would consider the flight test when deciding whether to use a sidestick controller in the V-22. Results of the flight evaluation indicated the sidestick controller provided a reasonable means of controlling the aircraft with or without the SCAS. However, when the third axis (yaw) was added to the sidestick controller, pilots noted a significant increase in workload, indicating that additional studies were necessary in this area. The sidestick controller system used onboard digital computers and electronics, which replaced mechanical linkages that normally transmitted pilot signals to the aircraft's control surfaces. Ames Research Center developed the system and would refine and reevaluate it during future control system studies. (NASA Release 85-124)
Galileo project team members would soon complete the two-month-long environmental test, phase 2, of the spacecraft, during which they put Galileo in a 25-ft. space simulator, an evacuated chamber cooled to -250 to 270° F, in order to observe how Galileo functioned in a space-like environment, the JPL Universe reported. Engineers also exposed the spacecraft to an array of high-intensity quartz lamps, which simulated the solar effects Galileo would experience in space. Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) personnel would move Galileo in about two weeks to the spacecraft assembly facility for the system test, phase 3. Following spacecraft disassembly, researchers would simulate different operational phases of the mission for spacecraft testing. Galileo was composed of a planetary orbiter and an atmospheric entry probe for investigations of the planet Jupiter's magnetosphere's chemical composition and its physical state of structure and physical dynamics. (JPL Universe, Mar 8/85, 1)
NASA announced a demonstration at Lewis Research Center (LeRC) of a convertible gas turbine engine, which could operate in turboshaft or turbofan modes or both simultaneously, that would enable future rotorcraft to operate either as rotary or fixed-wing aircraft capable of speeds equivalent to commercial transports. The demonstration was part of a joint NASA/Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) program using a TF-34 engine modified under a General Electric Co. contract. Such an engine would provide future X-wing (4-bladed) rotorcraft with the necessary shaft power to take off vertically. After reaching the conversion speed, near 200 knots, the pilot would disengage the transmission of the rotorcraft and lock the rotor blades in an "X" configuration for operation as a fixed-wing aircraft. The engine would convert from shaft to fan mode in 15 to 20 seconds to power the craft at speeds near .8 Mach. Landing would require reversing the conversion process. During the past year, designers had evaluated performance characteristics of the engine and in Dec 1984 accomplished successfully the first transient operation simulating the conversion to and from rotary-wing to fixed-wing flight. The conversion had required 18 seconds, with the engine responding as predicted throughout. These tests had represented the first successful operation of a 5,000 hp-class convertible engine in both fan and shaft modes and the first dual mode operation for an engine. The new engine would make possible a class of civil and military highspeed rotorcraft that could operate efficiently from hover to transonic speeds. (NASA Release 85-30)
measure the effect convection had on heat flow in a liquid (General Electric/Penn State University);
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) researchers were working on improvements in the National Airspace System (NAS) air-traffic control system to provide more efficient air transportation in the U.S. and to maintain the U.S. position of leadership in civil aviation, the Lewis News reported. A major NAS requirement was accurate upper-air wind information, necessary for efficient movement and control of aircraft. Dating back to 1982, LeRC recognized this need and proposed and developed, in cooperation with the Environmental Research Laboratories of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), an interactive data management and enhancement system (MERIT) to improve significantly the accuracy of upper-wind forecasts in the U.S. To evaluate the potential of MERIT, the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) formed an aviation weather task force of a dozen experts from NOAA, NASA, and universities that was led by Dr. John McCarthy of the National Center for Atmospheric Research. Over 18 months at a cost of half a million dollars, the task force would examine all aviation weather forecast products concurrently with MERIT. If the MERIT system could provide improved upper-level wind information (initial tests at NOAA showed a 20 to 30% reduction in wind error compared to the existing system), it was possible that MERIT could become an important contribution to the NAS of the 1990s. (LeRC News, May 2/85, 2)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) hosted January 10-11 150 cometary scientists from around the world at a meeting of the Internatl. Halley Watch (IHW), for which JPL was the western hemisphere lead center and University of Erlangen-Nurnberg, W. Germany, the eastern hemisphere lead center, the JPL Universe reported. Lead center representatives at the meeting had joined IHW discipline specialists in such fields as astronomy, photometry and polarimetry, radio science, and spectroscopy; representatives of European, Japanese, and Soviet spacecraft missions to Halley; and IHW steering group members. The IHW organized a group of ground-based professional and amateur Halley watchers worldwide to coordinate their observations with those of airborne, earth-orbital, and spacecraft-flyby observations. Nine hundred professional astronomers from 50 countries and some 300 amateur astronomers had signed on as members of the IHW. JPL expected the IHW meeting would be the last before perihelion, Halley's closest approach to the sun on February 9 at 53.1 million miles. Since its 1948 inbound leg of its 74-year orbit around the sun, Halley would make its closest approaches to earth on November 27 at 57.6 million miles and the following April 11 at 39 million miles. Astronomers had already observed that Halley's coma (the bright halo of dust and gas surrounding the nucleus) had begun developing and questioned why the comet exhibited this feature at such a great distance from the sun. Early observations had also unexpectedly revealed the comet's brightness was fluctuating. Amateur observers with small telescopes would be able to see Halley by fall 1985; naked-eye viewing would be possible by March or April 1986. Halley would appear again in 2061. (JPL Universe, Jan 25/85, 1)
The U.S. House Science and Technology transportation aviation and materials subcommittee completed its markup of NASA's FY 86 authorization, approving a series of changes that resulted in reallocations for several aeronautics programs and elimination of proposed funding for oblique-wing technology, Aerospace Daily reported. NASA requested $522 million for aeronautics and space technology in its FY 86 budget, of which $354 million was for aeronautical research and technology and $168 million for space research and technology. Under the proposed changes, NASA rotorcraft systems technology funding would increase by $4 million over the agency's request for $20.4 million. Hot section engine technology, for which NASA had requested $5.2 million, would increase by $2 million; and the subcommittee restored high-speed aeronautics funding. The panel approved a $1.4 million decrease for the fluid and thermal physics research and technology program and deletion of the oblique-wing technology, for which NASA had requested $4.7 million, and of funding for altitude wind-tunnel planning. The panel based its decision to delete oblique-wing technology funding on an advisory committee finding that the planned flight portion of the NASA/ Navy oblique-wing program was one whose design solutions would have low payoff to industry. Since the Navy was the only identifiable user, Chairman Dan Glickman (D-Kans.) said, if it was a program worth their while, the service should provide the funding. (A/D, Mar 27/85, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced completion of a study done by McDonnell Douglas under a 1983 contract that showed undeniable need for both humans and machines in space. MSFC was continuing to refine and validate the data. In the human role in space (THURIS) study, engineers identified 37 generic tasks requiring human involvement ranging from removing and replacing protective coverings around spacecraft to surgically acquiring tissue samples. The study then established three criteria for allocation of tasks (performance time, relative cost, and technological risk), which became the basis for an objective method to allocate tasks and determine how much of each of the generic tasks would benefit from human involvement. For each task, researchers rated man's participation from essential to not significant. For example, in a task entitled "compute data," man's role rated not significant. However, for the task "surgical manipulations", man's participation rated essential. A second THURIS product was an analytical method to define how man should participate in space systems. The method objectively compared humans, machines, and systems requiring both humans and machines and consisted of a short, logical sequence of questions and a set of highly condensed supporting data covering performance times, relative costs for each man/machine combination, and technology availability data for the 37 generic activities. "The study provided a set of fundamental data for planners that can be used as a guide for many future activities," MSFC's Stephen Hall said. "To me . . . machines and automation allow man to proceed to greater challenges and achievements. . . The THURIS study found that there are tasks for which man is best, and tasks for which machines are best. For most activities, a mixture of both is the best guarantee of success." (MSFC Release 85-1)
A flight today of an F—14 marked the completion of the latest phase in the plane's aileron-rudder interconnect (ARI) program, which was intended to coordinate turns, prevent wing rock, and resist spins at high angle-of-attach flight conditions, the DFRC X-Press reported. Dryden Space Flight Center (DFRC) modified the F—14 X's basic analog flight control system for ARI. Although earlier configurations were successful in flight tests, pilots noted a deficiency in loss of roll power in high angle-of-attack flight regions. NASA then developed a "cross control" feature in the ARI system to correct the problem. The cross control feature allowed the pilot to roll the aircraft opposite to lateral stick input but in the direction of the rudder pedal input. This gave the F—14 pilot roll power needed for tactical maneuvering while the aircraft was in a high angle-of-attack mode. Flight tests of the cross control feature began in June 1985. Two NASA Ames-DRFC F—15 project pilots, three Navy pilots, and one Grumman pilot flew these initial evaluation flights. As part of the evaluation program, four other Ames-DRFC pilots not involved in the F—14 program flew the aircraft. NASA Ames-DFRC pilot Ed Schneider said after his flight that "The new modification permits improved rolling performance at angles of attack above 30°, yet the system retains spin resistance and wing rock suppression, both ARI features." Navy personnel taking part in the evaluation would make presentations on program results to NAVAIR. Navy pilot Lt. Commander Chuck Baucom would also present results at the Society of Experimental Test Pilots' September symposium. (DFRC X-Press, Aug 16/85, 2)
Los Angeles's Cedars-Sinai Medical Center announced development of a new surgical tool, using JPL's excimer (excited "dimer") laser technology, for one of medicine's most difficult and long-awaited procedures—a means to clean out clogged vascular passages without surgical intervention, the JPL Universe reported. The lasers would be a significant alternative to existing treatments—that of angioplasty, in which a balloon catheter squeezed blockage out of the way, or by-pass surgery. A JPL research team with Cedars-Sinai colleagues had developed the new laser technology, which used glass-magnetic switches in which a xenon chloride-excimer laser produced a uniform beam of energy controlled and pulsed to extremely short periods, to overcome the problems of lack of precision and control and high heat of current medical lasers. The JPL/Ce-dars/Sinai procedure would allow a fiber-optic catheter, placed nonsurgically in the brachial and femoral arteries and threaded to the site of the obstruction, to transmit the laser's energy to the clogged vessel. The fiber-optic imaging system would enable doctors to view the artery on a TV screen as the laser cleared the material forming the blockage. The speed of the laser's delivery—10 to 200 billionths of a second bursts of ultraviolet light—allowed the laser to cut through arterial plaque with precision and little damage to surrounding tissue. Although researchers were cautious in predictions of the laser's medical potential, they believed results of experimentation, though not yet done on living human patients, signaled additional future medical applications, ranging from removal of kidney stones to changing the eye shape of patients with myopia. (JPL Universe, Feb 8/85, 1)
NASA announced Lewis Research Center awarded a $58,291,440 contract to General Dynamics Corp. to modify three Centaur G vehicles, the nation's most powerful upper stage vehicles, to fit into the Space Shuttle's payload bay to launch various large spacecraft including the Galileo and Ulysses missions, both scheduled for spring 1986. The sole-source, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for fabrication, assembly, test, checkout, and delivery of the vehicles would begin April 1985 and continue through October 1987. (NASA Release 85-61)
NASA announced the first flight at Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, scheduled for late September, of the advanced fighter technology integration (AFTI) F—111 with a mission adaptive wing (MAW). The AFTI F—111 research aircraft was modified with a wing that could change its camber (fore and aft wing curvature) and its wing sweep to adjust to varied flight conditions. NASA expected that MAW's variable camber capability would allow optimum efficiency at supersonic, transonic, and subsonic speeds by adopting the best wing shape for each speed. The MAW program was intended to demonstrate that smooth variable camber technology showed improvements over current aircraft wing lifting-altering devices in such areas as aircraft payload and range capability, maneuverability, fuel efficiency, and aircraft handling qualities. The first flights would test the airworthiness and flight envelope expansion phase of the program, followed by the research phase. The plans for the initial phase called for about 15 flights that gradually increased the MAW aircraft to speeds of approximately Mach 1.05 and altitudes of about 35,000 feet. NASA expected that phase to be complete by January 1986; and the research phase, about 30 flights, by June 1986. The MAW system had smooth-surfaced, variable-camber wing leading- and trailing-edge flaps, an actuation mechanism, hydraulics, and redundant computers to control flap positions. Six independent trailing-edge flaps (three per wing) and two leading-edge flaps provided a smooth continuously variable wing camber using flexible fiberglass skins on the upper surface and sliding panels on the lower surface. Fully developed, the MAW system would result in an aircraft equipped with an automatic flight control system with several control modes. Cruise camber control mode would optimize the trailing-edge flap position for maximum cruise speed. Maneuver camber control mode would continuously position leading and trailing edge for optimum Iift-to-drag ratio depending on the lift coefficient and speed of the aircraft. Maneuver enhancement/gust alleviation mode would enhance the aircraft reponse to pilot control inputs, while reducing the aircraft's sensitivity to wind gusts. Designed for research rather than as a production prototype, the AFTI F-111 was a joint program of Ames-Dryden Flight Research Center and the U.S. Air Force's Flight Dynamics Laboratory. The Boeing Military Airplane Co. manufactured the MAW. (NASA Release 85-129)
NASA announced that its deep space network (DSN), as part of a French-led international tracking network, would track the first of two international balloon experiments carried aboard the Soviet VEGA spacecraft to study beginning June 10 Venus's atmosphere. The VEGA 1 and 2 spacecraft each would drop an instrumented lander and an instrument-laden balloon into the Venusian atmosphere as they approached the planet on their way to a March 1986 rendezvous with Halley's Comet. After reaching the equatorial regions of Vfenus's atmosphere, the balloons would float free in the middle, most active, layer of Venus's three-tiered clouds. The flight plan called for the entry packages, consisting of the atmospheric balloon and a lander, to plunge from a 125-km (78 miles) to a 65-km (40 miles) altitude, where a parachute would deploy. The lander would separate from the balloon at 63 km (39 miles) and head for the surface. The balloon would then inflate and carry its instrument package through the atmosphere at an altitude of 55 km (34 miles) for more than two days. NASA's deep space network and other stations around the world would use a technique called very long baseline interferometry to measure the balloon's velocity, and therefore the wind velocity, with a precision of about 3 km (2 miles) per hour at Venus's about 108 million-km (67 million miles) distance from earth. A Soviet internal network would also track the balloons. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory was cooperating with the French National Space Agency (CNES), Paris, in the tracking activity. Scientists believed data from the balloons would further their understanding of Venus's complex weather system. (NASA Release 85-87) Management and Personnel
In its aerospace forecast and inventory issue, Aviation Week reported that aerospace sales would continue to expand in 1985 as a result of business that was already on the books, with reviving commercial transport orders expanding on earlier rebounds in the military and space segments of the industry. However, as strong as the expansion was, sales were not as robust in some markets as had been predicted the previous year. Among the factors affecting the sales picture was Congressional trimming of military funding in the FY 85 budget. But Aviation Week predicted that to trim outlays the Pentagon would go after operating funds rather than hardware money that was spent over periods longer than a year. Thus the aerospace industry experienced moderately slower but still firm growth. Also international and domestic competition was intensifying, particularly because the Pentagon sought to use competition as a primary tool to hold down weapons costs. The magazine forecasted that total aerospace sales in 1985 would reach $99 billion and over $100 billion in 1986. Military aircraft would produce $32 billion in sales, compared with $27.5 billion in 1984; missile sales would rise to $15.7 billion from $13.8 billion in 1984; space technology, rebounding from weak sales in the 1970s, would reach $14.8 billion compared with $12.5 billion in 1984; commercial transport orders would revive from the $6-billion level in 1984 to $9.2 billion in 1985; and business flying sales would remain flat at about $1.8 billion. Both transport and corporate aircraft had a common problem: the high cost of relatively small increments of new technology and the drop in fuel prices that had placed a premium on modest improvement in fuel efficiency. However, all-composite turboprop aircraft for the business market were flying and might begin to change that situation in 1986 and 87. Also, new ultra-high-bypass engines (in some situations a euphemism for propellers) were under test and might hit the commercial transport market in the early 1990s, as would increased use of composites, lighter and simpler subsystems, and more flexible cabins in terms of seating, galley, and lavatory layouts. Military sales levels depended on what happened to President Reagan's defense budget in Congress. Although orders on the books would carry industry sales for 1985 to forecasted levels, a stalemate in Congress would affect the longer term outlook. (AvWk, Mar 18/85, 10)
NASA announced it honored at a KSC reception 200 NASA and NASA industrial Quality Circle employees for their volunteer efforts in improving quality, safety, and productivity. Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for space flight, read a message from George Burns, president of the International Association of Quality Circles, congratulating the employees on their outstanding performance. NASA selected the honorees under an office of space flight program that recognized first-level supervisory and support personnel for their productivity efforts. The Manned Flight Awareness Panel, made up of NASA and industry personnel, managed the program. NASA had over 120 employee teams with over 1,000 employees voluntarily participating in Quality Circles. Through the program, NASA hoped to foster increased effectiveness through improved efficiency in the space and aeronautics research and development programs. (NASA Release 85-55)
The first month of the flight of cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Viktor Savinhkh aboard Salyut 7 was drawing to a close during which time the crew had accomplished all planned activities to bring the Soviet space station into a manned flight mode, checked the condition of onboard systems, and carried out a variety of scientific research projects and experiments, FBIS Moscow TASS in English reported. The cosmonauts had unloaded the Progress-24 transport spacecraft, positioned the delivered equipment, and replaced three sets of storage batteries as well as individual instrument units. They had used oxygen delivered in containers aboard the transport to pressurize the Salyufs living compartments. The cosmonauts had started preparation of the station's united propulsion unit for refuelling by checking for leaks in the fuelling lines. They would then pump compressed nitrogen out of the fuel tanks. The schedule for July 5 called for the cosmonauts to perform maintenance on a system for the regeneration of water from atmospheric moisture, take medical checks including measurements of body mass and evaluations of the condition of muscles, and exercise on a bicycle ergometer and running track. The cosmonauts would continue geophysical experiments in a research program on earth's natural resources and environment. They also would make visual observations and take photos of individual areas of the Atlantic Ocean. (FBIS Moscow Tass in English, July 5/85)
NASA announced that its Lewis Research Center (LeRC) awarded a $79,194,665 contract to General Dynamics Corp.'s Convair Division to support the Space Shuttle/Centaur program from August 30, 1985 through June 1987. Under the cost-plus-award-fee contract, General Dynamics would supply labor, materials, and resources necessary for management and engineering services and launch operations services to implement the program. Included in the multi-contract concept were services such as overall program management; administration and engineering support; technical management; operations, planning, and integration; and launch complex modifications. NASA planned that the Space Shuttle/Centaur combination in May 1986 would launch Ulysses, the first and only planned mission to observe the polar regions of the sun, and a week later Galileo to explore Jupiter's atmosphere. In spring 1988 the combination would launch the Venus radar mapper mission to investigate the surface and interior of Venus. (NASA Release
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that experiment teams for the Spacelab 3 mission had begun analysis of the 250 billion bits of data obtained during the mission, and preliminary results were excellent. In the area of materials science, two of the three experiment teams had begun to examine crystals grown during Spacelab 3. In one experiment, a mercury iodide crystal the size of a sugar cube grew from a seed crystal in the vapor crystal growth system; via the vapor transport technique, the crystal grew at a carefully controlled rate over a 104-hour period. Researchers would remove the crystal from the glass ampoule within the next few weeks for analysis to determine its quality and properties as an X-ray and gamma-ray detector for applications in scientific research, medicine, and industry. Two fluid mechanics experiments ended successfully; the geophysical fluid flow cell experiment completed more than 102 hours of experiments designed to provide information for the first time on convention in spherical rotating shells with a radial gravity field. Co-investigator Dr. Fred Leslie said of the experiment, "The films of one of the Jovian (Jupiter) scenarios indicated the formation of a 'Red Spofi similar to that present on Jupiter. This data should be useful to meteorologists and astrophysicists in modelling the large-scale circulations of fluids under the influence of rotation, gravity, and convection." Three atmospheric and astronomical observations were completed during the Spacelab 3 flight. The atmospheric trace molecules spectroscopy experiment operated for 50 hours providing 19 sequences of more than 150 independent atmospheric spectrally resolved measurements. Researchers would use these to analyze the earth's atmospheric composition chemically and physically for the stratosphere and mesosphere between 10 and 150 km. The information also would provide extremely detailed measurements of the minor and trace components of the atmosphere, which was crucial to understanding the evolution of earth's climate, and would aid in the analysis of pollution causes and effects. The experiment also provided the first high-resolution infrared spectrum of the sun, which indicated some surprising evidence about its molecular constituents. Four of the six life sciences experiments completed successfully were part of the Ames Research Center's life sciences payload. The research animal holding facilities proved a suitable animal habitat in which the two squirrel monkeys and 24 rats adjusted to spaceflight and demonstrated their suitability for research in orbit. One primate apparently developed symptoms of space adaptation syndrome but recovered in a manner analogous to human experience. "In addition to the successful results from each of these experiments," said Dr. George Fichtl, Spacelab 3 mission scientist at Marshall Space Flight Center, "the overall success of the mission has proven the importance of the Spacelab concept. During this mission, we have proven that a microgravity environment is an important environment for the growth of crystals, the study of fluid mechanics, and measurement of the effect man is having on this environment. We have also proven the need for man's presence in performing these tasks." (MSFC Release 85-28)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) researchers believed their engine research, focusing on development of supersonic combustion ramjet (scramjet) technology, would lead to air-breathing engines capable of operating at speeds through Mach 12, Aviation Week reported. Testing had already produced net thrust-to-drag ratios of better than one at high Mach numbers. Research included solution of engine aerodynamics, diagnostics and measurement problems, and effects of change to full-scale, flight-weight engine prototypes. Although the Reagan Administration budget request for NASA FY 86 hypersonic research continued the existing level of effort, NASA believed propulsion technology development would be the pacing factor for hypersonic-flight capability and looked to congressional interest, evidenced by a request for a NASA report on hypersonic research, for increased funding. Initial scramjet technology applications might lie in missile development. As the potential for higher speeds and longer ranges became attainable, NASA concentrated on basic research for later generations of military cruise missiles rather than applications to aircraft. (AvWk, Feb 25/85, 52) During March: After a detailed review of the history of Concorde development, J.C.D. Baine in his article, "The Concorde Supersonic Airliner—The Struggle for Survival," concluded that the survival of Concordes or their being superseded by second generation supersonic airlines appeared doubtful under the persisting circumstances of international economic, political, and social relationships. He noted that the confrontation between aviation technology and the environment had brought into focus problems, whether real or emotional, that only advanced aeronautical science and technology would solve. That was especially true with respect to airport noise, sonic booms, and stratospheric pollution caused by emissions from multi-engines that consumed large quantities of petroleum-based fuels. Until those acceptable solutions were found, he concluded, opposition to civilian supersonic aircraft would continue and might further restrict or ban the aircraft's use on national and international routes. However, he noted that the efforts of Great Britain and France to develop the Concorde should not be dismissed as a waste of human effort and resources. They had contributed to advancements in aeronautical science and technology that, though not financially rev/arding, represented a store of scientific knowledge that would be available for future development. (Aerospace Historian, Mar/85, 10)
McDonnell Douglas Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Sanford McDonnell in a letter to Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger explained a company policy that instituted "expanded, no-questions-asked" refund policies on the sale of spare parts and support equipment to the U.S., foreign countries, and commercial customers worldwide, Defense Daily reported. McDonnell said the government could return "any covered spare part or piece of support equipment if there is any dissatisfaction with its cost—no questions asked." McDonnell described the refund policy as the most comprehensive in the aerospace industry and said that if the military felt it must retain an item in stock for operational readiness, "their complaint will be addressed without concern for a time limit." Under the new policy, the military could, if dissatisfied with the price, return within six months of delivery new and unused parts or equipment built by McDonnell Douglas and purchased under prime contracts. The company said the policy applied to prices to the government up to $100,000; at that level the company furnished cost data in advance of establishing price. Earlier Weinberger directed establishment of a standard industry-wide refund policy based on voluntary refund policies of Boeing Co. and the General Electric Co. The Boeing/General Electric refund programs accepted for credit the return of any spare parts or support equipment that the Pentagon considered to be unreasonably priced. (D/D, Aug 2/85, 1)
NASA announced that on December 26 its Venus orbiting Pioneer spacecraft began six weeks of observations of Halley's Comet during the comet's most active period closest to the sun (perihelion). Near the time of perihelion, the comet, Venus, and Pioneer were located on the opposite side of the sun from earth, making observations difficult from earth (160 million miles away). Pioneer was the only spacecraft close to Halley's Comet during perihelion, and NASA expected that Pioneer's ultraviolet observations would provide valuable insights into the state of the comet in advance of flybys of Halley's by European, Soviet, and Japanese spacecraft beginning March 6, 1986. Pioneer's first phase of observations would end January 4 when both Venus and Pioneer passed behind the sun for almost a month, cutting off effective communications between the spacecraft and ground controllers at Ames Research Center. Observations would resume about February 3, six days before perihelion, and would continue until March 6. NASA scheduled Pioneer to produce two images of the comet in ultraviolet light. One would show the hydrogen cloud surrounding the comet, an image expected to be 20 times larger than a photo of the comet in visible light. The image would come from 20,000 scans of the comet as it drifted for three days through Pioneer's ultraviolet spectrometer's field of view. A second image would show both Venus and Halley's Comet in a single view. (NASA Release Planetary Exploration
NASA announced the first flight of the NASA/Air Force/F-111 mission adaptive wing (MAW) [see Aerospace R & D/Aeronautics, Sept. 17] at the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility. The flight accomplished functional verification of the variable camber MAW at flight conditions up to MACH 0.6 and altitude of 15,000 feet. The Boeing Military Airplane Co. manufactured the MAW. (NASA Daily Activities Report, Oct 21/85)
NASA announced that S. Neil Hosenball, NASA general counsel since 1975, would retire on August 2 to become director of the University of Colorado's new Center For Space Law and Policy. Before appointment to his current position, Hosenball served as deputy general counsel since October 1967. Earlier he had been assistant general counsel for procurement and had served for four years at Lewis Research Center. From 1970 to 1979, Hosenball was a member of the U.S. delegation to the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and headed the U.S. delegation at legal subcommittee and committee sessions. Hosenball, who received a B.S. degree from the University of Michigan and his LL.B. degree from Harvard Law School, was awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1967, the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1973, the National Civil Service League Career Service Medal in 1980, and the Presidential Rank of Distinguished Executive in 1983. The Center for Space and Law Policy, established in November 1984, was one of a very few such institutions in the world and was intended to guide the university in its space research efforts. (NASA Release 85-104)
Officials at Japan's Institute of Space and Astronomical Research announced that today Japan launched from the Kagoshima Space Center in Kyushu its second spacecraft to observe Halley's Comet the following March, the NY Times reported. The spacecraft, Planet A, was on a trajectory that would take it within about 60,000 miles of the comet. The USSR had two craft bound for Halley and the European Space Agency had one. Planet A had a solar-wind analyzer to measure the distribution and direction of high-energy particles from the sun as they encountered the vicinity of Halley's Comet and an ultraviolet telescopic camera to examine the cloud of atomic hydrogen, glowing in the ultraviolet, that extended tens of thousands of miles out from the comet. (NYT, Aug 20/85, C3)
President Reagan, at a White House ceremony, presented Distinguished Executive Awards worth $20,000 each to 32 career civil servants for their professional accomplishments, including in many cases, their plans and programs that saved millions of dollars, USA Today reported. Among the recipients were Samuel Keller, NASA's deputy associate administrator for space science and applications; and Andrew Stofan, director of NASA's Lewis Research Center. (USA Today, Dec 13/85, 9; LeRC Release 8584)
NASA announced that its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) would begin a series of simulated airline flights to test two experimental laminar air flow control devices. Previous research had shown that laminar air flow could reduce aerodynamic drag from 25 to 40% and thus provide significant fuel savings under laboratory conditions. However, in actual flight insects, ice, and other obstructions adhering to the leading edges of an aircraft's wings could disrupt laminar flow. Ames-DFRC had installed on its business-sized JetStar aircraft the two experimental laminar control flow devices and would simulate airline service flights in widely separated areas of the U.S. to experience a wide variety of contaminant conditions. NASA would conduct the simulated airline service flights just as an airline would under normal air traffic rules and regulations. During the test, researchers planned up to four flights each day over a two-week period to gather as much information as possible on the test articles' performance. The test article installed on the left wing used suction through 27 0.003-in. spanwise slots on the upper and lower surface to maintain laminar flow. A propylene glycol methyl ether (PGME)/water mixture discharged through several slots at the wing leading edge and flowing back over the wing provided ice and insect impact protection. Lockheed-Georgia manufactured the article for NASA. The test article on the right wing used suction through approximately 1 million 0.0025-in. diameter holes in the titanium skin to maintain laminar flow on the upper surface of the article. For insect protection, a shield, which retracted at 6,000 feet altitude, extended much like a wing leading edge flap on commercial transports. Spray nozzles behind the shield could spray the PGME/water mixture on the test article for additional insect protection. For additional ice prevention, glycol was forced through the wing's porous metal section of the shield leading edge. McDonnell-Douglas manufactured the article for NASA. The JetStar would carry a Knollenberg probe, mounted atop the aircraft, to measure the number and size of ice and water particles encountered in flight. A charge patch, located on the pylon that held the probe, would measure the static electric charge caused by particles in the air rubbing across the patch surface, thus giving a qualitative measure of ice and water particles. Correlation of the probe and patch data could calibrate the charge measurement in a simple cockpit display. (NASA Release 85-101)
NASA announced that U.S., French, West German, and United Kingdom scientists completed preliminary findings from the September 11 [see Astronomy, Sept. 11] encounter of NASA's International Cometary Explorer (ICE) spacecraft with comet Giacobini-Zinner, which took place 44 million miles from earth and was the first comet intercept in history. In the precedent-setting encounter, ICE, traveling at 46,000 miles an hour, entered at approximately 6:50 a.m. EDT, September 11, the 14,000-mile-wide tail of the comet 4,900 miles behind the cometary nucleus and emerged from the tail about 20 minutes later. Midpoint of the tail encounter came at 7:02 a.m., when the spacecraft passed through a narrow region called the neutral sheet. ICE was then on its way to its fourth space exploration assignment to record on October 31 and March 28, 1986 solar wind measurements upstream of Halley's Comet. (NASA Release 85-138)
NASA researchers were continuing detailed analysis of all data, and Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would produce additional documents when results were finalized for the Spacelab system, payload integration, and the Spacelab-2 experiments managed by MSFC. Principal investigators would produce separate documentation for their experiments. (NASA MOR M-977-51F-03 [postlaunch] Sept 30/85)
An international team of planetary scientists gathered at the USSR's Space Research Institute to catch the first return of data from the Vega-2 spacecraft plunging into the atmosphere of Venus, the NY Times reported. At 6:06 a.m. Vega-2 began its descent. Among the roughly 100 participants were representatives from eight European nations and the French Ambassador. Two days before, exploding bolts had freed an eight-foot sphere that carried one-and-a-half tons of payload bound for Venus's night side. The main craft would miss Venus entirely and use energy provided by the planet's gravity to propel it toward an encounter with Halley's Comet. Inside the rapidly decelerating sphere a timing device programmed months before switched on the scientific packages around it, then set loose a 15-lb. stack of miniaturized weather instruments built by French, Soviet, and U.S. scientists. An 11-foot-diameter teflon balloon filled with helium kept the instruments from reaching Venus's surface. An hour after the balloon inflated, the Vega-2 lander had reached the surface safely. The lander, in an atmospheric pressure 80 times the earth's at sea level and in a nighttime temperature of 855° F, was relaying information on surface conditions and excavating a small sample of the surrounding soil for crude analysis of its composition. Vega-1's balloon had reached the planet June 11 and had covered nearly 6,000	miles through the Venusian clouds in 46 hours, passing into the planet's sunlit hemisphere before exhausting its battery. The new Vega results suggested the planet had five discrete cloud layers whereas earlier missions detected only three. (NY Times, June 18/85, C8, June 16/85, 24; W Post, June 14/85, A10)
The National Science Foundation (NSF) in its Science Resources Studies Highlights reported that since 1980, annual increases in federal support of industry-performed research and development, primarily as a result of Department of Defense funding, had outpaced growth in company-financed R&D expenditures. In 1983 federal funding of industrial R&D performance amounted to $20.4 billion, 11% more than the 1982 level (7% in constant 1972 dollars), whereas industry's own R&D spending increased 8%. Federal and company funds together in 1983 were up 9% to a total of $62.9 billion. An NSF projection for 1984 placed total industrial R&D expenditures at $70.5 billion, 12% over the 1983 level. Companies in aircraft/missiles and electrical equipment industries received more than three-fourths of all R&D funds provided by the government. Industrial firms spent $42.5 billion of their own funds on R&D in 1983; between 1975 and 1980 the average annual constant-dollar rate of growth in company R&D financing was 6.6%, which slowed to 4.9% over the following 3-year period. The number of full-time-equivalent (FTE) R&D scientists and engineers in industry rose 3% during 1983 to 538,000. The electrical equipment industry, which employed over one-fifth of industrial R&D scientists and engineers, showed the highest gain—6%. (Science Resources Studies Highlights, June 21/85, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced selection of Teledyne Brown Engineering for negotiation leading to the award of a five-year contract to provide operation and maintenance of the propellants and pressurants facilities for the center. Total price for the first three contract years was approximately $8.8 million. Teledyne Brown would furnish the necessary management, personnel, equipment, and materials required to operate and maintain the gaseous pressurants equipment and distribution systems, liquid propellants storage and transfer systems, fluid transporter services, valve and component refurbishment, and retention of certification status of high-pressure systems, including test stands, wind tunnels, and Department of Transportation certification of fluid transporters. (MSFC Release 85-72) Wallops Flight Facility
NASA announced selection of 64 research proposals from high-technology small business firms for negotiation of Phase II contracts in its Small Business Innovation Research program established under Public Law 97-219. The contract awards would total approximately $30 million. NASA selected the Phase II programs, follow-ons to previous Phase I contracts, from 113 proposals submitted by Phase I contractors in the 1984 program. Phase I included 127 awards selected from 919 proposals. Objectives of the Small Business Innovation Research program were to stimulate technological innovation, strengthen the role of small business in meeting federal agencies' research and development needs, and foster increased private sector commercialization of innovations from federal research and development. The program also encouraged minority and disadvantaged business participation. In Phase I, NASA awarded six-month fixed-price contracts to explore the feasibility of the proposed innovation and the value of conducting further research and development. Continuation of the activity into Phase II, which could extend up to two years, depended on the merit of the work and agency program plans and needs. Selection might also depend on availability of funds from the private sector and/or government for development or commercialization beyond the scope of the Small Business Innovation Research program. (NASA Release 85-157) Public Affairs
NASA announced it had selected Grumman Data System Corp. for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for a high-speed (Class VI) computer system for Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). The fixed-price contract would require Grumman to provide hardware, software, documentation, and services for installation and maintenance of a scientific- and engineering-computations system in support of MSFC's programs in thermal, electrical, load, and structural-design characteristics that influence flight-vehicle and payload performance. The five-year contract, to begin no later than August 1985, would cost about $42 million and provide for a total lease period, with renewal in periods of one to 12 months, not to exceed 60 months. (NASA Release 8515)
