NASA and the Pentagon announced the award of $5000*million in contracts to seven different defense contractors for research into the development of the aerospace plane, seen by many as a successor to the Shuttle. The craft was envisioned as one that could take off and land like an airplane, but have the added capability of achieving orbit where it could then travel at 25 times the speed of sound. (WSJ, Apr 8/86; USA Today, Apr 8/86; W Post, Apr 8/86)
Parallel contracts for the Advanced Stirling Conversion System were awarded by NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, to Mechanical Technical, Inc. and Stirling Technology Company, for $253,385 and $246,576, respectively. Research was to be funded by the Department of Energy, as ground application took precedence over any potential space uses. The system would include a freepiston Stirling engine, a liquidmetal heat pipe receiver, and a means to provide power to a utility grid. The external combustion engine has only two moving parts and works by heating air, or another gas, in a cylinder, with a power source at one end, such as focused solar energy, which expands the gas and moves the piston. Electric power to the utility grid would be transferred from the engine directly, via a linear alternator, or indirectly with hydraulic output to a groundbased fluid pump coupled to a generator. (NASA Release 86156)
Thomas Paine, Laurel Wilkening, George Field, Jack Kerrebrock, Kathryn Sullivan, and Carl Sagan testified before Congress concerning Paine's report, "Pioneering the Space Frontier." (Hearing before the Committee on Science and Technology, July 22/86)
Pratt & Whitney was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to a contract award for the design, development, test, flight certification, and production verification of alternate'30*highpressure fuel and oxidizer turbopumps. With a proposed cost of about $182 million and a period of performance of five to six years, the turbopumps were intended to be interchangeable with the Space Shuttle's main engine turbopumps, provide extended life capability, and enhance safety margins. (NASA Release 86112)
NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, awarded a $6.6 million, fouryear contract to General Electric for definition, modification, and test of propulsion systems for supersonic short takeoff and vertical landing technology development. In support of next century military aircraft, design and modification of a GE F110 engine would focus on a fan air collection and valving system by taking compressed air from the engine and redirecting it to vertical lift producing devices. (NASA Release 86136)
NASA's Ames Research Center dedicated the $2.3 million, 21,336 square foot Fluid Mechanics Laboratory, a new research facility designed to stimulate basic knowledge of aerodynamic flows. The Laboratory could support multiple, simultaneous smallscale wind tunnel research while having full access to supercomputer resources. The laboratory would concentrate on vortex flows, a major factor in maneuverability and reduced drag by aerodynamic means, for applications ranging from developing fuelefficient aircraft to lowspeed research on the National AeroSpace Plane. (NASA Release 86158)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), in Pasadena, California, studied a program that would send a nuclearpowered spacecraft hurling into deep space traveling 225,000 miles per hour. The mission, said JPL Director Lew Allen, could be launched by 2005. The craft was expected to travel 1,000 astronomical units, 1,000 times the distance between the Earth and Sun, sending back data for more than 50 years. The Voyagers 1 and 2 spacecraft were expected to eventually reach deep space, but their slow rates of speed, about 36,000 miles per hour, would put any data gathering activity too far in the future. (LA Times, Sep 16/86)
NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California, modified an F15 jet engine to increase its thrust by 10 percent and fuel savings by 5 to 7 percent. The modification grew out of NASA's Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control program (HIDEC), which lessened unneeded engine stall margins (the amount that engine operating pressure must be reduced to avoid stall). The typical 25 percent stall margin allows for a contingency of any of the worst flight conditions and robs 15 percent of an engine's usable power. The HIDEC created engine and flight control systems that communicate with each other; thus the engine adjusts itself according to actual flight, not assumed constants. (NASA Release 86176)
In conjunction with its 1986 Small Business Innovation Research Program, NASA announced the selection of 172 research proposals from 144 small firms for Phase I Award'@0*Negotiations. Selected from 1628 proposals, about onehalf of the sixmonth, fixedprice contract efforts would be eligible for Phase II followon contracts of up to two years. This program was designed to stimulate technological innovation in the private sector and strengthen small business participation. (NASA Release
Two nearEarth asteroids, composed of nickel and iron and could provide future space mining, were discovered shortly before this date by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. About one mile in diameter, each, one asteroid is inside and one is outside of'%0*Earth's orbit. (NASA Release 8673)
A study by NASA scientist Linwood B. Callis concluded that the recently discovered thinning ozone layer might have been a result of increased sunspot activity. Other scientists, however, were hesitant to accept the theory and remained steadfast in their belief that manmade chemicals were responsible for the depletion. (LA Times, Oct 30/86; C Trib, Oct
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded an $8.9 million fiveyear contract to Calspan Corporation for operation of the Marshall Problem Assessment Center and the Safety Issue Assessment Center. Under the contract, Calspan would receive problem reports and safety issues from the contractors of Marshall's numerous projects, check the accuracy and completeness of the reports, track the closeout of proposed corrective actions, perform trend analysis and special study into causes of problems and safety issues, and appraise Marshall management on a daily basis. (NASA Release 86163)
