NASA named a board to investigate the July 13, 1987, Atlas Centaur 68 accident which resulted in extensive damage to the vehicle. James B. Odom, Director of the Science and Engineering irectorate, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was appointed Chairman of the Board. The Board was expected to report the results of its investigation to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly,h)0*0*0*Associate Administrator for Space Flight, by August 14, 1987. (NASA Release 87112; LA Times, July 14/87; NY Times, July 16/87)
The XWing, a NASA experimental aircraft, made its first brief venture into the air, lifting 25 feet off the runway for about 16 seconds. The XWing concept uses a fourbladed rotor system for vertical takeoff and landing. The first major test flight was expected to follow in about two weeks. (NASA Release 87172; Antelope Valley Press, Nov 19/87)
The Boeing Commercial Airplane Company was selected by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, for major aeronautical flight experiments. NASA tasked Boeing with providing data on the aerodynamic and operational effectiveness of a hybrid system to achieve laminar air flow control at flight conditions, particularly at high subsonic speeds. The tests were to be conducted on both commercial and military transport airplanes. H&(NASA Release 87140; Def News, Oct 12/87)
Officials from NASA and the LockheedGeorgia Company, Marietta, Georgia, announced that flight testing had begun on a new, highly fuelefficient, "propfan" engine. Aircraft equipped with the propfan propulsion system, which was developed as a result of a $56million NASA sponsored research program, was expected to be 1530 percent more fuel efficient than the most advanced turbofanpowered aircraft flying in the 1990's. (NASA Release 8773)
NASA announced plans for three balloon flights to study ray radiation produced by Supernova 1987a. The Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility at Wallops Island, Virginia, which manages NASA's balloon program, would provide launch services and helium. The first launch, from Alice Springs, Australia, was to take place no earlier than May 7, 1987, and the third balloon was to be launched within a month's time. (NASA Release 8760)
NASA reported that two techniques were being used to monitor the Supernova SN 1987a. In the first case, the Supernova was observed by NASA's Deep Space Network (DSN) located at Tidbinbilla, Australia, and connected by microwave with Australia's CSIRO Parkes Radio Telescope 200 miles away. Dr. Robert Preston of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which operates the DSN for NASA, said that the second technique, called Very Long Baseline Interferometry, consisted of an even wider network of four antennas: Tidbinbilla, Parkes, a Landsat ground station in central Australia; and a 26meter dish at Hobart on Tasmania, an island southeast of Australia. The supernova, an exploding star whose emissions were just arriving on Earth at the time of this report, was detected in the neighboring Large Magellanic Cloud galaxy. It was about 163,000 light years from the Earth. Supernova 1987a was the first such detectable star explosion close to our own galaxy since 1604. (NASA Release 8764)
NASA announced that it would begin, in late March, a new aircraft flight research program at AmesDryden Flight Research Facility, in Edwards, California. The aim of the program was the study of super maneuverability and prevention of dangerous spins and related crashes. (NASA Release 8737)
A spokesman at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that NASA's Deep Space Network station near Canberra, Australia, configured with Australia's Parkes Radio Observatory, was observing radio wave emissions from Supernova 1987a, first detected by astronomers in the large Magellanic cloud on February 24, 1987. (NASA Release 8731)
The United States and the Soviet Union signed an accord on cooperation in space exploration. The accord culminated a three day visit to Moscow by Secretary of State George P. Shultz. The accord formalized the ongoing exchange of information between NASAh)0*0*0*and the Soviet Academy of Sciences. It provided for no dramatic joint venture in space. Rather it called for coordination of projects in solarsystem exploration, space astronomy and astrophysics, earth sciences, solarterrestrial physics and space biology, and medicine. (NY Times, Apr 16/87; P Inq, Apr 16/87)
Flight controllers at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, reported that the untended spacecraft Voyager 2 was on course for a rendezvous in two years with the planet Neptune. Launched on August 20, 1977, Voyager 2, travelling at a speed of 41,600 miles an hour, was 642 million miles away from its target. It was expected to come within 3,000 miles of Neptune on August 24, 1989. (NY Times, Aug 18/87)
NASA's Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology selected five proposals for the development of space flight technology experiments as part of its Industry/University InSpace Technology program. (NASA Release 87164)
