Science magazine published findings from a recent Earthbased radar mapping of the planet Venus, conducted by Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) scientists. Newly processed radar pictures of the surface of Venus showed what may be geologically recent volcanic activity and impact cratering, including possible volcanic mountains and broad lava flows and fields like those which make up the Hawaiian Islands. The JPL radar images, with a resolution of less than a mile, were the latest in a series of Earthbased radar scans of Venus conducted at the Goldstone, California, complex of NASA's Deep Space Network. The Magellan spacecraft was expected to make more detailed radar observations of Venus in 1990. (NASA Release 8865; C Trib, May 21/88; )
NASA's Lewis Research Center and the NASA/Industry Advanced Turboprop Team were awarded the prestigious Collier Trophy at the annual Robert J. Collier Trophy Dinner hosted by the National Aviation Club. Lewis and the NASA/Industry Advanced Turboprop Team were honored for developing technology and testing advanced turboprop propulsion systems that offered dramatic reductions in fuel usage and operating costs for subsonic transport aircraft. (NASA Release 8859)
Controllers at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, directed the Voyager 2 spacecraft to fire its hydrazine thrusters for 3 minutes and 29 seconds in order to steer the craft toward a flyby of Neptune on August 28, 1989. The Voyager 2 trajectory would bring it to within 3,000 miles of Neptune's cloudtops. (Voyager 2 Neptune Encounter Press Kit; LA Times, Nov 14/88)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, and the Department of Energy's Argon National Laboratory, Chicago, Illinois, signed an agreement to begin joint research in the development of hightemperature superconductivity (HTS) materials and technology. The objective of this major research effort would be to exploit recent rapid advances in HTS technology for significant space and aeronautical applications. Research and technology development would be undertaken in those areas where HTS could be an enabling technology or substantially improve existing Initially, research would concentrate on advanced studies and critical exploratory experiments to identify the most promising applications for further development. Among the first candidate applications would be superconducting magnetic energy storage, space electromagnetic propulsion, microwave power transmission, aeropropulsion, and electromagnetic launch systems. (NASA Release
