The Philadelphia Inquirer carried an article about the new issue of Science magazine and its reports on the likely creation of hole in the Arctic ozone. The article quoted Robert Watson, head of NASA's atmospheric ozone program, as saying that Earth's ozone layer was declining as much as 8 percent each decade; scientists previously thought it was only 2 to 4 percent. Also NASA research found that losses occurred in the spring as well as winter, raising concern that ultraviolet radiation might threaten crops, forests, and ecological processes. (P Inq, May 31/91)
NASA announced it would be a major participant in the multi-agency High Performance Computing and Communication (HPCC) to begin in FY 1992. NASA had the lead role in coordinating interagency software and algorithm research and development. In this connection, NASA would buy advanced test beds from industry and use test beds developed by the Department of Defense to evaluate and build initial applications. NASA would also develop software to solve major computational challenges involved with robotic design and control. NASA centers would be equipped with the latest network communications to support the National Research and Education Network and NASA would expand the HPCC research program of NASA-funded research institutes and through NASA grants to universities.
Scientists of NASA's Magellan Project, together with the US Geological Survey, invited the public to propose names of notable women for the many impact craters and large volcanic vents being discovered on Venus. Names sent to Magellan offices at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory were to be compiled for the Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature, a committee of the International Astronomical Union (IAU). The IAU, which makes the final approval, meets only every three years and thus new names cannot be considered until 1994. (NASA Release 91-38; W Times, Mar 22/91; C Trin, Mar 27/91)
The Chicago Tribune reported that Northwestern University scientists had discovered a process called sputtering that can coat hardened steel with titanium nitride films a few microns thick and double its hardness. The computer-controlled system was built for Northwestern's Basic Industrial Research Laboratory (BIRL) in a project that also involved funds from NASA and the Department of Energy. (C Trin, Jul 28/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center/Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, announced a contract award to
NASA announced the selection of Lawrence J. DeLucas of the University of Alabama at Birmingham and Eugene H. Trinh of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to fly as payload specialists on the first U.S. Microgravity Laboratory mission, scheduled for June 1992. (NASA Release 91-66)
Several media articles dealt with attempts to rescue spacecraft Galileo's mission. The Los Angeles Times described Galileo's flight, which was functioning perfectly toward Jupiter, apart from its malfunctioning antenna. Engineers sought both by heating and cooling the craft to unstick the antenna. The New York Times reported in detail on efforts by engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, operated by the California Institute of Technology for NASA, to free the antenna, thus salvaging the mission. If efforts failed, Galileo would be unable to communicate discoveries to scientists because the craft's small antennas could not transmit recorded pictures until returning to the vicinity of Earth. The third attempt to fix the antenna was pronounced a failure on August 20. Other possible courses of action were discussed. (LA Times, Aug 9/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 13/91; W Post, Aug 13/91; USA Today, Aug 13/91; AP, Aug 13/91; AP, Aug 20/91; UPI, Aug 20/91;  NY Times, Aug 21/91; P Inq, Aug 21/91; B Sun, Aug 21/91; UPI, Aug 21/91; AP, Aug 28/91)
According to AP, the National Research Council endorsed NASA's planned Earth Observation System, which it called "the largest single component of the most ambitious scientific enterprise ever undertaken." The Council stated it had some concern over the program's management, however, and urged the earth science and space research community to keep a close eye on the program. (AP, Jul 11/91; W Post, Jul 13/91)
NASA announced that the spacecraft Galileo would execute a trajectory correction maneuver on March 20 to help aim it for the first-ever flyby of an asteroid next October. To perform the maneuver, Galileo would fire its small thrusters on and off during a three and one half hour period, thus changing its speed about five miles per hour. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, manages the Galileo project. (NASA Release 91-43)
NASA announced that undergraduate engineering students at Mississippi State University, Starkville, had won the competition to build a 50-foot mockup of the X-30/National Aero-Space Plane. (NASA Release 91-182; Fla Today, Nov 10/91)
Ellen Stofan, a Magellan scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said the planet Venus may be venting interior heat through giant hot spots called coronae, a form of volcanism. She indicated that Magellan data had revealed many exciting new aspects of coronae. (NASA Release 91-48)
The Baltimore Sun reported a NASA announcement on November 8 that its $10 million effort to determine whether a hole in the Earth's protective ozone layer was developing over the North Pole, was delayed by mechanical problems in both the project's aircraft. Mike Kurylo, manager of NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Program, said the DC-8 jet had a crack in its landing gear and the high-altitude ER-2 aircraft was grounded for a problem with its wings. In addressing the same subject, the New York Times quoted the project's chief scientist as saying three ER-2 planes would be used to survey the ozone layer at high altitudes. (B Sun, Nov 9/91; NY Times, Nov 10/91)
Gerald Fishman, principal investigator of the Burst and Transient Source Experiment, said so far the experiment on the Gamma Ray Observatory was working as planned. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Apr 23/91)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected Cortez III Service Corporation, Alamogordo, New Mexico, for a $140 million support service contract for center operations. (NASA Release C91-n)
NASA announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center/Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, had selected H and H Consolidated, Inc. of Hampton, Virginia, for an operation/maintenance and Alteration contract of facilities and equipment services. (NASA Release C91-jj)
NASA announced the selection of 70 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. The high technology firms were located in 21 states. (NASA Release 91-210)
NASA announced that NASA 816, a modified Convair F-106B, had been retired after more than 30 years of flight research. It was to be moved to the new Virginia Air and Space Center in Hampton. (NASA Release 91-73)
Bob MacMillan, public information manager for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, said scientists had ordered the Magellan spacecraft to reduce its mapping of Venus and stay in the shade to prevent recording equipment from overheating. (AP, Aug 28/91)
A local newspaper described the flight of the ER-2 (Earth Resources) giant high-flying spy plane that flew over the San Joaquin-Sacramento Valley. In 4 1/2 hours, the plane of the NASA-Ames Research Center captured more than 7 million acres on film. The photographs were to be a resource for the best use of water supplies in California.  (Bakersfield Californian, Sep 7/91)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center's Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET), an instrument aboard NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory, had detected "the most distant and by far, the most luminous gamma-ray source ever seen." The EGRET team, led by Carl Fichtel, reported to the International Astronomical Union, Cambridge, Massachusetts, that a source of intense gamma radiation was detected between June 15 and June 28. The source was identified as the variable Quasar 3C279, located in the constellation Virgo. (NASA Release 91-117; W Post, Jul 29/91)
NASA announced that as part of its Planetary Astronomy Program of the Office of Space Science and Applications, a team of radar astronomers had identified a near-Earth metal asteroid for the first time. Their discovery, observed from the giant Arecibo radar/radio telescope in Puerto Rico, was published in Science magazine. The object, called 1986 DA, was observed and analyzed by a team under Steven Ostro of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. The asteroid contains mostly iron but also 8 percent nickel as well as some platinum-group metals and gold. (NASA Release 91-89; NY Times, Jun 11/91)
RMS Technologies, Inc., Marlton, Pennsylvania, announced it had received a contract from NASA to provide operational support for workstations, other computers, and peripheral equipment at NASA's Lewis Research Center. (P Inq, Jul 24/91)
Gerald Fishman of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center at a press conference spoke of the findings of the Gamma Ray Observatory to date. He said that an instrument called the Burst and Transient Source Experiment had detected 117 gamma ray bursts since launching. Thse bursts were randomly scattered, not from the center of the Milky Way Galaxy as previously thought. (AP, Sep 23/91; P Inq, Sep 24/91; USA Today, Sep 24/91; W Post, Sep 24/91; NY Times, Sep 24/91; W Times, Sep 24/91)
NASA announced that on July 15 at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, NASA's F/A-18 High-Alpha Research Vehicle maneuvered in flight for the first time using a specially designed thrust vectoring system. Such research flights were to continue over the next two years and were designed to make future jet fighters safer. (NASA Release 91-123)
NASA announced that the Magellan spacecraft, mapping the surface of Venus with imaging radar, had discovered the longest channel known in the solar system, 4,200 miles long. Steve Saunders, Project Scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, said it was not known what formed the channel. (NASA Release 91-141; LA Times, Aug 30/91; UPI, Aug 30/91)
The Magellan spacecraft temporarily lost contact with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, when its antenna was misdirected toward Earth. Contact was restored, and only 0.3 percent of the mission's scheduled surface mapping was lost. (C Trin, May 14/91)
The Daily Press recounted the dedication on October 10 of the 100-ton Variable Density Wind Tunnel as a National Historic Landmark. The ceremony occurred at NASA's Langley Research Center. The wind tunnel was responsible for more efficient wing designs of aircraft and established NASA's predecessor, the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics as a technologically competent organization. (Daily Press, Oct 11/91)
NASA announced that Dudley McConnell, Associate Director for Applications for NASA's Earth Science and Applications Division, died of an apparent heart attack. (NASA Obituary; Fla Today, Oct 29/91; W Post, Oct 31/91)
An editorial in a space journal advocated that NASA wind down its program for the construction of the National Aerospace Plane, the X-30, for which it has no funds, rather than wait until 1993 to decide. Instead the journal advocated NASA's focusing on "research and development that would continue its already impressive advances in materials and propulsion technology." (SP News, Dec 2-8/91)
The Orlando Sentinel Star published two special reports on NASA and Space Shuttles. The first was a review of the first ten years of space flight: the dreams in contrast with the reality of costs and delays experienced. The conclusion was that "The price of a rushed design on a shoestring budget has meant, for the Shuttle, unreliability." The second article dealt with NASA's plans for the next decade with reference to such items as the Personnel Launch System, a small capsule or space plane on top of an expendable booster rocket to carry astronauts and some cargo to a Space Station; the Advanced Manned Launch System, a reusable vehicle combined with a reusable booster, capable of carrying more persons and cargo; and the National Aerospace Plane (NASP), which would burn a "slush" mixture of liquid and solid hydrogen. Most research funds to date went into the development of the NASP. (O Sen Star, Apr 7/91)
NASA announced that as a result of the huge outpouring of volcanic material from Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, a research team of NASA atmospheric scientists was being sent to the West Indian island of Barbados to gather data to help evaluate the global atmospheric effects of this event. Several NASA scientists subsequently commented on Pinatubo's plume and its spreading. (NASA Release 91-103; W Post, Jul 8/91)
Nature quoted scientists at NASA's Atmospheric Sciences Division in Hampton, Virginia, as reporting that forest fires--previously thought to be a major source of nitrous oxide--actually produce only about 7 percent of the amount in the atmosphere. The importance of the source of nitrous oxide relates to its action in the destruction of Earth's ozone layer. (W Post, Feb 25/91)
NASA's Soft X-ray Telescope aboard the Japanese Solar-A spacecraft launched from Japan's Kagoshima Space Center on August 30, made its first X-ray images of the sun. The purpose of the mission was to produce pictures of the genesis and life of solar flares to enable scientists to learn more about them. (W Times, Oct 3/91)
NASA announced the selection of 39 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). SBIR seeks to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of small business in meeting federal research and development needs, and increase private sector commercialization of results of federally funded research. The awards included 36 small, high technology firms located in 17 states and were valued at about $19 million. (NASA Release 91-15; Huntsville Times, Jan 29/91)
According to Patrick McCormick of NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines might cool global temperatures by a few tenths of a degree for as long as five or 10 years. (W Post, Aug 14/91)
NASA announced the development by its Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, of a new, more accurate, airborne radar system for topographic mapping of the Earth's surface. The instrument, called TOPSAR for topographic synthetic aperture radar, would be about three times more accurate than existing topographic mappers and had many commercial and scientific uses, according to Howard Zebker of the Pasadena laboratory. (NASA Release 91-205)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California, began analyzing the photos of Venus produced by the Magellan Spacecraft. JPL operates Magellan for NASA. The pictures show a tortured landscape featuring extreme volcanism, particularly surface bulges 30 to 140 miles wide called "arachnoids." (LA Times, Feb 4/91)
Robert Brown and Paul A. Vanden Bout, astronomers at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Charlottesville, Virginia, using the 12-meter telescope on Kitt Peak, Arizona, in July discovered carbon monoxide in a strange object previously found by researchers in Ursa Major. A huge gas cloud, at the fringe of the universe, it might be linked to a galaxy in formation. (P Inq, Nov 21/91; LA Times, Nov 25/91)
An article pointed out that space exploration was not a short-term mission. Therefore, given the age of several existing Space Shuttles, Congress should plan ahead and appropriate funds for additional Shuttles for the 21st century. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 7/91)
An editorial in a space publication stressed the need for space flight to gain some Congressional advocates and for NASA's new launcher plan to be salvaged before it was too late. (SP News, Apr 22-28/91)
A discussion of the robot explorer Magellan's probe of Venus during its 16 months and more than 3,000 orbits, mapping more than 90 percent of the surface, appeared in the Washington Post. Lead scientist Stephen Saunders of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, which manages the mission, was quoted as saying that scientists were looking for "active plate tectonics" such as occur on earth, such as "continental drift." To date, no such discoveries occurred. (W Post, Oct 21/91)
Lennard Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator, announced that the two largest mirrors for NASA's Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility have been successfully tested in the new X-ray Calibration Facility at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 91-145)
NASA announced the selection of 301 research proposals (from 2,583 received) for immediate contract negotiation in NASA's 1991 Small Business Innovation Research Program. While meeting federal research and development needs, the program aims to stimulate technological innovation. (NASA Release 91-184)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, Massachusetts, for the contract to design, develop, and operate a science support center for the space-based Advanced x-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). AXAF was scheduled to be launched in 1998 as the third of NASA's Earth-orbiting Great Observatories. The center is to serve the international scientific community with an observation program for the x-ray telescope and the data it collects. (NASA release 91-46)
NASA announced that the application of its sensor technology led to the development by a Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia team, headed by Allan J. Zuckerwar, of a portable fetal heart monitor. The marketing of this monitor was to be part of the NASA program to transfer the agency's space age technology to the private sector. (NASA Release 91-90)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, had selected the team of General Electric Corporation, Cincinnati, and United Technologies Pratt and Whitney Divsion, West Palm Beach, Florida, for a contract for propulsion materials to be used on a 21st century High Speed Civil Transport. (NASA Release C91-z)
Marshall Space Flight Center Director Jack Lee told the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce that the news media were to blame for NASA's bad image during the preceding year. In discussing Marshall's economic impact on the area, Lee cited increases in its budget, which had risen from $1.8 billion in 1983 to a requested $3.6 billion in fiscal 1992. Of this amount, an estimated $1.08 billion would be spent in Alabama. Moreover, Marshall civil service and contractor employees represented about 12 percent of the total Huntsville population. (Hntsv Tms, Mar 26/91)
Dr. Steve Saunders, Project Scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that Magellan to date had mapped more than 58 percent of Venus, including Aphrodite Terra, the largest of the highland regions. Various hypotheses exist regarding the formation of the different "continents" on Venus, and the mapping should clarify the situation. (NASA Release 91-31)
NASA engineers worried over data indicating that the critical 16-foot main antenna of Galileo, essential for the Jupiter probe, may have failed to unfold properly. Such a failure would limit the speed of transmitting data from Jupiter to Earth and reduce the number of photographs that could be sent. Galileo was unique among spacecraft launched to date in that it has a "dual spin" design with the antenna being located on the spinning section. Efforts were underway to see how the situation could be remedied. (LA Times, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 13/91; AP, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 15/91; NY Times, Apr 17/91; B Sun, Apr 18/91; W Times, Apr 18/91; USA Today, Apr 18/91)
Bruce Bunin, manager of Advanced Commercial Programs at Douglas Aircraft Company, stated that McDonnell Douglas Corporation had won a contract for up to $8 million from NASA's Langley Research Center to conduct system studies on the next-generation commercial supersonic transport. The five-year contract was part of NASA's High-Speed Research Program aimed at resolving environmental and economic issues and developing technology for a High Speed Civil Transport (HSCT). The HSCT team was to study atmospheric effects, noise and sonic boom reduction, advanced materials and lightweight structures, supersonic laminar flow control, engine cycles, and airline economics. (PR Newswire, Mar 11/91)
NASA announced that its Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, had selected RMS Technologies, Inc., of Landover, Maryland, for a contract for the computing, communication, and network mission needs of the center. (NASA Release C91-y)
The Huntsville Times published a history of NASA in connection with its Marshall Space Flight Center and the Army Ballistic Missile Agency Development Operations Division in Huntsville. Reference was made to the early days of the Redstone Arsenal as well as to statistics of employment and various Shuttle launches.  (Htsvl Tms, Jun 9/91)
NASA announced that a soccer ball-shaped carbon molecule might be the perfect propellant for a spacecraft engine that produced thrust by expelling charged atoms or molecules. Stephanie D. Leifer, an engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, and Winston A. Saunders of the California Institute of Technology proposed to use the molecule Carbon 60 as a fuel in ion engines. (NASA Release 91-197)
According to the Washington Post, for the fourth time since April, NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena were trying to free the antenna on the robot explorer Galileo. The scientists deduced that three of the 18 ribs of the antenna were stuck in the closed position. Being unable to deliver direct force, they sought to "shake" the structure by alternately heating and cooling it. On December 14-15, NASA tried again to free the jammed antenna without success. (W Post, Dec 15/91; UPI, Dec 16/91; W Post, Dec 17/91; W Post, Dec 18/91; USA Today, Dec 18/91)
NASA announced that at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, at Edwards, California, simulator research showed that multi-engine aircraft with specially programmed flight control systems could touch down safely using only the engines to turn and land. (NASA Release 91-85)
The Department of Energy requested $30 million to create a new space exploration program relating to civilian space activities. The new request brought the Energy Department's 1992 budget request for space exploration to $142 million, compared with NASA's $94 million. Some experts and officials saw the Energy Department's role in space as desirable, both to prevent NASA's monopoly and because the Department maintained active technology development programs whereas NASA allowed its technology research and development to wither as it struggled with existing programs. (W Post, Apr 30/91)
NASA announced the selection of MK-Ferguson Corporation, Cleveland for a contract to provide engineering, construction, and maintenance services to NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. (NASA Release C91-mm)
The Huntsville Times quoted the General Accounting Office as saying that contrary to earlier concerns, a survey revealed that potential retirements of skilled NASA scientists and engineers would not be a problem. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 1/91)
News editor Budd McLaughlin of the Huntsville News denied the blame placed on the media by Jack Lee, director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, for NASA's poor public image. (Huntsville News, Apr 1/91)
NASA announced that the first mirror for its Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF) space observatory was successfully completed at Hughes Danbury Optical System, Danbury, Connecticut, and shipped on June 12 to Eastman Kodak, Rochester, New York, for assembly. The AXAF observatory was to consist of six nested pairs of mirrors to obtain high resolution x-ray images of the universe. (NASA Release 91-95)
While commending Jay Apt's and Jerry Ross's work in freeing the jammed antenna of the Gamma Ray Observatory during their Atlantis mission, an editorial commentator advocated a rethinking of spaceflight goals and greater realism. (CSM, Apr 17/91)
The media reported that NASA engineers had debated whether to remove additional sensors in Columbia that might be cracked. NASA planned to create a new investigative team to review the process of flaw detection. (NY Times, May 24/91; W Post, May 24/91; B Sun, May 24/91; W Times, May 24/91; USA Today, May 24/91; AP, May 24/91; UPI, May 24/91)
The Christian Science Monitor commended NASA for naming the orbiting Gamma Ray Observatory the Arthur Holly Compton Gamma Ray Observatory because of the late Nobel Prize laureate's studies of the subject. Moreover, the renaming focused attention on one of NASA's "outstandingly successful missions." (CSM, Oct 9/91)
The Aerospace Industries Association said on December 11 that the U.S. aerospace industry would post record sales of $140 billion in 1991, but that employment during the year dropped 8 percent to 1.16 million workers. (LA Times, Dec 12/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported that thanks to a NASA program to establish a super computer network among black universities, Morgan State University had received a super computer. The university planned to make the super computer the foundation of a new Center for Applied Space Science and Engineering. (B Sun, Jun 7/91)
NASA announced that its research plane F-16XL demonstrated laminar airflow over a significant part of its wing while flying at supersonic speeds. This could increase flight efficiency and reduce fuel consumption. The experiment occurred in a series of 28 flights at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. In this connection, the New York Times wrote about wind shear problems faced by aircraft, leading to airline disasters, and NASA's work on three predictive systems made by Lockheed Corporation, Rockwell International, and Turbulence Prediction Systems. (NASA Release 91-188; Daily Press, Newport News, Nov 20/91; Antelope Valley Press, Nov 21/91; NY Times, Nov 24/91)
NASA announced some of the results of its Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), built by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. The LDEF was in a space environment from April 1984 to January 1990, with various materials samples and experiments on board. The 57 science and technology experiments gathered data on space radiation, atomic oxygen, meteoroids, contamination, space debris, space systems, and life sciences. Implications of LDEF results were being used in the design of lunar bases and Mars-bound aircraft. (NASA Release 91-113)
NASA announced that the X-29, an unusual research aircraft built to investigate the feasibility of a forward-swept wing design, made its last flight in its high angle of attack research program on September 30 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 91-159; Antelope Valley Press, Oct 4/91)
NASA announced the selection of nine scientists as team members in the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) Microwave Observing Project. The SETI project has two elements: Targeted Search and Sky Survey. The Targeted Search was to use the largest available antennas and search over a 1 to 3 gigahertz (GHz) frequency range, looking for patterns that could indicate an artificially generated signal. The search would conduct the most sensitive search yet conducted of nearby (less than 80 lightyears distant) solar-type stars. The Sky Survey would use the 34-meter antennas of NASA's Deep Space Network sites to scan the whole sky over a 1 to 10 GHz frequency range. The survey could detect signals from the vicinity of distant sunlike stars or from areas beyond the solar-type stars. SETI observations were to begin on Columbus Day 1992, with the Sky Survey deployed at Goldstone, California, and the Targeted Search mounted at the National Science Foundation's Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico.
A column by Robert C. Cowen cited variances in figures for global warming among NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and the University of Alabama at Huntsville from those of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, the Climate Research Unit of East Anglia in England, and the Soviet Union's Hydrometerorological Scientific Research Center. According to the British and the Goddard Institute, 1990 was the warmest year on record globally but according to the Marshall Center, using different data, the hottest years in descending order were 1987, 1988, 1983, and 1990. (CSM, Jul 31/91; B Sun, Aug 1/91)
