Scientists at NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies said chemicals, particularly sulfurs, spewed into the atmosphere by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines are reflecting 2 percent of sunlight back into space, reducing heat. The impact is global; local temperatures might not be affected. Scientists said early studies of the effects of Pinatubo's eruption indicated volcanoes play a far greater role in climate change than once thought. (USA Today, May 19/92; W Times, May 19/92; W Post, May 19/92; P Inq, May 19/92; B Sun, May 19/92)
NASA researchers began a three-week airborne study to increase understanding of microscopic plant productivity in the  equatorial region of the Pacific Ocean. The principal scientific objective was to understand why microscopic plant productivity involving phytoplankton is so limited in the Pacific compared to the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA Release 92-135)
Scientists probing river muck have discovered bacteria that can "eat" the main chemicals threatening the ozone layer, the U.S. Geological Survey reported. The bacteria that break down chlorofluorocarbons, known as CFCs, were found along the Potomac River in Virginia and in pond, marsh, and swamp sediments in Maryland, South Carolina, and Virginia. The CFC-eating bacteria are harmless to humans, but can operate only in the absence of oxygen, according to Derek Lovley, a microbiologist working at the Geololgical Survey in Reston, Virginia. (W Post, May 2/92)
NASA said that construction had started on a high-flying, light-weight, unpiloted research aircraft called "Perseus" that NASA was to use to measure ozone levels and other atmospheric conditions. NASA viewed Perseus as the first step toward general use of advanced aircraft for many aspects of Earth sciences research such as climate and radiation studies, tropical dynamics, meteorology, and for studies of the stratosphere and troposphere. Aurora Flight Sciences Corporation of Manassas, Virginia, won the $2.25 million contract to design, build, and flight test two Perseus aircraft. Flight tests were slated to begin in late 1992.(NASA Release 92-110)
NASA awarded research grants to three universities to develop teacher training courses that would enable middle school teachers to incorporate aerospace topics and concepts into their classrooms and to create new and imaginative practices in learning. The Teacher Training Pre-Service Program is a two-year program. The following schools were selected from responses to a solicitation of proposals: Fayetteville State University, Eastern Michigan University, and the University of Alabama. Each was to receive a $83,000 grant and were expected to provide matching, non-Federal funds. (NASA Release 92-50)
A recent U. S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs oversight subcommittee report said that millions of dollars had been wasted in recent years because of poor auditing and contract management at 39 federally funded research and development centers. The report concluded that standard government accounting and auditing requirements were often "missing or ignored" at the privately owned but publicly funded research centers, which together received contracts worth more than $10 billion last year. Among the laboratories criticized was the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which received $1 billion in
Scientists with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said that the ozone hole over the Antarctic that has formed annually since 1987 had closed up again after setting records for depleting Earth's protective ozone layer. After falling from October 12 to December 5, ozone levels rose above the levels considered to be a "hole" on December 6. The hole formed earlier and lasted longer this year than ever before, the scientists said. (UPI, Dec 10/92)
Recent studies showed that the technology spinoffs from National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) research and development had already had a positive impact on U. S. aerospace, automotive, medical, chemical, food processing, and energy industries. The studies predicted that the Gross National Product could expand by about $26 billion over the next 10-15 years as a result of productivity gains fostered by the program and that employment also could increase by an average of 40,000 jobs annually. In particular, the studies showed that NASP research could significantly benefit industries such as aerospace, motor vehicle, and emerging industries such as ceramics and high-speed civil transportation. (AvWk, Jul 27/92)
NASA reported that an SR-71A "Blackbird" research aircraft will test a key propulsion system for the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane (NASP). The SR-71A would act as a high-speed testbed to prove the concept of burning hydrogen fuel outside the X-30's engine exhaust nozzles as a way to improve overall flight efficiency. If the program operations received approval, the SR-71A would be modified and flown at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The NASP Joint Program Office, Wright-Paterson AFB, Ohio, funded the preliminary design work for the experiment. The NASP program is a joint effort involving NASA, the Department of Defense, and a U.S. industry team. (NASA Release 92-29)
According to a report in Aviation Week & Space Technology, wind tunnel facilities at Russia's Sibnia research and development center were being made available to Western companies. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
The Magellan spacecraft fired its four thrusters to swoop within 113 miles of the surface of Venus for study of the planet's gravity and prominent surface details. Since its deployment in 1989, the Venus probe has used radar to map 99 percent of the planet, exceeding its goal of 70-90 percent. With its mission completed beyond expectations, NASA scientists expected to shut down Magellan in May 1993 as a cost-cutting measure. (NASA Release 92-148; USA Today, Sept 15/92; LA Times, Sept 15/92)
Responding to evidence that Earth's protective ozone layer is thinning or disappearing faster than was forecast, environmental officials from 81 countries met in Copenhagen to consider revising the Montreal Protocol on the control of substances that attack ozone. The main point of the meeting, sponsored by the United Nations Environment Program, was to set a timetable for the phaseout of chlorofluorocarbons, halons, and carbon tetrachloride. (The Sun, Nov 22/92;
NASA engineers were preparing to do the first assembly of a large-scale, parabolic antenna in a huge water tank whose buoyancy lets researchers simulate working in the microgravity environment of space. The tests would help establish assembly times for such antennas, evaluate work procedures and task coordination, and check the compatibility of the hardware itself. (NASA Release 92-84)
In the current issue of the British journal Nature, two scientists, Martin I. Hoffert of New York University and Curt Covey of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California, reported new findings, largely developed from geological studies, on how Earth's climate responded to changes in atmospheric heat-trapping carbon dioxide and other influences in the distant past. Using climatic data from two periods in the past, one 20,000 years ago in the midst of the last ice age, and the other in the mid-Cretaceous period 100 million years ago, the two scientists found that if atmospheric carbon dioxide doubles from its present level, the average global climate will become about 4 degrees Fahrenheit warmer. These findings agree with computer models of climatic change. They are also compatible with earlier work by NASA scientists at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, whose climatic studies predicted that a doubling of carbon dioxide would reproduce a warming of about 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit. (NY Times, Dec 15/92)
NASA announced that an array of powerful, interconnected computers would help NASA solve some of the complex problems associated with designing aircraft propulsion systems. The Lewis Advanced Cluster Environment system at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, is a network of 33 IBM RISC/6000 computer stations that can perform up to 1 billion floating point operations per second and has three billion bytes of memory, making it the world's most powerful IBM workstation cluster. (NASA Release 92-195)
NASA selected the ColeJon Corporation of Cleveland, Ohio, for negotiations leading to award of a support service contract for operations, maintenance and repair of facilities at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio. Estimated value of the contract was approximately $30 million. (NASA Release C92-3)
A press briefing was scheduled to be held by a science team for the ATLAS-1 mission on March 23, 1992, at the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama. The briefing was to discuss the mission's science activities and was to consist of two panels. (NASA Note N92-18)
Project officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that the Magellan spacecraft would use its backup transmitter to resume mapping the surface of Venus with imaging radar on January 24, following a week of routine battery recharging. (NASA Release 92-8)
Engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that the Magellan spacecraft, already threatened with suspension of operations to save money, had developed serious transmitter trouble and for more than a week had been unable to send usable data and pictures for the completion of its mapping survey of the Venusian surface. Magellan's only functioning radio transmitter begun overheating, a repeat of similar trouble more than a year ago. Engineers hoped to devise a solution within a few days. (NY Times, Jul 15/92; NY Times, Jul 18/92)
A group of NASA scientists sampling the air over southern Africa found massive pollution usually associated with the industrial centers of the Northern Hemisphere. Most of the pollution is caused by peasant farmers burning huge tracts of scrub brush to clear their land for planting. The group arrived in southern Africa in early October after studying a virtually identical problem in Brazil. Together, the pollution from the two regions was thought to be changing the atmosphere throughout the Southern Hemisphere. Some 180 scientists from 13 countries were involved in what was considered the most detailed atmospheric study ever made of the South Atlantic. (AP, Oct 12/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92)
NASA scientists tapped into a 300-year-old lead coffin in St. Mary's City, Maryland, in a search for air free of man-made pollutants. Samples of such air was expected to aid in understanding ozone damage in the present-day atmosphere. Tests on this and other coffins also helped NASA scientists evaluate the effectiveness of a tool that examines metal for tiny cracks or corrosion that occur in aircraft or spacecraft. (USA Today, Oct 21/92)
Researchers from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, used laser-ranging instruments aboard the Wallops P-3B (HL) Orion aircraft to measure the Arctic sea ice above the water and the Greenland polar glacier elevations in order to study global climate changes. The data gathered was to be compared to previous studies and used to develop a baseline for future studies. Scientists are interested in developing accurate measurements of sea ice and glaciers because changes in these systems may indicate trends in world climate. Appreciable changes in these ice systems, such as increased melting, could directly affect global climate. (NASA Release 92-38)
A 50-foot-long X-30 National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) mockup rolled out of its hanger in ceremonies at Mississippi State University, Starkville. Forty-five students in Mississippi State's engineering program worked for five months to construct the 5,000-pound mockup at the University's Raspet Flight Research Laboratory. Throughout the project, they had access to NASP program officials, who advised them on technical aspects of the X-30's design. The program was directed by Dr. George Bennett. (NASA Release 92-86)
NASA announced the selection of 321 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts under the agency's 1992 Small Business Innovation Research Program. The program aims to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small business to help meet federal research and development needs and to encourage commercial applications of federally supported research innovations. (NASA Release 92-204)
NASA unveiled its high-flying, unpiloted atmospheric research aircraft called "Perseus" at Manassas, Virginia. Perseus-A is the first aircraft designed specifically for atmospheric science. It will carry up to 110 pounds of instruments to a maximum altitude of 82,000 feet and is expected to begin flying scientific missions in 1994. Perseus-A was built for NASA by Aurora Flight Services Corporation in Manassas at a cost of $1.5 million. Company engineers expected Perseus to break the world altitude record for unmanned aircraft and the record for altitude in horizonal flight by an airplane. (NASA Release 92-227; W Post, Dec 19/92, Dec 28/92)
A Senate Appropriations subcommittee recommended spending no additional funds for NASA's advanced solid-rocket motor plant in Mississippi. On July 29, the House of Representatives voted 249 to 159 to eliminate $265 million in research and development funds for the project, leaving only $50 million to close it down. (W Post, Jul 31/92; Htsvl Tms, Jul 30/92)
NASA astronomers at Kitt Peak National Observatory announced that they had observed what they believed to be a galaxy in the process of forming. They estimated that the galaxy is more than 10 billion light years distant. (W Times, Nov 1/92; NY Times, Nov 3/92; AP, Nov 11/92)
NASA scientists, reviewing results of seven months' observations, said that after a record buildup of ozone-damaging chemicals last January, the amounts rapidly dissipated because of sudden warming in February and March. While the tests continued to show a thinning of the ozone layer that protects the earth from ultraviolet rays, the sudden warming prevented any severe ozone depletion over the Arctic region, the scientists said. Nevertheless, they said, the potential for severe ozone destruction over parts of the United States, Canada, and Europe remains a matter of serious concern because of the high concentrations of destructive chlorine that were detected. (W Times, May 1/92; NY Times, May 1/92; W Post, May 1/92; USA Today, May 1/92; LA Times, May 1/92)
Astronomer Duncan Steel of the Anglo-Australian Observatory in Sydney warned of a possible collision between the Earth and  Comet Smith-Tuttle in the year 2116. Several years would be needed to track the comet to determine its orbit with accuracy and to decide whether or not a collision is likely. (The Sun, Oct 26/92; W Times, Oct 27/92)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and at California Institute of Technology recently reported that they had found water ice on the planet Mercury. Radar beams aimed at both of the planet's poles bore telltale signs of having bounced off of frozen surfaces. (Time, Nov 2/92)
An experimental aircraft known as the X-31 had flown maneuvers at a 70-degree angle of attack, the Pentagon announced.  All of the plane's experimental flights were flown at the NASA Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California. (AP, Sept 28/92)
Virginia Governor L. Douglas Wilder was scheduled to dedicate on Sunday April 5, the new Virginia Air and Space Center in Hampton, Virginia. The $30 million facility, which was to serve as the new official visitor center for the NASA Langley Research Center, has a 300-seat IMAX theater and was to feature exhibits on the Viking Orbiter and Viking Lander, as well as numerous exhibits on the history of flight and space exploration. (W Post, Apr 1/92)
NASA researchers found unexpectedly high productivity of microscopic plants near the equator in the Pacific Ocean during a recent airborne study aimed at increasing understanding of these plants in the region. The plants, called phytoplankton, play an important role in the absorption of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. (NASA Release 92-179)
NASA engineers decided to stop operating the radar aboard the Magellan Venus mapping probe until early September in an attempt to preserve the spacecraft's one fully operational transmitter until Magellan swings over one of the large regions of the planet that it has not mapped. Ground controllers had relied on Magellan's backup transmitter since January, but the backup unit had developed radio noise that interfered with its periodic transmissions of scientific data. (Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
Associated Press reported that three soldiers had burned to death as hundreds of construction troops rioted at Baiknour Space Center in Kazakhstan after complaining of "inhuman treatment" by their superiors. Baikonur was the main space launch site in the former Soviet Union. (P Inq, Feb 27/92)
Flights of the X-31 Enhanced Fighter Maneuverability demonstrator aircraft resumed at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The X-31s were being flown at Ames to show the value of thrust vectoring (directing engine exhaust flow) coupled with an advanced flight control system for close-in air combat at very high angles-of-attack. (NASA Release 92-52)
NASA reported that the agency would start supersonic flight tests of a new electronic control system that would improve the performance, reliability, and safety of high-speed military aircraft, future commercial supersonic transports, and the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane. A NASA F-15 research aircraft was to begin supersonic testing at the Performance Seeking Control in April 1992 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 92-44, Apr 1/92)
NASA researchers said they had "flown" a complete three-dimensional high-performance aircraft in a supercomputer for the first time. The research was part of an effort to reduce wind tunnel tests of new aircraft designs. The new supercomputer techniques have promise in aerodynamic studies of fighter aircraft and in other areas where fluid flow is modeled, such as weather prediction, spacecraft entry, artificial heart design, etc. (NASA Release 92-105)
