NASA announced that an ER-2 aircraft, an updated version of the U-2 spy plane, would spend seven months next year researching the ozone hole over Antarctica. The study, part of a joint New Zealand-U.S. atmospheric study into ozone depletion, would explore the extent of the hole in the ozone layer. NASA research pilot Jim Barrilleaux was to fly the NASA-owned ER-2 aircraft. The work was scheduled to begin in late March 1994. (RTw, Mar 4/93)
NASA announced that a NASA F/A-18, modified to test the newest and most advanced system technologies, made its first research flight on May 21 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The Systems Research Aircraft (SRA) was evaluating technologies that would benefit both civilian and military aircraft. (NASA Release 93-95; Mojave Desert News, May 27/93)
Richard T. Barrett, a senior design engineer at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, was awarded the Federal Laboratory Consortium Award of Excellence in Technology Transfer for 1993. (NASA Release 93-73)
Robert S. Harrington, 50, an astronomer with the United States Naval Observatory in Washington, died of cancer January 23 at George Washington University Hospital. Dr. Harrington was known for his work concerning the possible existence of a 10th planet beyond the orbit of Plato. He also focused on precise stellar distances, solar system dynamics, and multiple star dynamics.
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, scientists have developed a multifunctional glass that detects pollutants in the air by a dramatic change in color.  Dr. Albert Stiegman, a JPL chemist, and his associates described the development in a paper in the journal Chemistry of Materials. (NASA Release 93-209)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, and the Ohio Aerospace Institute were scheduled to host a conference in Cleveland, March 30 and 30, focusing on the new world of Cyberspace. The conference, called the Vision 21 Symposium on Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering in the Era of Cyberspace, would provide "a panoramic view of the research and technology that will assist humans in exploration activities," said Dr. Sheila Bailey, conference chairperson. (NASA Release 93-50)
NASA has chosen 38 research proposals to be incorporated into phase II of its Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The projects will be conducted by 36 small business from 18 states; the projects have a value of approximately $19 million. NASA will select approximately 100 additional research proposals in January and February 1993.
NASA announced that it had tested helicopter rotor performance in icing conditions.  The tests were performed in the Icing Research Tunnel at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio.  The new experimental database resulting from these tests was to be used to further refine and validate a computer code that predicts helicopter rotor performance loss occurring when ice accumulates on the rotors during an icing encounter. (NASA Release 93-147)
A rocky asteroid, rather than an icy comet, probably caused a huge explosion over Siberia in 1908 that flattened at least 40,000 trees over about 850 square miles. A research team from NASA and the University of Wisconsin used a computer simulation to determine that an asteroid measuring about 65 yards was a better explanation than the comet; the simulation revealed that comets would explode much too high in the sky to fit the projected altitude of the Tunguska blast. (B Sun, Jan 7/93; NY Times, Jan 7/93; LA Times, Jan 8/93; W Post, Jan 11/93; P Inq, Jan 7/93; WP, Jan 11/93)
Astro D, a cooperative x-ray astronomy mission with Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) and NASA, was scheduled for launching February 11 from the ISAS Kagoshima Space Center in Japan.
NASA announced that engineer Karl Anderson from the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, had invented a process that yields more accurate, faster stress measurements. Anderson's method uses a circuit called a "constant current loop"; the system prevents errors caused by temperature changes in the wires that link instruments, called strain gauges, to recording devices. (NASA Release 93-002; AP, Jan 25/93; Antelope Valley Press, Jan 20/93)
By firing small jets 10 times in one-minute bursts, NASA engineers have raised the orbit of the giant Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory by 66 miles and saved it from crashing to Earth. The observatory was scheduled to travel around Earth in an egg-shaped orbit until late November when a second series of firings was to circularize its travels so that it would be at 280 miles altitude all around the globe. (AP, Oct 19/93)
NASA reported that the agency had overcome a thruster glitch to successfully complete the reboost of its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory (GRO), adding five years to the spacecraft's on-orbit lifetime. (Defense Daily, Dec 22/93)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Magellan Project officials announced the successful first-of-a kind experiment to "aerobrake" a spacecraft by dipping it into the atmosphere of a planet.  The Magellan spacecraft's orbit was changed from highly elliptical to nearly circular by dragging it through the top of the thick Venusian atmosphere repeatedly over a period of 70 days, ending on August 3, 1997.
Officials at the University of California, Berkeley,  announced that a violent overnight wind storm had destroyed a multimillion-dollar radio telescope. The 85-foot diameter dish, which was built in 1962, was located at the Hat Creek Observatory in the Lassen National Forest 70 miles northeast of Redding. NASA used the dish as part of its Crustal Dynamics Program, which measures motion of plates that compose the earth's crust. (UPI, Jan 22/93)
NASA announced that scientists using the Earth-orbiting Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory had discovered a powerful pulsar that had become one of the brightest x-ray sources in the sky during the past two weeks. (NASA Release 93-141)
SBIR attempts to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small businesses to help federal agencies meet their research and development needs. (NASA Release 93-003)
The Hook Telescope on Mt. Wilson in California, which once ranked as the world's biggest, was written off as an astronomical anachronism eight years ago. However, using the latest electronic sensors and image-enhancers, scientists and philanthropists led by Robert Jastrow of the Mt. Wilson Institute and the founder of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Flight, were reported working to salvage the Hooker Telescope.  Jastrow had raised $250,000 for repairs and was seeking another $250,00 to make the telescope useful into the 21st century. (LA Times, Aug 2/93)
LTX Corporation announced that NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had taken delivery of a Synchro mixed signal test system for use in the radiation effects and testing laboratory in Pasadena, California. (PR NEWSWIRE, Aug 11/93)
Under its High-Speed Research Program (HSRP), which began in 1990, NASA was doing basic research on developing a "clean" supersonic airliner, including preliminary studies of the potential of new materials. As part of this work, NASA was studying the atmospheric effects of supersonic aircraft in the stratosphere. The third report from this study, still in draft form and unlikely to be published in 1993, promised to dampen the optimism of previous research. (New Scientist, Aug 14/93)
NASA announced that it had chosen the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas to become the NASA Specialized Center of Research and Training in Integrated Physiology. The new center would focus on arriving at a better understanding of how different organ systems of various species react to space flight. (NASA Release 93-040)
Writing in Sports Illustrated, Robert H. Boyle took to task those members of the media who have asserted that environmental problems such as depletion of the ozone layer and acid rain don't exist, that they were cooked up by scientists greedy for funding. Boyle pointed the finger at talk show host Ross Limbaugh but said that mainstream publications such as the Washington Post and the Wall Street Journal had also been guilty of misrepresenting environmental problems.  (Sports Illustrated, Jul 12/93)
Federal Computer Week reported that a small woman-owned Florida firm had protested Marshall Space Flight Center's decision to let companies with up to 1,500 employees bid on a small, disadvantaged business (SDB) set-aside program there. Challenger Engineering Inc., St. Petersburg, Florida, maintained that NASA's procurement policy was unfair to smaller minority-owned firms that could not compete with larger companies. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 1/93)
Nasa announced the selection of 111 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). These proposals and the 38 previously selected proposals came from 130 small, high technology firms located in 27 states. The SBIR program is intended to stimulate technological innovation by using small businesses, including minority and disadvantaged firms, to help meet federal research and development requirements and to encourage the commercial application of federally funded research innovations. (NASA Release 93-33; Washington Technology, Feb 25/93)
According to Space News, seven months after a NASA-appointed Management Review Team reported that lax security had created a high risk of espionage at the Ames Research Center in Northern California further investigations by the FBI and NASA's inspector general had not substantiated those charge. In the meantime, however, Ames had implemented many of the team's recommendations. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
NASA announced that Salisbury State University had become the first college in Maryland named to participate in a joint study program with NASA. The university was expected to receive a $110,000 grant over three years from NASA's Joint Venture Institutions program. (B Sun, June 4/93)
Dr. Lonnie Reid, a fluid dynamics expert at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, was scheduled to be inducted into the Ohio Science Technology and Industry Hall of Fame in Columbus on February 7.
NASA announced the selection of 130 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The SBIR goals are to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of small businesses (including minority and disadvantaged firms) in meeting federal research and development needs and increase private sector commercialization of results of federally funded research. (NASA Release 93-219)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected NYMA, Inc., Greenbelt, Maryland, for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for scientific, engineering, technical, administrative, and related support activities of Lewis' mission responsibilities. (NASA Release C93-q)
Researchers hoped that the lead coffins buried beneath the floor of the 17th-century Great Brick Chapel in St. Mary's City, Maryland, contained 300-year-old air. However, according to Joel Levine, the scientist who headed the team analyzing the air at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, the coffins appeared to contain modern air, as signalled by the presence of Chlorofluorocarbons, which were first manufactured in the 1940s.
Throughout the balloon's flight, teams of amateur radio operators in Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida were to receive information from the balloon's gondola; this information was to be relayed by high-frequency radio to the Utah State University team. Other flights of an longer duration were scheduled to be launched from Canada, the United States, Mexico, and Central America. (NASA Release 93-8)
The Plain Dealer reported that a group of African-American employees at NASA's Lewis Research Center had charged that the materials used in a pilot program intended to promote better communication between employees of differing cultural groups instead fostered racism. NASA was investigating. (The Plain Dealer, May 25/93; Space News, May 31-June 6/93)
Arkansas Governor Jim Guy Tucker and Thomas J. Lee, Director of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, signed a memorandum of understanding to conduct a joint effort to transfer NASA-derived and NASA-contractor derived technologies to businesses, industries, academic institutions, research facilities, and individuals in the state. (NASA Release  93-138)
NASA announced that researchers at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, had developed an ion exchange material that in laboratory tests effectively removed contaminants from water. Tests showed that the new material was easy to use and inexpensive to produce. (NASA Release 93-86)
NASA announced that it had officially kicked off Phase II of its High-Speed Research Program, a partnership with U.S. industry to develop technology that could enable the development of a next-generation supersonic airliner. (NASA Release 93-202)
NASA announced that it had selected Computer Sciences Corporation, Applied Technology Division, Falls Church, Virginia, to negotiate a contract for scientific computing operations, maintenance, and communication services in support of the Center Scientific Computing Complex (CSCC) at the Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA (NASA Release C93-1; W Times, Jul 22/93))
The Associated Press announced that NASA engineers had searched for the source of a mysterious "bang" in Shuttle Endeavour's engine compartment. The sound was heard as the Shuttle was being prepared for a June 3 launch. (AP, May 14/93)
Director Dale Compton and Deputy Director Victor Peterson, the two top directors at NASA's Ames Research Center, were scheduled to retire at the of the year. The retirements come at a time when women and members of minority groups have complained that the center's top jobs are reserved for an "old boy network" of white men. (San Jose Mercury News, Dec 11/93)
The Wall Street Journal reported that NASA's Langely Research Center in Virginia was searching for an easy-listening
NASA announced that Marta Bohn-Meyer, an aeronautical engineer at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, was one of 10 federal government employees chosen to receive the 1992 Arthur S. Flemming Award. The reward "recognizes U.S. government employees for outstanding and meritorious work," according to NASA.
NASA announced that it had begun flight tests of a fiber optic control system that could result in lighter, more fuel-efficient airplanes with more capable control and monitoring systems.  The tests, using the F/A-18 Systems Research Aircraft at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, were developing fiber optic systems that weighed less and took up less space than the copper wiring in today's aircraft. (NASA Release 93-199)
The Spacelab Life Sciences-2 (SLS-2) mission scheduled for October would offer scientists unprecedented opportunities to learn more about how life adapts to the microgravity environment of space flight.  For the first time in the history of space flight, scientists were to collect tissues during the mission.  Crew members were to draw blood samples from both themselves and rats and were to dissect five rats in space.  (NASA Release 93-173)
Officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, announced that an SR-71 Blackbird reconnaissance aircraft, once used as a spy plane, took off this week on its maiden science flight. The plane was equipped with an ultra-violet camera to study stars and comets.
NASA awarded 20 universities grants for the first phase of a new training program that ultimately would create a cadre of young engineers skilled in multi-disciplinary design and analysis methods. Each university was to get about $50,000 to define a multi-disciplinary curriculum and graduate-level research program in the aeronautics field that would be accomplished with industry. The universities also were to prepare proposals for Phase II of the effort. (NASA Release 93-210)
NASA said that scientists at the NASA-Langley Research Center had developed a radar that can detect wind shear before pilots fly into it. The FAA considers the Langley device an improvement over other wind shear radar on the market, according to an FAA spokesperson. NASA nominated Langley's radar work for the 1993 Robert J. Collier Trophy, a national award given annually by he  National Aeronautics Association to those who have made the greatest achievement in aeronautics and astronautics. (Daily Press, Nov 22/93)
Arkansas Governor Jim Guy Tucker and Thomas J. Lee, Director of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, signed a memorandum of understanding to conduct a joint effort to transfer NASA-derived and NASA-contractor-derived technologies to businesses, industries, academic institutions, research facilities, and individuals in the state. (NASA Release  93-138)
Louis Williams, director of high-speed research for NASA, lectured at NASA's Langely Research Center about an environmentally safe, economically sound supersonic transport (SST) that is within the nation's technological reach. The plane, which would ferry 300 people across the Pacific Ocean in four hours, would go twice as fast as the Concord and carry three times as many people. Government research on the project began in 1990 and was scheduled to run another two years; early research focused on the project's environmental goals, which Williams maintained were being met. The federal government gave $450 million to the project.
NASA announced that it would fund three new university research centers charged with fostering the next generation of researchers and engineers in hypersonic aeronautics--flight at more than five times the speed of sound.  Scheduled to receive $200,000 annually for three years were Syracuse University, New York; the University of Maryland, College Park; and the University of Texas at Arlington. (NASA Release 93-152)
The Delta Clipper-Experimental, a 42-foot prototype for a new generation of reusable spacecraft, climbed to about 300 feet, hovered, moved laterally about 350 feet, then made a vertical landing at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico.  This was the spacecraft's second successful test flight. (B Sun, Sep 12/93; National Journal, Oct 2/93)
In mid-June a new breed of spacecraft, the Delta Clipper Xl (DC-X), was scheduled to be launched for a brief test. If things go according to plan, the craft would hover briefly 100 feet in the air, and then settle back in its launching pad. The spacecraft, built by McDonald Douglas Aerospace, was to take off vertically and land the same way. Some experts in the field suggested that the DC-X might mark the next phase of U.S. space exploration. (Business Week, June 21/93)
NASA announced that a specially modified NASA F-15 research aircraft had arrived at the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The F-15 was to be involved in a research program aimed at substantially advancing the cruising efficiency and flight maneuverability of future U.S. aircraft. (NASA Release 93-115)
Orbital Sciences Corporation said its Orbital Imaging Corporation unit had been awarded a two-year, $7 million contract to provide atmospheric research data to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center.  (W Times, August 31/93)
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and the California Institute of Technology announced that they had developed a computer software system to catalog and analyze the estimated half billion sky objects in the second Palomar Observatory sky survey. (NASA Release 93-067)
A Utah State university group sponsored by NASA's National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program Office was scheduled to launch a high-altitude research balloon on January 11 to measure ozone distribution and wind parameters in the Earth's stratosphere. The balloon, which was to fly across the Gulf of Mexico to Florida, was the eleventh launched by this team and the first of 24-hours duration.
The Washington Post reported that ozone layer problem appeared to be on the way to a solution. Thanks to the Montreal Protocol, an international treaty obligating signatory countries to phase our ozone-destroying chemicals, scientists expected the threat of ozone destruction to peak in 2000. In that year, according to the latest scientific projections, the ozone layer should start slowly getting thicker and better able to block the sun's harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. (W Post, Apr 15/93)
NASA has begun full-scale development of the first spacecraft to rendezvous with and orbit an asteroid.  Called Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR), the mission received funding in the FY 1994 budget and was scheduled to be the first in NASA's new Discovery program of small-scale, cost-effective space exploration missions to be launched. (NASA Release 93-220)
Vigyan Corporation, Hampton, Virginia, last week asked the General Services Administration's Board of Contract Appeals to overturn what was thought to be the largest minority-set-aside contract ever, a $180 million pact with Nyma Corporation, Greenbelt, Maryland, for engineering support services at NASA's Lewis Research Center. Vigyan specifically charged both Nyna and NASA with conflict of interest, saying the company's winning proposal listed a current NASA employee "who possesses both proprietary and source-selection information" relevant to Vigyan's bid." (Federal Gomputing Week, Aug 23/93)
NASA announced the selection of 317 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase 1 contracts in NASA's 1993 Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR).  Over 2,850 proposals were submitted by small, high technology businesses from all parts of the United States. (NASA Release  93-207)
Richard B. Hoover of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was named NASA inventor of the year for his invention of the Water-Window Imaging x-ray Microscope. This instrument should enable researchers to see in great detail high contrast x-ray images of proteins, chromosomes, and other tiny carbon structures inside living cells. (NASA Release 93-024)
NASA announced that it had started flight tests of a fiber optic control system that could result in lighter, more fuel-efficient airplanes with more capable control and monitoring systems.  The tests, which used the F/A-18 Systems Research Aircraft, took place at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 93-199)
NASA selected Recom Technologies, San Jose, California, a small disadvantaged business, for negotiations leading to award of a contract for Computational Administrative, Professional, and Engineering Services to support NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. (NASA Release C93-t)
NASA announced that a NASAF-15 research aircraft made a touchdown on April 21, using only engine power for control. The plane landed at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The flight was part of NASA's attempt to develop a computer-assisted engine control system that lets a plane land safely with only engine power if its normal control surfaces are disabled. (NASA Release 93-75)
NASA announced that it would participate in the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People's (NAACP) national Afro-Academic Cultural, Technological, and Scientific Olympics (ACT-SO) competition, to be held in conjunction with the groups's annual convention in July.  Two thousand high school students, representing 600 cities, were scheduled to compete for national honors.  NASA scientists and engineers were to participate as science fair judges.  National winner would receive certificates from NASA and a sponsored visit to a NASA field center.
NASA announced a new initiative to commercialize NASA inventions by using top graduate students at Case Western to come up with new product ideas and strategies. NASA's Lewis Research Center, the Battelle Memorial Institute, and Case Western Reserve University, all based in Cleveland, Ohio, were involved in the program. (NASA Release 93-91)
NASA, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), and the Southern California Small Business Utilization Council were  scheduled to co-sponsor the 1993 High Technology and Small Business Development Procurement Conference on March 1-2 in Los Angeles. About 200 government prime contractors, federal agencies, and other large procurement organizations were expected to participate in the conference. (NASA Release 93-029)
Eleven high school students participated in an eight-week Summer High School Apprenticeship Research Program (SHARP) at NASA's Dryden space center this summer.  Four days a week, the participants completed a regular eight-hour workday, working alongside engineers and others, learning firsthand what it takes to succeed in these careers.  The fifth day was spent in career exploration, perhaps a tour of different facilities at Edwards AFB or a visit to a university such as UCLA.  (Antelope Valley Press, Aug 12/93)
NASA announced that researchers at the NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, had developed a new and unique group of ceramic processing chemicals that might revolutionize the ceramic industry.  The new processing chemicals might lead to high purity ceramic products that could better withstand temperatures over 2102 degrees F (1200 degrees Celsius). (NASA Release 93-143)
