Sayed Z. Shariq, director of the Office of Commercial Technology at NASA's Ames Research Center, said NASA had reshaped its technology transfer program so as to make it an integral part of NASA's business relationships with the private sector. In this regard, Shariq said that Government should adapt to industry's practices and both NASA and industry should work together during the research and development, product planning, prototyping, and fabrication stages. In addition, agency staff performance evaluations, incentives, and awards should be structured to foster commitment to the commercial program. One of the first signs of NASA's commercialization mission was the Aerospace Industry Technology Program, funded at $20 million for fiscal 1994. (AvWk, May 16/94)
A critical article broke down the percentages NASA would devote to various programs during the 1995 fiscal year, out of the $14.4 billion approved by Congress. The following categories were listed: Space Shuttle, 25 percent; NASA bureaucracy, 15 percent; Space Station, 15 percent; Mission to Planet Earth, 9 percent; physics and astronomy, 8 percent; aeronautics, 6 percent; planetary exploration, 5 percent; advanced concepts and technology, 4 percent; mission communications, 3 percent; launch services, 2 percent; life and microgravity sciences, 2 percent; space communication and telecommunications, 1 percent; new construction, 1 percent; safety office, .5 percent; inspector general, .5 percent. Not included were wind tunnel operations. (O Sen Star, Oct 16/94)
NASA's appointment of France Cordova as the agency Senior Scientific Adviser, on a three-year leave of absence from Pennsylvania State University was featured. She was to serve as the principal link between NASA and the science community and ensure that NASA programs were regarded as scientifically and technologically well-founded. She was also to coordinate an integrated strategic plan for all the scientific disciplines within NASA. (The Penn Stater, Feb/94)
NASA created or saved an estimated 5,300 direct and indirect jobs in the U.S. economy in the preceding 18 months because of technology transfer programs at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Of these, some 1,170 were in Alabama, according to Harry Craft Jr., manager of the MSFC Technology Transfer Office, 1,078 in Pennsylvania, and 430 in Tennessee. Most of the companies helped by the Office were small businesses. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 24/94)
Astronomer Alexander Wolszczan at Pennsylvania State University in an article published in Science magazine, claimed "irrefutable evidence" of at least two planets orbiting a nearby star--the first confirmed observation of planets outside the Earth's solar system. The planets were in orbit around an unusual neutron star located 1,200 light-years away in the constellation Virgo. Various NASA staff members commented on the discovery. Robert Millis, director of the Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona, said NASA had a major effort underway to search for planets around stars but its program focused on ordinary stars like the sun. (LA Times, Apr 22/94; USA Today, Apr 22/94; P Inq, Apr 22/94; W Post, Apr 22/94; NY Times, Apr 22/94)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services, Inc., of San Diego, California, for contract negotiations for two definite launches and options for seven added launches using the Atlas intermediate expendable launch vehicle. The first mission was to be the Earth Observing System-AM-1 spacecraft scheduled for 1998. (NASA Release C94-g)
NASA announced the discovery in the southern constellation Scorpius of an unusually bright X-ray source by an instrument aboard NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory. It remained to be determined whether the new source was a black hole, a pulsar, or some new object, according to B. Alan Harmon of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 94-140)
Kenneth J. Szalai, Director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center, received the Distinguished Executive Presidential Rank Award. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 6/94)
The research of engineers at NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, was featured, together with its applications to industry. Specifically, pistons were discussed and the benefits of making them from carbon instead of aluminum. NASA had "working agreements" with Ford, General Motors, lawn mower engine maker Briggs & Stratton Inc., and engine maker K&B Manufacturing Company, that would allow them to use Langley piston technology if they should decide to make the pistons. (Daily Press, Oct 23/94)
NASA announced the selection of two Winston-Salem State University faculty members to participate in the NASA/University Joint Venture Program (JOVE). The program enabled faculty and students to become involved in space science research. NASA was to invest $138,000 over three years to support Winston-Salem State's program participation. As part of the program, two faculty members would spend 10 weeks in the summer of 1994 at NASA field centers being "mentored" by NASA scientists. (NASA Release 94-48)
NASA was to award a Program Information System Mission Services (PrISMS) contract worth up to $800 million by May 1. Three companies were seeking to win the eight-year Marshall Space Flight Center contract: Computer Sciences Corporation, Harris Corporation, and incumbent Boeing Computer Services, Inc. The winning PrISMS vendor was to manage NASAwide communications, provide some NASAwide information management services, and run extensive computational services at Marshall. PrISMS had a two-year base with six one-year options; 10 percent of the work was to be set aside for small, disadvantaged businesses. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 25/94)
NASA announced the selection of Honeywell, Inc., for a contract for developing flight deck technologies in support of NASA's High Speed Research program. NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, was to manage the eight-year project. The advanced technologies to be developed included design for a potential future High Speed Civil Transport. (NASA Release C94-r)
The General Accounting Office, in a report to Congress, said that NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, managed by the California Institute of Technology, was poorly controlled and lost about $1 million in property annually. (Reuters, May 10/94; O Sen Star, May 11/94; Fla Today, May 11/94; AP, May 11/94)
Sandy Valenti, project team leader at NASA's Lewis Research Center, said the Center had compiled an inventory of space-related technology that has relevance to biotechnology and the work of medical researchers in northeastern Ohio. NASA's goal was to support existing organizations in he community, such as local hospitals and universities. Five specific research areas in which NASA could provide technological support were fluid mechanics, electronics, communication and instrumentation, materials development and structural design, surface modification, and energy storage systems. (Crain's Cleveland Business, May 30/94)
NASA announced the selection of two Space Grant Consortiums: Virginia and Colorado, and two universities: Pennsylvania and Cincinnati, to participate in the Student Launch Program. The program was intended to provide undergraduate students hands-on experience in flying space and Earth science experiments on suborbital sounding rockets and scientific balloons. (NASA Release 94-113)
Andrea Donnellan, a geophysicist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, stated that Oat Mountain in the Santa Susana range, north of the San Fernando Valley, had jumped several inches during the 6.6 earthquake that hit Los Angeles January 17. NASA collected data from a global network of 45 stations. (NASA Release 94-19; W Post, Feb 8/94; P Inq, Feb 13/94; National Black Review, Feb/Mar/94)
Paul F. Holloway, Director of NASA's Langley Research Center, said the Center had no desire to serve as a site for the two new wind tunnels. The Center feared its existing research would suffer if the new structures were located there. California, West Virginia, Tennessee, and Washington were vying as wind tunnel sites. (Daily Press, Apr 27/94)
Numerous federal agencies, including NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), were accused in a Senate report of "offloading" by devising elaborate practices for circumventing federal law so that hundreds of millions of dollars in government business could go to favored companies. The Senate Governmental Affairs subcommittee on oversight of government management said they had "abused and misused" the law and otherwise could have cut costs by half. (W Post, Jan 28/94)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, awarded the Computer Sciences Corporation, Arlington, Virginia, an eight-year contract to provide Program Information Systems Mission Services (PrISMS). (NASA Release C94-l; W Post, May 4/94)
Scientists said that the first spacecraft to fly over the sun's south pole--the Ulysses probe, a joint project of the European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA--reached the climax of a 3 billion-kilometer journey through space the week of September 12. As it did so, 80 of the project's 120 scientists met at ESA's research center in the Dutch town of Noordwijk to assess data gained during the four-year space odyssey. Ulysses' chief scientist Richard Marsden believed that the mission would give scientists greater insight into how the solar wind interfered with radio communications and electrical devices on Earth. (Reuters, Sep 16/94)
NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had signed an agreement with McDonnell Douglas Aerospace in Huntington Beach, California, to reconfigure the Delta Clipper experimental vehicle (DC-X) using advanced lightweight materials and advanced auxiliary propulsion systems. NASA was acquiring the DC-X from the Department of Defense to test new technologies needed to develop a reusable launch vehicle that could assist NASA's ultimate goal of gaining low-cost access to space. (NASA Release 94-125)
A Youth Science Symposium, "Your Place in Space," drew 400 middle school students to the California Museum of Science and Industry. Randii Wessen, a science systems engineer with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, was an instructor in one of the space-age exercises. Other students launched rockets and learned the fundamentals of comets and rockets. (LA Times, Dec 16/94)
NASA and contractor engineers were studying a number of existing engine designs as they tried to lower the propulsion technology risk for private development of a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) in the early 2000s. Operability rather than performance would be the key to any RLV engine. According to Len Worlund, director of the Advanced Transportation Technology Office at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to get reusability, NASA and its partners were working to build components that better withstood repeated firings. They were also trying to lower the high turbine temperatures that had saddled the Shuttle's engines with crack-prone cooling shields that required frequent repairs. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)
NASA announced the preliminary findings of the investigating team at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, California. The findings indicated that a faulty vertical gyro was responsible for the accident November 22 that resulted in severe damage to a Perseus remotely piloted research aircraft. (NASA Release 94-218)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, announced the selection of Robert P. Madison International for an engineering, construction, and environmental services contract at the Lewis Research Center and at Plum Brook Station, Sandusky, Ohio. (NASA Release C94-i; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)
NASA announced the resignation of Jeremiah W. Pearson as Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight and the appointment of Wayne Littles as new Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 94-191; AP, Nov 16/94; H Post, Nov 17/94; W Post, Nov 18/94; NY Times, Nov 21/94; AvWk, Nov 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
A scale model of Boeing's High Speed Commercial Transport was undergoing testing in the supersonic wind tunnel at NASA's Ames Research Center. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)
NASA announced the appointment of J. Stuart Fordyce, currently Deputy Director of NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, as Chief Scientist at the Ohio Aerospace Institute, Cleveland, effective September 18. (NASA Release 94-130)
A laudatory assessment was given of NASA's Technology Transfer program with specific reference to the Marshall Space Flight Center. According to Harry Craft, Jr., Technology Transfer office manager, the program had three elements: Industrial Outreach, Space Act Cooperative Agreements, and Dual Use Programs. Each was intended to increase cooperation between government and industry. In the Industrial Outreach area, industries came to NASA with problems they needed to resolve, requiring less than 40 hours work. For more complex problems, Space Act Cooperative Agreements were used. The Dual Use Program was a technology reinvestment program in which both government and industry contributed funds and technology to benefit both parties. (Huntsville News, Nov 30/94)
An example was given of the way in which NASA-sponsored research in aeronautics, in this case at the Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, had practical applications in daily life. The example involved a redesign of big rig trucks, based on Ed Saltzman's research, which made the trucks more fuel efficient. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Oct 16/94)
NASA announced that the Ulysses spacecraft, the first probe to explore the sun's environment at high altitudes, had completed a pass on November 5 over the southern solar pole, ending the first phase of its primary mission. Members of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, reported the development including the fact that Ulysses found a uniform magnetic field at the sun rather than any magnetic poles. In the sun's polar regions, the solar wind was found to be flowing at a very high velocity of about 750 kilometers per second, nearly double the speed of the solar wind at lower latitudes. (NASA Release 94-187; LA Times, Dec 4/94; UPI, Dec 5/94)
NASA announced its selection of 15 organizations to receive a total of $20 million to help develop applications and technologies as part of NASA's efforts to provide public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. The remote sensing database applications would make the information more accessible to a wider audience than in the past. (NASA Release 94-138)
NASA announced the award of a contract to the Boeing Company, Commercial Airplane Group, Renton, Washington, for engineering design and trade studies in support of the National Wind Tunnel Complex (NWTC). The NWTC was a joint effort between government and industry to construct state-of-the-art transonic and low-speed wind tunnels to meet the turn-of-the-century needs of the aerospace industry. The Wind Tunnel Program Office at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, was to manage the contract. (NASA Release C94-u)
NASA announced that scientists at its Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, were observing rare gamma ray flashes above thunderstorms at a rate six times that of previous observations. Steve Goodman of Marshall's Space Sciences Laboratory said the observations were being made by the Burst and Transient Source Experiment aboard NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, which was recently modified by ground commands to be more sensitive to such events. NASA planned to bring together investigators from the fields of space and atmospheric physics to study the newly discovered events. (NASA Release 94-204; AP, Dec 7/94)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced the award of a grant to Sierra College, Rocklin, California, for a hands-on community college engineering curriculum as part of the government's technology reinvestment project. (NASA Release 94-63)
NASA announced that it and the National Space Agency of Ukraine (NSAU) had agreed July 13 to explore possible cooperation in remote sensing and Earth sciences, telemedicine, space biology, space welding, advanced concepts and technology, and student and scientist exchanges. Robert W. Clarke, NASA Associate Administrator for Policy Coordination and International Relations, headed the U.S. delegation and Valeriy G. Komarov, Deputy Director General of NSAU, headed the Ukrainian delegation. (NASA Release 94-119)
NASA encountered difficulties in its desire to deliver planetary video data to microcomputer users because of the limitations of the technology. Mike Martin, a science data systems technologist with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said that so far he and his colleagues had been unable to incorporate Apple Quick Time video into multimedia presentations to run on the Macintosh and multimedia PCs. (Government Computer News, Mar 21/94)
Fifty-four minority high school students, mostly African Americans, from the Los Angeles area, began a four-week stay at Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio, studying computer science, Earth sciences, and mathematics. NASA sponsored the $300,000 Earth to L.A. program in order to encourage minority students to pursue such courses at traditionally black colleges and universities. Following the courses at Central State, the students would spend two weeks visiting 12 black colleges, looking toward future college entrance. (LA Times, Jul 21/94)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science Wesley T. Huntress announced two new science missions, both aboard small, relatively inexpensive spacecraft. The first, the Transitional Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE), would observe the sun to study the connection between its magnetic fields and the heating of the sun's corona. TRACE, scheduled for launch in 1997, would have Alan Title of the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, California, as the principal investigator. The second spacecraft, the Wide-Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE), scheduled for launch in 1998 to study the evolution of galaxies, would be headed by Perry B. Hacking of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. The two missions were part of NASA's Small Explorer Program for highly focused science missions. Small Explorer spacecraft weigh approximately 500 pounds, and the missions were expected to cost approximately $50 million for design, development, and operations through the first 30 days in orbit. (NASA Release 94-152)
NASA announced the selection of 42 additional proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in its Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The programs supplemented the 130 firms announced in December 1993. (NASA Release 94-18)
Two NASA-sponsored scientists, Scott Hudson of Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, and Steven Ostro of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, created the first three-dimensional model of an asteroid based on radar data. The asteroid was the double-lobed 4769 Castalia, discovered by Eleanor Helen of JPL at the Palomar Observatory in 1989. The model and resulting pictures appeared in the February 18 issue of Science magazine. (NASA Release 94-26)
NASA announced the establishment of a joint government research program that might result in developing plants that could withstand drought, unseasonable temperatures, soil salinity, and other adverse growth conditions. The program, called the Research Network on Plant Sensory Systems, was supported by NASA and the National Science Foundation. The program also was selected as NASA's ninth Specialized Center of Research and Training. (NASA Release 94-213)
NASA announced the signing of a collaborative agreement of the chief executive officers of the nation's 28 largest aerospace contractors, NASA, and the U.S. Department of Education in a plan to improve the nation's mathematics, science, and technology education goals. The agreement was in furtherance of President Clinton's Goals 2000: Educate America Act, which he signed March 31, 1994. (NASA Release 94-190)
NASA's Astrophysical Data Service allowed access to an astronomical data base that ultimately was to contain nearly a billion stars and several million galaxies. The data resulted from the comprehensive National Geographic Sky Survey made by the Mount Palomar Observatory in the 1950s. To this Mount Palomar added a second survey, underway for several years, of the northern sky covering more than 50 million galaxies and nearly 2 billion stars. (W Times, Feb 13/94)
NASA announced that scientists at its Marshall Space Flight center, Huntsville, Alabama, had discovered unusual gamma-ray flashes in the upper atmosphere high above thunderstorms. The heretofore unseen flashes were detected by the Burst and Transient Source Experiment, a Marshall instrument aboard NASA's orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. (NASA Release 94-86; W Post, May 30/94)
NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, and Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan, announced they had concluded a two-year cooperative agreement for the transfer of NASA-developed technology to improve the design and engineering of Ford vehicles. This was the first broad technology transfer process between NASA and any automotive manufacturer. (NASA Release 94-166; H Post, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 13/94)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and a consortium led by Texas Instruments' Metallurgical Materials Division were trying to use advanced aerospace materials to develop a demonstrator automobile engine significantly lighter and more efficient than the ones in present use. They planned to use high-temperature, high-strength materials developed for the defunct National Aerospace Plane. NASA would provide funding under its Aerospace Industry Technology Program. (AvWk, Nov 7/94)
NASA announced the selection of six Hispanic-Serving universities to receive five-year, Institutional Research Award grants for multidisciplinary research in science and engineering. The universities were to receive $400,000 the first year, $600,000 the second year, $800,000 the third year, and $1 million in the fourth and fifth years, for a total of $3.8 million over the five-year period. The universities selected were: California State University at Los Angeles; Florida International University, Miami; New Mexico Highlands University, Las Vegas; City College of New York; University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras; and University of Texas at San Antonio. (NASA Release 94-85)
An article described awards of the National Science Foundation (NSF) to historically black colleges and universities and institutions serving Latinos and Native Americans. Specific reference was made to Clark-Atlanta University in Georgia, which had built a multimillion-dollar science research facility, doubled its science faculty, increased the number of students in science and mathematics, and attracted large federal grants, including funds from NASA. As a result of its efforts, Clark-Atlanta was now a finalist for one of six $25 million NSF grants. (C Trib, Oct 22/94)
A federal grand jury indicted Ram Bachan Ram, chairman of the mathematics department at Hampton University, on seven counts of mail fraud related to alleged plagiarism in submitting a proposal for a research grant to NASA. The proposal concerned "Implications of Pressure Diffusion for Shock Waves," and for it Ram received $100,810 from NASA's Langley Research Center. However, it developed that Ram had stolen the proposal and findings from the work of a professor at Clemson University in South Carolina. (Virginia Pilot, Mar 9/94)
NASA announced the successful completion of the first and largest of eight mirrors for the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The mirror was scheduled to be a part of the AXAF telescope which was to be launched in 1998. (NASA Release 94-139)
NASA announced that it had selected 412 small business research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts up to $70,000 to perform a six-month feasibility study under its 1994 Small Business Innovation Research Program. Successful completion of Phase I would make companies eligible to compete in 1995 for two-year contracts in the amount of $600,000. (NASA Release 94-176; Huntsville News, Oct 26/94)
NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center's Western Aeronautical Test Range passed a milestone on March 18: the 10,000th mission monitored by the range. In this case it was NASA's F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle's second flight of the day. (Antelope Valley Press,Mar 19/94)
NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology announced its solicitation of proposals from all sources for industry-led research and development projects under the Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP). AITP aims to develop and apply advanced technology rapidly in the aerospace industry and in the non-aerospace commercial marketplace. (NASA Release 94-91)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, announced the award to Gilcrest Electric and Supply Company, Elyria, Ohio, of a contract to provide technical and fabrication services for the Center's in-house research and development program. The Lewis Center also announced the selection of R&R International, Akron, Ohio, for a contract for facilities operations and technical support services. (NASA Release C94-o; NASA Release C94-p)
JoBea Way, a radar scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, came up with the idea for KidSat in November 1993 while working with scholarship students in NASA's Space Radar Laboratory program. KidSat was a project to establish a permanent orbiting research payload that only students could operate to broaden their educational horizons. Sally Ride, director of the California Space Institute at the University of California, San Diego, was backing the project, which would enlist help from NASA and other organizations such as the National Science Foundation and private charitable foundations. The aim would be to begin the first KidSat classroom lessons in the 1995-96 school year. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, announced the selection of EG&G Langley, Inc., Hampton, Virginia, for a contract to provide maintenance, construction, and engineering support for the Center. (NASA Release C94-m)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, awarded the Engineering Design Group, Inc., Tulsa, Oklahoma, a contract for engineering, construction and environmental services in the rehabilitation, modification and construction of research and institutional facilities and systems. This small-business cost-plus-fee contract had a two-year basic period and three one-year renewals, a base value of $13.6 million, and a total value of $45 million. (NASA Release C94-e)
NASA announced that 166 small, high technology firms located in 31 states had been selected for Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. Funding for Phase II contracts could be up to $600,000 for a two-year performance period. (NASA Release 94-192)
NASA announced that it would negotiate contracts with 15 small companies to enable them to fully develop innovative new high technology products they had proposed for application in the aerospace industry. The contracts would be financed under NASA's Small Business Technology Transfer Program. (NASA Release 94-111)
NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology (OACT) scheduled a one-day forum, including an Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP), to encourage high-risk, high-payoff technology development. NASA responsiveness to industry's need was shown by industry participation in all aspects and phases of the AITP program, with representatives making presentations on both program content and structure. The fiscal 1994 budget allocation for this technology initiative was $20 million. (NASA Note to Editors N94-6)
The Boeing Company announced that it planned to cut about 900 jobs at its plant in Huntsville, Alabama, because it lost an eight-year, $1.05 billion contract with NASA. However, Boeing anticipated that Computer Sciences Corporation, which won the NASA contract, would hire most of the affected workers. (NY Times, May 10/94)
One of NASA's high-altitude, remote-controlled, Perseus research aircraft crashed, severely damaging the plane. NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center operated the craft, which was used to collect data from the upper reaches of the atmosphere--it could fly up to an altitude of 90,000 feet. (Antelope Valley Press, Nov 23/94; H Chron, Dec 5/94; LA Times, Dec 5/94)
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, released photos of the Chicxulub crater on the Yucatan peninsula in Mexico. The photos, taken from NASA's spaceborne radar, showed the site where scientists considered an impact 65 million years ago might have caused climatic changes that killed the dinosaurs. (USA Today, Jul 29/94)
Celebrating National Engineers Week, more than 20 engineers from NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center visited classrooms around Antelope Valley to discuss their careers. (Antelope Valley Press, Feb 24/94)
NASA announced the selection of ten organizations to receive a total of $6.8 million to help develop applications and technologies as part of NASA's efforts to stimulate public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. (NASA Release 94-194)
NASA announced the identification of nine proposals to begin cooperative agreement negotiations in NASA's Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP). AITP was established to focus industry's research and development efforts on dual-purpose aerospace technologies that showed potential for strong commercial applications that might also benefit NASA's programs. In addition to NASA funding, each project also would involve 50 percent or more in non-government cost-sharing. (NASA Release 94-165)
Kenneth Iliff, NASA Dryden Flight Research Center's first chief scientist, was featured. He developed a mathematical methodology used by nearly all the free world's flight test organizations to study flight dynamics, performance, and aerothermodynamics. (Antelope Valley Press, Nov 1/94)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, and Lockheed Corporation of Calabasas, California, reached agreement to merge and create the world's largest space and defense company. The agreement remained to be approved by shareholders and regulators. According to Lockheed chairman Daniel M. Tellep the merger would result in "significant reduction of costs to the government." Biographic data on Norman R. Augustine, chairman and chief executive of Martin Marietta and president-designate of Lockheed Martin Corporation, were included. (W Post, Aug 30/94; CSM, Sep 1/94; W Post, Sep 4/94; U.S. News and World Report, Sep 12/94)
A NASA engineering team succeeded in lifting the endangered Compton gamma-ray observatory to a safe orbit after its propulsion system malfunctioned. NASA said the reboost had extended the mission life of the observatory by five years, thus meeting its original two-to-eight-year life span--it was launched on April 5, 1991. (CSM, Feb 23/94)
On February 9, the Discovery was to launch the Orbital Debris Radar Calibration Spheres, designed to help locate "little junk" orbiting in space, which could pose a hazard to space flight. (CSM, Feb 7/94)
Following a protest ruling in its favor, Recom Technologies, San Jose, California, received payment for its Computational, Administrative, Professional, and Engineering Services contract with NASA's Lewis Research Center. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 7/94)
NASA announced that Suzanne Smrekar, a geophysicist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, who had been working on data from NASA's Magellan mission, had found that the planet Venus was still geologically active in places, even though radar images of its surface indicated little change in the past half-billion years. Data suggested that there were at least two, and possibly more, active hot spots on Venus. (NASA Release 94-105)
NASA announced the selection of BDM Federal, Inc., McLean, Virginia, to form a Remote Sensing Public Access Center for demonstrating, testing, and transferring technology to help provide public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. (NASA Release 94-131; Federal Computer Week, Aug 22/94)
