The Boeing Company and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation announced that McDonnell Douglas would merge with Boeing in a stock-for-stock transaction. The merger, the biggest in aerospace history, positioned Boeing to compete with Europe’s Airbus Industrie for nearly all commercial airline contracts. The merger also strengthened Boeing’s position as one of the most influential companies, both domestically and internationally, in the United States. The US$13.3 billion deal would place under a single umbrella nearly 200,000 employees, producing annual revenues in excess of US$48 billion. The Boeing Company also emerged from the deal with improved chances of winning major military contracts, whereas, previously, the company had few ventures involving the military aerospace industry. However, McDonnell Douglas had been the main supplier to the military of F/A-18 and F-15 Eagle-model fighter jets to the military. Thus, the merger brought together leaders in the commercial and military sectors of the aerospace industry, creating what one industry analyst called an “800-pound gorilla.” McDonnell Douglas stock rose 20 percent on the first day of trading following the announcement.(The Boeing Company, “McDonnell Douglas To Merge with Boeing, Combination To Be the World’s Largest Aerospace Company,” news release, 15 December 1996; Peter Kaplan, “Mission Inevitable,” Washington Times, 17 December 1996; David E. Sanger, “A Giant in Jets and Foreign Policy,” New York Times, 17 December 1996.)
NASA’s analysts at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), who had investigated the causes of the Challenger explosion, joined the probe into the crash of TWA flight 800, which exploded near Long Island, New York, on 17 July 1996. NASA offered the services of its MSFC investigative team to analyze why the center fuel tank of the Boeing 747 had exploded. Officials from the National Transportation Safety Board led the investigation, with support from a variety of other agencies, including NASA, the U.S. Navy, and the FBI.(Robert Davis, “Challenger Experts Aid in TWA Probe,” USA Today, 23 August 1996; Eric Malnic, “Experts at NASA Join Probe of TWA Crash,” Los Angeles Times, 23 August 1996.)
At the Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, Adriana C. Ocampo, a geologist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, announced the discovery of a chain of impact craters in Chad. According to a team of scientists, the presence of the craters suggested that a sizable comet or asteroid might have struck ancient Earth. Scientists discovered the craters using the Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C (SIR-C), which flew on Shuttle Endeavour’s Mission STS-59 in 1994. The impact craters were only the second chain of large craters ever discovered on Earth and the first impact craters found using the SIR-C technology. Ocampo warned that scientists still needed to excavate the ground extensively before they could be sure that the craters were indeed impact structures.(NASA, “Chain of Impact Craters Suggested by Spaceborne Radar Images,” news release 96-55, 20 March 1996. 46 NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-76—Press Kit,” news release 96-46, March 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Takes Off for Russian Mir Linkup,” Washington Post, March 23, 1996.)
A NASA research team published in the Journal of Geophysical Research its findings on urban- like pollution over the tropical South Atlantic Ocean. The team used data gathered from an experiment called the Transport and Chemistry near the Equator of the Atlantic (TRACE-A), conducted with the Brazilian Space Agency and scientists from South Africa. The scientists suspected that the high concentrations of ozone, like those found in densely populated urban areas, resulted from seasonal burnings in South America and Africa. According to the NASA researchers, the presence of pollution over the tropical ocean confirmed that humans had extended their negative impact on “traditionally pristine air” far beyond reaches directly above land. According to one researcher, the results of TRACE-A greatly improved the scientific community’s understanding of the atmospheric chemistry of the Southern Hemisphere.(NASA, “NASA Team Finds Urban-Like Pollution in Tropical South Atlantic,” news release 96-220, 30 October 1996.)
bombers marked the end of an era in the aerospace industry. The Wall Street Journal estimated that Boeing’s share of aerospace and defense revenues would increase to US$8−9 billion annually.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing To Acquire Rockwell Aerospace and Defense Units,” news release, 1 August 1996; NASA, “NASA Comment on Boeing Corporation Acquisition of Rockwell Aerospace and Defense Businesses,” news release N96-51, 1 August 1996; Associated Press, “Boeing To Buy Rockwell International’s Aerospace Holdings,” 1 August 1996; James F. Peltz, “Rockwell To Sell Space and Defense Divisions to Boeing,” Los Angeles Times, 2 August 1996; Jeff Cole and Steven Lipin, “Boeing Deal Will Strengthen Company,” Wall Street Journal, 2 August 1996.)
NASA announced the completion of a major benchmark in the development of its Advanced X- ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), as engineers completed the delicate task of assembling the high-resolution, cylindrical mirrors needed for the facility’s telescope. Engineers aligned and cemented the mirrors into place at the facility in Rochester, New York. Unlike optical telescopes, the AXAF used a series of shallow mirrors shaped like cylindrical cones to produce its image. AXAF’s mirrors were the largest set of such mirrors ever constructed.(NASA, “Completion of Mirror Assembly Marks Milestone for NASA’s Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility,” news release 96-212, 18 October 1996.)
NASA introduced a new technology with the potential to make much smaller and more efficient electronic devices: the Thin-Layer Composite-Unimorph Piezoelectric Driver and Sensor (THUNDER). Researchers at Langley Research Center (LARC) recognized the potential of piezoelectric material, because of its well-known capability to generate movement when subjected to an electric current. NASA hoped that the THUNDER technology would improve devices in “electronics, optics, jitter (irregular motion) suppression, noise cancellation, pumps, valves and a variety of other fields.” LARC’s interdisciplinary team had improved upon already available commercial-grade piezoelectric material, producing a more durable, cheaper, and more effective product. R&D Magazine announced that it would honor THUNDER as one of its top 100 most technologically significant new products of the year. Six companies signed agreements with NASA to develop THUNDER, and a dozen other companies expressed interest in negotiating similar pacts.(NASA, “NASA Rolls Out Award-Winning ‘Thunder’,” news release 96-197, 1 October 1996.)
NASA and the ESA made available images taken of Comet Hyakutake as it approached the Sun. The U.S. Naval Research Laboratory had captured the pictures during the appearance of the comet in late April 1996. The Naval Research Laboratory had built a special instrument⎯the Large Angle Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO)⎯to record the images. Operating aboard SOHO, LASCO suppressed the glare of the Sun, exposing the comet and its tails. In addition, the instrument produced the equivalent of a time-lapse movie of Hyakutake, thereby documenting the comet’s tails as they changed direction in reaction to the Sun’s forces. LASCO also allowed scientists to observe coronal mass ejections⎯the expulsion of hot gases. Researchers used the data to learn more about how comets interact with the Sun and about the behavior of comet tails.(NASA, “SOHO Images Comet Hyakutake’s Close Encounter with the Sun,” news release, 15 May 1996. 72 Paul Hoversten, “A Space Race with a Lofty Goal: Cash,” USA Today, 17 May 1996.)
A team of scientists from the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia discovered new evidence that pushed back considerably the scientifically estimated date of the origin of life on Earth. The researchers projected that the Earth’s age might be 350 million years older than previously thought. The research team, led by Gustaf Arrhenius, published its findings in the 7 November issue of Nature. The scientists argued that the presence of apatite (basic calcium phosphate) in Earth’s oldest known sediment sequences suggested that life had emerged on Earth 3.85 billion years ago. The scientific community met these findings with both excitement and skepticism.(S. J. Mojzsis et al., “Evidence for Life on Earth Before 3,800 Million Years Ago,” Nature 384, no. 6604 (7 November 1996): 55; Malcolm W. Browne, “Evidence Puts Date for Life’s Origin Back Millions of Years,” New York Times, 7 November 1996.)
Paul F. Holloway, Director of Langley Research Center (LARC) in Hampton, Virginia, announced his retirement. Holloway had served at LARC for his entire aerospace career, beginning in 1960. He became the Center’s Director in 1991, overseeing 4,500 employees and a budget of more than US$600 million. During his tenure, Holloway published 42 technical articles in the fields of hypersonic aerodynamics; boundary layer transition and flow separation; analysis of entry flight mechanics; and Earth orbital and planetary space missions. NASA awarded Holloway its Outstanding Leadership Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, Distinguished Service Medal, and Equal Employment Opportunity Medal. Holloway also received the Presidential Rank of Meritorious Service and two Senior Executive Service Distinguished Presidential Rank Awards. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin summarized Holloway’s contributions to NASA, saying that his “career spans almost the entire history of the Space Age, and his many achievements at Langley are a tribute to his talent, his professionalism, and his dedication to the importance of NASA aeronautical programs.”(NASA, “NASA Langley Director Paul F. Holloway To Step Down,” news release 96-127, 2 July 1996.)
