NASA announced the start of a month-long research endeavor to explore the levels of radiation present at high altitudes, using a refitted ER-2 aircraft. The project focused on altitudes between 52,000 and 70,000 feet (15,900 and 21,300 meters), where radiation typically occurs because of cosmic and solar rays. The project had both scientific and public policy applications; researchers intended to use the data gathered to assess the safety of public, supersonic travel. The campaign, funded by NASA’s High-Speed Research Program, specifically investigated the plausibility of the High-Speed Civil Transport, still in the conceptual stage of planning, a commercial jetliner that would carry passengers at 2.4 times the speed of sound and at altitudes above 60,000 feet (18,300 meters). According to NASA Project Manager Donald L. Maiden, the speed of supersonic flight could mitigate any ill effects of high altitudes on passengers, because “Even though the exposure levels are higher at the higher cruise altitude, the typical flying public will actually receive less radiation exposure than on today’s subsonic transports because of the higher speed of the High-Speed Civil Transport.” NASA, the U.S. Department of Energy’s Environmental Measurements Laboratory, the Boeing Company, and the space agencies of Canada, Germany, and the United Kingdom collaborated on the project.(NASA, “NASA Studies High Altitude Radiation with Upgrade ER-2,” news release 97-118, 3 June 1997.)
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) selected Scientific and Commercial Systems Corporation of Falls Church, Virginia, to provide support services for its Huntsville, Alabama, facilities. The US$66 million contract included transportation and equipment services, as well as publishing, mail, and food support. MSFC arranged the contract as a cost-plus-incentive-fee, performance-based contract, to provide NASA with cost savings, as well as with flexibility to reorganize services as necessary.(NASA, “Virginia Firm Chosen To Provide NASA Institutional Services,” news release C97−r, 10 October 1997.)
NASA announced that it had granted Hitco Technologies exclusive rights to use a NASA- developed, heat-resistant material to produce high-performance pistons. NASA had developed the carbon-carbon composite in the 1960s, for use as a heat shield for missile applications. Researchers speculated that pistons composed of carbon-carbon, a material with virtually no thermal expansion, would allow engines to perform more efficiently, holding their shape and rigidity in temperatures well above 2,500°F (1,370°C). According to G. Burton Northam of Langley Research Center, the carbon-carbon composite was “the material of choice for the most demanding applications.” Allowing industry to use one of NASA’s patented technologies continued the trend of government-industry collaboration that Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had fostered.
A team of scientists from the University of California at Riverside announced that NASA’s orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had enabled them to discover a “vast halo” of gamma rays surrounding the Milky Way Galaxy. The astronomers clarified that the discovery of the halo did not make clear how or why the gamma rays encircled the galaxy. NASA’s orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory uses gamma rays to expose highly energetic particles that would otherwise be invisible because of their absorption in the atmosphere. The scientific community greeted the discovery with interest and questions.(K. C. Cole, “Halo Around Milky Way Reported,” Los Angeles Times, 6 November 1997; Reuters, “Gamma Rays Found Surrounding Milky Way,” 5 November 1997.)
NASA announced that a plan for collaborative research and development between NASA and five other government agencies might result in the creation of an Internet connection a million times faster than home computer modems. The Next Generation Internet (NGI) initiative dedicated US$300 million and three years to developing the NGI, to fulfill the promise President William J. Clinton had made in his State of the Union address: “We must build the second generation of the Internet so that our leading universities and national laboratories can communicate at speeds one thousand times faster than today; to develop new medical treatments, new sources of energy, new ways of working together.” NASA sites designated for early trials of NGI connections included Ames Research Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, Lewis Research Center, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
NASA researchers announced that data from the Galileo probe indicated that Jupiter has distinct wet and dry regions similar to the Earth. The finding refuted the previous supposition that Jupiter was mostly dry. When it descended to Jupiter in December 1995, Galileo landed in an extremely dry and hot portion of the planet⎯an area one member of the team called the Sahara Desert of Jupiter. Scientists assumed that the area was representative of the entire planet, until they were able to analyze more long-range images taken by the probe. The Galileo team concluded that Jupiter was remarkably similar to Earth, with wet, dry, hot, and cold regions, as well as rain, snow, and thunderstorms. Before the creation of Galileo, scientists had been unable to observe much of the planet because of surface clouds of frozen ammonia. According to Robert W. Carlson of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA’s most fundamental conclusion was that “There is weather on Jupiter.” However, scientists pointed out that, in contrast to Earth, Jupiter faces weather developments that are far more extreme and long lasting. Storms on the planet can last for years or even centuries.(NASA, “Galileo Finds Wet Spots, Dry Spots and New View of Jupiter’s Light Show,” news release 97-123, 5 June 1997; K.C. Cole, “Scientists Detect Rain on Jupiter,” Los Angeles Times, 6 June 1997; Associated Press, “Jupiter Wet and Dry,” 6 June 1997.)
NASA announced that lighting technology developed to grow plants in space might help treat cancerous brain tumors in children. According to a series of trials, some tumor-fighting drugs performed more proficiently when illuminated with the light-emitting diodes (LEDs) created for NASA’s Shuttle plant experiments. To gauge further the effectiveness of LEDs in assisting cancer-fighting drugs, Dr. Harry Whelan of the Medical College of Milwaukee obtained permission from the Food and Drug Administration to use the LEDs on a limited number of children with cancer. Whelan’s method involved injecting his patient with cancer-fighting drugs and then placing an LED probe near the affected area. Whelan believed that the light focused the drugs on the dangerous tumors only, leaving the rest of the patient’s brain unaffected. NASA’s Small Business Innovation Research program, allowing small businesses to adapt NASA’s technologies for extended public uses, initiated the trial of LEDs to fight cancer.(NASA, “Space Research Shines a Light on Tumors To Save Lives,” news release 97-259, 6 November 1997.)
NASA announced that, through its Small Business Innovative Research program, researchers had successfully used recycled plastic milk bottles to create a more effective, lightweight insulation for clothing and blankets. The material had the same honeycomb structure as that of the metal heat barriers used in spacecraft. According to the principal investigator, Steven D. Miller of S. D. Miller and Associates, “The blankets are better than wool or fleece because they are non-allergenic, and they dry five times faster. The new material is also four times warmer than wool in cold and damp conditions.” The research team hypothesized that agencies such as the Red Cross, or other emergency medical personnel, eventually would be able to use the new material to warm patients more quickly. After developing the product for space and commercial uses, NASA planned to allow Miller’s company to pursue further commercialization opportunities without NASA funding.(NASA, “NASA Technology Creates Market for Recycled Milk Bottles,” news release 97-39, 13 March 1997.)
Software magnate James W. Benson announced the formation of SpaceDev, a new company focused on launching a robotic craft to an asteroid. Benson argued that space “is a place, not a government project,” claiming that his company would gather new scientific data for a fraction of the money NASA spent annually on space exploration. Specifically, Benson stated that his Near Earth Asteroid Prospector would land on an asteroid, gathering images and scientific readings. He estimated that his company could complete such a feat for under US$50 million, about US$200 million less than NASA’s budget for a comparable mission. Benson and SpaceDev entered the realm of space exploration with overtly capitalist intentions. Benson planned to sell the data the company gathered to NASA and to universities for profit. Additionally, SpaceDev consultants estimated that asteroids might contain significant deposits of gold and other precious metals, worth US$1–4 trillion, which would become the property of whoever succeeded in accessing it. Of his overall theory on space and science, Benson clarified: “When we deliver science, we expect to get paid. We expect a profit. We offer more science for the dollar.”(Associated Press, “Company Promotes First Private Launch to Asteroid,” 10 September 1997.)
NASA unveiled a new facility, called the Chemical Crib, at Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC). Officials hoped the new facility would reduce chemical waste by as much as 50 percent in three years. Waste disposal had become an increasingly expensive problem for NASA. “For every dollar spent to buy chemicals,” NASA’s Hazardous Materials Officer reported, “we spend three dollars to dispose of them.” The Chemical Crib would use a variety of techniques and technologies to compress waste, such as breaking down photographic-waste chemicals into a sludge, possessing as little as 5 percent of the mass of the original waste. NASA planned to construct similar facilities at its other sites. Staff of DFRC’s Safety, Health, and Environmental Office believed that the new facility would not only benefit the environment, but also the Center’s budget.(NASA, “New NASA Facility To Reduce Chemical Wastes; May Provide Better Storage for Hazardous Materials,” news release 97-102, 19 May 1997.)
NASA and the Boeing Company unveiled a new stitching machine that experts believed would change the method of fabricating aircraft wing structures. The demonstration took place at Boeing Stitched Composites Development Center in Huntington Beach, California. The project team of engineers had replaced the large metal structures used in airplanes with strong, but light, composite materials. By reducing the weight of an airplane, engineers hoped to decrease fuel usage, with the eventual result of cost savings for consumers. Rather than using rivets to hold together an airplane’s wings, the NASA-developed stitching machine sewed together precut fabric layers in the shape of a wing. Next, the machine added braided stiffener materials to the wing, before setting the wing skeleton with resin. The process created a wing as strong as one built with metal structures, but at a fraction of the weight.(NASA, “New Manufacturing Method Could Lower Air Travel Costs,” news release 97-176, 13 August 1997.)
