France’s Aérospatiale, British Aerospace, Germany’s Daimler-Benz Aerospace, and Spain’s CASA, partners in the Airbus Industrie airplane-manufacturing consortium, announced their intention to merge into a “unified civilian and military aerospace conglomerate that would compete in the world market with U.S. aerospace giants Lockheed Martin Corp[oration] and Boeing Co[mpany]” The partners provided no details regarding how the merger would take place, but the public statement represented “another move toward a unified European aerospace industry,” an idea that had been elusive “because of the competing national interests of the various countries.”
George W. Lewis Jr., NASA aeronautical engineer and son of George W. Lewis, former research director of NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, died at his home at the age of 81. He had worked for 30 years in Cleveland, Ohio, at Lewis Research Center, which NASA had named for his father.(Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), “George W. Lewis, 81, Was An Engineer at NASA,” 9 October 1998.)
The European Southern Observatory (ESO) successfully tested the first of four linked, identical telescopes of 8.2-meter (27-foot) diameters, comprising the Very Large Telescope (VLT). The VLT is the world’s largest and most advanced Earth-based telescope, with a collective diameter equal to16 meters (52 feet). The telescope’s “first light” images (its first astronomically useful images) met the design goals. Exposures lasting up to 10 minutes confirmed that the telescope’s tracking was very accurate and stable. The ESO had built the new telescope in the Atacama Desert in northern Chile, where a dry atmosphere and stable climate guaranteed clear skies 350 nights of the year.(Financial Times (London), “Staring Out Across 14 Billion Light Years: Technology Very Large Telescope: The Earth-Based VLT Brings a Twinkle to a European Astronomer’s Eye,” 4 June 1998.)
NASA’s Ames Research Center awarded a six-year, US$90 million contract to Logicon Syscon Inc. of Falls Church, Virginia, to provide operations, development, maintenance, and modification of the Center’s aeronautical simulation facilities. The contract included the operation and maintenance of the world’s largest motion-base simulator, the Vertical Motion Simulator, designed to aid in the study of helicopter and vertical short takeoff and landing issues, as well as the Crew-Vehicle Systems Research Facility, designed for the study of human factors in aviation safety.(NASA, “NASA Awards $90 Million Contract to Virginia Firm,” news release c98-s, 2 November 1998.)
NASA’s Ames Research Center awarded a five-year, US$99.3 million contract to Sverdrup Technology Inc. of Tullahoma, Tennessee, to provide testing and facility operation, including wind tunnels and arc-jet testing.(NASA, “NASA Awards $99 Million Contract to Tennessee Firm,” contract announcement C98-q, 27 October 1998.)
NASA awarded Aerojet, a GenCorp Inc. company, a US$16.4 million contract to provide a de- orbit propulsion stage for the X-38 technology demonstrator vehicle. The contract for design, development, manufacture, test, and delivery of one propulsion stage for the first X-38 spaceflight test included a second option for five operational propulsion units for the crew return vehicle (CRV), if NASA selected the X-38 design for the CRV. Engineers at Dryden Flight Research Center were flight-testing the X-38, a prototype spacecraft intended to lead to the development and construction of a CRV for the ISS.(Defense Daily, “Aerojet Wins $16.4 NASA Contract for X-38 Propulsion,” 20 August 1998.)
Chryssa Kouveliotou of the Universities Space Research Association led a team of astronomers at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in confirming the existence of magnetars, a special class of neutron stars with a magnetic field one thousand trillion times the strength of Earth’s. The team calculated the strength of SGR1806-20, first discovered in 1979, by combining data from NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer satellite and the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics.(UniSci Science and Research News, “‘Magnetar’ Generates Most Intense Magnetic Field in Universe,” 21 May 1998; C. Kouveliotou et al., “An X-ray Pulsar with a Superstrong Magnetic Field in the Soft Gamma-Ray Repeater SGR1806-20,” Nature 393, no. 6682 (21 May 1998): 235–237; NASA, “Strongest Stellar Magnetic Field Yet Observed Confirms Existence of Magnetars,” news release 98-87, 20 May 1998.)
NASA announced that Raytheon STX Corporation of Lanham, Maryland, would provide routine data operations, research, and development support for the Space Science Data Operations Office and the National Space Science Data Center at GSFC, under a two-year contract with three one- year options. Valued at more than US$33 million, the contract covered the processing of space- science data and the acquisition, modeling, analysis, archiving, and dissemination of NASA’s archival data to the scientific community, educators, and the public.(NASA, “NASA Selects Raytheon STX To Provide Goddard Support,” contract announcement c98-v, 2 December 1998.)
NASA officially opened its new communications terminal on Guam, to provide “global, full- time and real-time communications support for NASA’s Space Network customers.” The Guam ground station replaced the interim ground terminal in Canberra, Australia, established to provide continuous, full-time, real-time communications support for NASA’s Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after it had “suffered an on-board tape recorder failure in March 1992.”
At the request of the United States, Israeli officials arrested Ehud Tenenbaum, the eighteen-year- old computer hacker who called himself The Analyzer, along with two other Israeli teenagers. Tenenbaum was ringleader of a group called Israeli Internet Underground. Prosecutors accused the teenage hackers of breaking into U.S. government and military computer systems, including NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), as well as into Israeli government computers and commercial and educational computer systems in the United States. The FBI said that all three had admitted their involvement, stating that they had worked in tandem with two juveniles in Cloverdale, California.
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had selected Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space of Sunnyvale, California, and TRW Inc. Space and Electronics Group of Redondo Beach, California, as industry team members for the Space Interferometry Mission. The Interferometry Mission would measure the precise location of stars and search for planets orbiting nearby stars. The two contracts, which together exceeded US$200 million, included mission formulation and implementation.(NASA, “Contractors Chosen for Space Interferometry Mission,” news release 98-162, 10 September 1998.)
The European Science Foundation and the U.S. National Research Council published a joint study analyzing 13 projects in astrophysics, planetary science, space physics, earth science, and microgravity research. The report advised the United States and its international partners to “set aside a specific part of their annual space budgets to plan for future critical joint exploration projects,” highlighting factors hampering cooperation within the projects analyzed. Hampering factors included cultural differences, poorly defined objectives, and “lukewarm support from the scientific community for projects undertaken more for political than research reasons.” The report set forth recommendations for successfully pursuing cooperative space projects within tight budget constraints.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Study: Space Projects Need Good Science,” 30 June 1998; European Space Foundation, “Transatlantic Study Identifies Keys to Success in International Space Collaboration,” news release, 30 June 1998, http://www.esf.org/media-centre/press-releases/ext-single-news/article/transatlantic- study-identifies-keys-to-sucess-in-international-space-collaborations-220.html (accessed 27 September 2007).)
Boeing Company announced plans to cut an additional 8,200 jobs by the end of the year 2000, to streamline facilities, to focus on manufacturing and assembly operations, and to eliminate redundant laboratories. The job cuts, affecting work sites in Arkansas, California, and Texas, included planned product phaseouts of the MD-80 and MD-90, and brought into question the future of the MD-11. As it shut down selected facilities, including an electronic manufacturing facility and the Site 9 modification center, Boeing planned to transfer thousands of employees involved with aircraft and missile systems, reusable-space-systems support, and satellites.(United Press International, “Boeing Cuts 8,200 Jobs,” 20 March 1998.)
At a ceremony marking its official opening, Virginia Governor James S. Gilmore III announced that Reston-based DynCorp was the first major investor in the Commercial Spaceport Launch Pad at Virginia Space Flight Center on Wallops Island, the nation’s third commercial spaceport. The Virginia Commercial Space Flight Authority, a collaborative effort of the state, the Center for Innovative Technology at Old Dominion University in Virginia, NASA, and private industry, had developed the communications facility, located at one end of NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility. The spaceport was one of 18 sites competing to launch the VentureStarTM, a privately owned space plane still in development, which could eventually carry construction materials to the ISS.(Sonja Barisic, “Firm Gives a Big Boost to Spaceport,” Roanoke Times (VA), 15 September 1998; Karen Jolly Davis, “$4.5 Million Contribution Gives Wallops Island Spaceport a Boost,” Virginian Pilot and the Ledger-Star (Norfolk, VA), 15 September 1998.)
Jeremy Lin of Taiwan’s Academia Sinica Institute and colleagues at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Socorro, New Mexico, reported in the journal Nature that measurements taken with the world’s largest radio telescopes—the Very Large Array (VLA)— had detected “peculiar bulges in the atmosphere of a giant star.” Huge plumes of gas thrust from beneath the surface of the red supergiant star, Betelgeuse, had likely caused the bulges. Betelgeuse is located in the shoulder of the constellation Orion, about 430 light-years from Earth. The research team used the Y-shaped, 22-mile-wide (35-kilometer-wide) cluster of 27 huge antennas of the VLA telescopes to capture the most detailed radio image ever taken of a star other than the Sun. The team discovered that some of the gas in the star’s atmosphere was much cooler than previously believed—about 5,750°F (3,200°C). The discovery of the lower temperatures enabled astronomers to understand “how huge amounts of dust are constantly blown away from the star.” Before the lower temperatures were identified, scientists had not been able to explain how the stellar dust formed, because at “higher temperatures the dust could not condense from the hot gas expelled from the star’s interior.” Astronomers believe that dust created and expelled by stars like Betelgeuse “is distributed throughout the universe and provide[s] the raw materials that gave rise to life on Earth.”(Malcolm W. Browne, “Atmosphere Bulges on None-Too-Distant Star,” New York Times, 21 April 1998.)
NASA awarded contracts to Boeing Information, Space, and Defense Systems; Kelly Space and Technology; Lockheed Martin Astronautics; and Orbital Sciences Corporation Space Access. The five contracting companies would study ways that NASA could meet its requirements for human spaceflight at a lower cost. The studies would examine three scenarios: 1) keeping the Shuttle operational until 2020, 2) replacing the Shuttle when it was cost-effective to do so, and 3) developing an alternative plan in case NASA’s funding remained at FY 1999 levels.(NASA, “NASA Contracts for Future Space Transportation Studies,” news release c98-n, 4 September 1998; Defense Daily, “NASA Awards Future Space Transport Study Contracts,” 8 September 1999.)
NASA announced the establishment of a Near-Earth Object Program Office at its Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), responsible for coordinating “NASA-sponsored efforts to detect, track, and characterize potentially hazardous asteroids and comets that could approach Earth,” and with facilitating communication between scientists and the public, were NASA to discover any potentially hazardous objects. NASA selected JPL to host the new program, because of “its expertise in tracking precisely the positions and predicted paths of asteroids and comets.”(NASA, “NASA Establishes Near-Earth Object Program Office at Jet Propulsion Laboratory,” news release 98- 123, 14 July 1998.)
S. George Djorgovski, an astronomer at California Institute of Technology; Dale A. Frail, an astronomer with the Very Large Array (VLA) Observatory in Socorro, New Mexico; and their colleagues issued a notice to fellow astronomers regarding a gamma-ray burst (GRB) detected on 2 July. Frail and Djorgovski had combined the resources of the VLA and the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii to pinpoint the source of the burst, which they calculated to be a galaxy, “alive with new-forming stars,” billions of light-years away from Earth. Although scientists did not yet know the cause of GRBs, Frail remarked, “the fact that this burst happened in a hot galaxy where new stars are being rapidly formed is probably the death knell for the theory that collisions between old, dying neutron stars are responsible for the gamma-ray bursts.”(John Fleck, “N.M. Scientists Track Galaxy Blast: Explosion Is Billions of Light Years Away,” Albuquerque Journal (NM), 9 July 1998.)
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that the ion engine responsible for the Deep Space 1 probe’s primary propulsion was back in operation after its unexpected shutdown two weeks earlier. Scientists believed that metallic grit or another type of contaminant located between two high-voltage grids had caused the engine to shut down after running for 41⁄2 minutes.(NASA, “Deep Space 1 Ion Propulsion System Starts Up,” news release 98-215, 25 November 1998; Associated Press, “Spacecraft’s Troubled Ion Engine Restarts,” Washington Post, 26 November 1998.)
NASA successfully launched Deep Space 1, a spacecraft that could “think for itself.” Driven by ion propulsion, Deep Space 1 was the first craft to rely on this technology for its primary propulsion. The craft’s destination was an asteroid 120 million miles (193 million kilometers) away from Earth. Although tracking stations encountered initial difficulties receiving signals from the spacecraft, Deep Space 1 communicated 2 hours after liftoff that it was on “the right course” and “in good shape.” NASA scientists expected the spacecraft to travel 450 million miles (724 million kilometers) to catch up with the moving asteroid. Without the ion-propulsion technology, it would have required 10 times more fuel to reach its target. The craft was also flying with 10 other “futuristic technologies,” such as lens-covered solar arrays to generate additional power, and a radio beacon to communicate with ground controllers without their prompting the probe from Earth.(New York Times, “U.S. Launches a Spacecraft That Thinks for Itself,” 25 October 1998.)
NASA modified its contract with Orbital Sciences Corporation in order to produce a second flight vehicle for the X-34 program. The modified contract expanded test objectives, allowing US$7.7 million in additional funds for the purchase of hardware and another US$2 million for additional testing and analysis, wind tunnel testing, and a second leading-edge thermal protection system.(NASA, “NASA Commits to Second Vehicle for X-34 Program,” news release 98-11, 21 January 1998.)
