NASA scientists announced that, because the Deep Space 1 spacecraft had aimed its camera incorrectly when it flew within 15 miles (24 kilometers) of a small asteroid named Braille, the craft had failed to capture an image. However, the craft had succeeded in its primary mission to test 12 new technologies during the flyby, thereby validating the instruments’ future use in solar- system probes. Deep Space 1 was equipped with “a mind of its own,” enabling it to navigate through space without much assistance from ground control. The craft had traveled at 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometers) per hour relative to the asteroid, which was 117 million miles (188 million kilometers) from Earth. The flyby of the Braille asteroid, the final test of Deep Space 1’s Autonomous Navigation System, had been the closest any spacecraft had come to an object in our solar system without landing.(Washington Times, “Spacecraft Misses Asteroid Snapshot: Camera Can’t See Rock Called Braille,” 30 July 1999.)
The Perseus B research aircraft, built by Aurora Flight Sciences Inc., sustained moderate damage when it crashed on a California highway during a flight from NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. The craft was a “developmental vehicle designed to operate at high altitudes for extended periods on scientific sampling missions,” one of several aircraft that NASA was evaluating as part of its Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology program. Controllers could operate the craft remotely from a ground station, or the Perseus B could navigate autonomously along a preprogrammed flight path. At the time of the accident, ground-based Aurora Flight Sciences mission controllers at Edwards Air Force Base were guiding the Perseus B. DFRC flight safety officials, with assistance from Aurora Flight Sciences operations staff, formed an accident investigation team to determine the exact cause of the crash.(NASA, “Perseus B Damaged in Crash on California Highway,” news release 99-115, 1 October 1999.)
NASA released two initial images from its Chandra X-ray Observatory. One image traced “the aftermath of a gigantic stellar explosion in such stunning detail” that scientists believed they had detected evidence of a neutron star or black hole near the center. The second image showed “a powerful x-ray jet blasting 200,000 light-years into intergalactic space from a distant quasar.” Chandra was still in its orbital “check-out and calibration phase” when it captured the images, confirming that the observatory was performing up to expectations.(NASA, “NASA Unveils First Images from Chandra X-ray Observatory,” news release 99-98, 26 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-098.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
After assessing its safety aspects, officials from the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA’s) commercial space office approved the first space launch from a platform in the sea. The FAA issued the launch license to an international launch consortium known as Sea Launch. The Boeing Company, based in the United States, was a 40 percent partner in the consortium. The Sea Launch Company planned a demonstration launch for 27 March 1999, from a converted, self-propelled, oil-drilling platform in the Pacific Ocean. The consortium’s initiative, to launch communications satellites from a mid-ocean location at the equator, offered several advantages, such as the capability to lift heavier-than-normal payloads.(Federal Aviation Administration, “FAA Issues Launch License to First International Sea Launch Consortium,” news release APA 34-99, 15 March 1999, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsId= 4952 (accessed 27 December 2007); Associated Press, “FAA Gives Its OK to 1st Spacecraft Launched from Sea,” Salt Lake Tribune (UT), 16 March 1999.)
NASA announced that after just two months in space, the Chandra X-ray Observatory had taken “a stunning image of the Crab Nebula,” revealing for the first time “a brilliant ring about the nebula’s heart.” The Crab Nebula, located 6,000 light-years from Earth, in the constellation Taurus, is the remnant of a star that Chinese astronomers had observed exploding in 1054 A.D., when it “appeared suddenly and remained visible for weeks, even during daytime.” Astronomers had used “virtually every astronomical instrument” to study the Crab’s area of the sky, discovering that unlocking its mysteries led to “insight after insight” into how the universe works. Astronomers had linked the origin of pulsars to supernovas and confirmed the cosmic origin of chemical elements through the study of the “expanding cloud of filaments” in the Crab. The new image showed the Crab pulsar “accelerating particles up to the speed of light and flinging them out into interstellar space at an incredible rate.” Using Chandra’s “exceptional resolution,” scientists had traced the jet all the way to the neutron star, where the ring pattern clearly appeared. Previously, Hubble Space Telescope images had revealed “moving knots and wisps around the neutron star,” and other x-ray images had shown the outer portions of the jet, only hinting at the ring structure.(NASA, “Chandra Discovers X-ray Ring Around Cosmic Powerhouse in Crab Nebula,” news release 99-109, 28 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-109.txt (accessed 15 February 2008); Paul Hoversten, “Photos Get to the Source of Pulsar,” USA Today, 29 September 1999.)
NASA researchers at MSFC unveiled an experimental 50-foot (15-meter) track using magnetic levitation (maglev) technology to propel a 30-pound (13.6-kilogram) model of a spacecraft, at a speed of 60 miles (97 kilometers) per hour, in 0.5 seconds. MSFC researchers had sought to reduce launch costs, as well as to reduce space-vehicle size with the development of a maglev launch-assist system. The maglev track was theoretically capable of propelling and releasing a spacecraft at 600 miles (965 kilometers) per hour; wing design would then lift the craft and “give it a kick start” before the ignition of the rocket’s engines. MSFC Manager of Launch Technologies Sherry Buschmann commented that the researchers believed the use of maglev technology could cut launch vehicle size by 20 percent. NASA’s industry partner in the experimental technology was PRT Advanced Maglev Systems Inc. of Park Forest, Illinois.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “New NASA Track Races Toward Cheaper Trips to Space,” news release 99-260, 4 October 1999; Kent Faulk, “NASA Spacecraft Float to Future: Researchers Test Levitation as Way To Boost Launches,” Birmingham News (AL), 7 October 1999.)
Robert Thomas “R.T.” Jones, who had “led the development of the swept-back jet wing design that revolutionized air travel and enabled planes to break the sound barrier,” died at the age of 89. Jones had begun designing the swept-back wings in 1944, when airplane wings were perpendicular to the fuselage, while working at NACA (National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics), NASA’s predecessor agency. In 1945 Jones had conducted airflow studies, showing that a cone-shaped shock wave cut across the tips of straight wings, causing deterioration at Mach 1, the speed of sound. Jones had concluded that a swept-back design would preserve the wings and reduce drag. Although his idea was initially ignored, “virtually every commercial and military jet uses the design today.” Jones’s later research had included work on the oblique wing, “mounted on a pivot on top of the fuselage.” The oblique wing maintained a right angle to the fuselage for maximum lift during takeoff, but the pilot could manipulate it so that, at cruising altitude, one wing tip pointed forward and one backward, saving fuel, generating less engine noise, and eliminating the sonic boom. Although Jones’s oblique wing design had never advanced beyond the testing stage, some aeronautical designers continued to study its possibilities.(Washington Post, “Robert Jones Dies; Led Breakthrough on Wing Design,” 15 August 1999.)
The Boeing Company announced that it had completed negotiations on a cooperative agreement with NASA to develop an experimental space plane. The US$173 million contract stipulated that Boeing and the federal government share costs equally. Boeing and NASA hoped that the X-37 space plane, previously called the Future-X Pathfinder, would “serve as a test bed for new reusable launch technologies,” helping to achieve the “goal of reducing the cost of placing space vehicles and cargo into orbit.” Boeing envisioned a vehicle that would be “unpiloted, autonomously operated, and capable of speeds up to Mach 25, while demonstrating aircraft-like operations.” NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center led the X-37 government team, comprising the U.S. Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base and NASA facilities, including Ames Research Center, Kennedy Space Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Dryden Flight Research Center.(The Boeing Company, “NASA, Boeing Sign X-37 Vehicle Agreement,” news release, 14 July 1999, http://www. boeing.com/news/releases/1999/news_release_990714t.html (accessed 19 February 2008); John O’Dell, “California Southland Focus Boeing, NASA Agree on Space Plane Contract,” Los Angeles Times, 15 July 1999.)
