NASA’s Langley Research Center awarded contracts valued at US$1.8 million to two companies for operating airport-surface surveillance systems intended to prevent runway accidents, a top safety priority of the FAA and the National Transportation Safety Board. The contracts required Sensis Corporation of Dewitt, New York, and Rannoch Corporation of Alexandria, Virginia, to operate the Airport Traffic Identification System (ATIDS) and the Dynamic Runway Occupancy Measurement Systems (DROMS) at Detroit’s Metropolitan Wayne International Airport, for six months, establishing and validating the systems in a “live” environment. The contracts also required Sensis to deploy and evaluate DROMS at Memphis International Airport and to interface the system with the existing Sensis-operated ATIDS at that airport.(NASA, “Contracts Awarded for Airport Surface Surveillance Systems,” news release C00-m, 28 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-m.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA released to the Internet a database of 1.9 million celestial images, the largest collection of images of stars and other celestial bodies ever made freely available for public use. The rapid improvement of technology had made possible the release, which brought to home computers information that could have filled 6,000 CD-ROMs. The Two-Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS), which used two 51-inch (130-centimeter) telescopes to survey the sky, had collected the images. The University of Massachusetts at Amherst and the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had collaborated on 2MASS, creating a database of great value to scholars and the public alike.(NASA, “Twin-Telescope Sky Survey ‘Gives You the Stars’,” news release 00-108, 14 July 2000.)
NASA announced that the Chandra X-ray Observatory had detected iron-emission lines in the afterglow of a gamma-ray burst (GRB), marking the first time such lines had been “unambiguously detected” in association with GRBs, and the first time scientists had been able to measure their properties precisely in x-ray wavelengths. Luigi Piro, lead author of a paper published in the 3 November issue of the journal Science, explained that the discovery provided an important clue to understanding the origins of the bursts. The new data enabled scientists to rule out the theory that two neutron stars or black holes collide to cause a GRB, one of various theories about how the bursts originate. Instead, Piro suggested that the bursts were more likely the result of “something similar to a supernova explosion, but much more powerful.”(NASA, “NASA’s Chandra Captures Telling Gamma-Ray Afterglow,” news release 00-173, 3 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-173.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); L. Piro et al., “Observation of X-ray Lines from a Gamma-Ray Burst (GRB991216): Evidence of Moving Ejecta from the Progenitor,” Science 290, no. 5493 (3 November 2000): 955–958.)
Raymond Toricelli of New Rochelle, New York, pled guilty to breaking into two NASA computers in 1998, to steal user names and passwords to gain access to other systems. The two computers, which helped launch robotic spacecraft, were at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California. Toricelli had also set up a chat room to direct people to a pornography site, which paid him 18 cents per referral; broken into a San Jose University computer system to gain access to other networks; and stolen more than 15 credit card numbers online. He stated that he had never intended to damage the computers he illegally entered. Prosecutors planned to seek a prison term of 8 to 14 months at Toricelli’s sentencing on 7 March 2001. The maximum penalty for his crime was 27 years in prison and a US$950,000 fine.
NASA’s Glenn Research Center (GRC) in Cleveland, Ohio, opened a new laboratory dedicated to the study of ballistics. The laboratory, housed in the complex’s Building 49, featured a 40-foot (12-meter) gas gun that could shoot projectiles at speeds of up to 1,500 feet (457.2 meters) per second. A camera with the ability to capture 2.5 million images per second allowed researchers to observe the behavior of the projectiles and chart the results of their impact on aviation equipment. “The whole idea,” Team Leader Dale A. Hopkins explained, “is to watch the impact and see how materials struck by the projectiles behave . . . not just whether they survive, but how they deform and fail.” GRC had designed the new facility to test materials used for aircraft engine housings and for flywheel containment. Researchers hoped that the new tools would help engineer aircraft that could withstand the pressures of high-speed and high-altitude flight better than those already available could. GRC had been testing ballistic materials since 1980.(NASA, “New Lab Ready To Test Sudden Impact,” news release 00-34, 3 March 2000.)
Chairman and founder of Beal Aerospace Technologies Inc. Andrew Beal announced his decision to cease all business operations effective immediately. The company had sought to develop low-cost, reliable, commercial space launch systems and had “made significant advances in low cost hydrogen peroxide propulsion systems.” Beal expressed confidence that, despite the company’s cost overruns and schedule delays, Beal Aerospace Technologies could have successfully developed its BA-2C rocket-launch system if it had remained in operation. Beal outlined the risk factors that had been beyond the company’s control and had led to the decision to cease operations: 1) NASA’s and the U.S. government’s commitment to the subsidization of competing launch systems; 2) federal laws mandating the company’s “potential liability for pre-existing environmental contamination at the only available Cape Canaveral launchpads”; and 3) uncertainty about receiving approval from the U.S. Department of State to launch from the company’s launch facilities in Guyana. Beal remarked that government subsidization of launch systems was the primary reason that the company had to choose, either to become a government contractor, like the Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin, or to cease operations.(Beal Aerospace Technologies Inc., “Statement from Andrew Beal Regarding Cease of Operations by Beal Aerospace,” news release, 23 October 2000.)
NASA announced that its Chandra X-ray Observatory had revealed a “luminous spike of x-rays,” known as a hot spot, located approximately 800,000 light-years away from its black-hole source. Scientists commented that the images captured x-ray behavior that astronomers had not predicted. Andrew S. Wilson of the University of Maryland explained, “the brightness and the spectrum of the x-rays are very different from what theory projects.” A possible explanation offered for the brilliant hot spot of x-rays was that a series of shock waves had catapulted across the galaxy electrons with energies as high as 50 thousand billion times the energy of light.(NASA, “Spectacular X-ray Jet Points Toward Cosmic Energy Booster,” news release 00-89, 6 June 2000.)
The 20 July 2000 edition of Astrophysical Journal Letters published research of Gibor Basri chronicling the first sighting of a flare from a failed star, or brown dwarf. Using the Chandra X- ray Observatory, a team of scientists from the University of California at Berkeley had spotted the brown dwarf and its bright x-ray flare. Scientists believed that examining the x-ray flare would help them better understand dying stars and the explosive activity and magnetic fields of low-mass stars. Early analyses indicated that the brown dwarf’s x-ray flare was approximately 1 billion times more powerful than the x-ray flares emitted from the planet Jupiter. Scientists reacted to news of the discovery with excitement and surprise. Robert E. Rutledge of California Institute of Technology stated that he and his colleagues were “shocked,” clarifying: “we did not expect to see flaring from such a lightweight object. This is really the mouse that roared.” The task of spotting an x-ray flare had been difficult, because the brown dwarf emitted the flares only periodically. However, the intermittent flares made the successful capture of an image all the more significant. The observation of the brown dwarf’s occasional release of x-ray flares confirmed the theory that brown dwarfs only release energy when they heat to temperatures above 4,500°F (2,500°C).(Gibor Basri et al., “An Effective Temperature Scale for Late M and L Dwarfs, from Resonance Absorption Lines of Cs I and Rb I,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 538, no. 1 (20 July 2000): 363−385; NASA, “Chandra Captures Flare from Brown Dwarf,” news release 00-103, 11 July 2000.)
A team of three high school students from the North Carolina School for Science and Mathematics in Durham won first place in the Siemens-Westinghouse Science and Technology Competition. The team won for discovering the first evidence of a neutron star in the nearby supernova remnant IC443, using data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and the National Science Foundation’s Very Large Array (VLA) Observatory. The students had located a point-like source of x-rays embedded in a supernova and had determined that the central object was most likely a pulsar, a young and rapidly rotating neutron star. Bryan M. Gaensler, a pulsar expert at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who had reviewed the team’s paper, remarked that the students had produced “a really solid scientific finding.”(NASA, “Students Using NASA and NSF Data Make Stellar Discovery; Win Science Team Competition,” news release 00-195, 11 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-195.txt (accessed 7 April 2008). 1067 Andrew Kramer for Associated Press, “Russian Company To Build Spacecraft To Carry Customers,” 13 December 2000.)
NASA announced that a team of scientists had used the Chandra X-ray Observatory to solve one of astronomy’s fundamental problems⎯determining the distance from Earth to a cosmic object. Peter Predehl, the lead researcher on the project, had found that by scattering x-rays between Earth and a given object, the dust grains and scattered materials between the two points could serve as measuring posts to determine the distance covered by the x-ray. Because of the Chandra Observatory’s superior resolution and strength, particles that scientists could not otherwise have observed would serve as points of context. Researchers were confident that they could use the new approach to help determine the size of nearby galaxies. Furthermore, the newly devised means of measuring the distance between objects and Earth had implications for understanding the universe and its age.(NASA, “Chandra Shows New Way To Measure Cosmic Distances,” news release 00-66, 25 April 2000.)
NASA announced that new technology recently tested at Ames Research Center (ARC) had converted sounds emanating from landing-gear wind noise into color images on computer screens, “enabling engineers to pinpoint loud and preventable aircraft flight noise more easily than in the past.” The imposition of nighttime curfews on noisy takeoffs and landings had prompted aircraft manufacturers to develop quieter planes. Paul T. Soderman, leader of the ARC aeroacoustics group, explained that the ability to visualize the cause of wind noise coming from landing gear enables engineers to analyze the problem so that they can find ways to reduce significantly noise. The engineers had created the sound images using a computer linked to a quarter-scale landing-gear model and an array of 70 microphones inside the wall of a wind tunnel. The researchers had then removed various combinations of landing-gear parts in the wind tunnel, resulting in significant noise reduction.
NASA announced that a team of astronomers had discovered what they believed to be the earliest known structure ever to form in the universe. The researchers had used the Hale Telescope at Palomar Observatory in California and the National Science Foundation’s Mayall Telescope in Kitt Peake, Arizona, to find an ancient quasar. By measuring the quasar’s redshift to determine how fast the quasar was moving away from the galaxy, scientists had been able to calculate the cosmic distance separating Earth and the quasar. The odds of discovering such a distant and relatively fast-moving quasar were remote, especially since scientists could monitor only a fraction of the sky at any one time. The discovery had the broader value of providing a reference point by which to assess those bodies between Earth and the quasar. Daniel Stern of NASA described the finding’s utility: “Finding a quasar at this distance is like turning on a flashlight at the edge of the universe.”(NASA, “Newfound Quasar Wins Title ‘Most Distant in the Universe’,” news release 00-30, 18 February 2000.)
Astronomers using the telescope at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico captured the first- ever images of the so-called Metal Dog Bone asteroid, officially named 216 Kleopatra. Scientists had categorized the asteroid as a main-belt asteroid, theorizing that the New Jersey–sized rock was the result of an ancient, violent collision. Steven Ostro of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory called the find “one of the most unusual asteroids we’ve seen in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Scientists made the discovery by bouncing radar signals off the asteroid and cataloging the signals’ echoes. By gathering a comprehensive collection of echoes, the research team had been able to assemble a computer model of the asteroid’s shape. The use of radar signals with a moderately powered telescope had made the long-distance discovery possible. Ostro marveled at the technology, describing the find as akin to “using a Los Angeles telescope the size of the human eye’s lens to image a car in New York.” Many of the astronomers working on the project spoke of their amazement at the size, shape, and metallic complexion of the asteroid. They also clarified that the asteroid posed no danger to Earth.(NASA, “Astronomers Catch Images of Giant Metal Dog Bone Asteroid,” news release 00-74, 4 May 2000. 921 Birmingham Post (AL), “Serious Bone Loss for Cosmonauts Not Mir Speculation,” 5 May 2000.)
NASA announced its agreement with Lockheed Martin on a plan for the X-33 space plane program. The agreed plan included aluminum fuel tanks for hydrogen fuel, a revised payment schedule, and a target launch date in 2003, contingent on Lockheed Martin’s winning additional funding under the Space Launch Initiative for completing the project. NASA had funded the project through March 2001. The restructured plan focused on “providing milestone payments” to Lockheed Martin’s team, following the completion of tests and the delivery of hardware and software systems this year. The plan also gave greater emphasis to mission safety, quality, and mission success. Arthur G. Stephenson, Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, pointed out that, despite setbacks, the program’s successes had included the creation of technology applicable to the space program and to the commercial aircraft industry, such as a revolutionary new rocket engine; a robust, reusable, metallic thermal-protection system; and software and sensors that automatically determine and predict failures and errors before they affect the flight.(NASA, “NASA, Lockheed Martin Agree on X-33 Plan,” news release 00-157, 29 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-157.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
Lockheed Martin Systems Integration announced that the U.S. Navy had selected the company to build seven SH-60R Multi-Mission Helicopters, under the first SH-60R low-rate initial production (LRIP) contract, moving Lockheed Martin from development and testing to the production phase of the SH-60R program. The contract required Lockheed Martin to integrate the flight avionics systems, mission avionics systems, and stores and defense systems.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Awarded First SH-60R Avionics Production Contract,” news release, 23 August 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/LockheedMartinAwardedFirstSH60R Avio.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
NASA’s Langley Research Center selected Swales and Associates Inc. to provide research and development, engineering, and support services, under a contract valued at up to US$240 million over five years. Specific work areas covered under the contract included full-spectrum aerodynamics, gas dynamics, fluid dynamics, aerothermodynamics, acoustics and aeroacoustics, metallic and nonmetallic structures and materials, and spaceborne and airborne systems.(NASA, “NASA Awards Support Services Contract to Maryland Firm,” news release C00-o, 24 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-o.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
NASA announced that a team of Lockheed Martin scientists using NASA’s Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) spacecraft to observe coronal loops⎯coils of hot, electrified gas⎯believed they had located the source of the heating mechanism that makes the Sun’s corona 300 times hotter than its visible surface. A thirty-year-old theory had assumed that the coronal loops heated evenly, but the TRACE observations had indicated that most of the heating occurs at the base of the loops, near the point from which they emerge and return to the solar surface. The team had observed 41 loops extending from 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) to more than 180,000 miles (290,000 kilometers) from the solar surface and had found that, although threads within shorter loops heat more evenly, longer threads cool noticeably as they attain height. The team had calculated the loops’ energy levels and estimated that “heating typically occurs in the first 6,000 miles of a loop’s length.” Richard Fisher, head of the Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics at NASA’s GSFC, remarked that understanding how the coronal loops function could shed light on coronal-mass ejections (CMEs). CMEs can disrupt or destroy satellite components orbiting Earth and prompt surges in electrical transmission lines, causing blackouts on Earth.(NASA, “Fountains of Fire Illuminate Solar Mystery,” news release 00-146, 26 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-146.txt (accessed 25 April 2008); Peter N. Spotts, “Scientists Begin To Unravel a Stubborn Solar Mystery,” Christian Science Monitor, 27 September 2000.)
More than 10,000 white-collar workers walked off the job at the Boeing Company, in protest over failed contract negotiations. Most of the strikers came from the aerospace giant’s work site in Seattle, Washington.
NASA announced the selection of Sverdrup Technology Inc. to fulfill a contract providing engineering, science, and technical services at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). The two- year contract, with three one-year priced options valued at US$300 million over five years, would go into effect on 15 October.(NASA, “Tennessee Technology Firm Selected for $300 Million Contract,” news release c00-n, 6 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-n.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
NASA’s Stardust spacecraft entered safe mode after a stream of high-energy protons emanating from a solar flare hit the craft. Stardust, on a mission to return samples of a comet, had been 130 million miles (210 million kilometers) from the Sun, traveling at about 12,000 miles (19,000 kilometers) per hour, when the solar flare erupted on 9 November. The solar wind had brought the stream of protons into contact with the craft hours later, in the middle of the night, confirming that NASA engineers and scientists monitoring the situation had reason to feel concerned.(Associated Press, “NASA’s Stardust Spacecraft Survives Encounter with Solar Flare,” 21 November 2000. 1036 Associated Press, “NASA’s Stardust Spacecraft.”)
