NASA engineers completed a successful demonstration of a solar-powered UAV for remote- sensing applications. Engineers with NASA’s Suborbital Airborne Sciences programs had guided the Pathfinder-Plus UAV throughout a flight lasting nearly 4 hours, during which the aircraft had captured more than 300 high-resolution digital images of a coffee plantation on the Hawaiian island of Kauai. NASA had developed the UAV for Earth science research, but project engineers described the flight demonstration as evidence that their integration of the UAV technology with decision-support systems would have additional practical applications. For example, project engineers hoped that the UAV technology might eventually enable farmers and ranchers to produce harvests more effectively and efficiently. The solar-powered UAV had a ground-controlled aerial imaging system. In fact, an undergraduate student nearly 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) away at California State University in Monterey Bay controlled one of the craft’s digital cameras during the demonstration.(NASA, “NASA Mission Demonstrates Practical Use of UAV Technology,” news release 02-200, 16 October 2002.)
The Commission on the Future of the United States Aerospace Industry released its final report on the industry’s health and future well-being. President George W. Bush had created the Commission, composed of aerospace industry executives, lawyers, and policy analysts, to analyze the U.S. aerospace industry’s stability, financial health, and relationship to national security. The Commission had concluded that the United States should establish a national aerospace policy; create a government-wide framework to implement that policy; reduce legal and regulatory barriers, to enable the industry to grow and become more internationally competitive; and increase investments in the nation’s aerospace industrial base, infrastructure, personnel, and long-term research. In addition, the Commission’s report provided numerous recommendations to the industry concerning how to meet those objectives, such as increasing and sustaining public and private investment in the aerospace industry and aerospace technologies, transforming the nation’s air transportation system, and enhancing the defense industrial base.(Commission on the Future of the United States Aerospace Industry, Final Report (Arlington, VA, November 2002); The Boeing Company, “Boeing Supports Recommendations of U.S. Aerospace Commission,” news release, 18 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021118a.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
In an article published in the journal Geophysical Research Letters, scientists using data from NASA’s high-altitude research balloon reported a discovery that, potentially, could improve the research methodology for studying gases that contribute to ozone-layer depletion. Although scientists already knew that reactive hydrogen gases destroy stratospheric ozone and were able to detect hydrogen peroxide from space, they had problems with computer models used to analyze hydrogen-peroxide concentration in the atmosphere. However, in the reported study, researchers funded by NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise had compared a new predicted rate of hydrogenperoxide formation with the levels of the gas measured by two instruments on board NASA’s high-altitude research balloons. The new data had revealed a high degree of agreement between the actual and the predicted measurements. The researchers noted that, although their newly discovered rate of hydrogen-peroxide formation had no appreciable impact on rates of stratospheric ozone loss, they expected the findings would help to analyze the deleterious effects on Earth’s ozone of other, less easily measured, hydrogen gases.(NASA JPL, “NASA Study Leads to Better Understanding of Ozone Depletion,” news release, 9 May 2002; L. E. Christensen et al., “Kinetics of HO2 + HO2 → H2O2: Implications for Stratospheric H2O2,” Geophysical Research Letters 29, no. 9 (7 May 2002): 1299.)
Analyzing observations of the dwarf galaxy NGC 1569, a group of astronomers led by Crystal L. Martin of the University of California Santa Barbara found the first evidence that such galaxies produce most of the heavy elements in the universe. Heavy elements, defined as all elements other than hydrogen and helium, are essential for planet formation and can strongly influence astronomical phenomena such as the rate of galaxy formation. Scientists had theorized that, during the early development of the universe, heavy elements emanating from dwarf galaxies played a dominant role in enriching the intergalactic gas that formed other galaxies. Data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory enabled Martin and her team to test this idea. They found that NGC 1569 emitted large quantities of heavy elements in extremely hot x-ray winds, the first direct evidence of metal-enriched winds from dwarf galaxies. The researchers noted that the findings left open the question of whether or not dwarf galaxies or other galaxies dominate the intergalactic metallic enrichment process.(NASA, “Dwarf Galaxies Give Universe a Breath of Fresh Oxygen,” news release 02-134, 23 July 2002; Crystal L. Martin, Henry A. Kobulnicky, and Timothy M. Heckman, “The Metal Content of Dwarf Starburst Winds: Results from Chandra Observations of NGC 1569,” Astrophysical Journal 574, no. 2 (1 August 2002): 663–692.)
Lockheed Martin, NASA, and the state of Mississippi opened the Lockheed Martin Mississippi Space and Technology Center at NASA’s SSC. Officials planned for the 220,000-square-foot (20,440-square-meter) facility to commence operations by the end of 2002. Lockheed Martin announced that its new facility would include a center for production of propulsion and thermal systems for spacecraft, as well as an integrated metrology center. The company also announced that it would provide engineering and manufacturing services at the facility. Lockheed Martin officials cited the location of NASA’s Center of Excellence for propulsion testing at SSC as a critical factor in their decision to consolidate the company’s capabilities at the single facility.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Mississippi Space and Technology Center Opens Doors at John C. Stennis Space Center, MS,” news release, 5 August 2002, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/ LockheedMartinMississippiSpaceTechn.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency awarded the Boeing Company a contract to design a fuel cell–based propulsion system for a pilotless, ultra-long-endurance UAV. According to Boeing, the UAV’s propulsion system would incorporate existing automotive–fuel cell technology, to create a vehicle with a variety of commercial and military applications.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Receives Contract for UAV Advanced Propulsion System,” news release, 3 September 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q3/nr_020903m.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
Two separate teams of astronomers reported that NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and the HST had observed two stars, possibly composed of a form of matter unknown to scientists. Researchers examining data from Chandra and the HST had noted that the neutron star RX J1856.5–3754 was far smaller than expected and, therefore, had concluded that the star might be composed, not of neutrons, but of quarkscomponents of protons and neutrons that scientists had never before observed outside of the nucleus of an atom in laboratories on Earth. Another team of astronomers had analyzed Chandra’s observations of neutron star 3C 58 and had found that the star’s temperature was less than 1,000,000°C (1,800,032°F), a far lower temperature than scientists would expect for a star composed of pure neutrons. Thus, that star also appeared to be composed, either of quarks, or of another form of matter unknown to scientists.(NASA, “Cosmic X-rays Reveal Evidence for New Form of Matter,” news release 02-65, 10 April 2002; Jeremy J. Drake, “Is RX J1856.5-3754 a Quark Star?” Astrophysical Journal 572, no. 2 (20 June 2002): 996–1001; Patrick O. Slane, David J. Hefland, and Stephen S. Murray, “New Constraints on Neutron Star Cooling from Chandra Observations of 3C 58,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 571, no. 1 (20 May 2002): L45–L49.)
NASA’s Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) reentered Earth’s atmosphere nearly 10 years after its launch on 7 July 1992. NASA had initially planned for the spacecraft to operate for only three years but had extended the EUVE’s scientific mission twice, ending operations on 26 January 2001. The EUVE did not have an on-board propulsion system, and NASA scientists had not designed it to survive reentry intact. Thus, in February 2001, mission engineers had left the spacecraft in a decaying orbit, so that it would destruct upon reentering Earth’s atmosphere. The EUVE, the first astrophysics mission to explore the extreme ultraviolet spectrum (the energy range between 70 and 760 Å), had examined nearly 1,000 sources near Earth, including three-dozen objects outside of the Milky Way Galaxy.
Burton I. Edelson, who influenced NASA’s space science and Earth science programs, died at the age of 75. Edelson had served as NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science and
NASA announced an agreement with the National Institute of Aerospace Associates (NIAA), an organization of universities and nonprofit organizations engaged in aerospace research, to create the National Institute of Aerospace (NIA) at NASA’s LaRC. NASA described the agreement with NIAA as a long-term commitment to expand its collaboration with universities, industry, and other entities. The new NIA would host advanced aerospace and atmospheric research and the development of related technologies, offering graduate degrees in engineering and science, facilitating the growth of new business opportunities, and stimulating the commercialization of new intellectual property. The basic five-year cooperative agreement was valued at US$69 million, and the contract’s total value could increase to US$379 million with the acceptance of three five-year options.(NASA, “NASA Selects Corporation To Lead Innovative Research Institute,” news release c02-aa, 26 September 2002.)
President George W. Bush signed National Security Presidential Directive-15 (NSPD-15), initiating a review of all U.S. space policies. According to NSPD-15, the review’s purpose was to update the country’s National Space Policy―last revised in 1996―to better address domestic and international developments affecting the nation’s space capabilities. The review provided recommendations in three specific areas: commercial remote sensing and foreign access to remote-sensing space capabilities; space transportation policy; and existing national policy statements related to space activities. The National Security Council (NSC) was to chair the review with support from the Office of Science and Technology Policy. In addition, the NSC had established the Space Policy Coordinating Committee (Space PCC), which would include representatives from federal agencies with roles in the formation of U.S. space policy, such as the International Trade Administration and NOAA.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002, p. 43; U.S. National Security Professional Development Integration Office, “National Space Policy Review: Fact Sheet” (report, National Security Presidential Directive/NSPD-15, Arlington, VA, 2002), http://www.nspd.gov/ rawmedia_repository/4ff02489171c66d9a66ae29824384025.pdf (accessed 18 August 2008).)
Scientists with NASA’s JPL made contact with Pioneer 10, the first object made by humans to leave the solar system. NASA scientists had last made contact with the space probe on 9 July 2001 but had lost contact with Pioneer 10 from August 2000 to April 2001. Pioneer 10, launched on 2 March 1972, had been the first spacecraft to pass through an asteroid belt, the first to make direct observations of Jupiter, and in 1983, became the first object made by humans to leave the solar system. After Pioneer 10’s mission had ended on 31 March 1997, scientists with JPL’s Deep Space Network had continued to track the spacecraft’s signal as part of a study of communications technology. In addition, NASA had used the probe for training flight controllers in the acquisition of radio signals from space.(NASA, “An Early NASA Pioneer Still on the Job in Deep Space,” news release 02-44, 4 March 2002.)
Researchers using data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory found a substantial, pulsating source of x-rays in Jupiter’s atmosphere near the planet’s north magnetic pole. Existing theories could not explain either the pulsations or the location of the x-ray source. Scientists had posited that energetic oxygen and sulfur ions steadily precipitate from Jupiter’s inner magnetosphere, entering the planet’s polar regions and producing a northern aurora of x-rays. However, images from Chandra revealed that most of Jupiter’s northern auroral x-rays originate at latitudes that only ions precipitating from Jupiter’s outer magnetosphere could reach. In addition, researchers found that the hot-spot source of the x-rays was pulsating at 45-minute intervals, contradicting scientists’ theory that the x-ray emissions originate from a steady precipitation of ions in the inner magnetosphere. Although this discovery invalidated previous theories, scientists were not yet able to explain the process they had observed. Specifically, according to Chandra’s measurements, the researchers found insufficient energetic oxygen and sulfur ions within the required distance of the ion source―at least 30 times Jupiter’s radius―to account for the observed x-ray emissions.(NASA, “Jupiter Hot Spot Makes Trouble for Theory,” news release 02-34, 28 February 2002; G. R. Gladstone et al., “A Pulsating Auroral X-ray Hot Spot on Jupiter,” Nature 415, no. 6875 (28 February 2002): 1000–1003.)
Radar images of near-Earth asteroid 2000 DP107 revealed that it is a binary system, composed of two objects orbiting each other. The finding suggested that many near-Earth asteroids could be binaries. The images, taken by NASA’s Goldstone telescope facility and the National Science Foundation’s Arecibo Observatory, revealed that the asteroid was not one, but two objects, a nearly 800-meter-diameter (2,625-foot-diameter) primary and an almost 300-meter-diameter (985-foot-diameter) secondary, revolving around their common center of mass. The researchers suggested that approximately 16 percent of near-Earth asteroids larger than 200 meters (655 feet) in diameter could be binary systems. In addition, the analysis suggested that binaries with similar orbits might result from a close encounter of an asteroid and a planet, in which the planet’s gravitational pull breaks off a portion of the asteroid. Scientists consider binary asteroids potential hazards to Earth and worthy of further study.(J. L. Margot et al., “Binary Asteroids in the Near-Earth Object Population,” Science 296, no. 5572 (24 May 2002): 1445–1448; NASA JPL, “Some Asteroids Have Astronomers Seeing Double,” news release, 11 April 2002.)
Astronomers from the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics and the European Southern Observatory published research detailing their discovery of a diffuse emission of x-rays from a cluster of forming stars known as RCW 38. The new discovery contrasted with astronomers’ conventional understanding of bodies that commonly emit high-energy particles, namely supernovas and exploding stars in the intense magnetic fields surrounding neutron stars and black holes. The astronomers, using NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, had discovered that neither type of body was evident in the RCW 38 stellar region, which is, instead, an area of active star formation. Although the scientists remained uncertain about the source of the x-rays, as well as the effects of the x-rays on the star cluster, they hypothesized that these x-rays could affect the chemistry of the bodies that would form planets around the stars in the cluster.(NASA, “Young Star Cluster Found Aglow with Mysterious Cloud,” news release 02-251, 18 December 2002; Scott J. Wolk et al., “Discovery of Nonthermal X-ray Emission from the Embedded Massive Star-Forming Region RCW 38,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 580, no. 2 (1 December 2002): L161–L165.)
In an article in the journal Nature, scientists reported that they had used images from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory to reveal how objects in the most active area of the Milky Way Galaxy affect each other and other parts of the galaxy. The scientists had used 30 separate images from Chandra to construct a montage of the Milky Way’s central regions, revealing hundreds of white dwarf stars, neutron stars, and black holes, shrouded by the extremely hot gas around a massive black hole. The researchers found that emissions from highly ionized iron, previously attributed to diffuse hot gas, had actually originated from discrete sources in the Milky Way’s white dwarf stars, neutron stars, and black holes. The findings helped clarify the relative contributions of diffuse and discrete sources of x-rays emitted from the galaxy.(NASA, “Chandra Takes In Bright Lights, Big City of Milky Way,” news release 02-03, 9 January 2002; Q. D. Wang, E. V. Gotthelf, and C. C. Lang, “A Faint Discrete Source Origin for the Highly Ionized Iron Emission from the Galactic Centre Region,” Nature 415, no. 6868 (10 January 2002): 148–150.)
A team of NASA scientists using uninhabited aerial vehicles (UAVs) to research electrical storms achieved a flight-duration milestone. The research was part of the Altus Cumulus Electrification Study (ACES), a project that examined the causes of electrical storms and their effects on the planet. The ACES research team employed Altus II UAVs to study thunderstorms over Florida, capping off four weeks of research flights with the study’s longest flight, lasting for 6 hours and 32 minutes and monitoring four successive thunderstorms. General Atomics Aeronautical Systems had built the Altus II, which could fly near thunderstorms for hours, at altitudes of up to 65,000 feet.(NASA MSFC, National Space Science and Technology Center, “NASA Lightning Study Achieves Flight- Duration Milestone, Monitoring Four Storms in Single Mission,” news release N02-011, 23 August 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of the instrument and science teams that would provide instruments for NASA’s Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST), the intended successor of the HST. The team selected to provide the primary near-infrared science camera comprised engineers and scientists from the project team’s leader, the University of Arizona at Tucson, as well as from Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center, EMS Technologies of Canada, and COM DEV Limited, also of Canada. The team selected to build the NGST’s mid-infrared instrument included engineers and scientists from NASA’s JPL, NASA’s Ames Research Center (ARC), ESA, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and the University of Arizona at Tucson. In addition to the principal instrument scientists, NASA had selected scientists to serve on the NGST Science Working Group, including Heidi B. Hammel, Simon Lilly, Jonathan Lunine, Mark McCaughrean, Massimo Stiavelli, and Rogier Windhorst.(NASA, “NASA Selects Instruments and Science Team for Next Generation Space Telescope,” news release 02- 109, 10 June 2002.)
NASA scientists Eric J. Rignot and Robert H. Thomas published results of one of the most detailed and widespread examinations of polar ice sheets ever performed. Researchers had already determined that changes in the thickness of polar ice correlated with changes in sea level but disagreed about the extent to which the thickness of the ice sheets was changing. Analyzing recent remote-sensing measurements of ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica, Rignot and Thomas discovered that the thickness of the ice sheets was changing more rapidly than previously thought. Although the data was indeterminate concerning changes in some parts of the ice sheets, Rignot and Thomas found clear evidence that large regions of the polar ice sheets were rapidly changing, with accumulation of ice in some areas and attrition in others. Despite such variations, the scientists found that, overall, the major polar ice sheets were losing mass. Specifically, Greenland’s ice sheet was losing 50 cubic kilometers (12 cubic miles) of mass annually, and the West Antarctic ice sheet appeared to be losing nearly 48 cubic kilometers (11.5 cubic miles) of mass per year.(NASA JPL, “NASA Study Finds Rapid Changes in Earth’s Polar Ice Sheets,” news release, 30 August 2002; Eric Rignot and Robert H. Thomas, “Mass Balance of Polar Ice Sheets,” Science 297, no. 5586 (30 August 2002): 1502– 1506.)
Using images from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, scientists found evidence that an ancient eruption had burst through a cluster of galaxies, which could explain why those galaxies act like massive magnetic fields. Scientists believed that the universe’s largest known structures bounded by gravity―called galaxy clusters―might be the source of highly energetic and recurring explosions, which cause the clusters to behave like huge cosmic magnets. Chandra’s images of the galaxy cluster Abell 2597 had revealed a cloud of hot gas with two dark circular cavities called ghost cavities, containing little x-ray or radio emissions. The images suggested that powerful explosions around a black hole in the cluster’s center might have occurred when these ghost cavities expelled material from the black hole’s vicinity, creating gaps in the cluster’s hot gas. Scientists believed that these cavities might eventually move to the edge of the cluster, similar to the movement of air bubbles to the surface of water, thereby transporting magnetic fields to the cluster gas. The images suggested that these explosions are recurring. If the recurring explosions continue to create more cavities, this could explain the strong magnetic field of the extremely hot gas throughout the cluster.(NASA, “Chandra Finds Ghosts of Eruption in Galaxy Cluster,” news release 02-02, 8 January 2002.)
Scientists found that a bright blue ring of dust surrounds Earth’s solar system, beginning outside of Saturn’s orbit and extending beyond the orbit of Neptune. However, viewed from outside the solar system, this band of dust appears to surround the Sun. The discovery of the dust ring provided empirical support for the idea that this feature around a mature star indicates that the star harbors a planetary system. Therefore, researchers planning missions would be able, based on whether the star has a dust ring, to narrow down the list of which stars to study in their search for planets and planetary systems. ESA scientist Markus Landgraf had led the research team, which had made the discovery using data collected by Pioneer 10 and 11.(ESA, “ESA Scientist Discovers a Way To Shortlist Stars That Might Have Planets,” ESA news release SNR 1- 2002, 15 February 2002.)
Scientists obtained the first measurements ever taken of the dimensions and compositional matter of a neutron star, providing important new information about the fundamental nature of matter and energy. Using ESA’s XMM-Newton space telescope, Jean Cottam of NASA’s GSFC and other researchers captured the first measurements of the gravitational redshift of a neutron star. Gravitational redshift occurs when an intense gravitational field such as that of a neutron star warps light or other electromagnetic radiation. Thus, by calculating the star’s redshift, the scientists were able to estimate its gravity, compositional material, and other characteristics. The researchers found that the star EXO 0748-676 is likely composed of normal nuclear matter, as scientists had previously theorized. The researchers’ observations regarding neutron stars, specifically, and matter and energy, generally, occurred under conditions that scientists are unable to replicate on Earth. The researchers thought that the findings might reveal new information about the creation of the universe, because, theoretically, the temperature and pressure of neutron stars is similar to the temperature and pressure that was present just one second after the Big Bang.(ESA, “XMM-Newton Closes In on Space’s Exotic Matter,” ESA news release 69-2002, 6 November 2002, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ESAK117708D_index_0.html (accessed 2 February 2010); NASA, “Exotic Innards of a Neutron Star Revealed in a Series of Explosions,” news release 02-214, 6 November 2002; Jean Cottam, Frederik Paerels, and Mariano Mendez, “Gravitationally Redshifted Absorption Lines in the X-ray Burst Spectra of a Neutron Star,” Nature 420, no. 6911 (7 November 2002): 51–54.)
