NASA announced that the Spitzer Space Telescope (SST), launched on 25 August 2003, had made several new discoveries. The SSTformerly called the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, or SIRTFwas the largest infrared telescope ever launched. Among the SST’s specific findings was the discovery of nearly 300 new stars in RCW 49, a region in the constellation Centaurus, 13,700 light-years from Earth. In addition, the SST had revealed high quantities of icy organic materials in planets forming around young stars in the constellation Taurus, located 420 light- years from Earth. The presence of organic materials in the newly forming planets could explain the origins of similarly icy bodies, such as comets. Scientists theorized that comets might have provided the water and other organic materials that enabled life to form on Earth.(NASA, “Raw Ingredients for Life Detected in Planetary Construction Zones,” news release 04-167, 27 May 2004; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Spots New Youngest Planet, Just a Million Years Old,” New York Times, 28 May 2004; NASA JPL, “About Spitzer,” http://www.spitzer.caltech.edu/about/index.shtml (accessed 31 March 2009).)
The airline company Virgin Atlantic conducted the first successful test flight of its Globalflyer airplane. The company had designed the Globalflyer to conduct a flight around the world in 3.3 days without refueling, which, if achieved, would create a world’s record for the length of an unrefueled flight. During a test flight lasting 11⁄2 hours, the Globalflyer aircraftalso known as the Model 311 Capricornexhibited no significant mechanical problems. However, the experimental aircraft had required several modifications, such as the development of a cabinpressurization system, to reach its final design parameters. Previously, the longest duration for an unrefueled flight around the world had been nine days, a record set by Dick Rutan and Jeana Yeager in 1986.(Michael A. Dornheim, “Globalflyer Airborne,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 11 (15 March 2004): 38.)
NASA hosted representatives from 30 countries―including China―in talks about how to accomplish President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration. Experts and participants described Chinese participation in the talks as a small but significant advance toward the goals of global security and space exploration―China’s presence at the talks indicated its interest in collaborating with other countries, particularly the United States. According to analysts, Chinese contributions to space exploration could include expendable rockets, piloted spacecraft, and space robotics.(Mark Carreau and Patty Reinert, “NASA Makes First Overture to China,” Houston Chronicle, 19 November 2004.)
NASA’s Stardust spacecraft performed a flyby of comet Wild 2, obtaining particle samples, as well as the most detailed, high-resolution images ever taken of a comet. Stardust was the first robotic mission created to collect material from outside the Moon’s orbit. Scientists planned to analyze the particle samples of the comet in January 2006, once the spacecraft had returned to Earth. During the flyby, Stardust flew within 240 kilometers (149 miles) of Wild 2, capturing images of the comet’s nucleus at resolutions ranging from 6.5 to 32 kilometers (4 to 20 miles) per pixel. NASA scientists hoped that the images would help them better understand conditions on comets and that the particle samplescomposed of materials identical to those that had formed planetswould reveal information about how comets and Earth’s solar system formed.(NASA JPL, “NASA Spacecraft Makes Great Catch . . . Heads for Touchdown,” news release 2004-001, 2 January 2004; NASA JPL, “Stardust: NASA’s Comet Sample Return MissionEncounter with Comet Wild 2,” http://stardust.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/details2.html (accessed 9 January 2009).)
Kevin L. Petersen, Director of NASA’s DFRC, appointed Steven G. Schmidt as DFRC’s Deputy Director. Schmidt had served as Special Assistant to NASA’s Administrator since January 2002. In addition, Schmidt had previously worked in numerous programs at DFRC, such as the X-33, X-43A, and the F-15 programs. Schmidt, who had begun working for NASA in 1994, had also served as Executive Director of the President’s Space Commission and as Executive Secretary for Management on the Columbia Accident Investigation Board.(NASA, “NASA Names Dryden Flight Research Center Deputy Director,” news release 04-188, 10 June 2004. 199)
A NASA-funded study revealed evidence of newly discovered relationships between climate change, ice sheets, and sea-level rise. Researchers led by Ian R. Joughin of NASA’s JPL found that, between 1992 and 2003, the speed of the ice movements of Greenland’s Jakobshavn Isbræ glacier―which has the fastest flow of ice from land to ocean of any glacier―had doubled. The increased ice flow from this single glacier had led to nearly a 4 percent increase in the rate of global sea-level rise during the 20th century. Furthermore, remote-sensing data from Canadian, European, and NASA satellites indicated that the glacier’s accelerated ice flow was largely the result of the warming of Earth’s climate.(NASA, “NASA Study Finds Glacier Doing Double Time,” news release M04-192, 1 December 2004; Ian Joughin, Waleed Abdalati, and Mark Fahnestock, “Large Fluctuations in Speed on Greenland’s Jakobshavn Isbræ Glacier,” Nature 432, no. 7017 (2 December 2004): 608–610.)
NASA and ESA jointly announced that scientists had obtained evidence of a black hole consuming a star, an event known as stellar tidal disruption. Previously, scientists had only theorized the existence of such an event. Using observations from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESA’s XMM-Newton orbiting observatory, an international team of scientists had discovered a star that had been thrown from its orbit after a close encounter with another star and, subsequently, had moved into the gravitational field of a black hole. The black hole, with a mass estimated at 100 million times greater than the Sun, had exerted a gravitational pull on the star that led to its eventual disintegration. Stefanie Komossa of the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Germany led the group of scientists that had made the discovery.(John Noble Wilford, “Black Holes’ Vast Power Is Documented,” New York Times, 19 February 2004; Stefanie Komossa, Jules P. Halpern, and Suvi Gezari, “Follow-up Chandra Observations of Three Candidate Tidal Disruption Events,” Astrophysical Journal 604, no. 2 (1 April 2004): 572–578.)
Scientists revealed the first observations of the merger of two galaxy clusters, providing crucial support for a theory of the universe’s formation. The scientists, led by J. Patrick Henry of the University of Hawaii, used ESA’s XMM-Newton orbiting observatory to obtain data showing that the galaxy cluster Abell 754 formed from the collision of two distinct clusters. Galaxy clusters such as Abell 754 contain hundreds of galaxies and are the universe’s largest gravitationally bound structures. Measurements of Abell 754’s density, pressure, and temperature indicated that it is still in formation. Moreover, the evidence showed that Abell 754 had emerged from the collision of galaxy clusters, supporting the theory that the universe’s hierarchical structure had resulted from small galaxies and galaxy clusters merging into relatively larger ones.(NASA, “Massive Merger of Galaxies is the Most Powerful on Record,” news release, 23 September 2004.)
NASA scientists reported that many of the samples from the Genesis space capsule had survived the spacecraft’s crash on 8 September 2004. NASA had launched Genesis in 2001 to obtain particle samples from solar winds, planning to use the particles in a study of the chemical composition of the solar system during its creation billions of years ago. However, Genesis’s sample-return capsule had failed to land on Earth as planned. Instead, it had crashed into the Utah desert, risking the destruction of the particle samples. However, although the crash had complicated the extraction and processing of the capsule’s fragile, wafer-like, sample-collection plates, NASA scientists had found many of the samples intact and usable for subsequent analyses.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Specimens Saved from Wrecked Capsule,” New York Times, 5 October 2004.)
Scientists from NASA’s ARC and Yale University announced that they had designed a complete map of gene activities in human tissue. The researchers had affixed pieces of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequences from the human genetic blueprint―known as the genome―to specially patterned glass slides. Using these slides, they had measured levels of ribonucleic acid―biochemical copies of DNA, which activating genes produce to make proteins. Among their findings, the scientists had discovered that certain DNA sequences, which they had previously believed are nonfunctioning, are actually functioning―they are encoding active genes. The NASA scientists hoped their results would enable other researchers to analyze genes for human diseases and to develop new treatments for them. In addition, their research had a specific benefit for NASA: the NASA scientists hoped it would help them understand how human genes respond to spaceflight, so that they would be better able to protect the health of astronauts.(NASA, “NASA Scientists Help Create Complete Human Genome Activity,” news release 04-376, 15 November 2004; Viktor Stolc et al., “A Gene Expression Map for the Euchromatic Genome of Drosophila Melanogaster,” Science 360, no. 5696 (22 October 2004): 655–660.)
Researchers announced that they had found a new type of celestial object, which they suspected was a new class of black holes. A group of scientists led by Rosanne Di Stefano of the Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics had examined data collected by NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory. The team had studied x-rays emitted by enigmatic objects located in nearby galaxies, finding that the volume of x-rays emanating from these objects was comparable to or greater than the volume emitted by relatively warmer, larger hard x-ray sources, such as neutron stars and supermassive black holes. The findings indicated that the newly discovered objects could be a type of black hole that the researchers termed “quasi-soft” x-ray sources.(NASA, “Enigmatic X-ray Sources May Point To New Class of Black Holes,” news release 04-067, 1 March 2004; Frank Morring Jr., “In Orbit,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 10 (8 March 2004): 19.)
The U.S. Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space concluded a hearing on the final report of the President’s Commission on Implementation of the U.S. Space Exploration Policy. The report, which the commission had released the previous day, addressed ways in which the federal government and private companies could implement the Vision for Space Exploration. Individuals testifying before the committee included Edward C. Aldridge Jr., who had led the President’s Commission; Paul D. Spudis of the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory; Maria T. Zuber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Department of Earth Atmospherics and Planetary Sciences; Laurie A. Leshin of Arizona State University; and retired U.S. Air Force General Lester L. Lyles, formerly Commander of the Air Force Materiel Command at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, Final Report on the President’s Commission on Implementation of U.S. Space Exploration Policy, 108th Cong., 2nd sess., 17 June 2004.)
A group of astronomers reported new findings concerning two prominent enigmas of physicsdark energy and the expansion of the universe. Steve Allen of Cambridge University led a group of scientists who had used NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory to examine 26 clusters of galaxies, located 1 to 8 billion light-years from Eartha span of time covering the universe’s initial explosion and subsequent expansion. Previously, many scientists had theorized that a force called dark energy might have counteracted gravity, causing the expansion. Chandra’s observations of the distances between the galaxy clusters indicated that the universe’s expansion had accelerated, and Chandra’s data on the ratio of hot gas to dark matter within the galaxy clusters indicated that the density of dark energy had not changed. Both findings were contrary to many previous hypotheses. The astronomers stated that, although their findings were inconclusive, the data suggested that the constant density of dark energy causes the universe to expand eternally. This finding is consistent with Albert Einstein’s concept of cosmological constant, which states that the universe expands constantly and gradually.(NASA, “Chandra Opens New Line of Investigation on Dark Energy,” news release 04-163, 18 May 2004; Guy Gugliotta, “Astronomers Find More Evidence of ‘Dark Energy’,” Washington Post, 19 May 2004.)
