President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-108, legislation that provided US$16.5 billion in appropriations to NASA for FY 2006. In the bill’s conference report, Congress noted some specific programs that it wanted NASA to pursue. For example, Congress specified that NASA use the funds to develop the Crew Exploration Vehicle and Crew Launch Vehicle, as described in the Exploration Systems Architecture Study, NASA’s master plan for meeting the goals of the Vision for Space Exploration. Moreover, Congress also directed NASA to make more effective use of NASA Television―NASA’s own television station, which it had primarily used for internal communications―to promote public knowledge about and interest in space exploration.
NASA announced that the Spitzer Space Telescope had captured the light from two known planets that are orbiting stars other than the Sun, enabling scientists to measure and compare extrasolar planets directly. This event marked the beginning of a new era in planetary science. Previously, scientists had confirmed the existence of extrasolar planets using one of two techniques of indirect discoverythe “wobble” technique or the “transit” technique. The wobble technique detected the gravitational tug that a planet exerts on its parent star, and the transit technique inferred the presence of a planet when the planet passed in front of its star, causing the star to dim. Both techniques depended on visible-light telescopes. By contrast, Spitzer observed infrared light, enabling astronomers to contrast a planet against the glow of its parent star. If detected using the transit technique, the glow of the parent star would have overwhelmed the glimmer of light reflected by the planet.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer Marks Beginning of New Age of Planetary Science,” news release 05-082, 22 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05082_Spitzer_First_Light.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
NASA announced that the Chandra X-ray Observatory had detected the most powerful eruption measured in the universe to date, generating a supermassive black hole that is growing at a remarkable rate. The eruption in the galaxy cluster MS 0735.6+7421 had been in process for more than 100 million years, generating energy equal to that of hundreds of millions of gamma- ray bursts (GRBs). In the past, scientists had usually detected the rapid growth of supermassive black holes by observing very bright radiation from galaxies. However, MS 0735.6+7421 had no detectable bright, central radiation, and the galaxy cluster’s radio jets were faint. Chandra’s x-ray observations of the hot cluster gas had revealed the true nature of the black hole. Michael R. Wise of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology remarked that, until Chandra had captured this information, scientists had no idea that the black hole was “gorging itself.” Chandra’s discovery demonstrated that, to observe and understand some of the most violent events in the universe, astronomers need x-ray telescopes.(NASA, “Most Powerful Eruption in the Universe Discovered,” news release 05-004, 5 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/jan/HQ_05004_chandra.html (accessed 11 May 2009).)
NASA launched a 40 million-cubic-foot (12.2 million-cubic-meter) balloon, the Deep Space Test Bed facility, from Fort Sumner, New Mexico, carrying an automobile-sized aluminum gondola containing scientific experiments prepared by university and elementary school students. NASA had collaborated with the students to carry out research to analyze characteristics of Earth’s atmosphere from the unique laboratory traveling 30 miles (48.3 kilometers) above Earth. The primary payload was the High Energy Replicated Optics (HERO), a hard x-ray–focusing telescope. Engineers from NASA’s MSFC had designed HERO to create images from high- energy x-ray light. Undergraduate students from Pennsylvania State University, Montana State University, the University of Alabama, and Auburn University in Alabama had prepared experiments for the new laboratory. The experiments would identify pollution-related aerosols in the atmosphere, measure radiation and its impact on the integrity and behavior of the balloon, measure the external temperature of the balloon material, and gather magnetic-field data. Students from eight grade schools had prepared experiments to observe the effect of the flight environment on microscopic organisms and seeds, placing their experiments in brick-size plastic containers inside two large containers on board the balloon.(NASA, “NASA and Students Partner for High Altitude Research,” news release 05-121, 11 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05121_Student_Experiments.html (accessed 14 September 2009). 792 Richard M. Jones for the American Institute of Physics, “New NASA Administrator Appears Before Senate Appropriators,” FYI Bulletin 69, 17 May 2005, http://www.aip.org/fyi/2005/069.html (accessed 17 September 2009).)
ESA’s CryoSat spacecraft was destroyed during a failed launch from Russia’s Plesetsk Cosmodrome. ESA had intended CryoSat as one of a series of Earth-observation spacecraft called Earth Explorers. ESA had built CryoSat to monitor the thickness of land and sea ice, to determine whether climate change is reducing Earth’s ice masses. Initial assessments of the launch failure indicated that the rocket launching the satellite had experienced a problem with its on-board flight-control system, a problem that had prevented the rocket’s upper stage from separating from its second stage.(ESA, “CryoSat Mission Lost Due to Launch Failure,” ESA news release 44-2005, 8 October 2005. http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMR3Q5Y3EE_index_0.html (accessed 14 July 2009); New York Times, “Arctic Study Satellite Crashes into Ocean,” 9 October 2005.)
NASA signed a memorandum of agreement (MOA) with the United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), in an effort to improve global conservation through increased use of NASA’s Earth science research and remote-sensing data. Under the agreement, UNESCO would use NASA-generated data to share scientific information about how Earth functions. In addition, the MOA would further an existing partnership between the NASA- supported Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) education program and UNESCO’s World Heritage Centre. NASA and UNESCO would train teachers in UNESCO-member states to work with UNESCO’s Natural World Heritage Site managers on collaborative conservation program activities.
NASA selected Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation of Broomfield, Colorado, to develop, manufacture, and provide prelaunch and postlaunch support for the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) Microwave Imager (GMI) instrument. The total contract value was approximately US$100.2 million over a period of seven years and nine months. The GMI, a conical-scan microwave radiometer, would fly on the GPM Core spacecraft as part of a multinational collaborative effort to measure global precipitation. The spacecraft, which NASA had not yet built, would be the first in a constellation of spacecraft deployed under NASA’s GPM mission. The GMI instrument would make calibrated, radiometric measurements from space at multiple microwave frequencies and polarizations. NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for the Science Mission Directorate Ghassem R. Asrar remarked that scientists need to know the amount and distribution of precipitation worldwide so that they can assess the quantity and quality of fresh water resources for food and fiber production, human consumption, and other societal needs. Experts in water resource management, agriculture, transportation, forestry, weather forecasting, and other fields, would be able to use future research findings based on GMI data.(NASA, “NASA Selects Firm To Provide GPM Microwave Imager Instrument,” news release c05-g, 15 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_c05g_gpm_imager.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Matt Branaugh, “Ball Gets In On NASA Mission,” Boulder Daily Camera (CO), 16 March 2005.)
NASA and its partner the Spaceward Foundation, a publicly funded, nonprofit organization dedicated to advancing the cause of space access, announced prizes totaling US$$400,000 for four competitions. The competitions would be the first under NASA’s Centennial Challenges program, designed to promote technical innovation in support of the Vision for Space Exploration and NASA’s goals. The first two competitions, the Tether Challenge and the Beam Power Challenge, would challenge innovators to focus on developing lightweight, yet strong, tether materials and wireless power transmission technologies. Winners of each of the initial 2005 challenges would receive a prize of US$50,000. The Tether Challenge would require teams to make the strongest tether of a specified diameter. Competing in a tournament-style bracket system, the tethers would be stretched until they broke, with the overall winner competing against NASA’s “house tether” to win the cash. The Beam Power Challenge would require teams to use wireless technology to lift a weight off the ground. NASA planned a second set of Tether and Beam Power challenges, with a greater degree of difficulty, for 2006.(NASA, “NASA Announces First Centennial Challenges’ Prizes,” news release M05-083, 23 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_m05083_Centennial_prizes.html (accessed 2 September 2005); Robert Roy Britt, “NASA Details Cash Prizes for Space Privatization,” Space.com, 24 March 2005, http://www.space.com/news/050323_centennial_challenge.html (accessed 2 September 2009).)
The FAA published the first proposed regulations on commercial human spaceflight, a growing industry often referred to as space tourism. The Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004 (Pub. L. No. 108-492) required the U.S. Department of Transportation, which oversees the FAA, to implement regulations on commercial human spaceflights. Congress had passed the bill for to establish a balanced and clear regulatory regime that promoted the development of the growing commercial human spaceflight industry. Most of the FAA’s proposed regulations addressed passengers’ informed consent and crew members’ qualifications, as well as the training of both passengers and crew. The proposed regulations would remain subject to public comment for 60 days (until 27 February 2006). The FAA was required to issue the final regulations by 23 June 2006.(Darlene Superville for the Associated Press, “Gov’t Issues Proposed Space Tourism Rules,” 29 December 2005; Human Space Flight Requirements for Crew and Space Flight Participants, 70 Fed. Reg. 77, 262 (29 December 2005) (to be codified at 14 C.F.R. pt. 401, 415 et al.).)
Astronomers using NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) detected, for the first time, a large population of black holes known as type-2 quasars. Quasars―supermassive black holes―are the universe’s brightest objects. Although scientists had observed the light from type-1 quasars, they had never before been able to detect type-2 quasars because, despite the brightness of type-2 quasars, the gas and dust rings that surround them obscure the quasars’ visible light and block their emission of x-rays. Space telescopes and other scientific instruments rely on x-ray emissions to detect and to analyze these celestial phenomena. However, Alejo Martínez-Sansigre of the University of Oxford led a team of astronomers who used the SST to detect infrared light emitted by type-2 quasars, thereby capturing evidence of 21 quasars. The research also indicated that the growth of black holes has been concentrated in obscure regions of the universe and has tended to occur in the cores of forming galaxies during brief, highly productive periods. The new data suggested that thousands more such quasars might exist in the universe.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer Finds Hidden, Hungry Black Holes,” news release 05-211, 3 August 2005; Alejo Martínez-Sansigre et al., “The Obscuration by Dust of Most of the Growth of Supermassive Black Holes,” Nature 463, no. 7051 (4 August 2005): 666–669.)
Woodrow Whitlow Jr. became Director of NASA’s GRC, replacing the retiring Julian M. Earls. Whitlow had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s KSC since September 2003. Before that, he had served as Director of Research and Technology at GRC. Whitlow, who held bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral degrees in aeronautics and astronautics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, had begun working for NASA in 1979 as a research scientist at LaRC.(NASA Glenn Research Center, “Center Director: Dr. Woodrow Whitlow Jr.,” 10 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/about/bios/whitlowbio.html (accessed 31 July 2009).)
Alliant Techsystems announced the successful completion of the first in a series of ground tests for solar-sail technology, developed to enable solar-powered interplanetary probes and solar observatories. At NASA’s GRC’s Plum Brook Station in Ohio, NASA engineers fully deployed a 20 x 20 meter (65.6 x 65.6 feet) version of the solar-sail system, in a 100-foot-diameter (30.5- meter-diameter) vacuum chamber, to test the system’s functional deployment and attitude control. The test marked a critical milestone in the development of in-space propulsion technology using the Sun’s energy, instead of fuel propellant, to provide thrust. The In-Space Propulsion Program of NASA’s Science Mission Directorate was developing the solar-sail propulsion system.(Alliant Techsystems, “ATK and NASA Successfully Test First Solar Sail Propulsion System,” news release, 6 May 2005, http://atk.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=118&item=447 (accessed 16 September 2009).)
