Scientists using NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) reported the first measurements of day and night temperatures ever made on an extrasolar planet. Previously, astronomers had been able to measure extrasolar planets’ global traits, such as mass and size, but had not been able to measure characteristics of particular portions of those planets. The scientists had observed a Jupiter-like gas giant, called Upsilon Andromedae b, which orbits very close to a star called Upsilon Andromedae. Gas giants are planets composed primarily of gas, rather than solid matter. The astronomers had discovered that Upsilon Andromedae b might be extremely hot on one side and extremely cold on the other. The observed temperature difference of 2,550oF (1,400oC) on the planet’s two sides indicates that the planet’s atmosphere absorbs and re-radiates sunlight127 rapidly, so that that gas circling the planet cools quickly, forming a stratosphere of cool gas.
NASA’s Mercury Surface, Space Environment, Geochemistry, and Ranging (MESSENGER) spacecraft performed the first of two scheduled flybys past the planet Venus, a maneuver intended eventually to steer the spacecraft to its final destination, Mercury. MESSENGER was the second spacecraft that NASA had launched to Mercury; the first had been Mariner 10, which had flown past the planet in 1974 and 1975. NASA had created MESSENGER to produce color maps of Mercury’s surface and to conduct compositional analyses of the planet’s atmosphere, magnetosphere, and surface. NASA had sent MESSENGER past Venus to collect new information about the planet—the closest planet to Earth—and to test equipment on the spacecraft. NASA had planned the Venus flyby as one of several planetary passages that, collectively, would help MESSENGER reach Mercury. During these planetary passages, the gravity of Venus and of the other planets would help decelerate MESSENGER, altering its trajectory so that the spacecraft would eventually attain orbit around Mercury. NASA planned for MESSENGER to fly past Venus again in June 2007, with the goal of reaching Mercury by 2011.(Britt Norlander, “Dropping By,” Science World, 23 October 2006, 6; Von Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2006.” 48)
NASA announced that the aviation industry, including the Boeing Company, was using the unique wind-tunnel technology that NASA had developed to test new aviation concepts before applying them in flight. Unlike conventional wind tunnels, the National Transonic Facility at NASA’s LaRC used super-cold nitrogen gas at high pressure to duplicate true-flight aerodynamics capability, even with models as small as 1/50th the size of the typical test aircraft. According to facility chief aerodynamicist Richard A. Wahls, this capability “allows the aircraft manufacturers to produce better performing airplanes with less risk.” Boeing had purchased wind-tunnel time to evaluate high-lift system designs for its new 787 jet aircraft.(NASA, “Industry Uses NASA Wind Tunnels To Design New Airplanes,” news release 06-060, 8 February 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/feb/HQ_06060_LaRC_wind_tunnel.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
Ohio University astronomers Thomas S. Statler and Steven Diehl, who had analyzed images of 56 elliptical galaxies, which NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory had made, reported that the data from the images had revealed an unsuspected turmoil in the galaxies, which appear calm in optical light. Statler and Diehl had determined that the previously held assumption—that the equilibrium shape of the multimillion-degree gas clouds in these galaxies would correlate with the shape of its stars—had been erroneous. Searching for an energy source for the explosive activity, the astronomers had drawn a correlation between the shape of the hot gas clouds and the power produced at radio wavelengths by high-energy electrons. Scientists can trace this power output back to the centers of the galaxies, where supermassive black holes are located. Statler’s and Diehl’s analysis indicated that the phenomena of repetitive explosive activity, fueled by the in-fall of gas into central black holes—a process known to occur in giant elliptical galaxies located in galaxy clusters—was also occurring in isolated elliptical galaxies. According to Statler, “these results are part of an emerging picture that shows the impact of supermassive black holes on the environment is far more pervasive than previously thought.”(Chandra X-ray Observatory, “NGC 0507: Black Holes Stir Up Galaxies,” http://chandra.harvard.edu/photo/ 2006/galaxies (accessed 17 December 2009); NASA, “NASA’s Chandra Finds Black Holes Stirring Up Galaxies,” news release 06-006, 10 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06006_Chandra_AAS_ update.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
Using images from the HST, astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, were able for the first time to witness the birth of a second red spot (dubbed Red Spot Jr.) on the planet Jupiter. The Great Red Spot, which dates at least to the seventeenth century, is a storm rising as high as 5 miles (8.05 kilometers) above Jupiter’s cloud level. The Great Red Spot is large enough to contain two or three planets the size of Earth. The new red spot, roughly half the diameter of the Great Red Spot, had begun as three white ovals—cooler, upper-level storms. Observers had first seen two of the ovals in 1915, and astronomers had seen the third in 1939. The three storms had merged between 1998 and 2000. Astronomers believed that Red Spot Jr., like the Great Red Spot, rises above the top of the main cloud deck on Jupiter. Scientists had theorized that the change in color of the oval to red, which occurred earlier in 2006, was the result of the storm’s exposure to the Sun’s ultraviolet light. They surmised that, when the storm dredged up material deep below Jupiter’s clouds and lifted it above Jupiter’s cloud deck, the Sun’s ultraviolet light chemically altered the material, giving it a red hue. Astronomers also speculated that the HST images could indicate a major climate change in Jupiter’s atmosphere, related to the new spot.(HubbleSite, “Hubble Snaps Baby Pictures of Jupiter’s ‘Red Spot Jr.’” news release STScl-2006-19, 4 May 2006, http://hubblesite.org/newscenter/archive/releases/2006/2006/19 (accessed 26 March 2010); John Johnson Jr., “Astronomers See Spot’s Runt, Clue of Jupiter Climate Change,” Los Angeles Times, 5 May 2006; Space Daily, “Hubble Takes Sharpest Shot Yet of New Red Spot on Jupiter,” 5 May 2006.)
NASA awarded contracts to two companies to develop commercial orbital transportation services for the ISS, creating the possibility of a commercial space transportation industry. The agreements also marked the first time that NASA had hired contractors to build a space transportation system for private-sector use, rather than for government use. Under the agreements, NASA would invest up to US$287 million in Rocketplane Kistler and US$207 million in Space Exploration Technologies Corporation, also known as SpaceX, enabling the two companies to develop a spacecraft that could provide crew and cargo services for the ISS. NASA’s provision of the funds would be contingent on the companies’ completion of designated milestones—including launching and docking a spacecraft with the ISS. According to a NASA official, NASA hoped that private companies would be able to turn low-Earth-orbit services— such as transportation of people or cargo to the ISS—into a profitable venture, thereby enabling NASA to focus on other objectives, such as missions to Mars and the Moon.(NASA, “NASA Selects Crew and Cargo Transportation To Orbit Partners,” news release 06-295, 18 August 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_06295_COTS_phase_1.html (accessed 15 March 2010); Mark Carreau, “Two Firms, Both Space Novices, Get Nod from NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 19 August 2006. 102 NASA, “Hubble Sees Faintest Stars in a Globular Cluster,” news release 06-292, 17 August 2006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_06292_HST_globular_clusters.html (accessed 15 March 2010); Harvey B. Richer et al., “Probing the Faintest Stars in the Globular Star Cluster,” Science 313, no. 5789 (18 August 2006): 936–940, http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/short/313/5789/936 (DOI 10.1126; accessed 29 June 2010).)
The U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy publicly released the U.S. National Space Policy, which President George W. Bush had signed on 31 August 2006. The first full revision of overall U.S. space policy in 10 years, this policy superseded the previous National Space Policy of 14 September 1996. U.S. national security issues were a prominent feature of the new policy, with many of its stated principles and goals addressing U.S. defense and intelligence activities in space. The policy also supported private enterprise in space and the implementation of human and robotic space exploration to extend human presence across the solar system.(Marc Kaufman, “Bush Sets Defense as Space Priority,” Washington Post, 18 October 2006; U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, “U.S. National Space Policy,” 31 August 2006, http://www.whitehouse.gov/ administration/eop/ostp/library/archives (accessed 2 April 2010).)
Scientists published research indicating that the number of galaxies in the universe had sharply increased 700 million to 900 million years after the Big Bang. The finding provided important information about the formation of galaxies and the composition of stars. Rychard J. Bouwens and Garth D. Illingworth of the University of California, Santa Cruz, had used data from NASA’s HST to determine that, beginning 700 million years after the Big Bang, the number of galaxies had increased tenfold in 200 million years. Another team of researchers, led by Masanori Iye of the National Astronomical Observatory in Tokyo, had found a similar increase in galaxy formation during the same period. These findings supported a prevailing theory of galaxy formation, which held that luminous galaxies were rare in the universe’s earliest times. As heavy elements, such as carbon, iron, and oxygen emerged, these new elements had formed the building blocks for stars and galaxies. The team cautioned that astronomers would need to make further observations to determine more certainly how galaxies had formed during the universe’s nascent years.(Dennis Overbye, “The Boom in Galaxies After the Big Bang,” New York Times, 14 September 2006; Rychard J. Bouwens and Garth D. Illingworth, “Rapid Evolution of the Most Luminous Galaxies During the First 900 Million Years,” Nature 443, no. 7108 (14 September 2006): 189–192, http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v443/n7108/ abs/nature05156.html (DOI 10.1038/nature05156; accessed 29 June 2010).)
The House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to assess whether NASA’s current workforce strategy was developing the tools needed to meet NASA’s future needs. Subcommittee Ranking Member Mark Udall (D-CO) expressed concern that the proposed budget reductions to its aeronautics, microgravity life and physical sciences, and space and Earth sciences programs would further complicate NASA’s efforts to create a workforce with an appropriate balance of civil servants and private contractors. NASA’s Assistant Administrator for Human Capital Management Toni Dawsey testified that the overall objective of NASA’s workforce strategy, submitted to Congress in April 2006, was “to transform the composition of NASA’s workforce so that it remained viable for the long-term goals of NASA’s missions.” She stated that NASA was addressing its two most pressing workforce challenges— “uncovered capacity, caused by program changes and cancellations and budget constraints, and retaining Space Shuttle employees through its retirement in 2010.” NASA was maintaining sufficient work in house to protect and strengthen its core capabilities and had established a Shuttle Human Capital Working Group to oversee the complex Shuttle workforce issues. David C. Black, co- chair of the NRC committee that NASA had asked to explore “long-range science and technology workforce needs to achieve the Nation’s long-term space exploration vision,” also testified. In its interim report, the committee planned to recommend that NASA work with other government agencies involved in space-related work, as well as with the private sector, including universities, to “assess the nature, scope, and possible solutions for its skill mix.”(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, The NASA th Workforce: Does NASA Have the Right Strategy and Policies To Retain and Build the Workforce It Will Need? 109 Cong., 2nd sess., 13 June 2006, 14, 17, 81, 84, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath= 109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId=CHRG-109hhrg27971&packageId=CHRG- 109hhrg27971&fromBrowse=true (accessed 21 December 2010); U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, “What Will NASA’s Future Workforce Look Like?” news release, 13 June 2006, http://science.house.gov/ press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1140 (accessed 4 February 2010).)
NASA’s Voyager 1 achieved a milestone during its passage out of the solar system when it reached a distance of 100 Astronomical Units (AUs)—nearly 9.3 billion miles (15 billion kilometers) from the Sun. An AU is the average distance between Earth and the Sun, measuring approximately 93 million miles (150 million kilometers). Voyager 1 was already the most distant human-made object from Earth when it reached 100 AUs from the Sun. NASA had launched Voyager 1 and its twin spacecraft Voyager 2 in 1977 to explore Jupiter and Saturn and had continued to extend the operations of the two spacecraft. In the Voyagers’ current mission—the Voyager Interstellar Mission (VIM)—the spacecraft would explore the environment of the outer solar system and, eventually, that of interstellar space.(Von Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2006”; NASA, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Voyager: Mission Overview,” http://voyager.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/mission.html (accessed 14 September 2010).)
A team of European astronomers, led by Christophe Lovis of the Observatoire de Genève in Switzerland, reported in Nature their discovery of a new system of three extrasolar planets in the constellation Puppis. The discovery of the three planets orbiting the Sun-like star HD 69830, which is approximately 41 light-years from Earth, marked the first time that astronomers had identified a system composed of several planets, each planet possessing a mass approximating that of Neptune. Theoretical calculations of the complexion of the three planets had indicated that the two closest to HD 69830 have a rocky composition similar to the planet Mercury. The astronomers reported that the outermost planet likely has a significant gaseous envelope, surrounding a core composed of rock or ice or a combination of the two, and that the temperatures of the planet are moderate enough to allow the existence of liquid water. The team had discovered the planets using the European Southern Observatory’s 3.6-meter (11.8-foot) telescope at the La Silla Observatory in Chile. The telescope was equipped with a precise spectrograph to detect small wobbles induced by the Puppis planets in the HD 69830 star. The technique of detecting and studying these wobbles enabled astronomers to measure the 64 gravitational influence of a planet on its parent star and, thereby, to infer the planet’s presence.
NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and the private company Gulfstream Aerospace conducted the first test of the Quiet Spike, a 24-foot-long (7.3-meter) retractable, lance-like rod, affixed to the nose of NASA’s F-15B research aircraft and designed to suppress sonic booms during supersonic-jet flights. The term “sonic boom” refers to an accumulation of shock waves that develop around aircraft as they near the speed of sound (760 miles per hour or 1,223 kilometers per hour at sea level). Like an explosion, the sound energy generated by sonic booms can damage windows on the ground below a supersonic jet’s path. The FAA prohibits supersonic-jet flight over land, except in designated military flight corridors. DFRC and Gulfstream had designed the Quiet Spike, which created three small shock waves, traveling parallel to one another to the ground, thereby reducing the noise produced when supersonic jets break the sound barrier.(NASA, Dryden Flight Research Center, “Gulfstream, NASA Dryden Joust with Supersonic Shockwaves,” news release 06-39, 5 October 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/dryden/news/NewsReleases/2006/06-39.html (accessed 5 March 2010).)
Scientists using NASA’s HST reported research demonstrating how an enigmatic form of energy called dark energy has helped shape the universe’s structure. Unable to observe dark energy directly, scientists analyze it by measuring its effects on matter. Previous research had revealed that dark matter causes the universe to expand by counteracting the collapsing gravitational pull of matter throughout the universe. However, several properties of dark matter had remained a mystery, such as how strong it is and when it began to exert its expansive effects. Attempting to solve some of these puzzles, a team of scientists, led by Adam G. Reiss of the Space Telescope Science Institute, had examined HST data on the luminosity distances of the farthest known supernovae—a type of ancient exploding star—to measure the universe’s rate of expansion. The scientists found that dark energy had begun to accelerate the universe’s expansion as long ago as 10 billion years, and that the expansive force of dark energy, although weak, had been sufficiently consistent to counteract gravity. In addition, the research supported Albert Einstein’s theory of the existence of a “cosmological constant” that works against gravity to create equilibrium in the universe.(Adam G. Riess et al., “New Hubble Space Telescope Discoveries of Type Ia Supenovae at z ≥ 1: Narrowing Constraints on the Early Behavior of Dark Energy,” Astrophysical Journal 659, no. 1 (10 April 2007): 98–121, http://iopscience.iop.org/0004-637X/659/1/98 (DOI 10.1086/510378; accessed 29 April 2010); Dennis Overbye, “9 Billion-Year-Old ‘Dark Energy’ Reported,” New York Times, 17 November 2006.)
Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne announced the completion of the assembly of the first Common Extensible Cryogenic Engine (CECE) demonstrator, a deep-throttling 15,000-pound-thrust-class engine, fueled by a mixture of liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. Built in support of NASA’s Vision for Space Exploration, the CECE would validate key component technologies that high- energy, in-space propulsion systems would require for future space exploration. The CECE program would focus on descent propulsion for the Lunar Surface Access Module, as well as demonstrating technologies for other applications, such as the Earth Departure Stage and in- space transfer systems. In June 2005, NASA had awarded Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne the first portion of a US$40 million four-year contract to develop CECE.(Pratt & Whitney, “Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne Completes Assembly of First Common Extensible Cryogenic Engine Demonstrator,” press release, 5 April 2006, http://www.pw.utc.com/Media+Center/Press+Releases/ Archive+-+2006 (accessed 27 April 2010).)
