NASA announced that it had awarded a contract to the Boeing Company to provide engineering and technical support for four specialized research aircraft—two F-15s and two F/A-18s—at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC). NASA had modified the aircraft to conduct a variety of flight-research missions to support NASA and other government agencies, as well as private industry. The contract’s value was as much as US$28 million during the five-year performance period lasting through April 2012.(NASA, “NASA Awards California Aircraft Support Contract to Boeing,” contract release C07-20, 20 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_C0720_Boeing_Aircraft_Support.html (accessed 16 February 2010).)
Jeanna Bryner, “Twisted Solution to Sun’s Mystery Heat,” Space.com, 21 March 2007, http://www.space.com/ scienceastronomy/070321_solarb_update.html (accessed 28 January 2010). NASA-AHS Robert L. Lichten Internship Award. The basis of the award was a paper that Greenwood had submitted to the AHS International 2007 Robert L. Lichten Competition, “Helicopter External Noise Radiation in Turning Flight: Theory and Experiment.” During his eight-week NASA-sponsored internship, Greenwood would divide his time between two NASA centers: ARC at Moffett Field, California, and Langley Research Center (LaRC) in Hampton, Virginia. Greenwood would work on NASA’s science and technology projects involving rotary wings.(NASA, “NASA Announces First Lichten Intership Award Winner,” news release 07-79, 30 March 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07079_ARMD_Intern.html (accessed 14 October 2009).)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to examine NASA workforce issues and recommendations made in recently released reports of two independent review panels—the National Academy of Public Administration (NAPA), and the NRC. The subcommittee noted a sizeable shift in NASA’s programmatic activities, to implement the Vision for Space Exploration; retire the Shuttle by 2010; complete the ISS; develop the Orion CEV and the Ares CLV; and deal with the growing retirement-eligible workforce, all within the framework of a limited budget. NASA Assistant Administrator for Human Capital Management Toni Dawsey testified that NASA’s Workforce Strategy, submitted to Congress in April 2006, articulated three underlying principles: “building and sustaining ten healthy Centers; maximizing the use of NASA’s current human capital capabilities; and evolving to a more flexible, scalable workforce.” John G. Stewart, a member of NAPA’s Panel on NASA Multi- Sector Workforce, summarized the panel’s major recommendations, including NASA’s adoption of “a longer range, risk-based planning strategy to anticipate and respond effectively to future program needs, budget shortfalls, and schedule revisions for [its] total multi-sector workforce.” David C. Black, co-chair of NRC’s Committee on Issues Affecting the Future of the U.S. Space Science and Engineering Workforce, testified that the committee had concluded that NASA did not currently have the in-house expertise, particularly in the areas of systems engineering and project management, to implement the Vision for Space Exploration. Black recommended that NASA adopt policies enabling it to obtain the highest quality personnel over the long term. Toni Dawsey acknowledged that NAPA’s and NRC’s reports confirmed NASA’s “assessments of the challenges facing us in the workforce arena and validate the actions that we have initiated to address the most critical and encompassing issues.”(National Research Council, Committee on Meeting the Workforce Needs for the National Vision for Space Exploration, Building a Better NASA Workforce: Meeting the Workforce Needs for the National Vision for Space Exploration (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2007); National Academy of Public Administration, NASA: Balancing a Multisector Workforce To Achieve a Healthy Organization (report, Washington, DC, February 2007), 95−101, in U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Building and Maintaining a Healthy and Strong NASA Workforce, 110th Cong., 1st sess., 17 May 2007; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “Subcommittee Focuses on Ensuring the Health and Vitality of NASA’s Current and Future Workforce,” news release, 17 May 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1833 (accessed 9 August 2010).)
NASA announced that it had begun testing SOFIA, the highly modified Boeing 747SP aircraft that NASA intended to use as an airborne observatory for “first light” infrared observations of the universe. Before arriving at NASA’s DFRC, engineers had installed a 17-tonne (18.7-ton or 17,000-kilogram) telescope in the aircraft’s aft fuselage and had cut a 16-foot-high (4.9-meter- high) telescope door in the fuselage. At DFRC, engineers had installed test instrumentation critical for the initial flight tests. In addition, they had equipped a telescope-cavity environmental-control system, designed to keep the telescope dry when the cavity door was closed, as well as when the craft had achieved the altitude required for operating the observatory. The first series of flight tests, conducted with the cavity door closed, would study the aerodynamics, structural integrity, stability and control, and handling qualities of the modified aircraft.(NASA, “Sofia Observatory Enters Aircraft Testing Phase,” news release 07-225, 12 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07225_sofia_first_flights.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
NASA announced its selection of four research teams, which would receive five-year grants valued at approximately US$7 million per team. The teams would become new members of the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), increasing the number of the NAI’s members to 16. The University of Wisconsin team proposed to study organic and mineralogical environments and signatures of life on Earth and on other planets, focusing on technologies for detecting microbial life within rock chemistry. The team from the California Institute of Technology planned to extend the research it had conducted at NAI during 2001−2006, using the Virtual Planetary Laboratory that the team had developed to explore the habitability and biosignatures of extrasolar Earth-like planets. The Montana State University team would investigate the role of iron-sulfide compounds in the transition from the nonliving to the living world, supporting NASA’s mission to investigate prebiotic chemistry and the development of signatures for terrestrial and extraterrestrial life. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology planned to investigate requirements for the development of multicellular life in Earth’s ancient past, concentrating on organic biosignatures preserved in the rock record and on the state of Earth’s early atmosphere.(NASA, “NASA Selects New Members of Astrobiology Institute,” new release 07-108, 9 May 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07108_Astrobiology_Grants.html (accessed 24 March 2010).)
NASA announced the selection of the Boeing Company of Huntsville, Alabama, as the production contractor for the Ares-1 upper stage. Under the contract, valued at US$514.7 million, plus US$610 million in options, a NASA-led design team would receive support from Boeing during the design phase. Boeing would take responsibility for production of the upper stage, manufacturing a ground-test article, three flight-test units, and six production-flight units to support NASA’s flight manifest through 2016. The cost-plus-award-fee contract covered a126 performance period that would begin in September 2007 and last through December 2016.
NASA released images of solar activity captured by the Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory (STEREO), a pair of spacecraft launched on 25 October 2006 to study the Sun. The images revealed a close view of the Sun’s activity, as well as a progressive view of the Sun’s radiation as it reaches Earth’s atmosphere. Scientists intended to use STEREO images to study the flow of energy from the Sun to Earth, in particular, coronal mass ejections (CMEs), which can cause dangerous solar storms. STEREO Principal Investigator Russell A. Howard stated that the new view from the spacecraft would improve scientists’ ability to forecast the arrival time of severe space weather, enabling them to predict the arrival of solar storms to within a couple of hours, instead of within a day.(Aalok Mehta, “Photo in the News: Stunning New Images of Sun Captured,” National Geographic News, 1 March 2007.)
The National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) announced that a landmark test flight of a balloon-borne solar telescope had succeeded, clearing the way for long-duration polar balloon flights to capture unprecedented details of the Sun’s surface. The project, called Sunrise, was an international collaboration among NCAR, NASA, Germany’s Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research and Kiepenheuer Institute for Solar Physics, Spain’s Astrophysics Institute of the Canary Islands, and the Swedish Space Corporation. U.S. partners Lockheed Martin and the University of Chicago were also participating. The balloon, which was larger than a Boeing 747 jet, launched 3 October carrying a gondola containing 6,000 pounds (2,722 kilograms) of scientific instruments. The balloon flew for 10 hours, reaching an altitude of 120,000 feet (36,576 meters), and released the gondola to descend to Earth via parachute. During the flight, the telescope captured stable images of the solar surface, and the various instruments on board captured additional data. David Elmore of NCAR confirmed that the test flight had verified the operations of the entire system, allowing the team to continue planning the first full-scale mission. NASA and the NSF had funded the projects. Associate Administrator of NASA’s Science Mission Directorate S. Alan Stern, in congratulating the NCAR team for their successful test flight, advocated the use of suborbital flight as a less expensive method of studying space than satellites and spacecraft.(National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), “Solar Telescope Reaches 120,000 Feet on Jumbo-Jet-Sized Balloon,” news release, 23 October 2007, http://www.ucar.edu/news/releases/2007/sunrise.shtml (accessed 29 September 2010); Katy Human, “Balloon Test Flight Hailed,” Denver Post (CO), 22 October 2007.)
NASA announced a modification to its contract with Lockheed Martin to design, test, and build the Orion CEV. The modified contract had three significant changes, including the addition of two test flights of Orion’s launch-abort system and the deletion from the initial design phase of the production of a pressurized cargo carrier for the ISS. The contract also added two years to the development period, extending it to December 2013, and increased the contract’s value from US$3.9 billion to US$4.3 billion. The modification reflected the continuing progress on Orion’s development and NASA’s evolving budgetary landscape.(NASA, “NASA Modifies Orion Crew Exploration Vehicle Contract,” contract release C07-21, 20 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_C0721_Orion_Contract_Mod.html (accessed 16 February 2010).)
NASA announced a landmark achievement of its Spitzer Space Telescope (SST). For the first time the SST had captured enough light from exoplanets—planets outside Earth’s solar system— to identify molecular signatures in their atmospheres. NASA described the event as a significant step toward achieving the ability to detect life on rocky exoplanets. Using a spectrograph to reveal the “fingerprints” of the objects’ chemical composition, the space-based infrared SST had obtained the data from two different gaseous exoplanets—HD 189733b, located 63 light-years from Earth in the constellation Vulpecula, and HD 209458b, located 150 light-years away in the constellation Pegasus. The telescope had monitored the planets as they transited behind their stars and temporarily disappeared from view. Once the exoplanets were no longer visible, Spitzer’s spectrograph measured the dip in infrared light. The data collected through this method, known as the secondary-eclipse technique, indicated that the two planets—known as “hot Jupiters,” because they are gaseous like Jupiter, but orbit much closer to their stars—are drier and cloudier than scientists had previously predicted. Although scientists had predicted that water vapor would prove a common feature of the atmospheres of hot Jupiters, the SST found no evidence of water vapor on either HD189733b or HD 209458b.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer First To Crack Open Light of Far Away Worlds,” news release 07-48, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_0748_Spitzer.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Eric Berger, “Another Step Closer To Finding a Planet Like Ours,” Houston Chronicle, 22 February 2007.)
NASA released findings from the collective efforts of its Chandra X-ray Observatory, HST, SST, and ground-based telescopes—the Very Large Array in New Mexico and the Multi-Element Radio Linked Interferometer Network (MERLIN) in the United Kingdom. The telescopes had captured imagery showing, for the first time, a powerful jet from a supermassive black hole striking a nearby galaxy. The system, called 3C321, contained two galaxies orbiting each other, each with a supermassive black hole at its center. However, NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory had shown a jet emanating from the black hole at the center of the larger galaxy and “punching” the smaller galaxy, which had swung into the larger galaxy’s path. The study’s leader, Daniel A. Evans of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, remarked that, although scientists had seen many black holes produce similar jets, this was the first time scientists had observed such a jet punching into another galaxy. Coinvestigator Martin J. Hardcastle of the University of Hertfordshire in the United Kingdom added that, although these jets are common in the universe, scientists struggled to understand some of their basic properties. Hardcastle said that 3C321 had provided the chance to learn about the behavior of jets when they slam into a galaxy and about the subsequent effect of such events on jets.(NASA, “‘Death Star’ Galaxy Black Hole Fires at Neighboring Galaxy,” news release 07-280, 17 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07280_Death_Star_Black_Hole.html (accessed 20 October 2010). 184 Todd Halvorson, “Whitson, ‘The Queen of EVA’: Commander Sets Record for Female Spacewalkers,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 December 2007; Robert Z. Pearlman, “Astronauts Mark 100th Station Spacewalk,” Space.com, 18 December 2007, http://www.space.com/news/cs-071218-100th-iss-spacewalk.html (accessed 29 November 2010); Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Inspect Space Station’s Solar Wing Joints,” Space.com, 18 December 2007, http://www.space.com/071218-expedition16-fourth-spacewalk-wrap.html (accessed 29 November 2010).)
