NASA announced that it had signed a cooperative Space Act Agreement with the Challenger Center for Space Education of Alexandria, Virginia. The partnership would use hands-on interactive educational activities to interest students, as well as their families, teachers, and the public, in the study of engineering, mathematics, science, and technology. The Challenger Center, founded in 1986, consisted of a network of 50 Challenger Learning Centers that train teachers to use project-based learning and space exploration themes to engage skills in critical thinking, communication, decision making, and teamwork.(NASA, “NASA and Challenger Center Combining Efforts for Students,” news release 08-217, 28 August 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08217_NASA_Challenger_Center.html (accessed 25 July 2011).)
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract for the completion of a 210-day independent study of the design concept of the Constellations Program’s lunar-landing craft. NASA awarded the contract, totaling approximately US$1.5 million, to five different companies: Andrews Space of Seattle, Boeing Defense, Space and Security in Houston, Lockheed Martin Space Systems in Denver, Northrop Grumman in El Segundo, California, and Odyssey Space Research of Houston. Each company would receive a maximum payment of US$350,000 to assess the Altair lunar lander’s current design, recommend safety improvements, and propose partnerships between government and industry.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contracts for Design Study of Lunar Landing Craft,” news release C08-014, 17 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_C08014_Altair_BAA_Selection.html (accessed 13 January 2011).)
NASA announced that it had signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) for the implementation of the Joint Dark Energy Mission (JDEM). JDEM would measure the universe’s expansion with high precision, making it the first space- based observatory to study the nature of dark energy, specifically. Scientists hoped that understanding the properties of dark energy, which makes up approximately 70 percent of the total mass energy of the universe, would help them learn more about how galaxies form and gain their mass. NASA and DOE signed the MOU in accordance with recommendations of a 2007 study issued by the jointly funded Beyond Einstein Program Assessment Committee. The Committee had recommended that NASA should develop and launch JDEM first, out of the five proposed missions in NASA’s Beyond Einstein Program.
NASA announced that it had generated the highest-resolution topographical data of the lunar south pole to date, using the Goldstone Solar System Radar (GSSR) in the Mojave Desert in California. Scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had generated the data over six months during 2006, when the Moon’s axis was tilted at a relatively rare alignment, allowing for a good view of the pole. The GSSR had gathered the data using its 70-meter (230-foot) radar dish, which bounced 500-kilowatt radar signals, at 90-minute intervals, off an area of the lunar surface measuring 400 miles by 250 miles (644 kilometers by 402 kilometers). The resulting images showed a resolution of up to 20 meters (66 feet) per pixel, close enough to identify a feature the size of a house. They revealed that the topography of the area, located near Shackleton Crater, was extremely rugged, with craters 2.5-miles deep (4-kilometers deep) and mountains as high as Mt. McKinley. NASA scientists claimed that the newest data had more than 3 times the resolution and 10 times the vertical accuracy of the best mapping data acquired previously—data that the GSSR had captured during a 1997 study.(NASA, “NASA Views Landing Site Through Eyes of Future Moon Crew,” news release 08-071, 27 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/HQ_08071_goldstone_radar.html (accessed 28 December 2010); Kenneth Chang, “The Moon’s Craggiest Stretch Comes into Focus,” New York Times, 28 February 2008.)
A team of astronomers led by Alicia M. Soderberg announced in the journal Nature that they had made the first observations of a supernova in the process of exploding. Before this discovery, astronomers had only observed supernovas by means of their visible light, which had traveled at least a month before reaching Earth. However, by serendipity, Soderberg had viewed the supernova SN 2008D from the beginning of its explosion. She had been observing the star’s galaxy using NASA’s Swift X-ray Telescope, when she caught the initial explosion of SN 2008D, only visible in the x-ray wavelength. Soderberg had alerted the astronomy community of the event. Scientists had trained several telescopes, including NASA’s HST and NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, on SN 2008D. They had watched the star as it exploded over the following days. Scientists hoped that studying the initial x-ray burst of SN 2008D would teach them how to recognize and observe other supernovas in the future.(Dennis Overbye, “Scientists See Supernova in Action,” New York Times, 22 May 2008; Andrea Thompson, “Supernova Birth Observed for First Time,” Space.com, 22 May 2008, http://www.space.com/5371-supernova- birth-observed-time.html (accessed 16 March 2011); see also A. M. Soderberg et al., “An Extremely Luminous X- Ray Outburst at the Birth of a Supernova,” Nature 453, no. 7194 (22 May 2008): 469−474.)
NASA announced that it had selected Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX) for a contract with the Launch Services Program at NASA’s KSC. The indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity contract stipulated that NASA would be able to place orders for the launch services of the Falcon-1 and Falcon-9 launch vehicles through 30 June 2010, and that ordered launches could take place through December 2012. SpaceX would have to be able to launch payloads of 551 pounds (249.93 kilograms) or more into a circular orbit of 124 miles (199.56 kilometers) at an orbital inclination of 28.5°. Since 1999, NASA had awarded launch services contracts two times per year to multiple launch services providers. NASA allowed the companies awarded contracts to compete for missions in support of NASA’s Science Directorate, Space Operations Directorate, and Exploration Directorate. The contract’s potential value was between US$20,000 and US$1 billion, depending upon the number of launches NASA actually ordered.
NASA announced that it had renamed its GLAST telescope the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope, in honor of the early twentieth century scientist Enrico Fermi. Fermi had developed a theory to explain how cosmic particles could be accelerated to high speeds. His work formed the basis of the scientific study of gamma rays. NASA also announced that the telescope, which had launched on 11 June 2008, had successfully completed two months of instrument testing and calibration. Scientists hoped to use the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope to study gamma rays and to make new discoveries about black holes, pulsars, and the laws of physics.(NASA, “NASA Renames Observatory for Fermi, Reveals Entire Gamma-Ray Sky,” news release 08-214, 26 August 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08214_NASA_renames_GLAST.html (accessed 25 July 2011).)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics received testimony from S. Alan Stern, Associate Administrator for NASA’s Science Mission Directorate (SMD), and from a panel of research scientists, regarding the FY 2009 budget request for science programs. The president’s budget request had provided US$4.4 billion in direct funding for science programs, an amount representing 25 percent of NASA’s total budget request. Subcommittee Ranking Member Thomas C. Feeney (R-FL) called the budget “essentially flat,” but Stern testified that the budget accomplished all of the SMD’s objectives, including starting seven new missions, increasing research analysis, accelerating the suborbital program, beginning a lunar program, and initiating the Earth Science Decadal Survey.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “Witnesses: FY09 NASA Science Budget Makes Best of Limited Resources,” press release, 13 March 2008, http://science.house.gov/PressRoom/Item.aspx?ID=89# (accessed 19 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “NASA’s Science Programs: Fiscal Year 2009 Budget Request and Issues,” 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 13 March 2008, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg41067/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg41067.pdf (accessed 19 January 2011).)
European Space Agency (ESA) scientists announced that the Ulysses spacecraft had made its fourth pass over one of the Sun’s poles. Ulysses, engaged in an 18-year, ongoing joint mission operated by NASA and ESA, had completed an orbit of the Sun every 6.2 years. As it passed over the Sun’s poles, Ulysses occupied a unique position enabling the craft to sample solar winds, a vantage point unavailable to any other spacecraft or Earth-based observatory. This most recent flyby of the Sun’s north pole had occurred a week after scientists had observed the beginning of a new solar cycle. “This is a wonderful opportunity to examine the Sun’s north pole within a transition of cycles,” said Arik Posner, a NASA scientist for the Ulysses program.(European Space Agency (ESA), “Ulysses at the North Pole,” news release, 15 February 2008, http://www.esa.int/ esaSC/SEMLLN3MDAF_index_0.html (accessed 17 December 2010); Houston Chronicle, “Ulysses Flies over Sun’s North Pole,” 15 January 2008.)
NASA’s Human Research Program announced that it would fund nine ground-based studies on the effects of space radiation on human health. The selected study proposals, chosen from a pool of 60 submissions, would investigate issues such as damage to the central nervous system and risk predictions for cancer. Researchers from California, Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, New York, and Utah would split the total value of the US$13 million funding. The Human Research Program’s mission was to provide knowledge and technologies to improve human health during space exploration and to identify possible countermeasures for known problems.(NASA, “NASA Awards Space Radiobiology Research Grants,” news release 08-200, 5 August 2008, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08200_NRA_Space_Radiobiology.html (accessed 7 July 2011).)
NASA announced the cowinners of its 2007 Software of the Year Award: the Data-Parallel Line Relaxation (DPRL) software and the Adaptive Modified Gerberg-Saxton Phase Retrieval program. The DPRL, developed at NASA’s ARC, simulated the heat, pressures, and shear stresses that a spacecraft experiences while entering a planet’s atmosphere. Because it was more accurate than a test facility, the software allowed engineers to design optimally suited protective materials for spacecraft. NASA’s JPL had developed the Adaptive Modified Gerberg-Saxton Phase Retrieval program, which used algorithms to characterize possible errors in the imaging of a telescope’s scientific camera and then corrected the errors, improving the camera’s resolution and sensitivity. NASA had used the software in designing its James Webb Space Telescope, scheduled to launch in 2013. NASA’s Software of the Year Award recognized software inventions that had significantly improved NASA’s ability to explore space and had benefited science.
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing on NASA’s aeronautics R&D programs. Jaiwon Shin, NASA’s Associate Administrator of the Aeronautics Research Mission, was among the witnesses. The Subcommittee examined whether NASA’s aeronautics R&D programs were satisfactorily meeting the United States’ needs, especially regarding the impact of aviation on the environment, the development of aeronautics safety, and the development of the Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen). NextGen, a joint program of NASA, the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), and the Departments of Commerce, Defense, Homeland Security, and Transportation, proposed to overhaul the nation’s air transportation system. NextGen required an increase in applied R&D. However, to comply with the NASA Authorization Act of 2005, NASA had shifted its focus from applied R&D to fundamental research. Additionally, Congress had reduced NASA’s FY 2009 budget for the Aeronautics Research Program from FY 2008 levels by US$62.5 million. At the hearing, Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) expressed concern that NASA would not be able to maintain the relevancy of its aeronautics R&D in the face of decreased funding.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “Subcommittee Examines NASA’s Aeronautics R&D Program,” press release, 1 May 2008, http://sciencedems.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=2175 (accessed 16 June 2010); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “NASA Aeronautics Program Faces Challenges To Meet Air Travel Demands,” press release, 1 May 2008, http://gop.science.house.gov/Pressroom/Item.aspx?ID=100# (accessed 16 March 2001); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “NASA’s Aeronautics R&D Program: Status and Issues,” 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 1 May 2008, http://www.gpo.gov/ fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg41902/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg41902.pdf (accessed 16 March 2011).)
NASA’s Aeronautic Research Mission Directorate announced that it had awarded six research contracts, with a combined value of US$12.4 million, for the study of advanced concepts in subsonic and supersonic commercial transport. The 18-month studies would focus on the development of key technologies and advancements that would allow NASA to prepare innovative new commercial vehicles for public use sometime during 2030−2035. The studies were the first phase of a two-phase acquisition process; NASA would ask participants who successfully completed Phase 1 to submit proposals for Phase 2. The leaders of the six study teams were Boeing Company, GE Aviation, Lockheed Martin, MIT, and Northrop Grumman. Each team’s contract was valued at approximately US$2 million.(NASA, “NASA Awards Future Vehicle Aircraft Research Contracts,” news release C08-060, 6 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_C08-060_ARMD_contracts.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
NASA’s GRC announced that it had awarded a contract for the definition, design, fabrication, assembly, integration, test, and operation of spaceflight projects to ZIN Technologies of Middleburg Heights, Ohio. The cost-plus-incentive-fee, indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity contract covered a base period of three years, with two optional one-year extensions. The contract’s total value was US$94.5 million. The contractor would perform ISS flight investigations, particularly in the Exploration Technology Development Program and Human Research Program. The projects would include advanced technology development and demonstrations in power, energy storage and distribution, in-space propulsion, lunar surface and in-situ resource applications, space communications, and spacecraft fire safety.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contract for Space Flight Projects Systems Development and Operations,” news release C08-065, 10 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_C08065_GRC_ ZIN.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
NASA’s Langley Research Center (LaRC) announced that it had selected four companies to compete to supply its orders for developmental test hardware and aerospace model systems for use in ground tests, flight tests, space exploration, and spaceflight. NASA had designated the contracts, which would have a cumulative maximum value of US$30 million over five years, as awards for reliance-consolidated models and for centralization of design and fabrication practices at NASA’s Ames Research Center (ARC), Glenn Research Center (GRC), LaRC, and MSFC. The contract recipients were Advanced Technologies of Newport News, Virginia; ATK Micro Craft of Tullahoma, Tennessee; Tri Models of Huntington Beach, California; and Triumph Aerospace Systems−Newport News of Newport News, Virginia.(NASA, “NASA Selects Companies for Design and Fabrication,” news release C08-006, 23 January 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jan/HQ_C0806_Contract_model_systems_and_test_hardware.html (accessed 17 December 2010).)
NASA announced that the Constellation Program had awarded to 11 companies and a university contracts to conduct 180-day studies of the systems necessary for lunar outposts. NASA would use the studies’ recommendations to choose packaging options, to identify basic functions for lunar habitats, and to develop innovative avionics, computer software, and energy storage ideas, as well as equipment and techniques to assist in preparing for the outpost site. NASA had awarded contracts on six study topics. Oceaneering Space Systems of Houston would study alternative packaging options, and Honeywell International of Glendale, Arizona, would study avionics. ATK Space Systems Group of Brigham City, Utah, Battelle Memorial Institute of Columbus, Ohio, and Hamilton Sundstrand of Canoga Park, California, would study energy storage. The Boeing Company of Huntington Beach, California, ILC Dover of Frederica, Delaware, and University of Maryland, College Park, would study minimum habitation functions. Astrobotic Technology of Pittsburgh and Honeybee Robotic of New York would study methods for moving regoliths. The Charles Stark Draper Laboratory of Cambridge, Massachusetts, and United Space Alliance of Houston would study software. The maximum value of each individual award was US$250,000, and the total value of all contracts was approximately US$2 million.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contracts for Concepts of Lunar Surface Systems,” news release C08-48, 28 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_C0848_Lunar_surface_contract.html (accessed 18 May 2011).)
NASA announced that its Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) had passed the first round of flight-testing, after the craft successfully flew five times with its external door closed. The external door is a modification of the craft’s 747SP fuselage. The craft’s 10-foot (3-meter), 19-ton (38,000-pound or 17,237-kilogram) telescope would make observations through the door, collecting data that scientists would be able to use to study the birth and evolution of planets, stars, and galaxies. In addition to confirming SOFIA’s aerodynamics, control, handling, stability, and structural integrity, the tests also assessed the telescope’s tracking abilities. SOFIA, a joint partnership between NASA and the German Aerospace Center, was based at the Aircraft Operations Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, part of NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC).(NASA, “SOFIA Completes Closed-Door Test Flights,” news release 08-010, 16 January 2008, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2008/jan/HQ_08010_SOFIA_Flight_Series_End.html (accessed 7 December 2010).)
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract to Northrop Grumman Corporation’s Integrated Systems Division of San Diego, California, for services in support of its Northrop Grumman−manufactured Global Hawk aircraft. NASA’s DFRC planned to operate the two uncrewed aircraft. The indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity, sole-source contract, which would span from 6 August 2008 through 5 August 2013, carried a maximum value of US$25 million. The contract would include the operation of the aircraft, their ground control station, and related systems. Additionally, the contractor would supply technical assistance, including analysis, design support, operational and manufacturing support, simulation, and software development and engineering. NASA’s DFRC planned to use the high-altitude, long-endurance, long-distance aircraft in missions in support of Earth science research and the research of NASA’s SMD.(NASA, “NASA Awards Global Hawk Support Contract to Northrop Grumman,” news release C08-050, 7 August, 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_C08-050_GLOBAL_HAWK.html (accessed 7 July 2011).)
