NASA informed Marshall Space Flight Center that management of the Agena B vehicle system would be retained at Marshall Space Flight Center.
NASA announced that a two-stage Saturn C-l will be used for the first 10 research and development flights.
USAF announced expansion of gaseous physics research activities with the construction of a $636,000 laboratory at L. G. Hanscom Field, Bedford, Mass., as a part of the Cambridge Research Laboratory.
Inhouse procurement policies and practices of NASA reviewed by headquarters and field personnel in conference at Lewis Research Center.
NASA announced first success in immediate detection in real time of radar signals off planet Venus by Jet Propulsion Laboratory Goldstone, as part of 2-month research program.
Long duration static test of the S-I stage (SA-2 vehicle) occurred at Marshall Space Flight Center, for a period of 120 seconds.
Lewis Research Center scientists, G. B. Brown and E. E. Callighan, reported at 1961 International Conference on High Magnetic Fields at MIT, that NASA was constructing a magnetic shield of superconducting alloys for future manned spacecraft.
Last of second series of static firings of Saturn completed at Marshall Space Flight Center for 110 seconds, approximately full duration.
NASA Launch Operations Directorate announced establishment of Offices of Financial Management and of Procurement and Contracts to support NASA activities at Cape Canaveral, previously done by Marshall Space Flight Center.
Reported from Stowe, Vt., that unofficial American-Soviet discussions on cooperative space exploration were near agreement, and that internationalized status for space similar to that achieved by treaty for the continent of Antarctica was under consideration. Delegations included seven members of President Kennedy’s Science Advisory Committee and six members of the ruling body of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. The Stowe Conference was sponsored by the National Academy of Arts and Sciences of Boston, with costs defrayed by the Ford Foundation.
Anniversary of the first flight of the USAF-USN-NASA X-15 powered with the XLR-99 engine (15 flights total to date). A $225 million research program under NASA management, test data indicated that X-15 would exceed its design limits by 100 percent in altitude and 17 percent in speed. The X-15 had already pushed near its design altitude limit of 250,000 feet (reached 217,000 feet October 11, 1961) and passed its maximum design speed of mach 6 (reached mach 6.04 November 9, 1961).
NASA’s Incentive Awards Committee determined that Dr. Henry J. E. Reid, Director Emeritus of the Langley Research Center, would receive NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal.
Ambassador Adlai Stevenson introduced a resolution before the U.N.’s Political Committee for a U.N. space program guided by four considerations: (1) Application of the principles of international law to outer space and celestial bodies to ensure against sovereignty claims in space; (2) making the U.N. a clearinghouse for use of outer space, including information on satellite launchings and cooperation for peaceful use of outer space; (3) international cooperation on weather satellite information; (4) international cooperation on communications satellites. Ambassador Stevenson said: “There is a right way and a wrong way to get on with the business of space exploration. In our judgment, the wrong way is to allow the march of science to become a runaway race into the unknown. “The right way is to make it an ordered, peaceful and cooperative and constructive forward march under the aegis of the United Nations.”
NASA Aerobee-Hi successfully reached 96 miles above Wallops Station in test of behavior of liquid hydrogen in zero gravity for Lewis Research Center hydrogen propulsion development.
Senate Government Operations Subcommittee on National Policy Machinery released report on “Science Organization and the President’s Office.” This study recommended that a new Office of Science and Technology be created in the Executive Office of the President.
New wind tunnel became operational at Ames Research Center, capable of research on reentry problems at speeds of mach 7.5, 10, and 15.
NASA’s Space Task Group, charged with carrying out Project Mercury and other manned space flight programs, officially became a separate NASA field element.
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory reported that Earth is a slightly irregular ellipsoid according to new calculations.
Joint F A A - DOD--NASA “Commercial Supersonic Transport Aircraft Report,” prepared by a joint task force, said that the development of a commercial transport airplane to fly three times the speed of sound tmach 3) was feasible and could be developed by 1970-71.
NASA selected Pearl River site in southwestern Mississippi, 35 miles from the Michoud plant in New Orleans, for static test facility for Saturn and Nova-class vehicles, completed facility to operate under direction of Marshall Space Flight Center.
Radar tracking of planet Venus for 7 weeks by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists had proved “astronomical yardstick” of 93,498,125 miles as the distance between the Earth and the Sun (within 1,000 miles of error).
Draft text of program of the Soviet Communist Party to be presented to its 22d Congress in October was released in English by Tass, official Soviet press agency. This new program, the first proposed since the one submitted by Lenin and adopted in 1919, made no direct or indirect reference to space exploration. On the role of science, it stated: “The party will do everything to enhance the role of science in the building of Communist society, it will encourage research to discover new possibilities for the development of the productive forces, and the rapid and extensive application of the latest scientific and technical achievements, a decisive advancement in experimental work, including research directly at enterprises, and the efficient organization of scientific and technical information and of the whole system of studying and disseminating progressive Soviet and foreign methods. Science will itself in full measure become a productive force * * *.”
DOD revised its patent policy on space research and development contracts in accordance with present NASA patent provisions, such provisions already having been written into space communications contracts (i.e., Government retains royalty-free exclusive title to patents developed under contract).
Soviet astronomers claimed to have discovered the presence of oxygen in the atmosphere of Venus. Dr. Brian Warner of the London Observatory correlated and reinterpreted spectrographic data gathered earlier by Soviet Astronomer Nikolai Kozyrev.
NAA delivered X-15 No. 2 with XLR-99 engine to NASA for the initiation of the NASA flight research program.
Director of Marshall Space Flight Center directed that further engineering work on Saturn C-2 configuration would be discontinued, and that efforts would be applied to clarification of the Saturn C-3 and Nova concepts.
Construction of dynamic test stand for Saturn completed at Marshall Space Flight Center.
Ablation model test with electric arc attained 4,000° F. for 105 seconds at Langley Research Center, one of a series of tests begun in September 1960.
NASA announced accelerated recruiting of qualified scientists and engineers at its field centers to fill anticipated manpower requirements in the expanded space exploration program. During 1960 NASA interviewed 3,000 persons on 100 college campuses.
NASA and the Argentine Comision Nacional de Investigaciones Espaciales signed a memorandum of understanding for a cooperative space science research program using sounding rockets.
Celestial simulator” at Jet Propulsion Laboratory in final checkout, an “instant universe” chamber which can duplicate white light and infrared point sources of solar system bodies likely to be used for navigation and attitude control of spacecraft.
President Eisenhower in his state of the Union address to Congress reviewed U.S. progress in space exploration, stating, “These achievements unquestionably make us pre-eminent in space exploration for the betterment of mankind.”
Wind tunnel testing of model of the first Saturn (SA-1) began at Arnold Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn.
Saturn static firing of 44.17 seconds’ duration to test-fire detection system at engine position No. 2 was successful, the second SA-1 flight qualification test at Marshall Space Flight Center.
USAF completed Titan I research and development test flight program of 40 launches at the Atlantic Missile Range; of the 40 launches 4 had been failures.
World altitude record for aircraft of 113,891 feet (34,714 meters) flown by G. Mussolov in Soviet E-66A.
Dr. Sydney Chapman of the British Royal Observatory reported at Langley Research Center-National Research Founda-tion-Virginia Polytechnic Institute conference that evidence suggested existence of a third radiation belt surrounding the Earth—except for areas above the poles—at altitudes between 20,000	and 28,000 miles.
Announced that the largest quartz lens ever ground had been completed by Bausch & Lomb for use in NASA’s optical solar simulation system at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The lens is 36 inches in diameter, 6 inches thick at the center, and weighs 350 pounds.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that construction was underway on the first large space simulator in the United States capable of testing full-scale spacecraft of the Ranger and Mariner classes with the three primary space effects—solar radiation, cold space heat sink, and a high vacuum equivalent to about one part in a billion (1:1,000,000,000) of the atmospheric pressure on the Earth.
In a speech at Naval Research Laboratory, Harold Brown, Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said Government labs would hereafter be the “primary means” for carrying out military weapon programs; that DOD would seek an increase in the number of supergrade scientific positions and would ask for the same top pay for scientists as NASA has; that labs would be given increased status in the chain of command; and that lab directors will be given funds they can spend for research without prior approval.
NASA Ames Research Center measured the intensity of radiation from the hot gas over the nose of a model flying through the air at 42,300 feet per second. This speed was in excess of parabolic atmospheric entry speed and the data are significant in relation to development of lunar spacecraft. The speed, 11,100 feet per second higher than maximum air speed obtained previously, was achieved by firing the model from a light-gas gun into a highspeed jet of air flowing in the opposite direction from a shock-driven wind tunnel.
NASA Langley Research Center awarded contract to Marquardt Corp. to increase structural wind tunnel testing temperature from 600° to 2,000° F.
Paul F. Bikle set world glider altitude record of 46,267 feet in Schweizer 1-23-E sailplane, beating record of 42,100 feet set by W. S. Ivans in 1950. Bikle is Director of NASA Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif., which is conducting the X-15 flight research program.
Dr. George N. Constan of Marshall Space Flight Center named as acting manager of the new NASA Saturn fabrication plant near New Orleans by Director von Braun of Marshall Space Flight Center.
Scientists and engineers of Langley Research Center and the Space Task Group were guests of the Peninsula Chamber of Commerce honoring the 46 years of NACA and NASA on the Virginia Peninsula.
Saturn H-l engine drop-tested into salt water at Cape Canaveral, then returned to Marshall Space Flight Center for inspecting, cleaning, and static firing.
NASA announced that top speed of X-15 on Major White’s record flight was revised to 4,093 miles per hour (mach 6.04), reached at 95,800 feet. (White also held altitude record of 217,000	feet (41 miles), flown on October 11).
USAF Aerobee-Hi with Cambridge Research Laboratory payload designed to trap space dust, reached 101 miles over White Sands Missile Range.
Navy-sponsored Hypersonic Propulsion Research Laboratory, for simulating flights at speeds up to mach 10, was opened at Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins University.
NASA revealed it had selected 12 women airplane pilots to undergo tests to determine space flight research capability.
NASA directed Marshall Space Flight Center to enter contract negotiations with contractors for procurement of five operational Atlas-Centaur vehicles. These launchings were planned to begin in second quarter of 1964.
Preproposal conference on the contract for design, research, development, fabrication, and testing of the reactor-in-flight-test (Rift) vehicle was held at Marshall Space Flight Center. This vehicle would test-fly the Nerva nuclear engine now under development. Twenty-nine firms were invited to attend this preliminary conference at which they were furnished general information on the project. Interested firms would then have 30 days to file information on their capabilities and experience. Then a smaller number of firms would be invited to submit detailed bids. Purpose of the two-step evaluation was to enable firms not in a competitive position to avoid the expense of entering detailed proposals.
Hypersonic wind tunnel at Douglas Aircraft became operational at El Segundo, reportedly the largest industry-owned tunnel in the United States (36 inches long, 6-inch diameter, capable of mach 10).
Eight-engine static test of Saturn SA-T2 of 29.9 seconds’ duration successful at Marshall Space Flight Center.
Reuters reported that the United States pays about $140 per hour for use of the Jodrell Bank Observatory in England, while the U.S.S.R. pays nothing. Sir Bernard Lovell explained that “the Americans occupy the telescope for long periods, where the Russians scarcely use it.”
Meeting to examine the modification of C -IX] aircraft for carrying Saturn S-IV stages was held at NASA Langley Research Center.
In-house testing of Ranger I spacecraft completed at Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
First U.S. showing of films of Vostok II space flight by Gherman Titov, before the Maryland Academy of Sciences in Baltimore, was canceled at the last minute by a Soviet Embassy official. Film had been shown to press correspondents in Moscow on October 9.
Soviet press conference at Soviet Academy of Sciences in Moscow, at which Biochemist N. M. Sisakian announced that all six of Strelka’s pups, on exhibit, were developing normally: “Our research on these animals, just completed, has proved that no dangerous consequences to the functioning of their organs have stemmed from the space flight. This problem has an important bearing on our preparations for man’s orbiting.”
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded contract to Douglas and Chance Vought to study launching manned exploratory expedition into lunar and interplanetary space from Earth orbits.
Centaur vehicle C-l was tested and accepted by Marshall Space Flight Center.
Eberhardt Rechtin, of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, questioned the Soviet calculations on the rotation speed of the planet Venus and the astronomical unit, and suggested that the Soviet scientists may have been influenced by earlier MIT studies (1958). Completion of extensive radar studies of Venus by Jet Propulsion Laboratory Goldstone, he submitted, provided more accurate information. The differing figures as reported are— U.S.S.R (1961): 9 to 11 days’ rotation—A.U. 92,812,797 miles. Jet Propulsion Laboratory (1961): About 225 days’ rotation—A.U. 92,956,000 miles.
Reported that ONR-supported radio observatory at Cal Tech’s Owens Valley, Calif., had expanded the radius of the observable universe 27 times (36 sextillion miles, the distance traveled by light at a speed of about 186,000 miles a second in 6 billion years).
Mercury-Redstone 6 was static tested for 30 seconds at Marshall Space Flight Center to ensure satisfactory operation of the turbopump assembly.
NASA announced consolidation of nuclear-electric propulsion program at Lewis Research Center by transfer of the Marshall Space Flight Center Research Projects Division under Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger to Lewis within 3 months.
Legislature of the State of Alabama considered investment of $3 million in establishing a Space Research Institute at Huntsville as a joint University of Alabama and Auburn University center.
Dr. Arthur Rudolph was appointed Assistant Director of Systems Engineering in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight. Operating out of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. Rudolph would serve as liaison between vehicle development at Marshall and the manned space flight program at the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston.
First four U.S. Nike-Cajun rockets arrived in Norway for use in research program off Andoeya Island early next year.
Charles J. Dolan named Associate Director of NASA’s Langley Research Center. He had been associated with the NASA Space Task Group since its formation at Langley in November 1958.
National Meteorite Symposium held at Arizona State University, Tempe, Ariz.
House Science and Astronautics Committee released interim report on “Research and Development in Aeronautics,” which concluded that “the welfare of the Nation, in both its economic and security aspects, is dependent in no small degree on continuing aeronautical research of high caliber.”
NASA awarded contract to Pratt & Whitney for development of space radiators and condensors for the Lewis Research Center.
Dr. Henry J. E. Reid, senior staff associate and former Director of the Langley Research Center, retired after over four decades of Government service. He began as a junior engineer at Langley in April 1921, became Director in 1926, in which capacity he served for 34 years.
Tiny particle of matter from another galaxy hit upper atmosphere of the Earth over New Mexico at a speed close to that of light and split with great force. Resultant particle shower numbered between 20 and 40 billion pieces, according to scintillation counters at the Volcano Ranch Cosmic Ray Research Center near Albuquerque, N. Mex.
President-elect Kennedy announced that Jerome B. Wiesner of MIT would be special assistant to the President for science and technology.
First manned balloon launched from and landed back aboard a naval vessel, a Stratolab High test flight over U.S.S. Antietam in the Gulf of Mexico (6,000 feet).
Final test flight of USAF Atlas D traveled 5,000 miles to target down Atlantic Missile Range, representing 35 successes, 8 partials, and 6 failures in 49 test launchings for D model.
Two X-15 test pilots, USAF’s Maj. Robert M. White and NASA’s Joseph A. Walker, were jointly awarded the 1960 Iven C. Kincheloe Memorial Award as the Nation’s outstanding test pilots; award of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots September SO: NASA received an additional $10 million for salaries in a supplemental appropriation bill approved by Congress, enough to hire an additional 1,250 persons. During September: National Bureau of Standards and the Institutd Geofisico de Huancago of Peru initiated construction of the Jucamarca Observatory, a 6-million-watt pulse transmitter and a 22-acre antenna with 9,216 crossed dipoles mounted above a reflecting screen. Located 17 miles east of Lima, Peru, the Observatory will be used for ground-based exploration of the upper atmosphere and space.
Construction contract for Saturn umbilical tower (Launch Complex 34, Cape Canaveral) was awarded by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to Consolidated Steel and Ets-Hokin-Galvin. Cost of the 240-ft. steel tower was estimated at $504,900.
Soviet scientist N. Varvarov was reported to have stated U.S.S.R. program to orbit one-man spacecraft had been completed with flights of vostok iii and vostok iv. During October: In letter report to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden disclosed problems in the Centaur launch vehicle program: Atlas-Centaur capability to carry heavy payloads under severe wind conditions must be studied in greater detail; quality of fabrication must be improved to reach desired level of quality control; guidance system requires further development to achieve necessary accuracy and reliability; tank fabrication requires better welding techniques; Atlas-Centaur inflight separation requires further analysis; nose cone and insulation panels must be further tested to prove their aerodynamic-load resistance. Report said about $100 million would be spent on Centaur in FY 1963 to accelerate development, nasa Lewis Research Center would study use of Centaur in combination with Titan II, Saturn C-l, and Saturn C-lB boosters.
nasa Ames Research Center announced its high-altitude radiationresearch balloon was flying at 135,000-ft. altitude over eastern Manitoba and that the balloon’s payload capsules containing two monkeys, four hamsters, and instrumentation would be released early August 12.
Col. Daniel McKee, Project Gemini director in nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, reported as saying that two-man Gemini spacecraft might be used for the next four or five years, and describing it as “a reliable and flexible spacecraft which has a lot of potential for scientific investigations of space. If additional applications develop, it would be used for various purposes.” At present, primary goal of Project Gemini is one-week-long, two-man mission with testing of orbital rendezvous operation.
nasa radiation-research balloon released biological payload near Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, after 130,500-ft.-high, 51-hour flight from Goose Bay, Labrador. Two monkeys survived the flight in good condition, but four hamsters could not survive the day-long recovery operation in the Canadian wilderness; fate of the flour beetles was not yet known. The animals and insects were flown to the University of California at Berkeley for scientific study. This was the second in a series of four balloon experiments conducted by nasa Ames Research Center.
General Electric announced that control system for first Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (oao) had successfully completed its first simulated space flight test.
usaf Titan II icbm launched from amr on a planned 5,000-mi. test flight, the missile falling short of its target but achieving most of its test objectives;.
Ryan project engineer Willis F. Everest was slightly injured in crash of Ryan Flexwing aircraft undergoing flight-test research at Langley Research Center (LaRc). 40-ft.-wingspan aircraft based on the Rogallo concept had completed aerodynamic tests in Langley Research Center’s full-scale wind tunnel and was to be flight tested by LaRc and the Army Transportation Research and Engineering Command.
Balloonist Don Piccard set new altitude record in ascent of 17,000 ft. during two-hr. and two-min. balloon flight from Sioux City to Kennebec, Iowa.
nasa Flight Research Center announced it had received A-5A (A3J) aircraft from usn for use in its supersonic transport research. The “Vigilante” would be used primarily in study of problems in terminal area of air-traffic control operations. Working closely with faa officials, frc engineers would plan and conduct supersonic flights of Vigilante on assigned Federal airways and into high-air-traffic-density areas; the flights would provide basis for formulation of control plans necessary for safe operation of future commercial supersonic aircraft.
nasa announced plans to attempt to launch 440-lb. Orbiting Solar Observatory (Oso) containing 13 experiments, within a week.
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s selection of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. to establish method of assessing hazard potential of operational nuclear vehicle (Saturn C-5/Nerva) was reported. Three-phase study would include: (1) study of influence of impact delay time on hazard magnitude at impact in case of flight failure; (2) study of effect of vehicle trajectory on flight hazards; and (3) study to produce integrated hazards evaluation technique.
nasa Ames Research Center said that its high-altitude, radiationresearch balloon with cargo of four hamsters and two monkeys had been lost in a storm over Manitoba. The balloon was last seen nearing the end of its 1,900-mi. flight as it entered a storm over God’s Lake, in northeastern Manitoba. This was the third in Ames’ series of balloon flights and the first loss of payload.
Army Nike-Zeus test flight from Point Mugu, Calif., a partial success in that “missile accepted and correctly executed control commands transmitted from a ground gllidance center,” although third stage did not fire.
Research Institute for Advanced Study of the Martin Company was awarded contracts by nasa, afosr, and one for basic research in nonlinear mathematics, an area relating to problems in space flight, long-range communications, and automation.
Fourth official anniversary of nasa, charged by the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to organize and conduct U.S. space exploration for peaceful purposes. No new agency of the Executive Branch of the Federal Government was created by the transfer of so many units and programs of other departments or agencies as nasa.
dod announced that it was consolidating all military basic research overseas. The first step would be the opening of a Defense Research Office in Rio de Janiero, Brazil, on July 1, 1962, to coordinate the military basic research program throughout Latin America, nsf and nih would open offices in the same building for their independent programs, with all efforts coordinated by the State Department.	_
National Science Foundation announced FY 1963 expenditures for Government-sponsored research and development would total $14.7 billion, 31% higher than last fiscal year. 95% of the estimated total would be spent by four agencies—nasa, DOD, AEC, HEW.
President Kennedy nominated Dr. J. Herbert Holloman to the new post of Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology. Dr. Holloman was general manager of the General Engineering Laboratory of GE in Schenectady, N.Y.
British scientists protested U.S. plans to explode “rainbow” bombs 500 miles above the Pacific test area (called “rainbow” bombs because high-altitude nuclear explosions light up the sky thousands of miles away). Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Radio Observatory, Martin Ryle, radio-astronomer, and Sir Mark Oliphant, Australian nuclear physicist, all protested the “probable” distortion of the Van Allen radiation belt by the forthcoming U.S. tests.
President Kennedy toured nasa’s Manned Space Center, after speaking at Rice University, Houston, where he said: “. . . Man, in his quest for knowledge and progress, is determined and cannot be deterred. The exploration of space will go ahead, whether we join in it or not, and it is one of the great adventures of all time, and no nation which expects to be the leader of other nations can expect to stay behind in this race for space. “Those who came before us made certain that this country rode the first waves of the industrial revolutions, the first waves of modem invention, and the first wave of nuclear power, and this generation does not intend to founder in the backwash of the coming age of space. “We mean to be a part of it. We mean to lead it, for the eyes of the world now look into space, to the moon and to the planets beyond, and we have vowed that we shall not see it governed by a hostile flag of conquest, but by a banner of freedom and peace. “We have vowed that we shall not see space filled with weapons of mass destruction, but with instruments of knowledge and understanding. “Yet the vows of this Nation can only be fulfilled if we in this Nation are first, and, therefore, we intend to be first. In short, our leadership in science and in industry, our hopes for peace and security, our obligations to ourselves as well as others, all require us to make this effort, to solve these mysteries, to solve them for the good of all men, and to become the world’s leading spacefaring nation. “We sail on this new sea because there is new knowledge to be gained, and new rights to be won, and they must be won and used for the progress of all people. For space science, like nuclear science and all technology, has no conscience of its own. “Whether it wlli become a force for good or lli depends on man, and only if the United States occupies a position of preeminence can we help decide whether this new ocean wlli be a sea of peace or a new, terrifying theater of war. “I do not say that we should or wlli go unprotected against the hostile misuse of space any more than we go unprotected against the hostile land or sea, but I do say that space can be explored and mastered without feeding the fires of war, without repeating the mistakes that man has made in extending his writ around this globe of ours. “There is no strife, no prejudice, no national conflict in outer space as yet. Its hazards are hostile to us all. Its conquest deserves the best of all mankind, and its opportunity for peaceful cooperation may never come again......... “We choose to go to the moon ... in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard, because that goal wlli serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills, because that challenge is one that we are willing to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone, and one which we intend to win, and the others, too. “It is for these reasons that I regard the decision last year to shift our efforts in space from low to high gear as among the most important decisions that wlli be made during my incumbency in the office of the Presidency. . . . “We have had our failures, but so have others, even if they do not admit them. And they may be less public. “To be sure, we are behind, and will be behind for some time in manned space flight. But we do not intend to stay behind. In this decade we shall make up and move ahead. . . .” September 12: nasa announced it would launch a special satellite before the end of the year to “obtain information on possible effects of radiation on future statellites and to give the world’s scientific community additional data on the artificial environment created by the [radiation] belt.” The 100-lb. satellite would be launched from Cape Canaveral into an elliptical orbit ranging from about 170-mi. perigee to 10,350-mi. apogee.
nasa Flight Research Center announced modifications to X-15 (No. 1) had been completed, the modifications providing window and camera in fuselage for Follow-On Program of high-altitude research. Camera with window would be used to study optical degradation resulting from observations through hypersonic boundary layers and shock waves. This project would begin in early 1963 and would include first five flights of the 35 flights planned in X-15 Follow-On-Program, a two-year program sponsored by nasa and usaf.
President Kennedy sent to Congress a reorganization plan that would establish an Office of Science and Technology within the White House staff. Its director would advise and assist the President on (1) major science policies and programs in the Federal government; (2) assessment of scientific and technical developments for effect on national policies; (3) review, integration, and coordination of major Federal science activities; (4) ensuring “good and close relations” with Nation’s scientists and engineers. President said this would leave the National Science Foundation free to concentrate on fostering basic research and science education.
Special hand tools for use in zero-gravity conditions were tested by personnel of the Manned Spacecraft and the Marshall Space Flight Centers. Experiments were conducted in simulated space environment to try out non-torque hand tools drawn from a number of industrial sources.
National Science Foundation reported that Congress had appropriated $10.8 billion for research and development in FY 62, which included $3 billion for research, $6.7 billion for development, $1 billion for facilities, and $100 million for information. nasa spent $1.4 billion, the dod $6.2 billion.
Univ. of Illinois radiotelescope at Vermilion River Observatory was dedicated. The radiotelescope, world’s largest, included 400' x 600' x 65' parabolic reflector. Prof. George W. Swenson, Jr., Univ. of Illinois project engineer for the observatory, said radiotelescope’s first job wollid be to map Milky Way. The $871,650 telescope was financed mainly with grants from Office of Naval Research (onr), with supplemental grants from National Science Foundation (nsf) and Univ. of Illinois. _	_
Third Saturn launch vehicle (SA-3) arrived at Cape Canaveral after 10-day trip by barge from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. Flight test was scheduled for November.
Army Signal Research and Development Laboratory at Fort Monmouth announced development of a super-powered laser with a peak power of more than 3 million watts. The laser (light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation) is 300 times as powerful as lasers in general laboratory use. It has potential in the fields of communications, range-finding, space vehicle guidance and special-purpose illumination.
U.S. Senate passed S. 2771 to establish a Commission on Science and Technology, which wollid coordinate Government research and development programs with those of business and industry and wollid establish coordinated systems of information storage and retrieval.
Rift (Reactor-in-Flight-Test) bidders conference held at Marshall Space Flight Center.
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, told Aircraft Industries Association Quality Control Committee in Houston that designs, procedures, and schedules in manned space flight program had to be flexible in order to absorb continual changes of rapidly advancing technology. Emphasizing importance of equipment malfunctions that occur during systems development or preflight preparations, Dr. Gilruth said: “In manned flight, we cannot afford to regard any of these equipment malfunctions as a ‘random’ failure. We must regard every malfunction and, in fact, every observed peculiarity in the behavior of a system, as an important warning of potential disaster. Only when the cause is thoroughly understood, and a change to eliminate it has been made, can we proceed with the flight program.... “Rapid corrective response to malfunctions throughout system development and preflight preparations is a critically important requirement of our programs if we are to meet schedules with hardware that is fit to fly. . . .”
Cosmonaut Nikolayev, by 10:00 PM Moscow time, had orbited the earth 40 times and had passed the million-mile mark in vostok iii. At this time, his companion Cosmonaut Popovich in vostok iv completed 24 orbits of the earth and logged 621,000 miles of space flight. Sohio Research Center calculated the two spacecraft were separated by 1,793 mi. at about 8:00 PM est.
Czech scientist Adeneck Dobrichovsky, writing in a Prague technical journal, said the U.S.S.R. would launch a four-man space observatory for two-month orbit in 1965-66.
In Voice of America broadcast, Dr. Christian J. Lambertsen of the University of Pennsylvania said that there is an increasing recognition of the role man can play in space exploration because “there are aspects of exploration which no machine yet conceived can carry out.” He pointed out that “the only computer capable of all functions such as remembering, recognizing, learning, thinking, reasoning, judging, integrating, reacting, communicating, and logically altering a previously programmed sequence of events is man himself.” He then reviewed the medicophysio-logical factors to be overcome for manned space flight, and he warned that “even the practicability of truly extended flight outside the earth’s atmosphere is not yet assured.”
nasa Langley Research Center announced contract with SpaceGeneral Corp. for the development of an inflatable paraglider to measure micrometeroid flux in the lower regions of space up to 700,000	feet. Inflatable Micrometeroid Paraglider (imp) will test new sensor system consisting of alternate layers of mylar and aluminum and will determine suitability of inflatable re-entry paraglider.
usaf prepared proposed FY 1964 budget requesting $23.5 billion, including funds for construction of eight RS-70 reconnaissance bombers and for expanded development of space weapons. Also considered in budget preparation was long-range proposal to use nasa’s Gemini two-man spacecraft as a stepping stone toward developing military manned space flight capability.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, stated in press interview that the recently-created radiation belt had not altered plans for Project Mercury manned flight MA-8. “We don’t have enough data on this. We are looking at this thing, but until we have looked at it a lot more completely, I would not like to see us change our. plans.”
nasa awarded contract to Kollsman Instrument Division for 38inch-diameter primary mirror in the space telescope to be used in the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao).
Panel of the Federal Council for Science and Technology, headed by Allen V. Astin, submitted report to White House. Report said that Federal laboratories are in imminent danger of losing their best scientists and engineers because present salary scales are not competitive. In a memorandum to Federal department and agency heads, President Kennedy stated that the Administration’s proposal for pay increases met one of the recommendations of the panel’s report: “With the increasing importance of science and technology in developing our mllitary defense, in achieving our foreign policy objectives, and in sustaining the health and welfare of every citizen, the Federal Government must attract and retain its share of talented scientists and engineers at all levels.”
nasa Ames Research Center established Space Sciences Div. to be headed by Dr. Charles P. Sonett. New division will conduct research in the areas of geophysics, interplanetary and planetary physics, planetary sciences, astronomy, and astrophysics.
National Geographic Society and Lowell Observatory announced preparation of an atlas, “A Photographic Study of the Brighter Planets,” containing “the most detailed and revealing pictures obtained since telescopes were perfected especially for observing the planets rather than the distant stars.”
Dr. Bernard Lubarsky of nasa’s Lewis Research Center named one of Ten Outstanding Young Men in the Federal Government for 1961 to receive Arthur S. Flemming Awards.
New York Times reported a 300-ft.-diameter radiotelescope at National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va., had recently detected in one day as many radio signals from Jupiter as smaller instruments have recorded in a month. Source of Jupiter’s long-wave radio signals was still unresolved.
Nova iaunch facilities study contract was awarded to Martin-Marietta Corp., Denver, by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The study assumes Nova will be launched from Cape Canaveral.
In the Third International Space Science Symposium sponsored by cospar, Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists W. K. Victor and Robertson Stevens reported that radar soundings of Venus suggest that its surface material and roughness are comparable to that of the earth. Radar probes of Venus have demonstrated that uhf signals can be used for space communications over distances of 50-75 mlliion miles.
nasa announced $240,000 grant to Smithsonian Astro-physical Observatory for setting up 16-station “prairie network” with automatic cameras to photograph bright meteors over seven midwestern states and to enable prompt recovery of meteorites. Project would enable scientists to study chemical and organic structures of meteorites before contamination on the surface of the earth.
nas Committee on Atmospheric Sciences submitted three-volume report on “The Atmospheric Sciences, 1961-70” to Dr. Jerome Wiesner, Special Assistant for Science and Technology to the President. Prepared under Dr. Sverre Petterssen of the University of Chicago and Dr. C. Gordon Little of the National Bureau of Standards, the report recommended: (1) a tripled funding of scientific research in the atmospheric sciences over the next 10 years; (2) university output of doctorates in the atmospheric sciences be increased by a factor of at least four or five; (3) universities must broaden and strengthen their programs to become national centers of academic and scientific excellence; and (4) Government research agencies must develop more rigorous research and educational programs.
Plans of a non-profit Washington Planetarium and Space Center Corp. were reported at the National Capital Planning Commission by Father Francis J. Heyden, S.J., of Georgetown University Observatory. They called for the construction of a $1.5 million, 85-foot-diameter dome on Daingerfield Island, south of the Washington National Airport. The planetarium would “provide the public with a much needed space education facility” and would be operated by the National Park Service.
nasa Flight Research Center released photographs of “lifting body” experimental wingless craft to test landing techniques in gliding from altitudes as high as 5,000 ft. The 24-ft.-by-13-ft. craft would begin testing early in 1963, first with truck to tow it aloft and later with airplane as towing vehicle. Made mostly of plywood, the 500-lb. craft suggests shape of missile nose cone cut in half lengthwise.
Australian National Observatory announced that it would install 40-inch telescope on top of Sidney Smith Mountain at Coona-barabran, New South Wales, one which would have three times the efficiency of its 74-inch telescope at Mount Stromlo near Canberra.
usaf Minuteman icbm launched from silo at Cape Canaveral in 3,600-mile test flight.
General Mills launched balloon, trailing 315-ft.-long reflectorized polyethelene tube in test to improve long-range communications, from GM’s research center at New Brighton, Minn. The cylinder, 23 ft. in diameter, was designed as a relay device to receive commercial TV signals from wkbt-tv, La Crosse, Wise., and relay them 260 mi. to usaf base, Wadena, Minn.
First nasa balloon carrying bioscience payload of two rhesus monkeys and four hamsters traveled faster and higher than planned after launch from Goose Bay, Laborador, requiring alternate plan for early jettisoning to effect daylight recovery. Payload was recovered 45 miles north of Prince Albert in Saskatchewan, all animals reported dead upon recovery. Conducted by Ames Research Center Life Science Laboratory, experiment was designed to check primary cosmic radiation.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists disclosed they were conducting radar exploration of Venus. Data obtained by the experiment, continuing from October 1 for about three months, would be compared with those obtained by mariner ii spacecraft when it flies in vicinity of Venus.
W. Randolph Lovelace II, of Lovelace Foundation for Medical Education and Research, told 200 space experts from 14 countries that scientists would have to volunteer for space flight teams. “It takes four years of college plus three years or more of further study to reach the doctor of philosophy level. It is a bit too much to ask our test pilots to undergo this further training.” He said that in projects such as two-man Gemini a scientist could make space flights in company of trained flier. Lovelace was addressing an international symposium on environmental problems of man in space, held in Paris.
Announced that International Association Machinist workers and Lockheed Corp. had agreed to extend their contract indefinitely, thus averting threat of strike in this aerospace industry.
Soviet Cosmonauts Nikolayev (vostok iii) and Popovich (vostok iv) continued to orbit the earth, their flight paths reported by Sohio Research Center as ranging from 1,382 mi. to 1,793 mi. apart. Radio Moscow reported the cosmonauts were maintaining radio contact with earth and between themselves. By 4:10 PM Moscow time vostok iii completed 52 orbits; vostok iv, 36 orbits. Soviet government remained silent on plans to land the pair. Cosmonaut Popovich, orbiting the earth in vostok iv, passed the mlliion-mile mark shortly after retiring, about 9:00 PM Moscow time.
25-ft. space environmental simulator used for the first time at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, in beginning of 3-week test of Mariner spacecraft designed for a Venus probe.
X-14A vtol aircraft was being used in research for lunar-landing maneuvers at nasa Ames Research Center, it was reported. X-14A pilot Fred J. Drinkwater, III, said that a “great similarity exists between the flight control system of our [plane] and that proposed for a lunar craft. This makes the X-14A a logical vehicle to investigate problem areas connected with the let-down and landing phases of the lunar mission.”
Drew Pearson repeated rumors previously published in Ms column that 5 Soviet cosmonauts may have been killed in manned space flight attempts.
Dr. Eberhard Rees, Deputy Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was quoted as stating that Soviet dual-flights vostok iii and iv came “six months to a year” earlier than he had expected.
Maj. Gen. O. J. Ritland (usaf), formerly Commander of afsc’s Space Systems Division, was named Deputy to the Commander, afsc, for Manned Space Flight. Gen. Ritland would be in charge of liaison with and usaf support of nasa’s manned space flight program.
ias awarded its Flight Test Engineering Fellowship to Raymond P. Boyden, Director of Engineering, U.S. Army Hq., St. Louis. Gene J. Matranga of nasa’s Flight Research Center and Maj. James C. Wayne (usaf) were named runnerups. All will attend Princeton’s Aeronautical Engineering Department.
nasa announced signing of $215,502,744 contract with Chrysler Corp. for production of Saturn S-I stages. Chrysler would deliver the 21 units (instead of 20 as originally planned) between early 1964 and late 1966, beginning with the S-I for Saturn SA-9. nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, with development responsibility for Saturn, would fabricate boosters for first eight vehicles. Chrysler would build the S-I stages at nasa Michoud Operations plant near New Orleans.
India’s first satellite-tracking station had been opened at Uttar Pradesh State Observatory, Nainital, one of 12 such stations established by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory.
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci appointed nasa's Director of Biotechnology and Human Research in the Office of Advanced Research and Technology. Dr. Konecci wlli be responsible for directing research and development of future life support systems, advanced systems to protect man in the space environment, and research to assure man’s performance capabllity in space. In announcing the appointment, Associate Administrator Seamans said: “Our success and progress in manned space flight in the next 10-20 years depend on the human research we do today. The human, man-machine and man-system requirements must be determined through research prior to the design of any manned system. The human capabilities and limitations will directly influence various subsystems of the space vehicle. It is therefore important that work in Biotechnology and Human Research be conducted at an accelerated rate, in order to have the necessary answers for the design of future aero-space vehicles.” The Life Sciences Research Group at Ames Research Center will have a major role in carrying out the programs of Dr. Konecci’s office, along with the other nasa centers and full utilization of the Nation’s military, research, and industrial resources and personnel. Dr. Konecci was Chief of the Life Sciences Section of the Missiles and Space Systems Division of Douglas Aircraft Co. and had previously served as a research scientist at the usaf School of Aviation Medicine and as Chief of Physiology and Technology in the usaf Directorate of Flight Safety before 1957.
usaf-nasa 30-member ad hoc committee established to plan a “joint hypersonic research program for the next couple of years.” The committee would consider two primary missions for the Aerospace Plane (asp), or hypersonic aircraft: (1) vehicle system to provide earth-to-orbit-and-return capability; and (2) earth aircraft capable of 5,000-mi. unrefueled flight, asp would be follow-on program to X-15 research aircraft program.
Soviet delegate Platon D. Morozov demanded that U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space reach agreement on legal aspects of space exploration before considering scientific and technical program, at opening meeting of Committee’s autumn 1962 session. Morozov argued that U.S. high-altitude nuclear test in July had caused atmospheric radiation that imperiled the lives of Soviet cosmonauts; he also commented that international space cooperation would be possible only “in a disarmed world.” When U.S. delegate Francis T. P. Plimpton said he hoped Mr. Morozov was not trying to “block progress” on technical issues, Morozov said U.S.S.R. had accepted “in principle” the recommendations of the scientific and technical committee and later added that his Government would not make agreement on international technical cooperation dependent upon acceptance of Soviet views on legal issues. Committee finally agreed to consider the two subcommittee reports jointly. Subcommittee on international space law had met in Geneva last summer but had failed to reach agreement.
oso i, the Orbiting Solar Observatory launched March 7, completed 1,000 orbits; approximately 900 telemetry data tapes were acquired and forwarded to all experimenters.
Second altitude record attempt in two days by X-15 was scrubbed just before drop from B-52, caused by failure of inertial guidance system.
Reported that Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory was establishing a mid western network of 16 observing stations with four automatic cameras to photograph the night sky to locate meteorites quickly after they fall. Located in 7 midwestem states, the stations will scan a total possible recovery area of two and one half billion acres.
Series of full-scale wind-tunnel tests of vtol fan-in-wing model vehicle at nasa Ames Research Center for Army lift-fan flight research program. Part of General Electric (Cincinnati) research contract, model and test hardware were fabricated by nasa, while GE fabricated and tested propulsion systems including two lift fans, two diverter valves, and two YJ85 engines. Wind-tunnel tests proved acceptability of inlet temperature, control characteristics, transition capability, and aircraft stability.
nasa Agena B vehicle program would be transferred from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to nasa Lewis Research Center, Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., announced. Transfer included Atlas and Thor boosters used with Agena B upper stage. Dr. Seamans said the transfer, which would be completed within three months, would allow “Marshall to wholly concentrate its work on the vital Saturn vehicle development for the manned lunar landing program and for the large unmanned scientific payloads of the future. ... In addition, it concentrates at Lewis the two Atlas-based vehicles, Agena and Centaur, which are essential to nasa’s program of space sciences.” Centaur was transferred to Lewis in September.
Report by Dr. James R. Killian, Jr., released by the National Civil Service League, stated that the U.S. Government is “unusually desperate” for more and better scientists and engineers. Education is not keeping pace “with the growing size of our national commitments in science and technology” and Government is being outbid by industries and even some universities for scarce talent. Greatest need, said the former scientific adviser to President Eisenhower and now President of mit, is for scientists and engineers “with managerial ability.” “Already there is a dangerous weakening of supervising technical leadership.”
nasa approved Saturn C-5 development program and authorized nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to direct its development.
Aerobee 150A launched from Wallops Station with 271-lb. payload boosted to 97-mile altitude; carried camera to study behavior of liquid hydrogen under conditions of symmetrical heating and zero gravity. Lewis Research Center payload was recovered 25 minutes after liftoff.
Committee for International Year of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), meeting in London, approved worldwide research program to be conducted during 1964-65 period of minimum solar activity. Proposed program included multi-nation participation in such research areas as meteorology, geomagnetism, aurora, airglow, ionosphere, solar activity, cosmic rays, and aeronomy. Project was outgrowth of International Geophysical Year (igy), 1957-58, considered highly successful both in scientific results and in international cooperation.
S-I stage of Saturn C-l space vehicle was static-fired for full duration at full thrust (1.5 mlliion lbs.) for first time, at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Previous full-duration firings had attained 1.3 mlliion-lb. thrust.
In speech to the ars Capital Section, Rear Adm. J. P. Monroe (usn) stated that the Navy had an interest in space exploration and operations as essential as its need for aircraft was in the past. He pointed out that dod’s responsibility for developing a military capability in space was not inconsistent with the nation’s peaceful objectives.
White House Reorganization Plan No. 2 became effective, establishing the Office of Science and Technology in the Executive Office of the President. Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner was appointed Director, retaining duties of the special assistant to the President for science and technology and receiving certain functions transferred from the National Science Foundation.
President Kennedy nominated Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner to be director of the Office of Science and Technology.
S-IV stage for Saturn space vehicle arrived at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., after 23-day journey from Douglas Missiles and Space Systems Div., Santa Monica, Calif. First Saturn stage to be shipped by water from West Coast manufacturing site, the S-IV would be mated with other Saturn stages in dynamic test tower at Marshall, for series of bending and vibration tests. Its external configuration, weight, and other characteristics were same as S-IV flight units.
nasa announced selection of Republic Aviation Corp. as contractor for Project Fire, the flight re-entry research program. Contract would call for construction of two re-entry spacecraft to be flown in the second half of 1963 and re-enter the earth’s atmosphere at a speed of 25,000 mph.
nasa Ames Research Center reported that a number of beetles had survived the 25-mile-high balloon flight in which the monkey and hamster passengers in the bioscience payload perished because of a failure in the life-support system supplying oxygen and heat.
Announced that U.S.S.R. Ministry of Communications had already issued postage stamp honoring double space flight of vostok iii and iv.
Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech reported on first direct detection of elastic waves 40 to 50 miles high that carry heat from the sun to its corona. Photographs made through Mount Wilson Observatory detected the energy transfer mechanism of waves which rose and fell at the rate of 1,000 mph and in five-minute periods.
Velery Lutsky, Soviet astronomer of the Moscow Planetarium, said in English-language Radio Moscow broadcast to North America, that the flight of aurora 7 made it “more urgent” that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. cooperate in space exploration.
nasa research pilot Glenn W. Stinnett and Stanford physiologist Dr. Terence A. Rogers emerged from 7-day confinement in a simulated lunar spacecraft. Unique study by Ames Research Center involved performance of continuous and realistic professional tasks while under confined space flight conditions.
In address to Loyola University in Los Angeles, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) said: “For the first time in history, scientific and engineering knowledge gives man a realistic means of world wide attack on the age-old problems of hunger, poverty, and disease . . . Now science has opened the way to space. “There is every reason to be grateful for this new knowledge and power. But some have gone too far. Instead of merely accepting and using the fruits of scientific discovery, they have made a religion of science. This, in essence, is what has happened under Communism—and it has turned out to be the most false, deceptive, and cruel religion the world has ever known. It means that men and women are treated the way a biologist treats plants and animals. It is power without principle . . .” June 17-August 10: Space Science Summer Study, sponsored by National Academy of Sciences Office of Space Sciences (funded by nasa grant), held at State University of Iowa, Dr. James Van Allen as chairman. Scientists represented nasa, dod, aec, nsf, private industry, and research organizations. Review of nasa’s space science program was contained in a detailed nas report released January 1963.
Article in Komsomolskaya Pravda stated that one of mariner ii’s main missions was to learn temperatures of Venutian atmosphere and surface but that Soviet radioastronomers already had answered these questions. Experiments by Pulkovo Observatory determined that Venutian surface was between 300° C and 400° C, and Venutian atmosphere was within limits of 0° C to 100° C and therefore, that Venus should be defined as a “red hot planet.”
At meeting of the National Academy of Sciences at Austin, Texas, President Frederick Seitz said that other nations should bear a larger share of space exploration efforts. This would help solve “a big problem for us today—whether the attention being given to aero-space in America is draining too much manpower from the other sciences.”
Two-month Project Firefly series of 27 upper atmosphere chemical releases was completed by usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories, ending four-point basic research program aimed at learning more about the ionosphere.
Congressman George Meader (Mich.) introduced H.R. 13130, bill to establish a Commission on Research and Development. The new bill was a “perfected” version of his earlier bill. He called attention to S. 2771, the bill which had passed the Senate, and urged that “speedy action be taken on the legislation.”
Electricians began to return to work at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsvllie, Ala., after a ten-day walkout. Estimated 70% of total construction work-force, including workers of other trades who had refused to cross electricians’ picket lines, had returned to work. Hearing on the strike by President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission was scheduled for August 27.
usaf Titan II flown 5,000 miles down amr on third test flight.
Speaking before mit School of Industrial Management, nasa Manned Space Flight Director D. Brainerd Holmes said: “The major national problem today is not a lack of technological or economic resources. It is a lack of trained and courageous minded men. For this reason, the integration of our human, economic, and technological resources is basically a manpower problem. We need a special kind of man. “This kind of man not only combines general and scientific training and general management with technical experience, but he has the true courage of his convictions. Above all, he must be tireless and devoted and not give in to compromisers and obstructionists. Technical people may not necessarily be the best managers, but in this age of technology if you do not have the technical answers jmu cannot make good decisions. This is the vital point I want to stress to you today. . . . “We need group research, group engineering, and group science. But we also badly need individual creativity. In short, we need to utilize effectively all of our available capabilities, regardless of the channels they take. We must integrate group and individual efforts.”
Third test flight of usn Polaris A-3 was partially successflli, the missile functioning properly until second stage went out of control near burnout and was destroyed by range safety officer.
H. Julian Allen, Assistant Director of nasa Ames Research Center, proposed at NASA-University conference in Chicago that interplanetary spacecraft be cone-shaped and that they enter the atmosphere point-end-first. The originator of concept for returning orbital spacecraft blunt-end-first, Allen stated: “Blunt vehicles are desirable when you are dealing with speeds of the sub-orbital range up to speeds required to escape the effects of the earth’s gravity. But when entry speeds exceed this range, as they probably wlli on return to the earth from trips to other planets, radiation heating drives you away from very blunt bodies, such as the Mercury capsule, to bodies with conical noses. . . . Our concepts of aerodynamic flow, in short, must change as the velocities with which we are dealing increase. . . .”
mariner ii interplanetary probe reported data showing that interplanetary space was free of cosmic dust and debris found in vicinity of earth, Dr. Wlliiam H. Pickering, director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, told press interviewers. “On this basis, one has to think of the earth as moving in its own cloud of dust,” Dr. Pickering added.
nasa supplemental appropriation for FY 1962 was approved by the House and the Senate. It carried $82,500,000 for research and development and $71,000,000 for construction and facilities at Cape Canaveral.
University of Alabama Research Institute dedicated at Huntsville,
U.S.S.R., U.S., and 13 other countries proposed that U.N. General Assembly call for urgent efforts to break deadlock over legal problems of space exploration. Compromise resolution was submitted for consideration in General Assembly’s Political Committee, which was debating report of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
Dr. Robert M. Petrie, Director of Dominion Astro-physical Observatory in Victoria, B.C., told aaas in Philadelphia that the Milky Way Galaxy appears to be expanding. Dr. Petrie’s 20-year study of 600 “B” stars (hottest and brightest stars in the galaxy) produced evidence that our sun and all other stars are moving away from the galactic center.
Polaris A-2 missile, modified to carry guidance system for advanced A-3 model, was launched on successful 1,500-mi. test flight from Cape Canaveral.
An estimated 7,000 persons visited the opening of the Space Museum at the nasa Marshall Space Flight Center.
nasa Ames Research Center announced construction of four space research facilities, totaling more than $14 million, had been authorized for FY 1963: biosciences laboratory, guidance facility, radiative heat system for Mass Transfer Facility, and helium tunnel. Bioscience laboratory would be used for studies in genetics, radiobiology, immunology, and environmental physiology, and detection of extraterrestrial life. Guidance facility, consisting of three-man capsule with systems and equipment, combined analog and digital computer, and rotating centrifuge to drive capsule, would be used to obtain data on integrated design of guidance, stabilization, control, and crew support systems in advanced manned spacecraft. Radiative heat system would permit Ames scientists to investigate re-entry heating of spacecraft from lunar or planetary missions. Sections of complete heat shields wlli be tested at the facility. Mach 50 helium tunnel would be used to complement the existing Ames hypersonic free-flight facility, which used gun-launched models to obtain 50 times speed of sound.
Announced that Boeing had received $15,954,096 supplementary contract from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center for work leading to design, development, fabrication, and test of Saturn C-5 first stage (S-IC).
usaf Atlas F missile was successfully fired more than 4,000 mi. from Cape Canaveral in test flight.
Last usaf B-52 strategic bomber, produced by the Boeing Company, left final assembly area at Wichita, Kansas. The B-52H model was the 744th in the series since the first B-52 came from Boeing plant on November 29, 1951. With numerous improvements throughout its production, B-52 had eight versions—from B-52A to B-52H (speed of 650 mph and unrefueled range of 12,500 miles). Models G and H were capable of carrying Hound Dog 500-mile-range missile and Skybolt 1,000-mile-range missile.
usaf Nuclear Effects Research Laboratory dedicated at Kirtland afb, N.M. Lab was designed to simulate effects of nuclear explosions on ballistic missile systems; study effects of radiation on people and electronic systems; simulate magnetic and radiation effects of high-altitude nuclear explosions; and conceive radiation experiments for space probes.
Last of 4 solid-fuel Areas rockets fired at White Sands in nasa Langley Research Center photographic study of deployment characteristics of 15-ft.-diameter parachute for use in measuring atmospheric winds at altitudes from 100,000 to 240,000 ft. Other 40-mi.-high Areas shots were on June 30, July 2, and July 5,
nasa announced Project Fire, a high-speed re-entry heat research program to obtain data on materials, heating rates, and radio signal attenuation on spacecraft re-entering the atmosphere at speeds of about 24,500 mph. Information from the program would provide technology for manned and unmanned re-entry from lunar missions. Under management of Langley Research Center, Project Fire would use Atlas D boosters and the re-entry velocity package would be powered by Antares solid-fuel motor (3rd stage of the Scout).
Army Pershing missile successfully fired on longest test flight to date—400 miles—from amr.
Issue of ars’ Astronautics contained series of articles by nasa Langley Research Center scientists and others, reviewing LaRC research program on manned space-station technology since early 1960.
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of nasa’s Lewis Research Center, received the National Civil Service League's Career Service Award, one of 10 Government leaders so recognized.
Senate confirmed Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner as Director of the Office of Science and Technology.
usaf Minuteman launched from silo at Cape Canaveral in successful test flight.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists reported that mariner ii Venus probe was disoriented on Sept. 8, by either a micrometeorite impact or a solar pressure wave, but that automatic devices onboard the craft had restored it to proper orientation.
dod released following statement: “Lockheed [Aircraft Corp.] stands alone in refusing to follow the course that the other members of the [aerospace] industry considered reasonable. . . . Should a strike take place at Lockheed, Department of Defense programs of critical urgency to the national defense would be affected. It is imperative in the national interest that the Department of Defense make necessary preparations to minimize to the greatest extent possible any loss of production that might follow a work stoppage. Responsible officials of the Department of Defense are therefore considering whether alternate means of production can be utllized so that work on these vital programs can go forward in the event of a stoppage at Lockheed.”
In regular press conference, President Kennedy announced that he had asked his Science Advisory Committee, in cooperation with the Federal Council for Science and Technology, to report “as quickly as possible on the specific measures that can be taken within and without the Government to develop the necessary and well-qualified scientists and engineers and technicians to meet our society’s complex needs—government, educational and industrial.” He prefaced his announcement with a review of the declining number of scientists and engineers educated in the United States since 1951.
Space-age religion must be an “open undogmatic religion which itself reaches out for undiscovered truth,” Rabbi Sheldon H. Blank, professor at the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, said in Williamsburg, Va. If space exploration discovers rational people living on other planets, religious people on earth “wlli have to abandon parochialism and reach for a God who is less comfortably near than we have wanted to believe.”
Albert J. Evans, nasa Deputy Director of Aeronautical Research, told iata Public Relations Conference in Washington: “Our understanding of aerodynamics has reached the point where it appears certam that in time an efficient supersonic transport can be developed. . . . There is no question as to whether there wlli be a supersonic transport; the only question is whose. Right now part of my job is to see that the United States is the first to develop a commercially competitive supersonic transport. . . . “In the hypersonic region, the X-15 has given tremendous focus to our efforts. The X-15 has such capability that it wlli be used in furthering certain space research programs. Already we are making radiation measurements—piggy-back experiments along with the hypersonic research program. Our results with the X-15 have been so encouraging that I think we must soon look beyond the transport that goes to Mach 2 or 3, and begin laying the groundwork for the generation to follow. . . .”
In speech to National Conference on Application of Electrical Insulation, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) pointed to the lessons of history: “. . . Our boldest predictions do not keep very far ahead of technical developments. “A second lesson is that the advance of scientific and engineering knowledge is most effectively achieved through joint effort. The growth of military airpower has owed much to the scientific and industrial community .... I think we can predict the same mutual benefits in space exploration . . .”
usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories reported its 150-ft. radiotelescope at Sagamore Hill Observatory, Hamilton, Mass., would be ready for operation in early 1963. Telescope would be among three largest radio telescopes in U.S., the others being one operated by Stanford Univ. at Palo Alto, Calif., and one by nrl at Chesapeake Beach, Md.
Scientists at Jodrell Bank Experimental Station announced they had measured part of Milky Way’s magnetic field, marking first time positive evidence had been obtained of the field’s existence. Milky Way’s magnetic field measured 25 mlliionths of a gauss (earth surface’s magnetic field measures about half a gauss). Led by Dr. Rodney D. Davies, research team had spent 20,000 hours over past four years on the experiment, involving radiotelescopic measurement of light from a star cluster 1,000 light years away.
nasa and Indiana University jointly announced experimental center for industrial applications of aerospace research would be established at Indiana Univ., with initial nasa funding of $150,000. Project would involve the university’s business professors, biologists, geologists, physicists, and others, working with research and development people of industry and nasa.
U.S. District Judge Clarence W. Allgood ordered striking electricians back to work at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. President of the afl-cio International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Gordon Freeman, also directed the workers to return to their jobs.
The World’s Fair Corp. announced it was developing plans for a unified space exploration exhibit called “Aerospace Island,” as part of the U.S. exhibit in the 1964-65 World’s Fair.
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced first static test of p&w liquid-hydrogen engine. In first firing of series, which was run in vacuum chamber to simulate space environment, RL-10 ran nine seconds and generated a rated 15,000 pounds of thrust.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa’s Director of Manned Space Flight, testified before a subcommittee of the House Science and Astronautics Committee on the very large and complex manned space flight program. The most important step in space capability in 1961, he said, “was not that of awarding particular contracts or making technical decisions, but rather Mr. Webb’s carefully planned reorganization of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.” Speaking of future launch sites for the Advanced Saturn vehicle as the workhorse of the manned lunar program, he said: “. . . it shows our plans for an entirely new concept of launching our large space vehicles. Instead of literally assembling or building the launch vehicles on the pads as we do at present, this arrangement would permit assembly and test at a location remote from the launch pads and under cover, protected from weather. It wlli be possible to have vertical transfer of the entirely assembled vehicle to the launch pad in a tested condition. This arrangement should offer many advantages in order to permit better and more thorough checkout, and to assure more rapid launching and efficient utilization of each pad. For the extremely tight schedules that wlli be required for launch operations in support of orbital rendezvous, this rapid launch capabllity is highly desirable.”
Secretary of Labor Arthur Goldberg, in telegram message, told unions involved in strike at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center it was “imperative” that union members “return to work immediately and remain at work.”
nasa Langley Research Center (LaRc) announced plans to build a cyclotron laboratory on 1,300 acres of usAF-owned land, a former Bomarc missile site, halfway between LaRc and Williamsburg, Va. The laboratory will include two accelerators to generate electrons and protons of the energies spacecraft will encounter on deep space flights.
Soviet scientist A. Prokhorov, writing in Soviet labor organization’s publication Trud, stated that study of structure of living organisms would provide great opportunities for their utilization in space exploration. He stated that the “general reliability of modern automation systems is less than the reliability of each of their components taken individually. Living organisms, on the other hand, having developed over millions of years, are much more reliable than their component organs.”
nasa announced mariner ii would miss Venus by 20,900 mi. instead of the 9,000 mi. previously expected, but that the probe would still come “well within the region where the scientific planetary experiments are expected to be very effective.” The added distance was caused by midcourse correction maneuver on Sept. 4 increasing mariner ii’s velocity by 47 mph instead of the intended 45 mph. nasa scientists said telemetry data [from 'mariner ii indicated that (1) solar particle radiation appears to be sufficiently strong to distort solar magnetic fields; (2) some atmospheric gas was present in entire path of the probe; (3) density of small particles in deep space was at least 1,000 times less in interplanetary space than in the near vicinity of the earth.
Senate and House space committee conferences approved compromise legislative authorization for nasa in FY 1963 of $3,744,115,250. Bill provided $43,160,750 less than nasa requested. Nearly $1.3 billion was assigned to manned space flight, including the lunar program.
(1) communications satellites; (2) weather satellites; (3) coordination of tracking and data reception on scientific satellites; (4) international search and rescue operations to recover space crews who have returned to earth outside the planned recovery areas; (5) mapping the earth’s magnetic field and exchange of information on space medicine; (6) joint agreement on problems of international law as related to space exploration, beyond those points already agreed to in the U.N., especially the prohibition of space experiments that would inhibit the space experiments of other nations. Premier Khrushchev warned, however, that space cooperation would “depend to some extent on the settlement of the disarmament problem,” since much military hardware and techniques were used in peaceful space exploration vehicles.
In address to the House of Representatives, Congressman Emilio Q. Daddario pointed to a need for a common patent policy for inventions arising out of research and development financed by Federal funds and cited President Kennedy’s statement at his press conference the day before.
Editorial on tactical fighter (tfx) program, contract for which was awarded to General Dynamics and Grumman Aircraft by dod, appeared in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “. . . Underlying the whole tfx concept is one of the solid, basic technical explorations by the researchers of the old National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (naca) that did so much to keep this country the international leader in supersonic aircraft development. Without the fundamental research into the variable sweep wing and the detailed development of this K‘ iple by the Langley research laboratory group headed by Stack, the current tfx concepts of both final competitors would have been impossible. . . . The full story of the Langley contribution to the tfx program should be hammered home as an example of how these research and development investments eventually pay substantial dividends. . . .”
The Rev. Theodore M. Hesburgh, President of the University of Notre Dame, speaking at the commencement exercises at mit, urged scientists to develop greater moral awareness and a greater use of science and technology “for the true service of mankind.” He told the science graduates: “You should be concerned, you should lead, but the beginning of significant human leadership involves a deep respect for the totality of man’s intellectual and moral heritage, an active cultivation of the wide areas of wisdom above and beyond your science and technology.”
nasa established the nasa Launch Operations Center at Cape Canaveral, with Dr. Kurt H. Debus as Director. Reporting to the Director of Manned Space Flight at nasa Hq., the new Center would serve all nasa projects launched from Cape Canaveral, absorbing Marshall Space Flight Center’s Launch Operations Directorate. Similarly at Point Mugu, Calif., the nasa Test Support Office was redesignated the nasa Pacific Launch Operations Office, with Cdr. Simon J. Burttschell as Acting Director.
usaf Cambridge Research Lab team, headed by Dr. Richard Dunn of the Sacramento Peak Observatory, successfully observed perfect total eclipse in Lae, New Guinea, making useful observations of the chromosphere (1,000- to 10,000-mile band of energy between sun’s visible surface and the corona) and the sun’s corona.
afsc announced that Colonel Charles E. “Chuck” Yeager (usaf), first man to fly faster than the speed of sound (X-l, October 14, 1947), was named Commandant of usaf Aerospace Research Pilot School at afftc, Edwards afb, Calif.
In address to ars lunar meeting in Cleveland, Dr. James A. Van Allen said that protons of the inner radiation belt could be a serious hazard for extended manned space flight, and that nuclear detonations might be capable of cleaning out these inner belt protons, perhaps for a prolonged period, for making manned orbits about 300-mi.-high above the earth. Van Allen said that the recent shot over Johnston Island was far too small and too low to have such an effect.
Third balloon in radiation-experiment series conducted by Ames Research Center was launched from Goose Bay, Labrador. In two hours, the balloon had carried its payload of two monkeys, four hamsters, and instruments to an altitude of 85,000 feet, where it was to catch prevailing winds and drift westward across Canada.	...	.
Hartley A. Soul<5 of nasa’s Langley Research Center retired after 34 years’ service at Langley. Soul6 was instrumental in the establishment of what is now the nasa Flight Research Center at Edwards, California, and directed the research on the X-l (which in October 1947 first broke the speed of sound) and the X-15. More recently he was nasa Project Director for the multimillion-dollar PVoject Mercury worldwide tracking and ground instrumentation system.
House voted approval of plan to create a White House Office of Science and Technology to coordinate Federal research and development programs now approaching expenditures of $12 blliion per year.
Five nasa scientists, led by Ozro M. Coverington of gsfc, arrived in Australia to inspect proposed sites for new tracking stations.
Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, nasa Office of Space Sciences, was appointed chairman of Joint Working Group of nasa Office of Space Sciences and Office of Manned Space Flight. Group would be responsible for (1) recommending detailed program of scientific exploration in future manned flights; (2) defining information desired from unmanned flights to support manned flights; and (3) establishing and maintaining close liaison with nasa field centers, other Government agencies, and universities in development of integrated scientific program for manned flight. Dr. Shoemaker had been employed by U.S. Geological Survey as Chief of Astrogeology Branch in Menlo Park, Calif.
D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, addressed the Engineers, Scientists, and Architects Day meetmg, in which he said: “as a stimulus to our fervent interest in rocketry have been the realities of life in a world which is divided into two armed camps, one of which has the avowed intention of imposing its own way of life on free peoples everywhere. We are, in short, compelled to achieve and maintain leadership in space research and technology because our own fate as a free nation and, in fact, the fate of human civilization as we know it, wlli depend upon whether the spacecraft of the future are devoted to peaceflli purposes or to the destruction of the human race . . .”
In address at Ohio State University, General Curtis E. LeMay (usaf) said: “It is in the fields of science and technology that the greatest explosion of problems is occurring. We are in the midst of an age of technological change that will make the industrial revolution seem dull indeed. The problems associated with technical change are producing opportunities in greater abundance than ever before. Opportunity is not only knocking at the door, it is beating gongs all around the house.... “In science and technology, there is no ceiling. We are going into space. This will be man’s greatest adventure—not only for the men who crew the ships and make the journey, but for the people on the ground who support the effort.... “The free world faces a grave threat. In rapidfire fashion, new discoveries and developments are being made almost daily that prevent us from relaxing our vigilance. Our future is directly dependent on having an educated and informed people who are in tune with the world tempo and alert to the myriad applications and possibilities in all fields of human endeavor ... .”
Tass reported that Soviet astronomers of the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory discovered molecular oxygen in the outer atmosphere of Venus, using 157.6-in. solar telescope and a special spectograph. Also reported were indications of the presence of nitrogen.
An S-IV stage for the two-stage Saturn began three-week, 3,500-mi. trip via barge from Douglas Aircraft Co. in Santa Monica, Calif., to nasa Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Ala., for dynamic testing.
nasa announced Col. George M. Knauf (usaf), Deputy Director of Space Medicine in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, has retired from usaf and accepted appointment to same position as a civllian. Dr. Knauf was responsible for much of development and organization of Project Mercury medical recovery support operation.
An estimated 23,000 visitors toured Marshall Space Flight Center during the “Family Day” observance of msfc’s second birthday.
Preparations for Operation Harp (High Altitude Research Project) announced by Dr. D. L. Mordell, Faculty of Engineering Dean at Canada’s McGill University. In the McGill-initiated project, McGill’s 66-in., 470-lb. Martlet missiles would be fired to approximately 200-mi. altitude from two 16-in., 140-ton guns provided by U.S. Navy. With the first launching in October from Barbados, B.W.I., McGill would become the first university to conduct its own space research program. At least 6 firings would be made before Christmas. Also involved in Harp were U.S. Army, which transported naval guns from Hampton Roads, Va., to Barbados; Florida State University meteorologists; and usn weather-observation aircraft.
Dr. Lawrence E. Lamb, chief of Clinical Sciences Div. of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, predicted before the Second InterstateTScientific^Assembly:bf D.'C. and Virginia Physicians that manned space exploration would yield a wealth of information for practicing physicians during the next ten years.
Establishment of nasa Industrial Applications Advisory Committee announced, with Earl P. Stevenson (former president and chairman of the board of Arthur D. Little, Inc.) as chairman. The committee wollid assist in transferring new scientific knowledge from nasa’s research and development programs to industry.
Subcommittee on construction of President Kennedy’s Missile Sites Labor Commission conducted closed hearing on recent 10-day work stoppage at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. Although electricians and other construction workers had returned to work, the basic labor dispute—union members’ stopping work on vital U.S. missile and space projects because of employment of nonunion members—remained to be settled.
Langley afb celebrated its 45th anniversary with the tac Thunderbird team, a band concert, displays of aircraft and missiles, and displays of nasa’s Langley Research Center highlighting the “open house” day.
Army Pershing missile destroyed in test flight from Cape Canaveral when second stage became erratic, the second failure in last three launchings after 13 straight successes.
Radio signals from Johannesburg, South Africa, activated four observation instruments on the mariner ii space probe. Transmitted data would be evaluated by Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (jpl).
Sudden drop in voltage on mariner ii Venus probe was reported by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists, jpl turned off the probe’s four interplanetary experiments to conserve on-board power for experiments in the vicinity of Venus. Discounting any probabllity of the solar cells being affected by radiation, experts indicated the problem could have come from faulty voltage regulators.
In press conference following MA-8, D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, said: “This was a highly successful flight, magnificently performed. It proved there is no substitute for sound engineering and thorough training.” Walter C. Williams, msc Director of Mercury Operations, said that “so far as I am concerned, the mission was perfect.” He added that the next Mercury mission would be a 24-hour flight in early 1963.
Soviet news agency Tass reported radioastronomers at Pulkovo Observatory had discovered radiation belt around planet Jupiter. (upi, Wash. Dally News, 5/15/63) Addressing tbe Forum, nasa Administrator James E. Webb reviewed early history of U.S. development in aeronautics, noting U.S. was far behind m aircraft development in 1915, when naca was formed: “The wisdom of its [naca’s] establishment was amply demonstrated over the ensuing years, and led ultimately to United States supremacy in civil and military aviation . . . .” He noted U.S. was behind in 1957 when U.S.S.R. orbited sputnik i, then cited formation of nasa in 1958 and President Kennedy’s recommendation in 1961 of accelerated program “to give the nation a clearly leading role in the conquest of space. “I review this history because it is necessary occasionally to remind ourselves of the past if we are to have a clear view of the Sresent. With a warning clearly sounded in space, the nation etermined, for the first time, that it would seize the opportunities offered by man’s new ability to explore space, and that it would not be content merely with catching up with somebody else. Instead we set our sights on the most challenging goal within our reach, which could be achieved within a time scale competitive with the ability of others to do the same, and determined that we would explore the moon with men within this decade. “Nothing in recent history suggests that we have reason now to change our course .... “Those who view the lunar program simply as a propaganda effort fail to grasp that not only our prestige, but our capacity for constructive international leadership, our economic and military capacity for technological improvement, depend upon our ability to achieve acknowledged superiority in science and technology, and to use this capability in our own behalf and that of our allies . . . .” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Director of nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, described nasa research in supersonic transport and in v/stol aircraft and said: “Aeronautical and space research serves as a sharp cutting edge to advance man’s knowledge in practically every technology which is fundamental to transportation devices. Although it is impossible to predict quantitatively the impact on transportation of current aeronautical and space research, past experience has shown that we may predict with confidence that it will be considerable . . . .” (Text) Najeeb E. Halaby, faa Administrator, said on May 16 that “there are areas—such as in pure research—where it is impossible for private industry to bear the full economic burden. For example, clearly it is up to the Government to play a role in the development of a supersonic transport, if this Nation is to provide such an aircraft .... “I believe the government should act only in areas where the people ‘cannot so well do for themselves’ even in this increasingly complex and technical world, and that we who are charged with making decisions affecting the public must be convinced beyond any reasonable doubt that there is a need for the Federal Government to conduct the activity at all . . . .” (Text)
. . . it is my view that the difficulty here is . . . one of organizing research about research, of developing more adequate insights into cost-benefit relationships, of illuminating our value analysis so that we can with greater confidence strike a balance between being first in high energy accelerators and being first in education and in decent living and job opportunity. I do not think that Government alone can reach these answers, but perhaps Government can—and indeed I believe it must—be as proportionately lavish in stimulating this kind of intellectual inquiiy as it has been in endowing science and technology .. . .” (Text, CR, 9/30/63, A6108-09)
In an article in Pravda, V. Golobachev reported that U.S.S.R. was filing with the Federation Aeronautique International claiming new records for the tandem space flight of Cosmonauts Valery Bykovsky and Valentina Tereshkova June 14r-19,1963. U.S.S.R. was claiming eight new records for the tandem flight: for vostok v (Bykovsky), duration of orbital flight, 119 hours; distance, 3,326,000 km. (2,063,377 mi.) ; these represented four new records, since they were records not only for orbital flight but for any type of flight. For vostok vi (Tereshkova), four records claimed for women in orbital flight: duration, 71 hrs.; height, 231 km. (144 mi.); distance, 1,971,000 km. (1,224,720 mi.); maximum weight orbited, 4,713 kg. (10,390 lbs.). Total maximum thrust for each flight was listed as 600,000 kg. (1,322,760 lbs.).	(Pravda, 10/4/63, afss-t Trans.)
President Kennedy appointed Robert M. White to succeed Francis W. Reichelderfer as Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau. White was president of Travelers Research Center, Inc., an independent nonprofit organization engaged in rad in environmental and mathematical sciences. (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/30/63)
Kaj Aa. Strand, former Chairman of Northwestern Univ. Astronomy Dept., succeeded retiring Gerald M. Clemence as Scientific Director of U.S. Naval Observatory. (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/27/63)
nasa Space Vehicle Review Board met at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, board being composed of 28 members representing Marshall, Manned Spacecraft Center, and Launch Operations Center. (Marshall Star. 1/23/63,3)
Lewis Research Center engineers reported on studies involving simulated micrometeoroid penetration of future spacecraft. Using specially-built .22 caliber rifles that fire at velocities up to 10 times the speed of normal bullets, engineers were puncturing different types of fuel tanks to duplicate what might happen in space to a spacecraft struck by a micrometeoroid. (lrc Release 63-42, Lewis Chronology, 5)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, said problem of communications blackout during manned spacecraft re-entry may be solved by spraying water from the spacecraft as it re-enters the earth’s atmosphere. Kelley told NASA-Industry Program Plans Conference that experiments conducted at nasa Langley Research Center had found that water suppressed ionized plasma, which creates shield around re-entering spacecraft and blocks radio communications. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/13/63, A6)
Near-operational Army Pershing missile launched from tracked-launcher at Cape Canaveral and hit target 130 miles down amr, its first complete test flight success. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/26/63, A3)
Editorial in the Washington Sunday Star commented on U.S.S.R.’s latest space feat, the launching of the maneuverable spacecraft polet i: “Russia’s newest venture in space has come at exactly the right time. Although not so intended, it pulls the rug from under those among us—such as economizing Congressmen and excessively zealous scientists like Linus Pauling—who have been clamoring for an end to our country’s program to place Americans on the moon by 1970. “These people, with much naivete (to use a polite word), have attached an extravagant degree of importance to Premier Khrushchev’s recent remarks vaguely suggesting that he may be withdrawing the Soviets from the lunar race .... their latest space shot plainly, and disturbingly, indicates that they are well ahead of us with the kind of rendezvous capability that is essential to efforts to place men on the moon and bring them back safely .... “Clearly, we must run this race as swiftly as we possibly can.” {OR, 11/4/63, A6869) November S: Reviewing the U.S. manned lunar landing program, John Finney of the New York Times concluded that the race to the moon had always been a one-sided one, that there was no evidence that the Russians were building the large rocket that would be necessary for such a venture, that they were rather proceeding on a building-block program in space tnat eventually would lead to a lunar landing, but not as a special, high-priority project. This, Finney said, was also the approach of the U.S. until May 1961. “Then, in the wake of the Bay of Pigs fiasco and the first Soviet manned space flight, the Kennedy Administration ordered an abrupt change in course.” The original justification was that U.S. prestige was at stake. As time went on and budget resistance developed in Congress, the Administration argument shifted to one of attaining “a position of preeminence” in space. Also the potential military benefits were emphasized more and more. Finally, the President’s proposal for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar program seemed to undercut all preceding positions. To Mr. Finney, all this added up to the certainty that the U.S. would continue its program for a manned lunar landing “but it will be pursued with less competitive zeal and at a more leisurely pace.” (Finney, NYT, 11/3/63, 5E)
Completion of M-2 lifting body’s successful wind-tunnel testing and analysis was announced by nasa Ames Research Center. A wingless, maneuverable spacecraft capable of orbiting the earth and landing like an airplane, the M-2 lifting body was now ready for full-9cale flight research. (Ames Release 63-7)
nasa $600,000 grant for “research in aerospace physical sciences” at Univ. of Alabama Research Institute, Huntsville, was announced by Univ. president, Dr. Frank A. Rose. (Huntsville Times, 3/5/63)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Scientific Advisory to the President, testified before Monopoly Subcommittee of Senate Small Business Committee on the need for flexibility in Government patent policy. “The Department of Defense feels strongly among other things that the performance of its mission requires the ability to assure the contractor at the time of contracting that he will retain commercial rights to his ideas, in order to assure the unrestrained participation by the most competent elements of American industry in the defense programs .... The central question ... is whether the terms of the contract will encourage tbe contractor to apply his full teclmical background and experience to the Government. These considerations also apply to contracts of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The national interest requires greater uniformity between dod and nasa patent practices since they are drawing on the services of the same sector of industrial research and development competence. “. . .1 feel that a reasonable basis for framing a government-wide patent policy can be found. It seems important for the Government to move in the direction of a more consistent policy that will eliminate the unhealthy confusion and instabilities that attend the present situation. Such a policy should provide for the Government to retain title in the range of circumstances that I listed earlier; but it is necessary to recognize that, because of the problems of the type that concern the Department of Defense and nasa, any policy, to be realistic, should enable industry to retain exclusive rights in certain circumstances .... The nature of the work involved, the commercial background of the contractor, and the extent to which the contractor would be expected to work the invention in the public interest would be significant factors in permitting contractors to retain exclusive commercial rights . . . .” (CR, 3/21/63, 4378)
At aas meeting in Washington, Dr. G. E. Moreton described photographs of H-Alpha rays showing that solar flares produce shock waves which depress the sun’s surface. The photographs were taken last Sept. 20 at Lockheed Solar Observatory, Burbank, Calif. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/28/63)
The Chemistry and Energy Conversion Division at the Lewis Research Center began a major study of the feasibility of using thin-film solar cells for space power applications. (Lewis Chronology, 11)
nasa Lewis Research Center awarded a $48,131,315 contract to Aerojet-General Corp. for redefinition of Snap-8 (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) development program. Snap-8 is designed to provide 35 kilowatts of on-board electric power to future spacecraft. (Lewis Chronology, 8)
Tracking and data acquisition operations ceased for oso i (Orbiting Solar Observatory), launched March 7, 1962. (gsfc Historian, 8/14/63)	_	.
James J. Haggerty, Jr., writing in Army-Navy-Air Force Journal and Register, said: “The excitement and enthusiasm which characterized the early years of space research is dimming. The barrage of criticism leveled at the Administration for its lunar landing program has taken a severe toll and brought forth a budget which will move the manned moon shot back at least two years and there seems to be a general lack of concern over this abrogation of a stated national goal .... “Space exploration may soon run into its first real barrier, which might be termed the ‘megabuck barrier.’ In the fantastic missions being considered for the next decade, there are myriad technical problems, the solutions of which will require a supreme effort on the part of the scientific and technological community. Yet none of tnese problems appears impossible of solution. The real stumbling block may be money .... “Perhaps tnere will be some great breakthrough—or a series of them—which will bring a dramatic reduction in the costs of space flight. But at the moment, with no such breakthrough on the horizon, the megabuck barrier appears more formidable than the speed of light. (A-N-AF Journ. <& Reg., 12/7/63, 14)
Reported that one example of space flight experience vitally benefiting other Government projects was adoption of Mercury spacecraft and landing maneuveis to the escape and survival projection system for F-lll (tfx) tactical fighter aircraft. In emergency escape from F-lll, entire two-man crew compartment and section of aircraft’s wings are separated from aircraft; drogue parachute then deploys and pulls out large Mercury-type parachute which lowers compartment to a landing. Like Mercury spacecraft, ejected compartment contains environmental life-support system and necessary survival equipment. (Cook, Wash. Daily News, 9/2/(53)	_	...
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, nasa Director of Electronics and Control, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology: “As a result of our review and study on the implementation of electronics responsibilities for future space missions, in our FY 64 Budget we are requesting Congressional approval for initial funding of $5M to establish a new Electronics Research Center to be located in the Greater Boston Area. Our long range plans call for an installation buildup over a period of six to seven years yielding a staff of approximately 2,000 personnel, of whom 600-700 would be professionals, and a plant value of approximately $50M. “The rate of Center growth will be gradual and represents an investment in the future of space flight, analogous to the investment made in the older research centers many years ago which is paying off so handsomely today. This rate of growth together with up-grading of Center personnel by continued graduate education after they are on-board is expected to allow us to meet our staffing requirements with little or no impact on scientific and engineering manpower as projected during this growth period. “The nasa considered many potential sites throughout the country for location of the Electronics Research Center. On balance, the overall university-industrial strength and capability in electronics and guidance research in the Greater Boston Area resulted in its selection as the location for the Center. This area, noted for its past and current heavy concentration on electronic research, both in industry and universities, provides a compatible, 741-623 O—64--0 stimulating environment for growth of nasa capabilities in this important area of technology. “The Center will have the principal function of conducting and directing research and component technique investigations in the related fields of communications, data processing, guidance, instrumentation, and control. It will be staffed and equipped to perform original -work and to work closely with industries and universities with common interests. For example, component test facilities will be provided for evaluation of industrially developed experimental components. The Center will serve to focus the increasing nasa out-of-house efforts in the burgeoning area of electronic technology. Most important, it will provide a regenerative path for the early exploitation of advanced techniques of developments for space flight, whatever their source.” (Testimony)
First meeting of nasa Advisory Committee on Biotechnology and Human Research held at Ames Research Center. {Av. Wk., 5/6/63,103)
Scientists and engineers from major nasa centers convened at Lewis Research Center to discuss future manned planetary missions, (lrc Release 63-30, Lewis Chronology, 4)
According to results of survey by National Industrial Conference Board, about two per cent of U.S. working population and nearly one third of its scientists and engineers are engaged in research and development. Survey also showed total rad spending, including both private industry and Government, is more than $17 billion per year. In 1960, more than one half of overall financing came from Federal government. Defense, atomic energy, and space projects accounted for 57% of all resources devoted to rad in 1960. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/19/63)
Invention of retrometer, device relaying light beam over which voice messages are transmitted, by nasa Langley Research Center scientist N. E. Thomas was reported in Newport News Times-Herald. (Newport News Times-Herald, 6/14/63)
Speaking at Boston College Seminar, Franklyn W. Phillips, Director of nasa’s North Eastern Office, said: “At the request of the Congress, nasa is conducting additional studies on a need for an Electronics Center, the nature of the Center, and its geographical location. The results of these three studies will be presented to Mr. Webb, who after making nasa’s decision on the location of the Center will forward these reports to the House and Senate Space Committees for their consideration on or about the first or February. These Committees have 45 days in which to take action on nasa’s report. If they take favorable action or for that matter if they take no action in the 45 days after submittal of the report, nasa can proceed with its plans. On the other hand, should these committees take negative action of any kind, it would force a further reconsideration of the proposal. “The proposed Electronics Research Center will employ approximately 2,000 people of which six to seven hundred would be scientists and engineers. Estimates of the investment to be made in constructing the Center amount to 56 million dollars. When the Center is fully operative, it wTill have an annual operating budget of $20 to $30 million, and will be expected to disburse considerably more than that through a contract research and development program with industry and universities.” (Text) December 17: First successful flight of the C-141 Starlighter took place at Dobbins afb, Ga. Featuring four fan-jet engines, the plane can cross any ocean nonstop at speeds of more than 500 mph. (AFSC Operational Highlights, 13)
nasa announced appointment of Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn) as Director of Launch Vehicles in Office of Manned Space Flight, effective about April 1. Capt. Freitag, since 1959 Director of Astronautics in Navy’s Bureau of Weapons and a recipient of Legion of Merit for work in ballistic missile programs, would replace Milton Rosen, who would become senior scientist on staff of nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Defense Affairs, Adm. W. F. Boone (usn, Ret.), (nasa Release 63-38)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) spoke on the House floor of the series of meetings with leading scientists that had been conducted by the Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development of the House Subcommittee on Science and Astronautics. “I cannot overemphasize the work of the Daddario Subcommittee in the effect it will have on the future progress of the United States, progress not only in science but also in the proper relationship of science and technology to our entire society. The members of the subcommittee are assuming a very weighty responsibility because, I believe, results of the subcommittee work will set the framework for science and technology in relation to the overall resources that we have to guide ourselves in the difficult years that lie ahead of us.” (CR, 11/7/63,20332)
Morton J. Stoller, Director of nasa Office of Applications, was awarded nasa Medal for Outstanding Leadership, nasa Admin-38 istrator James E. Webb, in making the award, commended Stoller for his “outstanding and dynamic leadership in planning, developing and directing a complex scientific organization whose notable achievements have significantly contributed to the preeminent position of this country in the space sciences, the development of space technology, and the practical application of such research and development.” (nasa Release 63-20)
Testifyingbefore the House Select Committee on Government Research, Dr. Vannevar Bush said: “The spectacular success of applied research during the war led to a fallacy entertained by many. It is that any problem can be solved by gathering enough scientists and giving them enough money .... It is folly to thus proceed. The great scientific steps forward originate in the minds of gifted scientists, not in the minds of promoters. The best way to proceed is to be sure that really inspired scientists have what they need to work with, and leave them alone. “If the country pours enough money into research, it will inevitably support the trivial and the mediocre. The supply of scientific manpower is not unlimited. “In any broad program of research the keyword in regard to any one aspect of the program is ‘relevance.’ It is a good word to have in mind in examining any research program. Competent directors of research know what it means. Probably ‘conducive to progress toward the main object of a program’ is as good a definition as any. Just finding out something new is not by itself sufficient justification for research. It needs to mean something when we find it. “When scientific programs are judged by popular acclaim we inevitably have over-emphasis on the spectacular. That is just what we have today. The deeply important scientific advances moving today are not easy to understand. If they were they would have been accomplished long ago. Outstanding scientific progress, which will most affect the lives and health of our children, is not grasped by many.” Objecting to the practice of the government and the armed forces of utilizing universities in the management of secret programs, Bush said: “It should never be forgotten that the main task of the universities is to educate men. The country will need skilled professional men in the future as much as it will need new knowledge. As we now go we are not meeting this challenge sufficiently. Every research program placed in a university should be so ordered that its product is not only new knowledge but skilled educated men.” (Text)
nasa announced launch responsibility for Agena and Centaur space vehicle programs had been transferred from nasa Launch Operations Center to nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Field Project Branch at Cape Canaveral. Launches would be conducted under technical direction of Ageiia and Centaur project managers, nasa Lewis Research Center. Transfer would permit log to concentrate on manned space flight and associated launch vehicles, including Saturn series developed under management of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Overall project responsibility for Agena and Centaur programs had been assigned to nasa Lewis Research Center in December and October, respectively. (nasa Release 63-19)
Dr. Walter C. Williams, Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and Flight Operations, msc, was named NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Operations. He would supervise manned space flight operations at msc, msfc, and loc. During manned space flight missions he would have full authority and responsibility for conduct of the flights. His appointment would become effective Nov. 1, 1963. (nasa Release 63-237)
In address at dedication of General H. H. Arnold advanced range instrumentation ship (aris), Cape Canaveral, General B. A. Schriever (usaf) said: “Instrumentation is a key element of technology in the Space Age. It plays a crucial role in the rapid progress of our research and development efforts, through the provision of more complete and accurate information on test results. As a result, far fewer tests are required than was formerly the case . . . .” Comparing the 2,500 test firings of V-2 to the less than 50 of Thor irbm, he said: “Better instrumentation is a major factor in this dramatic reduction.” He recalled General Arnold’s foresight “demonstrated as far back as 1917,” when he and Charles Kettering worked on development of “The Bug” pilotless guided airplane—in many ways “25 years ahead of its time . . . .” “Throughout his career ‘Hap’ Arnold was a pioneer of new ideas . . . .” In 1938 he predicted development of variable-wing aircraft. In 1944 he organized Army Air Forces Scientific Advisory Group, under Dr. Theodore von Karman, charging these scientists to “‘think about supersonic speed airplanes, airplanes that would move and operate without crews, improvements in bombs . . .; communications systems . . . television, weather, medical research; atomic energy, and any other phase of aviation which might affect the development and employment of the air power to come ....’” (Text, afsc Release 35-R-36)
Army Transportation Corps loaned 20 sea-going barges to nasa for use in space vehicle development program. Barges would be used initially for transporting supplies from Marshall Space Flight Center to Mississippi Test Operations; later, they would be fitted with liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen tanks to store the propellants for fueling Saturn S-IC static-test boosters. (Marshall Star, 3/6/63,1)
The ratio of nasa scientists and engineers to NASA-contractor scientists and engineers should be 1 to 4 by early 1964. It was 1in Jan. 1960,1:3 in Jan. 1963. (Space Bus. Daily, 11/18/63, 265)
Next Soviet space flight would be “spectacular” and “more complicated,” four Soviet cosmonauts indicated in Evening Moscow interview. The cosmonauts—Yuri Gagarin, Gherman Titov, Andrian Nikolayev, and Pavel Popovich—said U.S.S.R. was busily preparing for a forthcoming space launching, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/12/63)
Gov. Frank Clement of Tennessee signed bill authorizing construction of $2 million Tennessee Space Research Institute on site donated by usaf near Arnold Engineering Development Center, Tullahoma. Institute would be operated by Univ. of Tennessee. Mission of institute would be “to offer graduate level courses in aerospace science and engineering while carrying on research in these fields for both Government and industry.” {Nashville Tennessean, 3/16/63; Nashville Banner, in CR, 3/18/63, A1479)
Second anniversary of Titov’s orbital space flight in vostok ii; Pravda using occasion to announce the cosmonaut and his wife were expecting the birth of a baby, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 8/7/63)
Summary article entitled “Ames Hypervelocity Free-flight Research’’ by Alvin Seiff in Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering reviewed shock-tube wind tunnel and light-gas gun experiments at Ames Research Center. Model speeds up to 41,000 fps and at air densities from 0.0002-0.16 times that at sea level have been achieved. {A&AE, 12/63,16-23)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center, said in Kansas City that there was no conflict between science and religion. “Science stands to better understand creation. Religion stands to better understand the creator. Science seeks to harness the forces of nature around us; religion and ethics seek to harness the forces of nature within us.” (Kansas City Times, 11/15/63)
Senate passed nasa authorization bill (H.R. 7500) providing $5,511,520,400 in FY 1964, a restoration of $307,801,000 cut by House action Aug. 1. Senate bill would authorize $4,225,275,000 for research and development; $539,185,000 for administrative operations; and $747,060,400 for construction of facilities. Senate adopted amendment to bar, under certain circumstances, any authorized funds for r&d for exclusive benefit of any person providing satellite communication services (other than Government agency) and amendment requiring that, in addition to study of location for Electronic Research Center, there would be written notice to Administrator that study committee had no objection to selected location. Bill wTas ordered to House-Senate conference committee. (CR, 8/9/63, 13877-889, 13893-912)
Interplanetary space simulation was achieved in a 6-ft.-wide, lO-ft.-high-space tank at the nasa Lewis Research Center. This included solar simulation and vacuum of 10~13 torr. (Lewis Chronology, 3)
rca Board Chairman David Samoff, addressing American Friends of the Hebrew University in New York, predicted vast scientific and technological developments in the years ahead that “are so fundamental that they will alter the very structure of society and compel each of us to readjust some of our traditional concepts .... “Modem man—especially the would-be leader in society—has to be a culturally integrated individual, familiar with the sciences as well as the humanities. There cannot be two isolated cultures for the simple reason that there is only one society in which to live .... “I would propose that scientific and cultural education begin with the earliest school years and extend without interruption through college and into the professional schools. Specifically, courses in the social sciences and humanities should be related to the physical sciences. It seems to me highly desirable that science itself should be studied as a social phenomenon because of the great impact it has upon society .... “. . . scientific realities of tomorrow will surpass our vision of today. The great challenge before all of us is to make sure that the new knowledge and new instrumentalities shall be used constructively and not destructively. The powers of science and technology are neither good nor evil in themselves. Their capacity for good or evil lies in the use we make of them . . . .” (Text, OR, 12/4/63, 22087-89) December £: Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, announced that revised testimony refuted the earlier contention that 25 per cent of U.S. scientific manpower would be working on space programs by 1970: “I challenged the accuracy of that forecast. The next day the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee began hearings on nasa’s relations with universities .... “The best estimates are that 6 or 7 per cent—at most 10 per cent—might be involved. That is a long way from being an excessive drain on scientific brainpower.” (upi, NTT, 12/3/63, 47)	.	.
General Thomas S. Power (usaf) , CinC of Strategic Air Command, predicted at aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting that ‘‘space potentially offers unique military advantages, and we must anticipate that some nation or nations will endeavor to exploit such advantages to help them attain their political objectives .... We may find that, eventually, the only really surviv-able command and control structure would be one employing a maneuverable command post in space.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/24/63)
nasa announced Langley Research Center had requested industry proposals for studying manned obital research laboratory systems capable of sustaining a four-man crew in space for one year, (nasa Release 63-81; Langley Release)
Dr. Henry J. E. Reid, who was Director of naca’s Langley Research Center for 34 years prior to his retirement, was named “Elder Statesman of Aviation” by the National Aeronautic Association. (Langley Release)
At banquet of “Lectures in Aerospace Medicine,” School of Aerospace Medicine, San Antonio, Southwest Research Institute president Martin Goland said: “Our age is one of quickening technology, of economic opportunity accompanied by sharpened domestic and international competition, of changing social patterns and political structures. In the kaleidoscope of this environment, a major source of strength will be on the side of the nation which is creative and productive; the nation whose people are capable of exploiting for sound purposes the seemingly inexhaustible potential of science and technology. “Within this framework, it seems clear that we must view our space program as more than an assembly of scientific goals and technical objectives. So considerable is our intellectual and material investment in space that we cannot judiciously ignore its by-products, the opportunity to transfer knowledge and capabilities from space technology to other portions of our national effort. Each one of us must act as a catalyst in this diffusion of ideas . . . .” (Text)
. . . Government’s part in the research and development business has now reached the point where it commands attention because of its sheer size and propensity for growth. From here on, we will have to be more choosy in what we do, and better prepared to supply answers to questions about marginal costs and benefits. The budget this year for research and development is a husky $15 billion. Its growth potential dwarfs anything else in the budget. Someone has figured out that the doubling time for research and development as a fraction of national income is only 7 years, and that if this continued for 30 years research and development would rise to one-half of the national income.
nasa announced selection of Lear Siegler to negotiate contract for design study of “psychophysical information acquisition processing and control system” (Piapacs). Proposed system, mounted in pilot’s garment and headgear, would replace present system of sensors attached to pilot and would permit continuous acquisition of psychological and physical data, nasa pilots would test system in flights of aircraft including F-104, Jet Star, and X-15, at nasa Flight Research Center, (nasa Release 63-139; frc Release 13-63)
dod announced Army Corps of Engineers, New England Div., would provide design and construction assistance to nasa on proposed Electronics Research Center in Boston area. (dod Release 366-63)
Editorial in Indianapolis News stated: “The national interest, as well as the furtherance of Indiana’s economic well-being, would be served by the location ih this State of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s projected electronics research center. “. . . Indiana can offer transportation advantages, availability of trained young scientists, a favorable labor climate, coordination with established private industry, good living conditions and ample space for expansion. “Purdue and Notre Dame provide outstanding examples of what should be a top-priority site for installation of the $50 million facility proposed by nasa . . . .” (Ind. News, in (JR, 12/10/63, A7511)
Saturn project engineers James B. Bramlet and Robert E. Lindstrom, of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center Saturn Systems Office, said at aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting in Dallas that nasa heavy launch vehicle programs are on tight schedules but are “within the bounds of our capabilities .... [and can meet requirement for a] manned lunar landing in this decade.” (Huntsville Times, 4/23/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert R. Gil-ruth announced revision of management responsibilities, dividing operational from developmental activities within msc projects. Walter C.. Williams, Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and Flight Operations, would develop mission plans and rules, crew training, ground support and mission control complexes, and would manage all msc flight operations; concurrently, Williams would be Director of Flight Operations in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, with complete mission authority during flight tests of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo. James C. Elms, Deputy Director for Development and Programs, would manage all msc manned space flight projects, including total project planning, and would plan, organize, and direct msc administrative and technical support activities, (msc Release 63-88)
nasa Langley Research Center announced contract awarded to Basic Construction Co. for building to house synchrocyclotron of nasa’s Space Radiation Effects Laboratory at Oyster Point, Newport News, Va. (LaRc Release)
Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D.-Ark.), Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, stated on the Senate floor that he favored space exploration but considered the present large space budgets “an unwarranted diversion of resources from the Nation’s most pressing needs.” He favored President Kennedy’s proposal for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar exploration for two reasons: “First, it would greatly reduce the costs of space exploration, releasing funds for important domestic programs, such as education, employment, urban renewal, and conservation of resources; second, it would further reduce world tensions by opening up a significant new area of Soviet-American cooperation.” (CR. 10/2/63, 17598)
D. Brainerd Holmes announced his resignation as nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, effective some time next autumn. Holmes had joined nasa autumn of 1961, would return to industry “within the period of two years which was understood to constitute his obligation for government service at the time of his appointment.” (nasa Release 63-133)
Astronomers at McMath Hulbert Observatory of the Univ. of Michigan and at the U.S. Naval Observatory reported the first signs of a new 11-yr. solar cycle. Indications of a new cycle were the appearance of sun spots well above the sun’s equator and the reversed magnetic polarity of the disturbance. (Science Service, NTT, 11/18/63, 15)
Attempt to launch series of three Hopi-Dart wind research vehicles from nasa Wallops Station was canceled when first vehicle failed to perform properly. Tests, to gather wind-flow data at altitudes approaching 60 mi. for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, would be rescheduled after analysis of cause of rocket’s malfunction. (Wallops Release 63-21)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. were reported to have a draft of a resolution on legal aspects of space exploration and to be circulating it for comment to other members of the 28-nation U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space prior to formal submission. It was announced on Nov. 8 that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had reached general agreement. (Brewer, NYT, 11/17/63, 34)
Astronomers at Mt. Wilson and Palomar Observatories reported they had observed what they believed were five brightest objects in the universe. Joint research by astronomer groups at Mt. Wilson and Palomar, as well as Cal Tech’s Radio Observatory in Owens Valley, Calif.; Jodrell Bank Observatory in England; and astronomers in Australia, was presented in Cal Tech report, which said knowledge gained about the five objects may make possible optical study of objects nearly 10 or 12 billion light years away—the edge of the visible universe, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/17/63)	_
Addressing International Northwest Aviation Council in Edmonton, Alberta, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Educational Programs and Services James V. Bernardo said: “The destinies of all nations are inextricably entwined with aeronautics and space exploration. Aviation—or perhaps more appropriately, aerospace activities—will continue, on an ever-increasing scale, to have profound effects upon the lives of all people. “The frontiers of science and technology are limitless. The years ahead will bring about not only tremendous changes, but also an increased and unquenchable thirst for knowledge of the unknown beyond our earthly atmosphere. These years ahead will also witness, I’m sure, another great revolution in education, one which will give us a continuity and sequence in science and mathematics, from the kindergarten through the college graduate school. As the revolution takes place, great care must be exercised by the architects of the curriculum that we achieve a necessary balance. We must teach our young people—since the future lies with them—the physical sciences so that they can achieve our national goals in science and engineering. But we must also teach them the humanities so that they can use these achievements for man’s betterment. The two great branches of learning must be blended into the best possible educational program.” (Text)
An article in Aviation Week, by George Alexander, summarized the important advances in the Atlas test program: (1) 0.032-in. airframe, basically a stainless steel balloon relying on gas pressure for rigidity; (2) contaminant control in liquid oxygen systems; (3) early exploration of problems in staging: timing, hardware clearances, shifting center of gravity, flight control response and adaptability; and (4) handling of liquid oxygen to reduce geysering by using last-moment slug-filling to load the tanks. Of 87 research and development Atlas vehicles, 10 were classified as failures and 18 as partial successes. (SID, 5/20/63, 9; Av. Wk., 2/25/63)
With launching and recovery of 120-ft. balloon, Balloon Research Center at Palestine, Tex., completed its cosmic-ray study project. Today’s balloon floated to more than 10,000-ft. altitude to collect cosmic-ray data, (upi, NYT, 9/3/63,4)
nasa ordered its major manned space flight program contractors to freeze all new hirings and not replace any persons lost through normal attrition. Expected to save millions of dollars, the temporary action was taken while nasa was reassessing its budget programing for the current fiscal year, based on an expected appropriation of only $5.1 billion. (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/6/63)	....	.
Request for proposals to provide services and materials necessary for operating and maintaining X-15 “High Range” issued by nasa Flight Research Center. Range consisted of terminal station at Edwards afb and two up-range stations at Beatty and Ely, Nev. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/22/63,280)
More than 150,000 visitors visited nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, more than 50,000 visits recorded by persons on business. Biggest single attraction was Space Orientation Center, drawing about 83,000 visits during the year. (Marshall Star, 1/22/64, 1)
nasa Ames Research Center selected three companies for negotiation of contracts to study solar probe project—General Electric Co. Missile and Space Div., Martin-Marietta Co., and Philco Corp. Each contract would call for four-month study providing “information in depth for the procurement of any future Solar Probe spacecraft, should the program become fully authorized.” (Ames Release 63-19)
nasa announced selection of Genisco, Inc., to negotiate development, fabrication, and assembly contract lor man-carrying motion generator for research into guidance and psycho-physiological problems of space flight. Motion generator would be major component of nasa Ames Research Center’s Space Guidance Research Facility, expected to be operational in about two years, (nasa Release 63-146; Ames Release 63-26) iJu!/y2: jpl spokesman said tests showed deterioration of washer could have caused short circuit and overheating in ranger v lunar probe, which failed to generate power after launch Oct. 18, 1962, and passed within 450 mi. of moon Oct. 21. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/63)
nasa awarded a $236,520 grant to the Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz., to provide a building for processing, storage, and research of lunar and planetary photography. This would assist Lowell Observatory in fulfilling the request of the International Astronomical Union in August 1961 that Lowell establish a Western Hemisphere repository of lunar and planetary research materials corresponding to the Eastern Hemisphere center at Meudon, France, (nasa Release 63-235)
nasa Director of Aeronautical Research Programs Charles H. Zimmerman resigned to accept position with Army Material Command’s research and development directorate. Since June 1962, Zimmerman directed nasa’s aeronautical research programs including X-15, V/Stol research, and supersonic transport study. (Av. Wk.. 9/2/63,24)
Soviet news agency Tass announced launching of cosmos xiii (apogee: 209 mi.; perigee: 127 mi.; inclination to equator: 64° 58'; period: 89.77 min.). Tags stated that all systems were functioning and that onboard equipment was “intended for continuing outer space research in conformity with the program announced . . . March 16, 1962,” but gave no payload weight or specific mission details. In an interview in Guinea, Cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Pavel Popovich said that the Soviets plan more tandem manned orbital flights. In response to questions, they said that women sometimes have “physical superiority over men.” cosmos xiii was launched after 89 days of no announced Soviet space flight activity, longest period of space inactivity to date. ( upi, Wash. Post, 3/23/63, A8; Av. Wk, 3/25/63, 26; Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/22/63,1, afss-t Trans.)
nasa Ames Research Center announced award of contract to Westinghouse Electric Corp. Astronuclear Laboratory to study potential physiological radiation damage in space. One-year study would “attempt to understand the basic phenomena of biological response to cosmic radiation, and to develop the means of preserving man’s well-being and insure his survival during long periods of exploration in deep space. . . .” (Ames Release OS-22 ; nasa Release 63-107)
Columbia Univ. School of Journalism announced $131,000 award from nasa to evaluate nasa’s dissemination of space news and to study problems and competence of news media in reporting and interpreting space news, to determine whether better ways can be found to improve public understanding of space sciences and space exploration. Study would take 3 years, with comparable funds expected for the second and third years. Commenting on the grant, Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said: “It seems a strange expenditure, especially when we are desperately trying to maintain their budget . . . .” Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “It sounds like the agency is carrying out the Space Act by trying to find ways of better interpreting to the public the great technological developments in space.” Unnamed nasa spokesman said the grant was “a legitimate study fulfilling our Congressional mandate to keep the public informed.” (Toth, NY T, 7/13/63,21)
Reorganization at nasa Ames Research Center was put into effect by Director Smith J. DeFrance, designed to accommodate new Pioneer spacecraft program assigned to Ames. In addition to other changes, two new Assistant Directors were appointed: Assistant Director for Development, Mr. Robert M. Crane; and Assistant Director for Research and Development Analysis and Planning, Dr. Alfred J. Eggers. (Ames Memo For Staff, 1/31/63)
President Kennedy released report by special panel of President’s Science Advisory Committee, report concluding that exchange of scientific information “is an inseparable part of research and development .... [Scientists should] snare many of the burdens that have traditionally been'carried on by the professional documentalist .... Science can ultimately cope with the information expansion only if enough of its most gifted practitioners will compact, review and interpret the lit741-623 0—64-6 erature both for their own use and for the benefit of more specialized scientists . . . .” In releasing the report, President Kennedy said: “Strong science and teclmology is a national necessity, and adequate communication is a prerequisite for strong science and technology.” (nyt Co., Atlanta Journal <£■ Constitution, 2/17/63)
First meeting of nasa-usaf board to coordinate joint participation in Project Gemini. Board included nasa Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans and usaf Assistant Secretary Brockway McMillan as co-chairmen; Maj. Gen. O. J. Ritland; dod special assistant for space, L. L. Kavanau; nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes; and nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Defense, Adm. W. F. Boone. {M&R, 2/18/63, 9) February 8: Hawker Aircraft, Ltd., P-1127 jet fighter completed vertical take-off and landing test aboard aircraft carrier Ark Royal. Spokesman for the British company said P-1127 was first aircraft other than helicopter to achieve this feat. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/9/63; Rational Observer, 2/11/63)
President’s Award for Distinguished Civilian Service presented to: Dr. Alain C. Enthoven, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis; David D. Thomas, Director of faa Air Traffic Service; and Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory. (Av. Wk., 6/10/ 63,36) Jv/ne 12: Friends and associates of the late Dr. Edward R. Sharp, former director of Lewis, dedicated the Edward R. Sharp Medical Library at Southwest Community Hospital, Berea, Ohio. (lrc Release 63-39, Lewis Chronology, 5) Jwne 13: Responding to former President Eisenhower’s criticism of U.S. manned lunar program, Senator Edmondson (D.-Okla.) said on floor of the Senate: “We stand in the position of leader for the free world as we battle for superiority in this challenging field. We cannot afford to do less than we are now doing. “The national goals set by the President of the United States and ably administered by the distinguished James E. Webb deserve the united support of Americans, for it is this program which assures this country preeminence in space.” Rep. Charles H. Wilson (D.-Calif.) said on floor of the House: “Surely the critics of this program do not wish our country to be left behind in the space race ? . . . “In our own day and age, brave men are still exploring uncharted oceans. I have no doubt that these journeys, too, will be well justified and that once again in time the expense will be repaid many times over. “I suggest we study history a little more fully to prepare ourselves for the future. I regret that General Eisenhower will be pictured to our great grandchildren in future textbooks as being shortsighted and narrowminded . . . .” (OR, 6/13/63, 10168, 10248)
nasa and faa announced they were completing plans for joint study of supersonic transport operation, the study providing data for both (1) design and operation of a supersonic transport compatible with an evolving air traffic control system; and (2) definition of requirements for air traffic control system to handle supersonic commercial air transports. Study would be based on four different sst concepts evolved by nasa Ames and Langley Re: search Centers and on simulation of air traffic environments of today and of the 1970’s. The research would use flight simulation facilities of Langley Research Center and air traffic simulation facilities of faa National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center; it was scheduled to run through 1964. (nasa Release 63-53: faa Release #28)
nasa Flight Research Center announced award of $1.325-million contract to Lockheed-Georgia Co. to purchase Lockheed Jet-Star aircraft. Aircraft would be used for research investigation of aircraft flying qualities, automatic and manual control systems, pilot instrument displays, and pilot training, with special emphasis on supersonic transport research, (frc Release 2-63)
Catalytic Construction Co. of Philadelphia was selected by nasa for negotiations of contract to build, install, and test synchrocyclotron and related equipment and services for Space Radiation Effects Laboratory, to be built in Newport News, Va., under nasa Langley Research Center management. Expected to be completed in mid-1965, laboratory would be used for simulating high-energy corpuscular radiation encountered in proposed nasa space flights, and studies would include effects of radiation on spacecraft materials and components as well as means of shielding against radiation, (nasa Release 63-30)
Army Corps of Engineers awarded $1,701,368 contract to C&B Construction Co., Memphis, for' construction of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s components test facility at Huntsville, Ala. (dod Release 1569-63)
nasa’s Flight Research Center, faa, and U.S. Navy announced completion of a series of test flights simulating the supersonic transport aircraft (sst) flying in the air traffic control network. A Navy A5A jet aircraft was used to simulate the sot because its thrust-to-weight ratio enabled it to simulate closely the performance of the sst up to 50,000 ft. Some 21 flights were made into Los Angeles along Federal airways, starting from level flight at 50,000 ft. and mach 1.7, then decelerating to mach 1.4 and descending, dropping below the speed of sound before reaching 30,000 ft., and flying at 340 mph at 20,000 ft., not much faster tban present-day jet transports. Flight controllers reported no problems with descent and landing, although takeoff and climb did present more problems because of the high performance of the aircraft, (frc Release 31-63)
Sen. Albert Gore (D.-Tenn.) wrote in the New York Times Magazine about space law and the Dryden-Blagonravov agreements: “This agreement, though limited in nature, is significant if for no other reason than that it indicates there are some areas in which our two countries have found it possible to cooperate in outer space development. If successfully implemented it can, perhaps, lead to other and broader agreements. The Dryden-Blagonravov agreement relates to scientific and technical matters. It was achieved despite political differences. Similarly, agreement should be possible on some legal questions if we can isolate those questions from political considerations. “Perhaps if we can build on these small areas of agreement an escalation of the arms race into outer space can be avoided. It is conceivable that science and technology, so often in history energized by the threat or event of war, may, through space research and development, pave the way for removal of the barriers erected by hate, fear, and suspicion.” {NTT Magazine, 11/10/63, 23 ff)
nasa was about to enter the prolonged-flight phase of its bioscience program, according to Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences. He cited negotiations now underway with GE to provide six 1,000-lb. recoverable biosatellites. These would be used for such flights as three-to-five day flights to study effects of weightlessness and radiation on plants and animals; 21-day orbital flights to study effects of weightlessness and absence of earth’s rotation on biological rhythms in plants and animals; and 14-to-30 day flights by small monkeys to study effects of prolonged weightlessness on the cardiovascular system, central nervous system, and general physiology and behavior. All studies would have importance for prolonged manned space flight. (Macomber, San Diego Union, 10/12/63)
Opening of Technical University of Berlin’s Institute for Elements of Space Travel was attended by Prof. Eugen Saenger, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Prof. Hermann Oberth, and other dignitaries of West Berlin and Univ. of Berlin. Prof. Saenger, former head of Research Institute for Physics of Jet Propulsion at Stuttgart, has been nominated as director of the new institute. (Bild [Hamburg], 1/8/63, in msfc SIN, 3/63, 5)
Wind-tunnel studies to evaluate aerodynamic drag and jet engine mass air-flow characteristics with 3/10-scale model of free-flight lunar landing test vehicle were begun at nasa Langley Research Center. Model was built at nasa Flight Research Center. Data from Langley tests would be supplied to Bell Aerosystems Co., building two full-scale lunar landing research vehicles under contract from Flight Research Center. (Av. Wk., 4/22/63, 77)
D-558-II Skyrocket dedicated in ceremony at Antelope Valley College, Lancaster, Calif., where it would be on permanent display. Designed and built by Douglas Aircraft Co. with cooperation of usn and naca, research aircraft was first to fly twice speed of sound (mach 2.01, on Nov. 20, 1953). Antelope’s Skyrocket was third model; first two were on display at Smithsonian Institution and Claremont, Calif., Air Museum, respectively. (Dedication Program)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center employee Dave M. McGlathery became third Negro registered at Univ. of Alabama, first at Huntsville Extension Center. (Smith, NYT, 6/14/63, 16)
Results of Research Institute of America’s survey of more than 1,400 businessmen on U.S. goals and national policy, published in General Electric Forum, revealed 21% considered present expenditure on space fully warranted, 41% considered it probably fully warranted, 27%—probably not, and 11%—not warranted. Other replies: To “In years immediately ahead, what should be level of space expenditure, in relation to gnp?” 6% said “sharply higher than present expenditures, 16%—a little higher, 38%—remain at about the present ratio, 24%—a little lower, and 16%—sharply lower. To “Assuming that national policy in the immediate future corresponds to your answer above, do you believe that the U.S. will exceed the Russians in space achievements by 1970?” 38% said probably will exceed the Russians, 44%—will approximately equal them, and 18%—probably will not equal them. Asked to identify a statement closest reflecting their opinion on what space policy should be, 66% checked the statement, “Our prime objective should be to sustain a prudent and orderly program of scientific progress in space achievements with little regard for who leads in this or that particular aspect of space technology.” Asked about the military role in the U.S. space program, 16% replied it should be greater, 67%—about the same, and 17%— smaller. (GE Forum, July-Sept. 63,31-39)
nasa awarded contract for designing and fabricating advanced four-man, six-month, life-support system to General Dynamics Corp.’s Astronautics Div. (gd/a). 18-month contract called for research, design, fabrication, testing, and delivery to nasa Langley Research Center of fully operating prototype life-support system for space flights, (nasa Release 63-126; Langley Release) Jwne 5: usaf conducted successful test-firing of “second generation” Minuteman icbm from Cape Canaveral, its re-entry vehicle impacting target area near Ascension Island, (dod Release 820-63)
nasa Ames Research Center was assigned direction of future Pioneer space probes, first of which would be launched in 1964. Newly created Space Sciences Div. would direct scientific aspects of the project. (San Jose News, 1/1/63)
Sen. E. L. Bartlett (D.-Alaska) introduced in Senate a bill (S. 2038) to establish a Congressional Office of Science and Technology (cost) to advise and assist members and committees of the Congress on matters relating to science and technology. Bill was referred to Senate Committee on Rules and Administration. (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/125)
Senators Warren G. Magnuson and Henry M. Jackson announced three nasa study contracts awarded to Boeing Co.: $199,920 contract to continue studying methods of recovering Saturn first-stage rocket boosters for reuse; $106,000 award to continue studying large clustered solid-propellant rocket motors; and $84,108 contract to study vehicle-integrated rocket powerplant with air augmentations. Contracts were let by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. (7/l 1/63)
At news conference on the phenomena of pneumatic tire hydroplaning, at nasa Hq., Walter B. Home and Robert C. Dreher of nasa Langley Research Center described results of experiments conducted with automobiles traveling on wet roads. On highway curve where maximum safe speed is posted as 45 mph, automobile with tire pressure of 25 psi did not reach hydroplaning speed until about 52 mph; automobile with tire pressure of 16 psi attained hydroplaning speed at 40 mph and swung out of control. Mr. Home said: “In this country, most, automobiles use tire inflation pressures between 16 and 30 pounds per square inch. This is a hydroplaning speed between 42 miles an hour and 55 miles an hour. “This hydroplaning speed range is well within the higher legal speed limits on roads in this country. Therefore, automobiles are real susceptible to hydroplaning.” He exploded the popular notion that reducing tire pressure makes driving on wet roads safer. “About the only place where it does any good to reduce the tire pressure is when you are driving on sand and you want to get higher flotation.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/17/63; nasa Fact Sheet; nasa News Conf. Transcript; nasa TN D-2056)
U.S. Army’s Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully performed inflight maneuvers in test flight at White Sands Missile Range. Missile was launched from underground cell, (dod Release 55763)
U.N. General Assembly’s Political Committee approved draft resolution and declaration on international cooperation in space sciences and law. The resolution endorsed recommendations by U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, which called for proposals on exchange of scientific information, consideration of agreements on legal principles “governing the activities of the states in the exploration and use of outer space," and other steps toward cooperation. The declaration was an endorsement of legal principles drafted jointly by U.S. and U.S.S.R. representatives last month. Provisions of the nine-point draft included statements that celestial bodies should be regarded as free territories not subject to national sovereignty; exploration of space should be for the benefit of all men of all nations; and all nations engaged in space exploration should observe international law. With adoption of the two drafts, the Political Committee concluded its present consideration of space exploration. (Lubasch, NTT, 12/6/63,1 & 17)
Warren Rayle, Lewis Research Center engineer, described work he is doing m watching for “ball” lightning, a phenomenon occurring during thunderstorms and appearing as a round, glowing object which may move slowly or hang in the air. Lewis scientists engaged in research with plasma propulsion devices think ball lightning may be much like the plasmas they work with in the laboratory, (lrc Release 63-31, Lewis Chronology, 4)
Researchers at the nasa Lewis Research Center ran a giant cryomagnet producing a field of 50,000 gauss over a one-foot-diameter test section. Although this was probably the largest magnetic field ever produced over such a volume, the cryomagnet would be enlarged from two to twelve coils with an ultimate design goal of 200,000 gauss. (Lewis Chronology, 2)
Arnold W. Frutkin, nasa Director of International Programs, outlined progress in nasa international programs before Third European Space Flight Symposium, Stuttgart, and said: “I believe that the essential meaning of this brief review of our own programs is that international pooling of efforts in the space field can be highly successful if it is rigidly directed to solid scientific and technical objectives of mutual interest, requiring significant rather than token contributions by both sides and thoughtful planning. Perhaps even more important is the clear evidence that these successes engender growing interest and greatly expand the basis for succeeding cooperative enterprises. “We are quite aware of our great indebtedness to European science and technology. We believe that the freest possible association of our respective programs, where they complement and support each other, is the soundest way to proceed if we are to continue to benefit in this way and if we are to reciprocate generously. I believe that in the long run cooperation between nasa for the United States and esro and eldo for Europe affords the best means to expand the hard core of cooperation in space research, and that such collaboration will have the greatest potential for further extension to forward-looking nations everywhere in the world . . . .” (Text)
Nike-Cajun sounding rpcket launched at Wallops Island, Va., to 46.5-mi. altitude, ejecting ozone about 10 sec. after trajectory peak. Objects of the nasa Lewis Research Center experiment were to: test excited oxygen theory of sodium airglow; detect concentration of atomic hydrogen in the atmosphere; measure altitude of sodium and hydroxyl airglow layers; and test a new technique for studying atmospheric chemical releases with rocket-borne photometers. (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching)
First child bom to space traveler—Tanya Titov, daughter of Maj. Gherman Titov (vostok ii orbital space flight) and wife Tamara. (AP, NYT. 9/25/63, 8)	_
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuing requests for proposals for vacuum chamber to generate space environmental conditions for use in thermochemical tests. Chamber would permit msc engineers to study function of propellant equipment, heat rejection, and energy collecting devices during long periods of space flight, (msc Release 63-144)
Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.) addressed the Columbian Women of George Washington Univ., Washington, D.C.: “From . . . space research and exploration will come knowledge—knowledge about the universe and its physical laws; knowledge about the earth on which we live; and knowledge about life itself. “The space program will stretch the abilities and minds of our people for years to come. It will provide a continuing, long-term stimulant to our economy. The magnitude of the task will test the resources and cooperative will of all major elements of our society. Still, space exploration, and manned space flight in particular, offers the United States the opportunity for unparalleled progress in the future. “Ultimately, within this century, the sum of all our efforts will give us the equipment, the knowledge and the skill to utilize space as we now utilize the seas and the air. “This then is our motive—our objective. To develop superior competence in space which will be available for any national purpose which may be required, whether it be for the peaceful use of space for the benefit of all mankind or to keep the peace. . . .” {CR, 1/24/63, A230-32)
Langley Research Center issued invitations to bid to 39 contractors for construction of the laboratory building of the nasa Space Radiation Effects Laboratory at Newport News, Va. With cost of the laboratory building estimated at $3 million, this is the last major contract to be awarded for the $12.3 million facility. (uaRc Release)
jpl awarded contract to Motorola, Inc., for fabrication and system integration of receiving subsystems operating at S-band frequencies in the Deep Space and Manned Space Flight tracking networks. Contract was follow-on to present contract awarded March 1962 under which Motorola designed and fabricated modules for S-band receiving subsystems for Deep Space Network. The additional equipment was for the nasa Unified S-Band System, in which receiving equipment for both networks are identical except for slight difference in operating frequency. Unified S-Band System allows all communications functions between ground stations and spacecraft to be accomplished at single frequency; provides more efficient power transfer between ground station’s directive antennas; and reduces by hundreds of times the galactic noise received on uhf frequencies, (nasa Release 63-284)
Senate and House passed H.R. 7500, bill to authorize nasa appropriations for FY 1964. Senate and House both adopted the conference committee’s bill authorizing $5,350,820,400 total; of which $4,119,575,000 was for research and development, $713,060,400 for construction of facilities, and $518,185,000 for administrative operations. (CR, 8/28/63,15298-303,15268-270)
nasa Langley Research Center announced selection of E. W. Muller, Contractor, Inc., of Newport News for preparing the site for nasa Space Radiation Effects Laboratory, Newport News, Va. (Langley Release)
First stage of Saturn SA-5 vehicle was static-fired in 142.-sec. test at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Eight-engine cluster was fired at full thrust of 1.5 million lbs. (Huntsville Times, 3/14/63)
Atomic Energy Commission awarded full-power license to operate the 60 megawatt Plum Brook research reactor to the Plum Brook Station of nasa Lewis Research Center, (lrc Release 63-3, Lewis Chronology, 1)
usaf announced series of 27 upper atmosphere chemical releases (Project Firefly III), completed in mid-December, had “ended a four-point basic research program aimed at learning more about the ionosphere.” Information gathered during tests, which were made at Eglin Gulf Test Range, would eventually aid pilots of X-20 vehicle. ( dod Release 70-63)
dod announced study of emergency re-entry from manned space flight was being conducted by Armour Research Foundation under direction of afsc Flight Dynamics Laboratory. Armour study would be based on theoretical re-entry vehicle with crew of three or less, performing in low earth orbits, re-entries, and short duration missions. Armour would provide afsc Flight Dynamics Laboratory with design criteria and drawings for controllable emergency escape systems enabling the vehicle to land in relatively small area, (dod Release 441-63)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Director of the White House Office of Science and Technology, appeared before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee to request restoration of $245,000 that the House had cut from his office’s $1,025,000 budget request. If the cut were not restored, he said, he would have to cut back his 29-member staff just as the one-year-old organization was beginning to “realize some of the potential foreseen for it as a new innovation in the Federal science structure.” (NYT, 10/15/63, 25)
First anniversary of first tandem manned space flight, which began Aug. 12, 1962, when vostok rv piloted by Lt. Col. Pavel R. Popovich was launched into nearly same orbit as that of vostok iii piloted by Maj. Andrian C. Nikolayev, launched into orbit less than 24 hrs. earlier. At one point the two spacecraft were within 6.5 km. (4 mi.) of each other, according to Soviet newspaper Pravda. Upon landing Aug. 15, Maj. Nikolayev in vostok in had completed 64 earth orbits, 1,645,000 mi.; and 95 hrs., 25 min. flying time. Colonel Popovich in vostok rv had completed 48 earth orbits; 1,242,000 mi.; and 70 hrs., 29 min. flying time.
Two flight tests of M-2 wingless lifting body conducted by nasa Flight Research Center, with Milton O. Thompson as test pilot. Towed to 13,000-ft. altitude by C-47 aircraft, M-2 glided each time to landing on Rogers Dry Lake bed in a few seconds over three minutes. These were sixth and seventh air-tow flight-tests of M-2 in series to investigate man’s ability to control M-2 during low-speed operations, particularly during landing phase. ( frc Release 17-63; M&R, 9/9/63,14)
Andrew G. Swanson, scientist at nasa Langley Research Center, was one of 45 outstanding young executives awarded an Alfred P. Sloan fellowship in executive development at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Award was announced by Dean Howard W. Johnson of mit’s School of Industrial Management. (Langley Release)
Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, said in address before faculty and student body of Vanderbilt Univ., Nashville, that for the U.S. space program, “1962 was an active and successful year .... iiiv mull 1 mV ana Varied acco*npiiSmiicn.iS Oi A »oiuu like to stress three that have very far-reaching significance. “First, we demonstrated beyond any shadow of doubt that the United States has the capability for manned travel and manned exploration of the solar system .... “Second, ... we completed the difficult round of decisions on how to get to the moon .... “Third, in the past year we more clearly defined the long-range goals of our space program .... Our long-range goals [are] to make America the leading spacefaring nation and to achieve pre-eminence in all major aspects of space science and space exploration . . . .” (Text)
General B. A. Schriever (afsc) said in address to seminar participants at National Science Fair, Albuquerque: “The most challenging scientific enterprise we have today is the exploration of space. There are several reasons why this new region is of great importance to us. First of all, it is an unknown and unexplored medium, which is certain to contain many surprises. Second, it is a tempting region for a nation that is bent on aggression. Soviet leaders have shown a keen awareness of both the psychological and military aspects of space exploration. They have boasted repeatedly that they could use their space technology for aggressive purposes. We cannot afford to leave our space frontier unguarded. “Space exploration is also important for another reason. It greatly stimulates the advance of science by serving as a natural focus for intensive research in virtually every area of science and technology .... “Today’s methods of taking scientific measurements are far more accurate than those of the past, and they are improving all the time. For example, a year and a half ago we were able to measure speeds on our Holloman sled track to an accuracy of about one part in 40,000. Today that accuracy has been increased to about one part in 150,000 . . . .” (Text)
Three-year tektite research program described in Journal of Geophysical Research by G. S. Hawkins of Boston Univ., Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, and Harvard College Observatory. On the basis of extensive data obtained in their research, combined with previously known data on tektites, the researchers concluded that tektites originated from terrestrial impacts bv meteorites. (Joum. of Geophys Research, 2/1/63, in msfc ST ID, 3/11/63, 5-6)
Gov. Nelson Rockefeller was preparing his proposal for establishment of New York science and technology institution, it was reported. Proposed state institution would offer both undergraduate and graduate study in science and technology. Rockefeller and state university trustees were expected to appoint committee of educators and scientists to develop detailed plans. (Orlando Sentinel, 1/5/63)
Selection of Republic Aviation Corp. for negotiation of Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory (Aoso) contract announced by nasa. Under $5.5 million contract, Republic would complete Phase I of Aoso development, including detail design, systems engineering, reliability assessment, limited hardware development of critical systems and components, and trade-off analysis, (nasa Release 63-147)
Moscow Pravda announced Yevgeny Alexandrov, head of research laboratory in Moscow Mining Institute, had discovered a new law of physics which corrects the laws of Sir Isaac Newton. Newspaper did not indicate which laws of Newton were corrected nor how they were corrected, but it said: “Up to now, mechanisms and machines of an impact nature [presumably mining equipment such as pneumatic drills] quickly went out of commission. Now their life will not only be extended immeasurably but also their power will increase many times over. “Innumerable examples can be given,” the newspaper said, but did not offer any. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/14/63, A3)
Dr. Otto Struve, prominent U.S. astronomer and former Director of National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., died at 66 in Berkeley, Calif. (Chicago Trib., 4/10/63)
Senate debate of H.R. 7500, nasa authorization bill for FY 1964, continued. Sen. Stephen Young (D.-Ohio) said: “The argument has been made that it is unwise to spend billions of dollars to explore outer space when we have so many unsolved problems remaining here on earth. In my judgment, however, and I am sure most of my colleagues agree, elimination of expenditures for space exploration would not necessarily result in the transfer of those funds to other forms of research. Moreover, an investigation of the funding of all forms of Federal research reveals that no real conflict exists between space exploration and research in other fields. “In fact, this investigation provides persuasive evidence that, rather than interfering with other forms of research, our space effort has stimulated a more favorable climate for research in general, so that progress is being made simultaneously in a great many areas totally unrelated to space . . . .” (CR, 8/8/63, 13751)
Newly created nasa Management Advisory Committee on Manned Space Flight visited nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Chairman of committee was Dr. Marvin J. Kelley, retired President and Board Chairman of Bell Telephone Laboratories; other members were Dr. Hendrick W. Bode, James McCormack, Dr. Hector R. Skifter, and Dr. Arthur E. Raymond. (Huntsville Times, 4/4/63)
nasa plans for new Electronics Research Center in the Greater Boston Area were outlined by Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, in his address before Engineering Societies of New England, Boston: “. . . The principal function of this research center will consist of research and component technological development in the related fields of communications, data processing, guidance, instrumentation, control, and energy conversion. It will be staffed and equipped to perform original work and applied research as well as evaluation of industry and university efforts. It will sponsor nasa research and development efforts in these areas with industries and universities and act as a focal point for nasa research in these related fields . . . .” (Text)
Four airmen ended simulated 30-day space flight mission inside a space cabin at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, San Antonio, Tex. The airmen breathed pure oxygen at simulated altitude of 27,500 ft. in preparation for future manned space flights. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/17/63)
In wake of rumors that nasa was planning three-day manned space flight for August, nasa affirmed its announced plan to end Project Mercury with MA-9 flight in April unless unforeseen problems arise in that flight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/30/63)
Speaking in Tampa, Fla., at a ceremony celebrating the 50th anniversary of the first scheduled air service in the U.S., President Kennedy contrasted the first air service between Tampa and neighboring St. Petersburg with today’s jet travel. Looking ahead, he said that “within our sight, if not yet within our grasp, is the day when men will routinely fly through space at 25 times the speed of sound.” As soon as 1975, the President predicted, “metroplanes” would take off from the center of one city and land in the center of another, while supersonic jet transports would be crossing the oceans at 1,400 mph. And beyond that would be “hypersonic transports” flying at mach 6 to 8. (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/18/63)	_
Final parcel of giant 6,000-acre Plum Brook site near Sandusky, Ohio, was transferred from Army to nana jurisdiction, nasa Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, operates the Plum Brook Station. (Lewis Chronology, 2)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of nasa Lewis Research Center, told Chicago press conference that trouble in Centaur launch vehicle had been corrected. Centaur was proceeding at Lewis under highest national priority (DX) and would be developed on schedule to launch Surveyor lunar spacecraft and Mariner interplanetary spacecraft in 1965. Dr. Silverstein pointed out new testing philosophy for Centaur called for more extensive and qualitative ground test before flights. (Chicago Sun-Times, 1/10/63; Chicago Daily News, 1/10/63)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, the President’s Scientific Adviser, testified before House Science and Astronautics subcommittee on the Federal role in science and technology. He indicated that the tremendous surge in development of military weapon systems that had been the principal cause of the 15-to-20 per cent increase in the Federal science and technology budget each year for the last several years would level off. Now the effort would shift from military systems to bringing technology “to bear on serving the collective needs of our people.” He was concerned lest without the defense motive the Nation slip back into indifference toward support of science, particularly the basic research that provided the new ideas for further advances. He also said that he not only supported the U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative lunar landing proposal but that he had often commended the idea to the President. (NYT, 10/17/63; Space Bios. Daily, 10/17/63, 98)
nasa requested industry proposals for design and construction of a “prototype six-month life support system for four men”—a 2,600-cu.-ft. cabin in which four-man crews would make simulated space flights lasting six months. Proposals were due at nasa Langley Research Center by Feb. 26. (upi, Wash Post, 2/7/63, A13)
Results of industrial survey made bv Univ. of Denver Research Institute under nasa contract were released, survey based on questionnaires of 988 companies. Results indicated: (1) transfers of technology from Government-sponsored research and development to private industries was the most important contribution of space-related programs to civilian sector of nation’s economy; (2) space related r&d stimulates both basic and applied r&d of improved materials, processes, and techniques, as well as new test and laboratory equipment ; (3) space-related r*d output contributed to cost reduction in both commercial manufacturing and fabrication methods; (4) institutional and economic barriers exist and must be surmounted in the transfer process; (5) time lag exists between development of new or improved technology whether through industrial or Government-sponsored research and its ultimate utilization, nasa Office of Technology Utilization would use this information to determine ways of accelerating transfer of nasa’s technological advances to civilian/industrial community, (nasa Release 63-197: Text)
dod announced two single-engine Cessna 180 airplanes of usn Arctic Research Laboratory made deepest known light-plane penetration of Arctic Ocean Basin when they landed May 24 at North Pole. From May 21 to June 2, nine sites were occupied on pack ice so that scientists could collect scientific data on gravity and on ice conditions. ( dod Release 814—63)
Both Houses cleared for the President the Independent Offices Appropriations bill (H.R. 8747), including $5.1 billion nasa appropriation for FY 1964 ($612,000,000 less than requested). Of this amount, $3,926,000,000 was for research and development; $680,000,000 for construction of facilities; and $494,000,000 for administrative operations. House agreed to Senate amendments (unresolved in conference committee report): Amendment 82 provided that a joint venture to land a man on the moon may not be undertaken with any other nation without the consent of the Congress; Amendment 84 provided that no part of nasa’s appropriation could be transferred to any other Government agency for research without approval of the Bureau of the Budget, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. II/2Q2; (JR, 12/10/63, 22788-95)
nasa Ames Research Center announced laboratory synthesis of Adenosine Triphosphate (atp) molecule, universal medium of energy exchange in earth’s life-forms, atp was most complex molecule yet produced in a laboratory, according to Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma of Ames Exobiology Div., who performed the experiment by shining ultraviolet light on nine combinations of chemical mixtures. Dr. Ponnamperuma said the nine different mixtures may have resembled composition of earth’s oceans at the dawn of life four billion years ago. “Such experiments are lending significant support to the theory that biological molecules, which are the prerequisites of life, could have appeared by the interaction of forces and materials which existed on the earth before life did.” Collaborating in the atp synthesis were Dr. Carl Sagan of Smithsonian Astrophysical Laboratory, on the theoretical level, and Ruth Mariner of Ames. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/18/63)	_
Winners of nasa Certificates of Outstanding Achievement at 12th annual Tidewater Science Congress, Norfolk, Va., were announced by Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center. Awards were made to high school students for their exhibits in six fields of science and were in addition to regular Tidewater Science Congress prizes. Mr. Thompson said this marked beginning of annual nasa awards program in conjunction with Tidewater Science Congress and at regiohal fairs in four states. (Langley Release)
License granted by the Atomic Energy Commission for operation of low pressure, low power (100 kw) Mock Up Reactor to Plum Brook Station of nasa Lewis Research Center. The mtur would be used to determine the effects of experiments on the radiation flux in the core of its high-power twin, the Plum Brook 60-megawatt reactor. Also, experiments requiring low-level nuclear bombardment would be run in the mur. (Lewis Chronology, 3)
Robert Hotz wrote in Aviation Week and Space Technology “It is an inevitable historic trend that as new technology is transformed from the spectacular experimental stage to reliable operational use, peripheral public interest lags almost in proportion to the increase in technical significance. For example, the world press could write about little else for months after Charles Lindbergh made the first solo transatlantic aircraft flight from New York to Paris just 36 years ago this month. Last year more than two million people followed his trail across the transatlantic airway—most of them in jet transports taking about one-fourth the time of Lindbergh’s flight. Yet only a few obscure statistical paragraphs in the daily press recorded this tremendously significant perspective on the trail Lindbergh blazed. “And so it is likely to be wTith manned space flight, as it passes from the experimental flight-test phase into reliable operational {>erformance. . . . [MA-9] is less exciting than the first breath-ess attempt of man simply to survive short-duration space flight. But it is the type of foundation on which future capability can be built solidly. . . . “Mercury must go down in history as one of the most successful technical programs this nation has ever had. . . .” (Av. Wk., 5/20/63,21)
First Block II flight configuration of Saturn I space vehicle, SA-5, was static-fired for 33 sec. at Marshall Space Flight Center, developing full 1.5 million lbs. of thrust. All objectives of the firing were met. (Marshall Star, 3/6/63,1)
nasa Flight Research Center announced award of $128,675 to Comcor, Inc., for service and maintenance of computer system used to simulate flights of X-15 aircraft. Computer system is capable of providing actual X-15 performance and stability conditions that may be expected in flight, (frc Release 3-63)
Walter C. Williams and J. C. Elms assumed duties as deputy directors of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, under M6C Director, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth. Williams, formerly msc Associate Director, became Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and Flight Operations; concurrently he was named Director of Flight Operations in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight. Elms was appointed msc Deputy Director for Development and Programs, with primary management responsibility for spacecraft development. (MSC Roundup, 11/28/62, 1)
Quoting President Kennedy’s Inaugural Address, in which he said, “Let both sides seek to invoke the wonders of science instead of its terrors. Together let us explore the stars . . .,” New York Times editorial stated: “When the President spoke these words, there was far more reason to think his idea an impractical one than there is today. Of course there are difficult problems still in the way of serious Soviet-American cooperation on a manned space flight. But the financial, political and scientific advantages to both sides of a joining of forces in this area would be so great that every opportunity should be seized to explore this possibility with the Soviet Government. Moscow’s feelers in this direction should be followed up, not rebuffed out of hand . . . .” {NYT, 9/19/63, 26)
nasa-dod agreement on Manned Orbital Research and Development System (mords) was signed, which required aacb to coordinate ail study contracts. (Joint nasa-dod Release)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wemher von Braun announced reorganization of msfc, designed to strengthen the Center’s dual function of performing in-house r&d and monitoring industrial contracts. In Office of the Director, Deputy Director Dr. Eberhard Rees was designated Deputy Director-Technical, and Deputy Director H. H. Gorman, Deputy Director-Administrative. Hans Maus was designated Director of newly formed executive staff replacing msfc Central Planning Office. In second major group, msfc’s nine technical divisions were formed in new Research and Development Operations, with Hermann Weidner as Director. Third major group was new Industrial Operations, comprised of msfc elements concerned with work performed bv industrial contractors, and headed by Robert Young. (Marshall Star, 9/4/63,1, 3; N.O. Times-Pic., 9/1/63)
Testifying before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Edmond C. Buckley, Director of nasa Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, described basic support job that tracking and data acquisition provide to nasa’s flight projects, indicated major additional resources required, and concluded that “the success of the [space flight] mission depends on our ability to communicate, to receive telemetered data, to track, and to command.” (Testimony)
nasa Langley Research Center announced selection of the Boeing Co.’s Transport Div. and the Lockheed-Califomia Co. to negotiate two nine-month study contracts. Studies would evaluate four concepts of supersonic commercial transport investigated by nasa Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center and would provide information on feasibility of these four concepts through engineering investigations. Their evaluations would provide basis for and serve as guide to nasa’s future supersonic transport research programs. ( nasa Release 63-7; Langley Release)
In a speech at the 1963 Corporate Leadership Dinner, Detroit, Michigan, Robert W. Samoff, Chairman of the Board of nbc, said: “Within the past quarter century alone, scientific research has more than doubled the inventory of human knowledge. “The simple fact that we have shortened the distance between research and product development has itself altered and enriched American life immeasurably, and has created a potential for raising the living standards of people eveiy where .... “Historically, man’s adaptation to new circumstances has proceeded by fits and starts, aided by a generous allotment of time in which to accomplish massive transformation. But now science and technology are pumping a new form of quick-change fuel into the lifestream of civilization, and the time is past when we might count upon years of grace in which to alter concepts and methods to suit a differing environment. Today the unprecedented rate of change we experience—and can anticipate— is a fact unique in human experience, calling for more rapid and drastic accommodations than have ever before been required.” (Text)
In a ceremony coincident with nasa’s fifth anniversary, Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa’s Langley Research Center, presented a model of a Mercury space capsule to the new municipal aerospace park in Hampton, Va. (Newport News (Va.) Times-Herald, 10/1/63,13)
In addendum to speech delivered last Dec. 30, Dr. James A. Van Allen retracted his criticism of President’s Scientific Advisory Committee concerning radiation effects of U.S. high-altitude nuclear test in July. Dr. Van Allen said his criticism should have been directed toward joint nasa-aec-dod committee headed by Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, President’s special assistant for science and technology and also chairman of President’s Science Advisory Committee. Addendum appeared in published version of speech in bulletin of St. Louis Citizen’s Committee for Nuclear Information. ( nytns, Chattanooga Times, 2/14/63) During February: Four men spent 14 days in slow-rotation room simulating slowly-rotating space station, in NASA-sponsored experiment at Navy’s School of Aviation Medicine, Pensacola, Fla. “No serious disturbance of a psychological or physiological nature was encountered,” and no change was found in conceptual reasoning, physical performance, perception, and sensory ability. No important changes in blood pressure, respiration, or pulse rate were observed during the experiment. (Av. Wk., 3/4/63, 59)
S-l stage for Saturn SA-5 launch vehicle arrived at Cape Canaveral, having left nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., by barge Aug. 10. (Av. Wk., 8/26/63, 33)
U.K.’s newest commercial jet aircraft, the bac 111, crashed in a field in southern England during a test flight, killing all seven crewmen. The British Aircraft Corp.’s twin-jet, 74-passenger 111 was planned as a replacement for the prop-jet Viscount, bringing jet service on short-haul routes. Prior to the crash, the aircraft had had some 80 hours of flight test. (NTT, 10/23/63, 66)
Henry F. Auter, Chief of Electrical Systems Engineering Branch of Test Div., nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, appointed Deputy Manager of msfc Mississippi Test Operations. (Huntsville Times, 6/15/63) Jwne 16-19: Flight of vostok vi with Lt. Valentina V. Tereshkova, first woman in space, conducted by U.S.S.R. Launched from Baikonur, vostok vi completed 48 earth orbits in 70 hrs. 50 min.; initial orbital path was 141-mi. apogee, 112-mi. perigee, 88.3-min. period. Shortly after entering orbit, Tass reported, Lt. Tereshkova established radio communications with Lt. Col. Bykovsky in vostok v; the two cosmonauts then radioed joint message to Premier Khrushchev. Tass stated flight of vostok vi was being made “to continue the study of the effect of various space-flight factors on the human organism, including a comparative analysis of the impact of these factors on the organisms of a man and a woman; to carry out new medical-biological research and to further improve and perfect the systems of piloted spaceships in conditions of simultaneous flight.” During initial orbit vostok v and vi came within about five km. (three mi.) of each other, apparently closest distance achieved. Cosmonaut Tereshkova, whom Tass described as having never piloted an aircraft, landed bv parachute in Kazakhstan. After she and Cosmonaut Bykovsky landed, Tass issued statement on flight results: “New valuable data have been obtained about the influence of different factors of a space flight of long duration on the organisms of man and woman. Rich factual material necessary for further perfection of the systems of piloted space ships has been obtained.” (Tass, Izvestia, 6/18/63, 1, afss-t Trans.; NYT, 6/17/63-6/20/63, Iff) Jwne 16: Results of six-year experimental study of 25 generations of mice exposed to large radiation doses were reported in New York Times. Conducted by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, study disclosed large doses of radiation over long period of time have an “amazingly small” effect on mice: no evidence of malformations was found, and there appeared “to be no threat to genetic extinction of the species.” (Plumb, NYT, 6/16/63)
nasa announced signing of $456.6 million contract for Project Gemini spacecraft with McDonnell Aircraft Corp. Development of the two-man spacecraft began at McDonnell in December 1961 under preliminary letter contract. Contract called for 13 flightrated spacecraft, 12 of which would be used for space flight and one for ground testing. McDonnell would provide other services and equipment under the contract, including two mission simulator trainers, a docking simulator trainer, five boilerplate spacecraft, and three “static articles”—spacecraft for ground test evaluation in vibration and impact tests, (nasa Release 63-66; msc Release 63-71)
Soviet Ambassador to U.N., Nikolai T. Fedorenko, announced Soviets had broken off private talks with U.S. on uses of space and would submit its own declaration on space exploration to the Legal Subcommittee of the Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. (NYT, 4/17/63,1; Wash. Post, 4/17/63)
National Airlines President L. B. Maytag, Jr., told National Aerospace Education Council in Miami Beach that mach 2 commercial airliner would be far more economical and utilitarian than mach 3, usable only in transoceanic flight because of altitude requirements. Mach 2 aircraft could make transcontinental U.S. flights faster than mach 3 aircraft, which would have to cruise at 12-mi. altitude in order to prevent sonic boom damage. Mach 2 could be built of aluminum, but mach 3 airliner would have to be built of titanium and steel, Maytag said, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/11/63) July 10: Camera equipped with special synchronization system making it capable of taking 8 million pictures per sec. was reported in Washington Star. Synchronization system was devised by Pvt. 1/C R. Carey of Army Engineer Research and Development Laboratory, Ft. Belvoir, Va. (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/10/63)
Lewis Research Center tested a newly developed seal for liquid fluorine pumps. This seal eliminates the explosion inherent in previous seals for liquid fluorine transfer systems. (Lewis Chronology, 10)
usaf Minuteman icbm traveled more than 4,000 mi. down amr in “flawless” test flight, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/24/63; M<&R 1/28/63, 11)
Army Corps of Engineers announced start of construction of world’s largest structure, the Vertical Assembly Building for Saturn V launch vehicle, vab is being built on Merritt Island, adjacent to Cape Canaveral, Fla. As design and construction agent for nasa’s manned space flight facilities, Corps was managing construction contracts in Merritt Island for nasa Launch Operations Center, (dod Release 1141-63)
Willis B. Foster became Director of new Manned Space Science Div. of nasa’s Office of Space Science and Applications. Formerly Deputy Assistant Director for Research in dod’s Directorate of Defense Research and Engineering, Mr. Foster would direct liaison and scientific support of the manned space flight program, including the criteria and selection of scientist-astronauts and scientific r&d in support of manned space flight, (nasa Release 63-242)
Cumberland Plateau Seismological Observatory, near McMinnville, Tenn., was dedicated. Observatory was last of four U.S. observatories designed to measure earth movements as small as one-millionth of an inch and built to specifications set by 1958 nuclear testban conference in Geneva. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/14/63)
nasa’s Langley Research Center asked 36 companies for proposals on Project Scanner, a spacecraft that would establish the radiation characteristics of the Earth’s horizon and develop horizonscanning techniques. Program would involve two flight models complete with re-entry heat shield, plus one backup. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/29/63,165)
Sen. Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.) said in St. Louis that dod’s cancellation of Dyna Soar (X-20) manned space flight project probably would accelerate production of Gemini capsule by McDonnell Aircraft Corp. of St. Louis, thus benefiting employment and economy of St. Louis. (St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 12/11/63)
Ground-breaking ceremony for new astrophysics and space research laboratory in Chicago, part of Enrico Fermi Institute for Nuclear Studies, Univ. of Chicago announced. {Chic. Trib., 4/28/63)
In an address to the Press and Union League Club of San Francisco, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said that the two basic policy questions repeatedly raised concerning the U.S. space program were: (1)	“Is exploration of the moon an objective of sufficient value to our drive for space leadership to warrant a total investment of as much as $20 billion in this decade, and in the next fiscal year at a rate that requires two-thirds of our [nasa] space budget?” (2)	“Is the pace at which we are proceeding and the rate of expenditure which is required to explore the moon by 1970, necessary to insure eventual pre-eminence in space, and reasonable in the light of our other pressing national needs?” In speaking to these questions, Mr. Webb traced the evolution of the U.S. space program and the determination of the national objectives in space after the strategic surprise of sputnik i. He ' discussed the central considerations of world leadership in science and technology, and the role of space exploration and exploitation in national affairs. He reviewed progress to date and the urgent requirement for full public understanding of the meaning and purpose of space exploration. (Text)
Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center, was awarded honorary Doctor of Science degree by College of WTilliam and Mary. On previous day, he was awarded honorary Doctor of Science degree by Univ. of Michigan. (lorc Release, 6/10/63)
nasa report released on Project Mercury flight MA-8 (Oct. 3,1962), in which Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., said: “I was also impressed with the fact that . . . [under the different lighting conditions that prevailed, the separated sustainer stage] was almost black in appearance, rather than the shiny silvery vehicle that Astronauts Glenn and Carpenter had seen at this time and that I had observed on the launching pad .... “At about 10 minutes 30 seconds, I went back to flying-by-wire, low, and tracked the sustainer as it traversed down through the window, and it was a thrill to realize the delicate touch that it is possible to have with fly-by-wire, low. . . . The control system was so effective that it just amounted to a light touch and maybe a few pulses in either axis to get the response I wanted. I could point the spacecraft at anything I wanted to. I could see the sustainer and track it, but I do not believe the relative motion problem would be so easy to solve that I would be able to steam along and join up with it. Although the relative velocity was on tne order of 20 to 30 feet per second, it was enough to cause a problem, particularly at a time when one is becoming acclimated to a new environment. These problems would be difficult to solve by one’s own trajectory analysis, since there were no systems aboard to aid the pilot in solving the problem. I think that when we build up to the rendezvous technique, one will need more time than that just at the point of insertion to effect this rendezvous, even with proper training. The use of time while orbiting in space is only earth relative, therefore if a rendezvous is not hurried, the task should be relatively simple .... “A smog-appearing layer was evident during the fourth pass while I was in drifting flight on the night side, almost at 32° South latitude. I would say that this layer represented about a quarter of the field of view out of the window, and this surprised me .... Seeing the stars below the glowing layer was probably the biggest surprise I had during the flight . . . .” (nasa SP-12, Results of 3rd U.S. Manned Orbital Space Flight, 49-55)
Eight U.S. scientists issued statement supporting U.S. program to land men on moon and countering recent criticism that instruments would be more valuable than men in lunar exploration. “This criticism raises important issues which underlie the United States space effort.” Statement cited “overwhelming” Congressional approval of President Kennedy’s proposal for a manned lunar landing within this decade, presented on May 25, 1961. “Was this support tendered for scientific reasons primarily, or was it motivated by a broader concern with national interests and national goals?” Project Apollo cannot be assessed on scientific merits alone, but even if it could be, “situations are bound to arise in which the human performance is indispensible.” Furthermore, “the momentum and significance of the lunar program are derived from its place in long-range United States plans for exploration of the solar system,” at heart of which is role to be played by man. The eight scientists were: Dr. W. Maurice Ewing, Director of Lamont Geological Observatory; Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of nasa Goddard Institute for Space Studies; Dr. Joshua Lederberg, Chairman of Genetics Dept., Stanford Univ. School of Medicine; Dr. Willard F. Libby, Director of ucla Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics; Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald of ucia Institute; Dr. Lyman Spitzer, Jr., Director of Prinpeton Univ. Observatory; Dr. Harold C. Urey, Prof, of Chemistry, Univ. of Calif.; and Dr. James A. Van Allen, Chairman of State Univ. of Iowa Physics Dept. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/27/63,1,13)
Department of Commerce asked the National Inventors Council, previously concerned with routing the ideas of independent inventors to dod, to broaden its activities and advise the Commerce Department on all steps the Federal government can take to spur invention and application of inventions. Dr. J. Herbert Holloman, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology, said application of new ideas was the biggest problem: “There is immense resistance to new methods. Innovation often comes from an invader—from a foreigner to a company, an industry or a country. For example, polymers came from the chemical industry to the textile industry. Fluorescent lighting came from Europe. The transistor was not developed by a radio-tube manufacturer.” (Jones, NTT, 10/11/63, 53)
nasa announced selection of Boeing Co. and Douglas Aircraft Co. for final negotiations leading to manned orbital research laboratory study contracts, nasa Langley Research Center would negotiate definitive three-month study contracts with the two companies. (nasa Release 63-120; Langley Release)
Feasibility of operating large numbers of ion engines together was established when Lewis Research Center successfuly operated an array of nine ion engines under simulated space conditions, (use Chronology)
Titan II launch from amr on Nov. 1, 1963, testing the effectiveness of new damping devices installed to reduce surges of propellant and oxidizer that created vibration levels unacceptable to Project Gemini manned space flight, was termed successful by Space Business Daily. Vibration level had dropped to a level acceptable to nasa, although usaf wanted further tests to confirm reliability. (Space Bus. Daily, 11/14/63, 251)
Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center, announced he had formally accepted on nasa’s behalf custody of 110 acres of Government land at Oyster Point, Newport News, Va., for use as site of Space Radiation Effects Laboratory being established by nasa. (Langley Release)
usaf announced Minuteman icbm was flown on 3,000-mi. research and development flight from Cape Canaveral, the launch conducted by an all-usAFcrew, (dod Release 247-62)
Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, stated his conviction that a belt of comets never seen from earth lies near the path of the planet Pluto. It was this comet belt, he though, that accounted for the disturbances in the orbit of the planet Neptune. Pluto had sometimes been credited with this effect, but Dr. Whipple said that Pluto could scarcely weigh as much as the earth, while the objects producing such an effect would have to weigh ten times as much as the earth. (Science Service, NYT, 11 /14/63,3)
George M. Low, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, was named Deputy Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, replacing James C. Elms. Low would assume his new duties in February, would continue present position until May 1. Low joined NACA Lewis Research Center in 1949, became Chief of Manned Space Flight Programs upon formation of NASA in October 1958. (nasa Release 64-13)
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, in paper delivered at iaf in Warsaw, examined man’s possible roles in space flight. As a transmitter, receiver, or control mechanism, he said, man’s capacity and speed are limited as compared with a machine’s. Boredom, he said, makes man ineffective “in tasks that call for long periods of relative inactivity.” However, he said, man “is the only available computer which can solve problems by logical induction, although unfortunately he cannot keep emotions out of this thought process. He can make sense of fragmentary information.” (nasa Release 64-229)
Dr. Winston E. Kock, Director of NASA Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, Mass., announced that Dr. Lester C. Van Atta and Dr. W. Crawford Dunlap would head two of the Center’s major operations. Dr. Van Atta would direct research in electromagnetics, including microwave and optical research. Dr. Dunlap would direct research in component technology, including solid state and materials and qualifications standards. (NASA Release 64-317)
Three persons were killed and eight injured when small missile exploded during preparations for test-firing from an airplane at Tyndall afb, Fla. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/19/64) containing hollow glass and plastic spheres in plastic honeycomb matrix to provide structural strength. Lunar Landing Research Facility and lunar mission simulators also were among the featured attractions. In conjunction with the inspection was the LaRc Open House on May 23. (Program; NASA Release 64-99; arc, larc, lrc Releases; AP, 5/18/64) nasa Administrator James E. Webb remarked on May 18: “Years ago, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, one of NASA’s ancestors, annually conducted field inspection trips so that the nation’s leaders in aviation could have a first-hand look at the progress in research made by the scientists and engineers of naca. “Today, we are gathered for a first-hand look at advanced research and technology not only in aeronautics, but also in the new realm of space. “It is most fitting that the revival of the annual field inspection trip takes place first at the Langley Research Center, for Langley was the first research center of the original naca, and is today, as it was in 1917, working at the frontiers of scientific and technical knowledge. . . . “It is important to remember that nasa is not an operating agency, in the sense that the Weather Bureau and the Air Force are. Rather, NASA’s role is much closer to that of the naca, a research and development organization. . . .” (Text)
NASA announced Langley Research Center would conduct tests with Boeing 707 air transport prototype to find ways to lower landing and takeoff distances required for large jet transports. NASA pilots and engineers would study performance and handling characteristics of the aircraft in three-month program. (NASA Release 64^100)
NASA announced Flight Research Center’s selection of Norair Div., Northrop Corp., for design and fabrication of two “lifting body” research gliders. The fixed-price contract was expected to amount to about $1 million. The research gliders would be used by FRC in studying problems of piloting advanced spacecraft during landing, (frc Release 7-64; NASA Release 64-93)
The faa awarded contracts totaling $6 million each to the Boeing Company and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for the design of a supersonic transport. In addition, contracts totaling $5 million each were awarded to the General Electric Co. and the Pratt & Whitney Division of United Aircraft Corp. for designs for the engines of the transport. Boeing and Lockheed would do extensive design work, wind tunnel testing, and structural studies aimed at refining designs to conform to the technical and economic requirements established by the FAA. The two engine contractors would develop detailed preliminary layout designs. (AP, NYT, 6J3/64!, 16; faa Release 64-55)
Paul L. Styles, Chief of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s Industrial Relations Office, was named Labor Director of NASA. In the new position, which he assumed in addition to his present one, Styles would advise NASA management officials at Hq. and all field installations on all aspects of labor-management relations, also would serve as NASA representative with Dept, of Labor, nlrb, President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, and Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service. (NASA Release 64-14)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director of NASA’s newly created Electronics Research Center, said in an interview with Missiles and Rockets that erc would issue between 35 and 40 contracts, averaging about 850,000 each for a total of 82 million, within the next four months. Most of the contracts were expected to run for one year. (M&R, 11/16/64, 10-11)
NASA Flight Research Center announced award of $82,000 contract to General Electric Co. for study of flight instrumentation for use on a research ramjet to be carried on the X—15A—2 aircraft. Major portion of the instrumentation would be thrust/drag measuring device and appropriate sensors to measure net thrust or drag transmitted to the X-15 aircraft from the ramjet. Design of this device also would provide capability to jettison the ramjet from the aircraft, (frc Release 21-64)
NASA announced appointment of two directors in Advanced Manned Missions Program, Office of Manned Space Flight. M. J. Raffensperger assumed duties last week as Director of Manned Earth Orbital Missions Studies. F. P. Dixon would become Director of Manned Planetary Mission Studies on June 15.	(NASA Release 64-137)
NASA Technology Utilization Division and the Food and Drug Administration reported that preliminary experiments by fda’s Dr. Jacqueline Ver-rett indicated that a piezo-electric transducer invented at NASA Ames Research Center could, for the first time, monitor the heartbeat of a chick embryo quickly, continuously, quantitatively, and without egg damage. Instrument was invented to measure impact of micrometeoroid dust in space by Ames’ Vernon L. Rogallo, who suggested its potential in chick embryo research. Through its Technology Utilization program, NASA informed fda of the innovation. FDA had been conducting research during past four years using chick embryo technique, correlated with animal tests, to study effects of drugs, pesticides, and food additives. (NASA Release 64-76)
Navy dedicated 61-inch astrometric reflector telescope at Naval Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz. Its quartz primary mirror was largest quartz reflecting surface manufactured to date. It would be used primarily to study white dwarf, red dwarf, and sub-dwarf stars. (Wash. Post, 6/18/64)
Harold Goldstein, Assistant Commissioner of U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, discussed changes in the labor force at symposium in New York. “We now have about 1.2 million engineers and scientists. Their numbers may rise to somewhere in the neighborhood of 2 million by 1970. “There productivity is also rising rapidly. New inventions can be made faster, because as science and technology have progressed the techniques available for analyzing a problem, the knowledge of scientific principles that can be brought to bear, the different types of hardware that are readily available to be adapted in a new invention are increasing at a geometric rate.” (Lissner, NYT, 4/26/64,85)
Moscow Radio quoted Cosmonauts Andrian Nikol’ayev and Pavel Popovich as saying their “standbys” were ready for space flight and that their scientists were “planning new experiments in space exploration.” (Wash. Post, 8/14/64)
nasa announced $300,000 contract award to Wayne State University to establish program to accelerate industrial application of aerospace-related technology. Organized under Wayne State’s Center for Applications of Science and Technology, the program would receive and would process technical information through NASA; evaluate applicability of the information to prospective industrial users; and train applications engineers to match needs of specific industries with specific innovations or new knowledge, (nasa Release 64-23)
nasa Ames Research Center announced that the Carl N. Swenson Co., San Jose, Calif., had been awarded a $992,000 contract to construct a reinforced-concrete vacuum chamber and Structural Dynamics Laboratory at ARC. The space chamber would be in the form of a ten-story, 30-million-lb., hollow concrete pentagonal tower with walls three feet thick, would accomodate full-scale segments or smaller-scale models of rockets and spacecraft, and could be evacuated to a pressure of ten millimeters of mercury, (arc Release 64-31)
NASA Director of Personnel Robert J. Lacklen said in Aviation Week he had ordered a “complete re-write” of NASA Management Manual section dealing with employees’ acceptance of gifts and gratuities from aerospace industry representatives. “The same thing has jumped us off on a re-write that caused the Defense Dept, to issue its new orders. That is the continuing appearance of NASA names on contractor entertainment lists.” (Av. Wk., 10/5/64, 18)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Douglas Aircraft Co. for S-IVB stage mockup to be used with Saturn V launch vehicle simulator at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Expected to cost about $5 million, the mockup would be used in study of prelaunch, launch, and orbital checkout of third stage. (NASA Release 64-123)
Appointment of Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control Div. of NASA OART, as Deputy Director of the new NASA Electronics Research Center, was announced by NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff. Appointment was effective Sept. 1. Dr. Kelley formed NASA research program in electronics and control when he was assigned to his position in November 1961; he joined NASA in March 1960 to establish development program for Agena launch vehicle, (nasa Release 64-199)
Sh. P. Darchiya, an astronomer from the Pulkovo Observatory, succeeded in photographing details of the lunar surface on the unexposed side of the lunar disk, i.e., under conditions of earthlight. Astronomers had previously recorded the luminescence of individual details of the lunar surface on the unexposed side of the lunar disk, but according to A. A. Mikhailov, Director of the Observatory, this phenomenon had never been confirmed by instrument observation. (Izvestia, 6/3/64, 4, atss-t Trans.)
Dr. Robert L. Sproull, Director of DOD Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), speaking at the dedication of the Xerox Corporation’s new research and development laboratory in Rochester, N.Y., cautioned that the “spillover” from the Federal Government’s own development programs would in the future be less beneficial to industry than it had in the past. Dr. Sproull explained that this would come about because of increased efficiency in Federal research programs and “good management will focus funds and attention ever more precisely on the specific mission and that mission is not the stimulation of American industry.” Dr. Sproull offered two suggestions to fill the gap created by the disappearance of Federal “spillover”: (1) that a governmental extension service be set up to channel the university-scientific effort into businesses unable to provide their own basic research; (2) that there be more encouragement of industry-research institutes such as the one maintained by the textile industry at Princeton, N.J. (Frost, NYT, 11/13/64, 47)
Conference on New Technology at Lewis Research Center was opened by LRC Director Dr. Abe Silverstein: “The vehicles and spacecraft launched from Florida are the visible results of our nation’s space effort. Less evident is the body of technology that makes these and future flights possible. Almost half of NASA’s 30,000 employees are among those creating this technology.” Attending the two-day conference were some 350 representatives of industry; area development groups; universities; Federal, state, and local government; labor; banking; and nasa Hq. and Centers. (Lewis News, 6/6/64,1)
Glide parachute achieved glide ratio of up to 2:1 in wind-tunnel tests at NASA Ames Research Center, it was reported. Northrop Ventura, the parachute developer, was proposing it to NASA for later phases of Project Gemini, (arc; M&R, 4/6/64,25)
Soviet Academician Anatoli Blagonravov, chief Soviet delegate to cospar meeting in Florence, indicated to newsmen in press conference that the next major Soviet space flight might be a year away: “We are trying to open a way to the nearest planet. It will take a long time.” Asked if this meant that no launch was planned for the present, he replied: “We are preparing projects. The preparation might take a year.” (Levin, AP, 5/9/64)
Lewis Research Center conducted drop tests down a main elevator shaft at Cleveland’s Terminal Tower, dropping model experimental packages from heights of up to 400 ft. to gather data for design of decelerator for lrc’s new zero-gravity facility, (lrc Release 64-40)
Linde Division of Union Carbide has “grown” a new solid-state laser material for use by scientists in laser research at the Marshall Space Flight Center Astrionics Laboratory. The new material was yttrium aluminum garnet doped with neodymium. It supported solid-state continuous-wave laser action, with common tap water as the only coolant. Toughness of the garnet was comparable to that of ruby laser rods. {Marshall Star, 11/18/64, 2)
In a speech before a briefing conference on contracting for research and development sponsored by the Federal Bar Association and the Bureau of National Affairs, General Bernard Schriever, AFSC, stated that in his opinion “when understanding is fostered and encouraged among the various sectors of national life, such as industry, the professions, the scientific community, and government, then rapid progress can be made toward national objectives.” He cited the usaf ballistic missile program as an example of this principle at work and stated that the long-range usaf planning study (Project Forecast) set up in 1963 attempted also to put this principle to work, by employing broad participation by all the services, several Government agencies, and personnel from universities, corporations, and non-profit organizations. ( afsc Release 47—R-91)
Testimonial dinner for Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, resigning to return to MIT as Dean of Science, held in Washington. For three years Dr. Wiesner had been Director of the Office of Science and Technology, Chairman of the Federal Council of Science and Technology, Chairman of the President’s Science Advisory Committee, Special Assistant to the President, and Acting Director for Telecommunications Management. (Miller, Wash. Daily News, 1/22/64)
NASA announced modifications to X-15 No. 1 rocket-powered aircraft that would enable it to carry on scientific experiments above much of the earth’s atmosphere were being made at NASA Flight Research Center. The aircraft would have new inertial guidance system, originally designed by Minneapolis Honeywell Regulator Co. for the usaf X-20, and streamlined compartments for experiments at each wing tip. One compartment would contain device to collect micrometeoroids and extraterrestrial dust and special spectrometer to measure radiation and polarization of daytime sky-light; other pod would contain densitron to measure air densities at high altitudes, (nasa Release 64-184; frc Release 19-64)
NASA announced Franklyn W. Phillips would be Assistant Director for Administrative Operations at NASA’s new Electronics Research Center, Cambridge, Mass., effective Sept. 1. A veteran NACA-NASA executive, Phillips had been serving as Director of NASA Northeastern Office, which would Se absorbed within the new Center. As Assistant Director, Phillips would be responsible for administrative matters, including procurement, personnel affairs, management analysis, administrative support, and technical information. (NASA Release 64-218)
nasa Flight Research Center completed the first series of flight tests of the Bell Aerosystems Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv). Program officials observed that the llrv could simulate many nonaerodynamic space-flight maneuvers in addition to the lunar landing for which it was primarily designed and asked for a full year of experimentation with the craft. (M&R, 12/14/64,10)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced contracts for construction of facilities at lrc’s Plum Brook Station: $1,160,000 contract to Roediger Construction, Inc., and $1,386,000 contract to Mosser Construction Co. (lrc Release 64-100)
NASA’s astronomy program was topic of background briefing for the press at NASA Hq., by astronomy program chief Dr. Nancy Roman. Dr. Roman disclosed at the briefing that NASA was studying concept of a manned orbiting telscope. The 100-in. telescope would operate in space automatically, but man would have to make final adjustments in its focus, change auxiliary instruments from time to time for varying the experiments, collect photographic film, and make repairs. NASA had invited members of the astronomical community to propose studies basic to the Mot concept. Several NASA centers and Hq. offices were supporting related engineering studies. Dr. Roman said design studies for a Radio Astronomy Observatory were “pretty well completed.” Not yet an approved program, Rao would have four 750-ft. antennas extended in two V’s to receive radio emissions from space. (nasa Transcript; ATPh)
X—15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Milton 0. Thompson in flight to test and measure heating effect of atmospheric friction on certain aircraft structural components. Aircraft reached altitude of 81,000 ft. and traveled at 3,511 mph (mach 5.32) in the 7-min. flight near NASA Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif, (nasa X—15 Proj. Off.; CR, 8/20/64, 20046)
NASA’s Lewis Research Center announced that it was testing a gas bearing, designed as a research tool, in a vacuum simulating space environment above 100 miles. Suspended from the top of a 60-ft.-long, 15-ft.-dia. tank, the bearing would provide complete freedom of motion to any payload attached to the bearing. A suspended payload would have three-axis mobility with a 10° swing in both pitch and yaw. The bearing, designed to carry an average 350-lb. payload, would enable scientists to evaluate low-thrust systems for attitude control or stationkeeping in on-the-ground tests, (lrc Release 64-105)
Based on reports circulated at recent cospar meeting, Missiles and Rockets said that U.S.S.R. probably would not attempt another manned space flight for about a year but that flight probably would be an orbital rendezvous mission. (M&R, 6/22/64, 33)
NASA Langley Research Center announced that a foam generator developed for possible use in recovery at sea of instrument packages returned from space had been patented. Attached to instrument packages, generator mixes chemicals to produce almost instant plastic foam as it parachutes to water landing, filling a bag which keeps the payload floating on the surface awaiting recovery. (LaRC Release, 10/16/64)
NASA announced that Francis J. Sullivan had been appointed Acting Director of the Electronics and Control Div., Office of Advanced Research and Technology. The position formerly was held by Dr. Albert J. Kelley, who became Deputy Director of the Electronics Research Center, Cambridge, Mass, (nasa Announcement 64-274)
Philip Donely, Chief of Flight Mechanics and Technology Div., NASA Langley Research Center, received 1964 Laura Taber Barbour Air Safety Award of the Flight Safety Foundation. Citation said that Donely’s “diverse and unique contributions to air safety during his service of over 30 years with the NACA and NASA have made him an internationally recognized authority in the areas of aircraft loads, operating problems, and airworthiness requirements. . . . The counsel he has given to industry, operators, and government agencies on matters such as airworthiness aspects of new aircraft, assessment of design criteria, and airworthiness problems related to aircraft accidents has contributed significantly to the development and operation of safe aircraft.” (nasa Release 64-92)
NASA announced that space scientists had adopted a new analytical method— neutron activation analysis—to help them determine the presence and quantity of oxygen in alkali metals. General Atomics Div. of General Dynamics Corp. undertook this oxygen-identification problem under a contract from Lewis Research Center. ( lrc Release 64-102)
NASA selected Genisco, Inc., to develop, fabricate, and assemble motion generator for research into guidance and psycho-physiological problems of manned space flight. The fixed-price contract was expected to be valued between $6 million and $6.5 million. Genisco had been selected last July for contract negotiations for the motion generator, major component of advanced space navigation simulator at NASA Ames Research Center; however, “during the negotiations a better understanding of the design problems was reached and it was determined that numerous changes were desirable.” NASA then directed Ames to request revised proposals from the five bidders. When the companies submitted new proposals in January, Genisco again received highest technical rating and proposed the lowest fixed fee. (nasa Release 64-35)
NASA Langley Research Center issued requests for proposals for the conceptual and preliminary design of a hypersonic ramjet research engine to be used in the Hypersonic Ramjet Experiment Project announced by NASA last June. Since the project would ultimately include flight research with the engine mounted on the X-15 No. 2 aircraft, the guidelines included a weight limitation of 800 lbs. for the final research engine, including necessary flight-test instrumentation and dimensions compatible with mounting the engine near the lower aft fuselage of the X-15. (LaRC Release)
afsc announced its Research and Technology Div. had completed tests on most effective method of heating high-pressure air to simulate aerodynamic conditions of earth’s atmosphere. Wind-tunnel arc air heater produced direct power current of 5.1 megawatts [previous high was 4.2 megawatts]. During the 5.1-meg a watt run, 3.85 megawatts were contained in the gas, representing higher efficiency than had been predicted. New designs based on the test would extend the probable lifetime of a projected 50-megawatt heater to be used in electrogas-dynamic facility being built at Wright-Patterson afb. Both afsc’s Arnold Engineering Development Center and NASA Ames Research Center would use data from the test program for their work with similar heaters, (afsc Release 42-R-119)
Employment in aerospace industry during the past year reflected overall downward trend, according to Aviation Week survey. Exceptions to the general trend were McDonnell Aircraft Co. and Douglas Aircraft Co., the former mainly due to work on Gemini spacecraft and F—4 Phantom II aircraft and the latter due to increased work for Saturn launch vehicle program and commercial programs. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 20)
First manned Gemini space flight (GT-3) was scheduled for late December, msc public affairs official Ben Gillespie told reporters at weekly press briefing. (Maloney, Houston Post, 6/23/64)
In a House debate over the patent policy for the proposed Water Resources Research Center, Rep. Chet Holifield (D.—Calif.) criticized current dod and NASA patent policies. He urged that the policy be revised to permit any industry to “use any kind of a device or any kind of a patent procedure which is paid for by federal funds.” (CR, 6/2/64, 12045)
West Germany’s vertical take-off aircraft successfully passed the speed of sound in a test flight. The two-jet VJ101 achieved its vertical rise by tilting its jets downward and then went into forward flight by swinging them up to a horizontal position. The plane was being developed by the West German firms of Boelkow, Heinkel, and Messerschmitt. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/31/64)
Library of Congress had distributed to 30 large city and state libraries copies of Braille translations of books on space exploration. These information aids for the blind had been published by Library of Congress under a NASA grant. (Las Cruces Sun-News, 7/5/64)	.
New research project would study feasibility and design concept of advanced hypersonic ramjet engine, NASA announced. The work would extend ramjet propulsion technology which NASA and NACA had been developing for more than 15 years. To be conducted under direction of Langley Research Center, the project was being organized to determine potential of the ramjet as a propulsion system for hypersonic flight. Project would use hydrogen as fuel, (nasa Release 64-158)
“Astrometric” telescope of the U.S. Naval Observatory went into operation at Flagstaff, Ariz. The telescope featured world’s largest known telescopic mirror, 61 inches in diameter, ground from huge block of synthetic quartz. New telescope would be used chiefly to measure distances to nearby stars that are too faint for such study by other existing telescopes, thus exploring previously unknown regions of the universe. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/25/64,14)
Results of decompression experiments with mice in atmospheres of helium-oxygen, nitrogen-oxygen, and argon-oxygen were reported in Missiles and Rockets. Performed by group at Purdue Research Facility, experiments showed mice survived decompression markedly longer in helium-oxygen atmosphere than in air. In one experiment, eight mice decompressed in helium-oxygen atmosphere survived an average of 6.1min. longer than six mice decompressed in air. Extrapolation of these results might indicate desirability of helium-oxygen atmospheres in spacecraft for prolonged manned flights; the extra minutes of survival would provide safety margin, in case of accidental decompression, for crew to take necessary emergency measures. (M&R, 8/3/64, 32)
Herbert Friedman of Naval Research Laboratory reported to cospar a new picture of space cosmic rays, based on results of experiments with rocket-borne x-ray telescope. New results showed that less than one per cent of all cosmic rays could be produced in intergalaotic space. Therefore, Friedman said, all cosmic rays would appear to come from exploding stars. He said these findings showed that there were too many x-rays to support theory that x-rays are produced by cosmic rays’ colliding with starlight, and too few x-rays to support theory that they come from the near-collision of electrons and protons (formed by neutron’s disintegration in so-called “hot universe” theory). Further experiments were planned to gather more evidence. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/18/64)
Rep. James C. Cleveland (R.-N.H.), member of House Select Committee on Government Research, wrote in Washington World magazine: “Fourteen to fifteen billion dollars of the taxpayer’s money is going into R&D this year. The figure was only $2 billion 10 years ago. “More than 30 different departments, bureaus, and agencies of the Federal Government conduct research or have it conducted for them, often in the same fields. . . . “A breakdown of Federal research and development spending shows that five organizations account for 90 percent of it. These are the Department of Defense, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the National Science Foundation. About 70 percent of these funds support military research and development. About 10 percent of the total funds is channeled to colleges and universities. . . .” (CR, 2/4/64, A563)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved authorization of $5,246,293,250 in the next fiscal year for NASA. This figure would be $52,482,750 more than was voted by the House, but still $57,706,750 less than the budget requests. The Senate Committee’s recommendations included restoration of budget cuts by the House from the unmanned Surveyor program, the Orbiting Geophysical Observatory program, and funds for tracking network operations. (Wash. Post, 6/3/64; Av. Wk., 6/15/64,30)	*
NASA Flight Research Center requested bids for construction of a high-temperature heat facility at Edwards, Calif. The completed facility would include enough test area to permit heat load testing of actual aircraft of the size of the XB—70 and the proposed supersonic transport. It could produce temperatures up to 3,000° F on small isolated areas of the test aircraft; large areas could be heated up to 600° F. The contract would be administered by the U.S. Army Engineers, (frc Release 33-64)
Dr. Smith J. DeFrance, Director of NASA Ames Research Center, was one of 10 recipients of the 1964 Career Service Award of the National Civil Service League. Director of Ames since 1940, Dr. DeFrance was recommended for the award on the basis of his 43-year career as an outstanding administrator and leader of aeronautical and space research. (NASA Release 64-75)
Soviet astronomer Nikolai Barabashov said Kharkov Univ. observatory ultraviolet photographs might show surface of Venus. Tass quoted Barabashov as saying a large dark spot appeared on the planet in pictures taken before dawn, and he believed this indicated a clearing in the clouds normally covering Venus. “The position of the spot on the disk warrants the assumption that we have here a glimpse of a part of the surface of Venus, the closest neighbor of the earth.” He added that further studies and analyses would be made. (AP, Houston Post, 9/12/64)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., Assistant Director of Ames Research Center, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. In the newly created position, Dr. Eggers would work closely with staff members in planning NASA’s advanced and supporting research programs. Specialist in problems of hypersonic and space flight research, Dr. Eggers made many contributions to theories of hypersonic aerodynamics and atmospheric entry problems of motion and heating. Among his past awards were Arthur S. Flemming Award in 1956 and Sylvanus Albert Reed Award (1962) of the ias. (NASA Release 64-110; NASA Announcement 64-95)
U.S. Senate passed H.R. 10456, authorizing $5,246,293,250 budget for NASA in FY 1965. Included in this amount was $52,482,750 restored by Senate Space Committee from the $110,189,500 reduction made by the House. The hill would authorize $4,354,150,000 for research and development; $262,880,500 for construction of facilities; and $629,262,750 for administrative operations. Bill was passed by voice vote, was reintroduced two days later for record vote (see June 24).	(CR, 6/22/64, 14069-78)
A new division was formed within the NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology. The new Programs and Resources Division of oart would be headed by Merrill H. Mead who came to Hq. from the Ames Research Center. Dr. R. L. Bisplinghoff, Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said the new division was created to “improve the program planning capability and provide common objectives toward which all of the elements of the office can be directed. ” (NASA Release 64—132)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences voted (10-4) to approve NASA’s report on the electronics research center. (House Science and Astronautics Committee had approved the report Feb. 24.) (nasa lar III/43)
Cook Electric Co., Chicago, unveiled a $2 million observatory to be included in NASA’s first Oao. Cook built the equipment for NASA under contract to Univ. of Wisconsin, where astronomers were planning observations in the far ultraviolet region of the spectrum.	(Houston Post, 6/12/64)
Dr. Evelyn Anderson, research scientist at NASA Ames Research Center, was among the six distinguished' career women to receive Federal Women’s Award at banquet in Washington, (nasa Notice)
FAA Administrator N. E. Halaby announced National Academy of Sciences had assumed advisory capacity in connection with sonic-boom research program, at invitation of faa. First step in nas program would be review of sonic boom study now being conducted at Oklahoma City. (faa Release 64-50)
In the President’s proposed budget for FY 1965, dod expenditures were estimated at $51.2 billion, of which $5.5 was for research and development (including military space expenditure). Requested budgets for operation of ranges: $231 million for amr, $159 million for pmr, and $93 million for wsmr. (NYT, 1/22/64, 21, 22; M&R, 2/3/64, 9)
NASA Lewis Research Center was investigating several techniques for producing flexible, thin-film solar cells. One of the techniques being investigated was sputtering, which required absolutely clean atmosphere and a low pressure of inert gas. Sputtering apparatus in which controls were fully automated—rigidly controlling pressure, temperature, and voltage in relation to each other—had been built at Lewis. With this equipment, researchers were attempting to increase efficiency of thin-film cells to that of silicon cells, (lrc Release 64-28)
U.S. manned space flight plans were outlined in Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) article with Col. G. Terent’yev byline. Saying that the U.S. was “not leaving a stone unturned in trying to outstrip the Soviets in the conquest of space with manned space vehicles,” the writer gave particular attention to Gemini and Apollo plans, then went on to claim that U.S. policy “in the conquest of space is far from a peaceful one; it has a clearly evident military (more accurately, aggressive) nature.” (KrasnayaZvezda, 3/26/64,3, ATSS-TTrans.)
Orbital tanker study by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. for NASA Marshall Space Flight Center was discussed in Aviation Week & Space Technology. Tanker would be unmanned and would be used to transfer propellants to other unmanned or to manned spacecraft in earth orbit. Concepts in which orbital refueling capability was underscored were future manned planetary flights and potential reusable lunar transport ferries. (Av. Wk., 8/10/64, 55-57)
House adopted by voice vote the conference report on NASA FY 1965 authorization bill (H.R. 10456) and sent bill to Senate. Senate adopted conference report, clearing bill for President’s signature. Bill provided nasa authorization of $5,227,506,000 of which $4,341,100,000 was for research and development, $622,880,500 was for construction of facilities and $623,525,500 was for administrative operations, (nasa LAR III/133)
Interviewed in Boston Globe, Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control Section of NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, said nasa planned a gradual buildup of personnel for the proposed electronics research center to a maximum of 2,100 in 1969. Year-by-year buildup: 1964, 50; 1965, 250; 1966, 550; 1967, 1,000; 1968, 1,600; and 1969, 2,100. Nucleus of the center’s staff would be electronics task force currently operating in Washington. (White, Boston Globe, 2/3/(A)
MSC Public Affairs Officer Paul Haney said it was doubtful that there would be a manned space flight this year. The two-man Project Gemini flight (GT—3) had previously been planned for late 1964. However, lightning damage at Cape Kennedy where Titan II launch vehicle was being prepared for GT—2 unmanned flight would cause minimum delay of three weeks in GT-2, Haney said. Length of time GT—3 would be delayed would depend upon how long GT—2 would be delayed. (upi, NYT, 8/25/64; Maloney, Houston Post, 8/25/64)
New York State Atomic Research and Development Authority signed contract with General Electric Co.’s Aerospace and Defense Service Engineering Dept, for continued operation of Malta Test Station, which New York recently acquired from Federal Government through competitive bidding. Station has been operated by GE for Federal Government since its establishment in 1945, when facilities were installed there to duplicate German V-2 facilities at Peenemiinde. New York Authority would operate the station’s expanded test and research facilities in continued support of industrial contractors of Federal defense, space, and atomic energy programs. (CR, 2/19/64, 2011—12)
Sen. Stephen M. Young (D.-Ohio) spoke in Senate of NASA’s selecting Boston as site for new electronics research center, charging that “there is little to indicate that thorough evaluation was given to potential locations distant from the Boston area” and pointing out that “in all respects, Cleveland eminently qualifies for this important new facility. . . Each time a new facility is proposed, we hear the same well-worn argument that it should go to an area which already has institutions with experience in this field. As a result a vicious cycle has formed, and it can almost be predicted that any new important space facility will go to Boston, Houston, or to California. . . . “Frankly, I am tired of the argument. I rise today to speak briefly in protest of what has been going on. . . .” (CR, 3/2/64, 3943-44)
Thomas M. Canning, chief of Hypersonic Free-Flight Branch of NASA Ames Research Center, described aerodynamic shape being studied for spacecraft of the future, at Conference on the Role of Simulation in Space Technology, vpi, Blacksburg, Va. Canning said laboratory tests were being made of high-angle (wing-shaped craft) as possible optimum design for manned spacecraft entering atmosphere at speeds ranging from 50,000-55,000 fps returning from interplanetary journeys. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/19/64)
NASA awarded $16,975,000 contract to Blount Brothers Corp. for construction of three major elements of space environment facility known as Space Propulsion Facility, to be built at Plum Brook Station of NASA Lewis Research Center. The facility would simulate temperatures and pressure conditions at altitudes up to 100 mi. from earth, permitting evaluation and development testing of spacecraft, chemical propulsion systems, and nuclear electric power generation and propulsion systems. (lrc Release 64-61)
NASA Lewis Research Center undertook supervision at Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, Sunnyvale, Calif., of the design and development of a metal shroud section to replace the fiberglas section in Mariner 4. Investigations had indicated that the fiberglas fairing of mariner ill probably had structural failure when exposed to the flight environment and that this prevented shroud separation from the spacecraft, (ksc Release 206-64)
A hingeless Lockheed XH—51N rotor helicopter for advanced research in rotary wing aircraft had been delivered to NASA Langley Research Center. Studies would be made of the loads and flying qualities problems that might be encountered by operational aircraft of this type and of the extent to which their potential advantages of simplicity and improved flying qualities could be realized in practice. Rotor blades on the XH-51N were held firmly to the hub, which was attached rigidly to the engine drive shaft. On other helicopters, the blades were either hinged at the side of the rotor hub or were gimbaled atop the mast. (LaRC Release 12/16/64)
The House Science and Astronautics Committee Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development made recommendations to equalize the national distribution of Federal research and development funds: that additional funds be budgeted to the National Science Foundation to ensure at least one major center of excellence in research and technology in each appropriate region of the nation; that dod and NASA emphasize building new centers of science and technology when existing facilities in research-concentrated areas become obsolescent. The Subcommittee also called for the White House to convene a Government-industry conference to study such problems. (M&R, 11/16/64,11) During November: A team from Lockheed Propulsion Co. visited NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to brief scientists there on possible use of 156-in. solid motor as a strap-on for the first stage of both Saturn IB and Saturn V. (M&R, 11/23/64, 7)
Lt. Gen. James H. Doolittle (usafr) was awarded the Pennsylvania Military College Engineering Centennial Medal. In his acceptance speech, General Doolittle spoke on usaf Project Forecast report, which considered “national policy, technological opportunities, and capability” in its 10-year predictions. Based on the technological opportunities evaluated (including materials, propulsion, aerodynamic development, special weapons, and guidance), there would be eight important possible technical advances: Advanced Manned Precision Strike System (ampss), very accurate icbm’s, very precise air-to-ground missiles, a Vtol fighter, a Vtol light transport, a large cargo aircraft (cx—x), Mobile Air Defense, and a hypersonic mach 6 reconnaissance aircraft. General Doolittle concluded: “. . . our national security and our national welfare, in future, will depend very largely on military technology and, of course, as always, on the spirit and will of out citizens. Our Nation must become and remain superior in science and technology. We must have more and better scientists and engineers. This is one of the very important challenges to Pennsylvania Military College and to all of the other fine educational institutions of our land. . . .” (Text, CR, 8/31/64, 20404-06)
NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Dr. Eugene B. Konecci said in keynote address, Fifth Annual Conference on Human Factors in Electronics, in San Diego: “There is a great need today for simplification through a more fundamental understanding of phenomena we take for granted. Mathematical theories to aid in simplification and a better understanding of the cosmos around us are needed. Specifically in Electronics we need to re-examine our traditional complex circuitry and the logic behind it, so we can make even more rapid strides in solid state physics and electronics without imposing old circuit theory and wiring diagrams on new active elements.' In 50 years an electron tube as we know it will be an archaic museum piece. “The greatest need in Human Factors research is a better understanding of man, his capabilities and limitations. The study of human brain mechanisms promises the greatest rewards to science and technology and in turn to the betterment of mankind. We need more cross fertilization between neuro- and psycho-physiologists and electronic engineers, through a new educational tool ‘Systems Engineering’ that includes the human element. . . .” (Text)
A Japanese astronomer of the Kurashika Astronomical Observatory observed a new comet. It had been earlier sighted by an observer at Tokyo Astronomical Observatory on June 7, as well as by an Australian. On June 9, Soviet astronomer Anatoli Bakharev discovered what was described as a 9th-magnitude comet moving rapidly with respect to the stars. (AP, NYT, 6/15/64; Pravda, 6/13/64, 6, atss-t Trans.)
B. K. 0. Lundberg, Director General of the Aeronautical Research Institute of Sweden, predicted at Aviation/Space Writers Association in Miami that more than 15,000 passengers would be killed each year by the year 1990 unless aviation safety was improved. Deploring the aviation industry’s emphasis on supersonic transport development (“we are now apparently on the verge of plunging ourselves into a supersonic adventure”) , he stressed that the “No. 1 challenge to aviation and the aeronautical scientists” was aviation safety, and urged the world to adopt “new, radical and long-term aviation safety policy.” (Morrow, NYT, 5/31/ 64,78)
usaf space medicine team, in paper delivered to seminar at Brooks afb, reported on experiment with 12 volunteers committed to “absolute bed rest” for four weeks, in attempt to simulate conditions of extended space flight. After the period, subjects showed marked increase in tendency toward fainting, but when protected with antigravity suits this tendency nearly disappeared. Heartbeat rates were faster in stand-up test after the bedrest them in similar test before it. High gravity loads in centrifuge did not adversely affect the subjects after their long rest. The volunteers lost about one-fifth of a gallon of their total blood volume, and increase in calcium loss was apparent, but was not considered hazardous. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/21/64)
Discovery by two astronomers of what they believed to be the most distant object identified to date was announced. Thought to be several billion light-years away, the object—named 3C-147—was considered to be from 10 to 20 per cent farther away than 3C-295, previously considered the most distant object. Both objects were “quasistellar radio sources,” which produce 100 times the brightness and energy of an entire galaxy of 100 billion stars. Dr. Thomas A. Matthews located the new object by observing its radio emissions with Cal Tech’s twin antennas. Then Dr. Maertin Schmidt photographed the object from Mt. Palomar Observatory. (Sullivan, NYT, 3/30/64, 27)
In testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., discussed NASA’s relationship with jpl : “. . . [A] major contracting advance is taking place in our operating relationships with the California Institute of Technology . . . [which] manages the NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory under contract. Originally, the Laboratory and the contract for its operation were transferred to nasa from the Army in 1959. As the functions of the Laboratory have expanded and changed, we have modified the nasa/cit relationships to meet the current needs of the program. The present contract expires at the end of this year, and we have carefully negotiated its extension under terms more applicable to current agency requirements. A comprehensive review has been made of the operating experience gained since the inception of the nasa/cit/jpl relationship. As a result of this study, improved operating procedures in both the technical and administrative aspects have been developed and implemented. In addition to reflecting clauses which implement the above improvements in management, the new arrangements include three major departures from earlier agreements: “First, the earlier contracts were based on a principle of mutually requiring CIt/jpl concurrence before NASA directions would be carried out. This often resulted in lengthy ‘negotiations’ of assigned tasks. The new contract restricts the principle of mutuality to the broad terms of the operating relationship, but clearly gives NASA the unilateral right to issue task orders, require reports, and take other administrative actions as desired. “Second, a separate facilities contract is also being negotiated which will provide the government a more direct control over the planning, construction, and utilization of the facilities at jpl. “Third, a new principle is provided for determining crr’s fee for the operation of the Laboratory. The new contract contains a schedule which sets the upper and lower limits of the fee on the basis of the dollar volume of work which NASA places with cit/jpl. The exact fee within these limits, will be determined by how well cit/jpl performs in the management of the Laboratory.” (Testimony)
usaf launched Titan II on successful test flight from Cape Kennedy. The nose cone, carrying malfunction detection instrumentation to be used in Project Gemini manned space flights, impacted 5,000 mi. down the Atlantic Missile Range. (AP, NYT, 3/24/64; M&R, 3/30/64, !6)
Titan II icbm was launched on successful usaf test flight down the Atlantic Missile Range. This was the 33rd and final R&D firing of the Titan II. (upi, Wash. Post, 4/10/64; Witkin, NYT, 4/12/64,31)
Rep. Harold M. Ryan (D.-Mich.) said on House floor that if NASA’s proposed electronics research center were located in Michigan it “would provide a stimulus to the heartland of America, and bring into geographical balance the national capability in the field closely related with the electronic industry. “It is important that the resources of our part of the country be taken into consideration and the fact recognized that they are not presently being used to their fullest capacity. . . .” (CR, 1/15/64, 434-35)
NASA extended until Dec. 31, 1966, its contract with the California Institute of Technology for research and development programs conducted at the Government-owned Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Work that would be performed included research and development in lunar and interplanetary programs, aeronautics, development and operation of deep space tracking facilities, providing NASA with technical advice, scientific studies, rad reports of investigations, rad providing supervision of related work given to contractors. Requirements from NASA would be issued in the form of written Task Orders, and the cost of this contract would be determined by the sum of these task orders. In addition, the two parties would negotiate each fiscal year for a fixed fee for the management of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. (NASA Release 64-320)
Judge Charles Fairhurst issued temporary restraining order preventing Cambridge City Council from voting on application for $663,000 in Federal funds for survey and planning the proposed area for NASA Electronics Research Center. Judge Fairhurst granted the order after six Cambridge firms requested declaratory decree that Kendall Sq. “cannot and does not legally qualify as a valid subject for an urban renewal project.” (Boston Globe, 10/8/64)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory released figures on mariner iv, valid as of 12:01 pm: total miles to travel—325,000,000; total miles traveled—44,000,000; miles remaining to travel—281,000,000; miles from earth—4,306,180; speed in relation to earth—7,023 mph; speed in relation to sun—72,532 mph; total days required for trip—228; days already in space—26; days remaining to travel—202. (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/24/64)
Open House at Langley Research Center, in conjunction with field inspection during the past week, featured specially prepared exhibits and other items of interest for citizens of Virginia and nearby areas. (NASA Release 64^-99; NASA Announcement 64-89)
Speaking on the floor of the House, Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) pointed out: “In our preoccupation with our national space program, we often overlook the fact that aeronautical research and development is a very important and productive part of the whole NASA program. . . . “I should point out that the technology that has evolved from the X-15 program has made possible the creation of the A-ll and the RS-71, hypersonic aircraft in the 2,000-mile-an-hour range, which offer great potential to our Air Force as versatile, high-flying reconnaissance vehicles. NASA, with the X-15, is contributing significantly to the supersonic transport program through new materials, construction techniques, guidance and control systems, and aerodynamic designs that are available now because the naca had the foresight and determination to undertake the X—15 program in 1954, in association with the Air Force and the Navy. “In 1959, the first flight was made. Since then, the X—15 pilots have rocketed out into near space, where 99 percent of the earth’s atmosphere is below them, have reached speeds 6 times the speed of sound that have made the plane glow red hot. “Now, an advanced X—15 is ready to reach for new heights and even greater speeds. Our investment in the X-15 program and our confidence in the men and pilots who have made it so successful, have paid off handsomely for the individual taxpayer and for the country. Our world leadership and prestige in aeronautics have been enhanced manifold by the X-15. It has played an indispensable role in making sure that America’s place in the search for new knowledge of flight will never be less than it is now.” (CR, 8/20/64,20046)
NASA Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock announced appointment of James T. Dennison as Director of Technology Utilization, erc. Dennison joined NASA in May 1963 as a consultant and had been serving as acting director of Technology Utilization Div., NASA Hq. Appointment was effective Nov. 1. (nasa Release 64-244)
Giving his Sunday blessing to the public, Pope Paul VI referred to the successful U.S. RANGER Vii lunar flight: “We also would unite ourselves in the admiration of all for a happening that concerns the life of all humanity and that shows how far the man of science and technology has prbgressed. . . .” (AP, Houston Post, 8/3/64)
Appointment of Lt. Gen. Frank A. Bogart (USAF) as Special Assistant to Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight announced by NASA. Appointment would become effective shortly after his retirement from USAF Oct. 31. General Bogart would be concerned with industry relationships and special management problems of program control and contracting. (NASA Announcement 64-255)
nasa Langley Research Center awarded two contracts for construction on Vehicle Antenna Test Facility to aid in solving spacecraft communications problems: $1,265,505 contract to Nat Harrison Associates for construction of the building, and $280,630 contract to B. F. Goodrich Sponge Products Div. for design and installation of anechoic chambers for the facility. (LaRC Release)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced award of $797,200 contract for construction of concrete-lined shaft for the 500-ft. gravity facility, to Patrick Harrison, Inc. The underground shaft would be first phase of construction of largest zero-gravity facility in the U.S. Completion of the facility was expected this year, (lrc Release 64-30)
NASA Langley Research Center announced that power supply capability tests were being conducted on two huge magnet coils at the Space Radiation Effects Laboratory. In operation, the magnet coils would be capable of creating a pulling power greater than 3,500 tons. The magnet coils were part of the 600-million electron volt synchrocyclotron which NASA would operate to study the effect on spacecraft and their systems of the particle radiation streaming from the sun or trapped in the earth’s magnetic field. (LaRC Release)
Republican Critical Issues Council of the Republican Citizens Committee, chaired by Dr. Milton Eisenhower, issued statement calling upon U.S. to abandon the 1970 goal of a manned lunar landing. It also called for increased international cooperation in space exploration: “. . . The exploration of our universe is a goal too vast, too hazardous, too costly, and too important to all mankind to be financed and conducted by one country alone, and least of all in an atmosphere of unfriendly competition.” Council also deplored claims for military value of space exploration : “We are aware of no compelling argument thus far for the development and deploying of weapons in space. . . .” (Text, CR, 5/28/ 64,11775-77)	_
Membership on the NASA Policy Planning Board, established November 1, was formally designated, with Langley Research Center Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson as Chairman and NASA General Counsel Walter D. Sohier as Vice Chairman. (NASA Circ. 317)
Democratic Party Platform completed, containing space plank which stated: “In four vigorous years we have moved to the forefront of space exploration. The United States must never again settle for second place in the race for tomorrow’s frontiers. “1. We will continue the rapid development of space technology for peaceful uses. “2. We will encourage private industry to increase its efforts in space research. “3. We will continue to ensure that any race in space is won for freedom and for peace.” (Text, AP, Balt. Sun, 8/24/64)
Michael I. Yarymovych, Director of NASA Manned Earth Orbital Mission Studies, said before Canaveral Council of Technical Studies, Cape Kennedy, that NASA was coordinating fully with dod in exploring four different types of orbital systems: Extended Apollo, Apollo Orbital Research Laboratory (aorl), Medium Orbital Research Laboratory (morl), and Large Orbital Research Laboratory (lorl). The first three concepts were designed to be orbited by Saturn IB; lorl, by Saturn V.	Yarymovych said that it was “becoming increasingly clear that the Extended Apollo is an essential element of an expanding Earth orbital program. ... “In the initial stages, it would be used as a laboratory and later it could be converted to a logistics system.” aorl, morl, and lorl were in competition with each other, he said, and a decision would have to be made among them. USAF’s Gemini B/Manned Orbiting Laboratory was being studied as possible integral element of Orbital Research Laboratory program. (M&R, 4/27/64, 16)
Discovery of relatively cool region inside three-million-degree solar corona was announced at cospar meeting by Dr. Armin Deutsch of Mt. Wilson and Palomar Observatories and Dr. Guglielmo Righini, Director of Astrophysical Observatory at Arcetri, Italy. The corona clouds were believed to contain ionized calcium at relatively cool 20,000 degrees. They were discovered in analyzing spectrogram taken while the two astronomers were in DC—8 “flying observatory” during solar eclipse last July. (Reuters, Houston Post, 5/19/64)
NASA announced establishment of new research program with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. to develop advanced technology for large nuclear and chemical rockets. The program would continue certain research begun under Project Rift (Reactor-In-Flight Test), principally insulation development, cryogenic testing, structural development, application of Rift technology to Saturn stages, and documentation of pertinent technology for future use. NASA had committed an initial $500,000 letter contract to the program; cost of seven-month period was expected to be about $1.5 million. (NASA Release 64-57)
Reviewing the worth of scientific results gained in the first years of U.S. space exploration, Fortune magazine said: “. . . new knowledge is a dukedom whose great wealth and resources cannot even begin to be estimated or exhausted. Already the new knowledge acquired in space exceeds by far the value of funds so far spent. For knowledge, more than guns and butter, is the true power of modem states.” (nasa FY 1965 Auth. Hearings, Part 1,3)
NASA announced preliminary negotiations had begun to lease Convair 990 jet transport, with option to buy, from Convair Div. of General Dynamics Corp. The aircraft would be based at NASA Ames Research Center. Stripped of passenger accommodations, the aircraft would be used as a flying laboratory for research in aeronautical technology and the space sciences, (nasa Release 64-269)
Douglas Aircraft Co. Missile and Space Systems Div. received nine-month study contract from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to study methods of uprating Saturn IB space vehicle and S-IVB Saturn stage. (Av. Wk., 8/31/64, 23)
Reception honoring Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of NASA Lewis Research Center, was held on his 35th anniversary of service with naca-nasa. (Lewis News, 1/YIJ(A, 3)
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) spoke in the House of recent report By Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development which was a preliminary investigation of how existing Congressional resources of scientific and technical information can be made more effective. “. . . The critical need for Congress to study and evaluate its uses of scientific information cannot be minimized. It is imperative that we be prepared to assemble the necessary information for Congress to make complex policy decisions in order to meet national goals. As I have indicated we are more concerned with the policy of the decision than its technical aspects. In making these decisions the translation and conversion of scientific and technical information into policy terms is essential. . . .” (CR, 8/13/64,18753)
NASA announced appointment of Francis J. Sullivan as Acting Director of Electronics and Control Div., NASA Hq. The position was formerly held by Dr. Albert J. Kelley, who became Deputy Director of NASA’s new Electronics Research Center. Sullivan was Deputy Director of the division since November 1963. (nasa Release 64-276)
Results of experimental drop tests down elevator shaft of Cleveland’s Terminal Tower showed that styrofoam could be used successfully as a deceleration medium, according to NASA Lewis Research Center design engineer Terrence E. Russell. Purpose of the deceleration tests, conducted by LRC last May, was to verify use of styrofoam as filler in cart used to “catch” free-falling test packages at lrc’s new 500-ft. zero-gravity facility. ( lrc Release 64-64)
NASA awarded $100,000 contract to North Carolina Science and Technology Research Center for establishment of experimental program for transfer of technology developed in U.S. space effort to civilian industry. Other participants in the program would be Univ. of North Carolina, Duke Univ., North Carolina State College, and Research Triangle Institute. (NASA Release 64-124)
Aerospace industry sales for second quarter of 1964 rose to $4,006 billion from $3,808 billion in preceding quarter, Securities and Exchange Commission-Federal Trade Commission reported. (Av. Wk., 9/21/64, 34)
Kenneth C. McCracken, head of cosmic ray research of the Earth and Planetary .Sciences Laboratory at the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest said that the Imps (Interplanetary Monitoring Platforms) scheduled to be shot into earth orbit in 1966 would be the best tool for studying cosmic rays during the years of the quiet sun. Besides lasting much longer than either the “deep” space probes or the balloons, they would have one other tremendous advantage, McCracken said. “The imps will have very eccentric orbits, skimming 200 miles over the surface of the earth at the closest points of their orbits, or ‘perigees,’ and soaring 185,000	miles out in space at their ‘apogees,’ or farthest points of orbit. . . . That means that in counting and analyzing cosmic rays we shall for the first time be able actually to compare the virgin, or primary, rays with the secondary particles that have had all the wear and tear of passing through the earth’s atmosphere and magnetosphere.” (Getze, L.A. Times, 12/17/64)
At his Washington press conference, President Johnson announced successful development of an advanced, long-range reconnaissance aircraft to be employed by Strategic Air Command: “This system employs the new SR—71 aircraft and provides a long-range, advanced strategic reconnaissance plane for military use capable of worldwide reconnaissance for military operations. “The Joint Chiefs of Staff, when reviewing the RS—70, emphasized the importance of the strategic reconnaissance mission. The SR-71 aircraft reconnaissance system is the most advanced in the world. “The aircraft will fly at more than three times the speed of sound. It will operate at altitudes in excess of 80,000 feet. It will use the most advanced observation equipment of all kinds in the world. “The aircraft will provide the strategic forces of the United States with an outstanding long-range reconnaissance capability. The system will be used during periods of military hostilities and in other situations in which the United States military forces may be confronting foreign military forces. “The SR—71 uses the same J—58 engine as the experimental interceptor previously announced, but it is substantially heavier and it has a longer range. “The considerably heavier gross weight permits it to accommodate the multiple reconnaissance sensors needed by the Strategic Air Command to accomplish the strategic reconnaissance mission in a military environment. “This billion-dollar program was initiated in February, 1963. The first operational aircraft will begin flight-testing in early 1965, and deployment of production units to the Strategic Air Command will begin shortly thereafter. “Appropriate members of Congress have been kept fully informed on the nature of, and the progress in, this aircraft program. “Further information on this major advanced aircraft system will be released from time to time at the appropriate military secret classification levels.” (Transcript, NYT, 7/25/64, 6)
In address to the Wayne State University College of Engineering Honors Convocation in Detroit, Mich., Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said: “In the manned space flight program, we have tried to profit from t)he experience of the past. We are creating this very great capability in advance of the formulation of many of the specific operational requirements, which inevitably will emerge when it becomes clear what can be done. There are many elements to this capability. It includes trained people, a base of industry throughout the United States, ground facilities, launch vehicles, spacecraft, operational experience, and the ability to manage large research and development efforts. All of these things will enable the United States to undertake whatever exploration of space the national interest may require. “In the three years since 1961, the manned space flight effort has built up at a rapid rate until there are now 250,000 persons at work throughout the country—more than 90 percent in private industry—and their numbers will increase to 300,000 when we reach the peak activity of the presently approved programs next year. About 15 percent of these are scientists and engineers. The program has become a major element in the economic life of the country. Prime contractors assign work to subcontractors, who in turn engage second and third-tier subcontractors. “As the program progresses, we are now beginning to realize some of the benefits. Whereas six years ago we were extremely limited in the power available to place objects in space, we are now approaching a period when we will have the rockets available to do things beyond those being used in present programs. “The time is approaching when we must give more thought to the exploitation of the capabilities provided through these efforts. To avoid the pitfall into which we have fallen in the past, we must plan for the future even while we press vigorously to accomplish present programs.” (Text)
NASA and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had begun operating “Prairie Network” in midwestern U.S., a network of 16 automatic camera stations to photograph falling meteors and aid in tracking and recovering meteorites, NASA announced. Photographic measurements would assist scientists in determining how much mass is lost by bodies during atmospheric entry and in calculating origin of meteors. (NASA Release 64-106)
NASA purchased hingeless rotor helicopter, the XH—5 IN Research Vehicle, from Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for use in flight research at LaRC. The cost would be $556,158. It would be used as a flying laboratory to assess the loads and flying qualities problems that are likely to be encountered by operational aircraft of the hingeless rotor type. (NASA Release 64-147; LaRC Release)
Nobel Prize in Physics awarded to Dr. Charles H. Townes (mit) and two Soviet physicists, Aleksandr M. Prokhorov and Nikolai G. Basov, for research in quantum electronics leading to production of oscillators and amplifiers for lasers. Dr. Townes was Chairman of NASA Manned Space Flight Advisory Committee. (NYT, 10/30/64, 1)
NASA Director of Personnel, Robert J. Lacklen, who had been with NASA since its inception, resigned to accept a position with the Richardson Foundation of Greensboro, N.C, Mr. Lacklen would head a Personnel Research Institute which would conduct research in personnel selection and appraisal. Mr. Grove Webster was named Acting Director of Personnel, (nasa Ann. 64-300)
Dr. Nancy Roman, Chief of NASA Astronomy programs, told Space Business Daily that her office had a program under consideration for a 50-55-in. telescopic mirror manned orbiting observatory which might orbit in the mid-1970’s. Although she emphasized that all plans were in the “thinking stage,” Dr. Roman said the 50—55-in. configuration would provide another interim link between the unmanned Orbiting Astronomical Observatory series and the manned 100-in. configuration being considered for launching in 15 to 20 years. “The 50-55-in. interim configuration should be such,” she said, “that it could be used either manned or unmanned. But it will have as its principal objective the proving of man’s ability as an orbiting astronomer.” (SBD, 11/30/64, 132)
NASA announced FAA—NASA Memorandum of Understanding specifying NASA’s role in development of U.S. supersonic transport aircraft, under overall responsibility of faa. NASA would furnish facilities, background research, technical advice, and resources to faa and would conduct advanced flight research. In addition, NASA would conduct necessary background research to provide supporting technology and technical assistance and make available nasa’s facilities and technical resources. In flight testing phase, faa would be responsible for direction and acceptance testing, and certification trials; NASA would be responsible for flight research with its own funds, instrumentation, and resources. (NASA Release 64-28)
First of two main experiment units for Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) was delivered to NASA by Univ. of Wisconsin. Designed and built by Cook Electric Co. under contract to the university, the experiment consisted of clustered 16-in. nebular photometer telescope, four 8-in. stellar photometer telescopes, and two scanning spectrometers. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 55)
NASA selected 14 firms for negotiation of contracts to provide engineering, fabrication, and institutional support services to six laboratories and three offices of the Marshall Space Flight Center. Work would be in support of the Saturn/Apollo launch vehicle program with cost estimated at $68 million for one year, (nasa Release 64-322)
NASA announced Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, assumed the role of acting director of Project Gemini. George M. Low, former Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight at Hq. and since February 1964 Deputy Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, had served as acting director of Gemini since last November. (NASA Release 64-247)
Western Union announced it had completed a microwave system for the next lunar spacecraft’s communications with earth. The system was in test operation, linking Goldstone Tracking Station with Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 164 mi. away. For the next lunar probe, gs well as subsequent lunar and planetary probes, data obtained by the spacecraft would be sent through Goldstone to JPL for computer analysis; commands to the spacecraft would be sent from jpl through Goldstone to the probe. (Wash. Post, 4/21/64)
Vladimir Kotelnikov, member of Soviet Academy of Sciences, proposed one-year radio search of the universe for signals from extraterrestrial civilizations, according to Tass. He proposed that network of antennas be assigned to “listen to” specific target points in space. The antennas would be connected to a central multichannel receiver. U.S. radioastronomers at National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W.	Va., had conducted similar experiment in 1960 (Project Ozma) without detecting messages. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/18/64)
Brig. Gen. Benjamin G. Holzman (usaf, Ret.) was sworn in by Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, as consultant to NASA for planning and administration of its advanced research and technology program. General Holzman would work on staff organization and formation of a program for NASA Electronics Research Center, (nasa Release 64-271)
NASA Lewis Research Center issued requests for proposals for initial construction of 500-ft. drop tower for producing zero gravity environments. The facility would be largest of its kind in the U.S., would be able to provide weightlessness for periods up to 10 sec. (lrc Release 64r-12)
Boeing announced that Dr. George M. Knauf, for the past three years deputy director of space medicine in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, would join the company as chief of bioastronautics. He would manage groups working on life support rad protection, engineering psychology, rad program support. (Seattle Post-Intelligence, 12/18/64)
NASA announced frc had issued requests for proposals for construction of two low-speed lifting-body gliders. NASA would furnish the selected contractor with information obtained in research with M—2 concept at Ames Research Center and the HL-10 lifting-body at Langley Research Center. Both vehicles would undergo thorough testing in Ames wind tunnel, then be tested in Bight at FRC. (nasa Release 64-41)
faa began sonic-boom study program at Oklahoma City, Okla., generating sonic booms at the levels predicted for supersonic transport operations to determine public acceptability of these levels. Data acquired from the 26-week program would be used in planning and design of U.S. supersonic transport, faa conducted the program with cooperation of usaf and nasa; usaf provided F-104 aircraft to generate the booms and NASA researchers provided ground instrumentation to measure booms and boom effect. (FAA Release 64-3)
NASA announced it would negotiate one-year cost-plus-incentive-fee contract with General Electric Co., Computer Dept., for continuation of engineering services at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s computation laboratory, (nasa Release 64-31)
nasa Flight Research Center awarded a $1.2 million contract to the Norair Div. of the Northrop Corp. of Hawthorne, Calif., for the design and construction of two full-scale lifting body research vehicles. The two research vehicles (the M-2 and HL-10) were to be used initially by NASA for full-scale wind tunnel testing and for free flight tests as manned subsonic gliders, (frc Release 14-64)
NASA announced selection of Lear Siegler, Inc., Electronics Instrumentation Div. for negotiation of contract to install new electronic systems and modify present systems at East Test Area of Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. Contract value was estimated to exceed $4,000,000. (nasa Release 64-59)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of nasa Lewis Research Center, was awarded honorary Doctor of Applied Science degree by Fenn College, Cleveland, O.	(Lewis News, 6/19/64, 2)
NASA announced appointment of Ray Hooker, Chief of Research Models and Facilities Div. at Langley Research Center, as nasa’s Senior Scientific Representative in Australia. Hooker would replace Edwin P. Hartman, first nIsa Senior Scientific Representative in Australia, now completing his second two-year term. Hooker would leave in June for Melbourne, where his primary function would be liaison with the Ministry of Supply of the Commonwealth of Australia, the cooperating agency which builds, staffs, and operates NASA facilities there. (NASA Release 64-85)
Research in use of laser radar to map air turbulence in the skies was described by Drs. Ronald T. H. Collis and Myron G. H. Ligida of Aero-physicS Laboratory at Stanford Research Institute. The laser equipment would be installed in aircraft. Dr. Collis and Dr. Ligida reported their research in Nature. (NYT, 8/7/64,8)
At annual meeting of National Academy of Sciences, in Washington, Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, President of Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, was elected to a second four-year term as Treasurer. Also at the meeting, NAS elected 35 new members on the basis of distinguished and continuing achievements in original research, among them: George Howard Herbig, astronomer and assistant director of Lick Observatory; and Clark Blanchard Millikan, professor of aeronautics and director of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory. Election of six distinguished foreign scientists also was announced, among them: Marcel Gilles Josef Minnaert, Professor Emeritus at the Univ. of Utrecht and co-inventer of the stellar curve of growth, one of the most significant developments in modern astronomy; and Maurice Roy, Directeur General de l’Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales and currently President of the International Committee on Space Research ( cospar ). ( nas-nrs Releases)
Experimental hot-electron propulsion system had completed 1,000 hrs. of testing at RCA David Samoff Research Center without degradation of components or performance, RCA announced. (NYT, 2/11/64, 53; M&R, 2/17/64,21)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said in Gatlinburg, Tenn., speech to nasa-aec—usaf symposium on radiation protection that “not too far in the future huge nuclear-propelled spacecraft will take crews of men on long voyages deep into space. . . . “The problems of man-made radiation connected with these space ships will prove far more challenging in the long run than those of the natural radiation in space. . . .”	(NYT, 10/13/64, 18)
First four divisions of NASA Lewis Research Center had completed moving into new Development Engineering Building, lrc announced. Occupancy of the building by lrc units temporarily housed in a Cleveland shopping center would be completed by end of summer. (lrc Release 64-58)
The lowest altitude at which demarcation line between air space and outer space should be assigned is 100 km. (60 mi.), according to Norman Sissenwine, usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories scientist and cochairman of U.S. Committee on the Extension of the Standard Atmosphere. Sissenwine’s definition had been requested by Hyman, Hayman, and Harris law firm, which was attempting legislative interpretation for the International Astronautical Federation and the International Institute of Space Law. Sissenwine acknowledged that ultimately the line must be drawn arbitrarily, explained considerations favoring 100 km.: “Aerodynamic forces on most of the ballistic re-entry, lifting re-entry, and boost-glide orbital aerospace vehicles can generally be neglected at altitudes above 100 km. (This may vary from 80 to 120 km, depending upon the vehicle concept, but I believe 100 km is a good nominal altitude to use.) . . .” He pointed out that atmosphere’s basic composition begins to change near 100 km, “Specifically it has been determined that disassociation of molecular oxygen into atomic oxygen should be depicted at an altitude of 90 km in the Standard Atmosphere. . . Another consideration was that relationships of temperature and pressure fields to wind fields are generally constant to nearly 100 km. This is also true for speed of sound, coefficient of viscosity, kinematic viscosity, and thermal conductivity. Finally, he pointed out that meteors entering the atmosphere generally disintegrate below 120-km. altitude, and most meteor trails formed in atmospheric entry are observed below 100 km. (oar Release 1-64-4)
NASA announced appointment of Jennings Pemble Field, Jr., as Director of Gemini Program Control in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight. In this position Field would be responsible for Gemini program costs and budget. Field was an executive of imc Industries, Inc.; from 1954 to 1963 he was with Bendix Corp., and from 1940 to 1954 he was a commissioned officer in U.S. Navy. (NASA Release 64-257)
European Space Research Organization (esro) announced plans to build research center at Noordwijk, the Netherlands. Center would employ 800-man international staff, would include laboratories, proving grounds, and other facilities. (NYT, 10/27/64, 5)
A basic principle in bearing technology, discovered by NASA Lewis Research Center engineers, was hailed in 53rd Annual Report of the Fafnir Bearing Co. as “carrying bearing technology a step beyond conventional upset forgings.” The underlying principle was first reported by the lrc engineers in 1957; now the principle was developed into a manufacturing process. Walter T. Olson, assistant director of Lewis, said this was one instance where results from exploratory research had been adapted to production techniques, an important aim of NASA. (lrc Release 64-76)
nasa announced selection of Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to supply liquid hydrogen to nasa Mississippi Test Operations and Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn launch vehicle test program. Contract called for supply of up to 30 tons of liquid hydrogen per day by no later than mid-1965, would be renewable annually through December 1970. (nasa Release 64-10)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $2 million contract to Motorola’s Western Military Electronics Div., to develop the Airborne Ranging Orbital Determination (arod) system. (M&R, 12/14/64, 21)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He mentioned that NASA’s Advanced Research and Technology program encompassed more than 2,000 separate tasks and projects, and highlighted a few areas for illustration. “. . . Considerable effort is concentrated on commercial supersonic transports, a subject of nasa research for many years. Various aircraft configurations embodying widely differing design features have resulted from this research. All of these designs appear promising, particularly with regard to supersonic performance. In September 1963, at the Langley Research Center, the results of preliminary design studies and of related NASA in-house research programs were presented to all interested government agencies and major aircraft manufacturers. In general, it was concluded that a supersonic transport for airline use is technically feasibly. It was stressed, however, that additional research will be required in order to raise the level of technology to the point where a supersonic transport can be designed which is economically attractive to the airlines. . . .” (Testimony)
Museum of Modern Art in New York opened exhibition titled “20th Century Engineering,” which featured 195 spectacular and dramatic structures combining beauty with utility. NASA Langley Research Center wind-tunnel was represented among the dams, antennas, observatories, skyscrapers, and other structures. (Huxtable, NYT, 6/30/64, 29)
Three contracts were awarded by NASA Lewis Research Center to Hughes Aircraft Co. The first contract, totaling $1,151,370, was a 12-mo. continuation of a previous contract for research and development of a contact ion engine using cesium as a propellant. The other two contracts were also follow-on efforts: a contract for $202,915 provided for fabrication of porous alloy and solid sintered ionizers; a contract for $243,061 covered tests and evaluation of physical, electrical, and cesium ionization properties of porous ionizers and evaluation of the electrical properties of solid sintered ionizer material, (lrc Release 64-114)
Committee for the Preservation of Cambridge Industry, made up of representatives from each of the 94 industrial firms that would be disclocated by location of NASA Electronics Research Center on Kendall Square site, announced it would wage a legal battle to prevent NASA’s obtaining the site. Committee said implementation of NASA’s plan would “disrupt the jobs of 4,000 employees within this area,” contended it would cost some of the industries $200,000 to $400,000 to relocate although maximum renewal funds available for business relocation were only $25,000. (Lewis, Boston Globe, 9/23/64)
NASA announced award by Langley Research Center of $2.5 million contract to Boeing Co. for dynamic flight simulation work for the supersonic transport program. The Boeing 707 prototype would be modified by installation of major control and computer equipment to permit complete simulation of a wide variety of supersonic transport types. (nasa Release 64-286)
Albert J. Evans, NASA Acting Director of Aeronautics, said before Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “The Aeronautical Research effort of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has one specific goal: to provide technical information for use by the aircraft manufacturers of the United States, information which is sufficiently far advanced to permit the design and production of military and civil air vehicles which are superior to those of any other nation. “Our aeronautical program is classified in four broad disciplinary categories . . Aerodynamics, Structures, Air-Breathing Propulsion, [and] Operating Problems. “The resources utilized in accomplishing the NASA Aeronautical Research program are found primarily in the highly-competent technical staffs of the four Research Centers of the NASA. The in-house effort is supported, as required, by a certain amount of out-of-house contract research performed by universities, non-profit organizations, and private industry. The funds requested for the NASA Aeronautics program support these in-house and out-of-house research efforts. The program, however, is predominantly an in-house effort, conducted in the established framework of the theoretical and experimental research activity of the NASA Research Centers. . . .” (Testimony)
In article from Houston, upi reported on first manned space flight in Project Gemini (GT-3), quoting “informed sources” as saying: “We cannot possibly make it this year. It will be early 1965.” NASA’s officially announced planning date was in last quarter of 1964. (upi, L.A. Times, 8/2/64)
Three Soviet cosmonauts spent the day undergoing medical checks and post-flight examinations, following their 24-hour orbital space flight. (Clymer, Balt. Sun, 10/15/64)
Speculation that U.S.S.R. timed their three-man voskhod i space flight “to take the edge off the Chinese atomic demonstration which is expected very soon” was offered by Max Lerner in New York Post. (Lemer, N.Y. Post, 10/14/64)
NASA announced that its Office of Technology Utilization had issued Technical Briefs describing two instruments for measuring the rates of human respiration and heartbeat. The devices were a pneumotachometer (Tech Brief 64-10259) which would measure respiration rates per minute on a breath-to-breath basis and a cardiometer (Tech Brief 64-10258) which would compute the heartbeat rate from the wave-form output of an electrocardiograph (eicg) and visually display the data in beats per minute. Both were developed in connection with NASA’s manned space flight program. (NASA Release 64-311) A NASA technology utilization report described the effects of extremely low temperatures on structural metals. Based on studies at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, the report outlined some of NASA’s experience with various metallic materials and their capabilities at cryogenic temperatures. (nasa Release 64-325) NASA Tech Brief 64-10006 described a speed-sensing device to help power crane operators judge payload movements more precisely. Visual and audible signals would be produced in the crane cab to indicate the rate of load movement. The device would eliminate the necessity of a relay man to transmit hand signals to the crane operator, (nasa Release 64-300)
Results of Soviet biological experiments reported to cospar meeting. Discussing fruit fly experiments in space [see May 8], report said fruit flies mated in space apparently normally, but when the eggs hatched in the laboratory after the flight there was excess number of females. Furthermore, report said, average weight of male fruit flies was lower than of flies bred in the laboratory. Soviets disclosed that Cosmonaut V.	Bykovsky had conducted fixed biological experiments during his five-day vostok v space flight, killing specimens to stop their development at various intervals. In {mother biological experiment, Soviets reported that normal cell division in spores of Tradescantia plant was upset in space environment, with rearrangements of plant chromosomes as well as development of freak cells. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/17/64)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced seven researchers had won awards for four inventions, the awards totaling $1,400 under provisions of the Government Employees Incentive Awards Act. Winners were: S. Stephen Papell, $500 for low viscosity magnetic fluid obtained by collodial suspension of magnetic particles; Paul D. Reader and Harold R. Kaufman, $500 for electrostatic ion engine with permanent magnetic circuit; Robert J. Branstetter and Allen J. Metzler, $300 for black-body furnace; John R. Jack and Paul F. Brinich, $100 for improved heat exchangers for electrothermal rockets. ( lrc Release 64-38)
In his Economic Report to the Congress, President Lyndon B. Johnson reviewed progress toward economic goals and presented his programs for “achieving our national economic potential.” On transportation and technology, he said that the “. . . Federal Government provides major support for the research and development which underlie our striking technological advances. In the past much of our research and development has been connected with national defense. Now, as military outlays level off, we face:
NASA announced that a 10-month study contract for $191,835 to assess the technological problems of designing, building, and operating a manned orbiting astronomical observatory had been awarded to the Boeing Co. Boeing would study possible ways in which such an observatory might he operated, with particular emphasis on the role of man in its scientific program. A requirement of the study was that the orbiting telescope be sufficiently adaptable to support a broad astronomical program. The study would assume that the telescope would be operated in conjunction with a proposed Manned Orbital Research Laboratory (morl) under study by NASA Langley Research Center for NASA Office of Manned Space flight. (LaRC Release)
Thomas L. McGrath, director of R&D Dept, of Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce, said in Christian Science Monitor interview that NASA’s electronic research center would be a stimulus to Boston area economy. When the center is completed in 1969, he said, a “conservative” estimate would be $250 million contribution to income of the area. “The center will pull in a lot of capable people, and it’s impossible to say what they’ll add to the income of the area. Also one good research discovery coming out of the center might be worth millions to industry.” (Russell, CSM, 2/10/64)
Major improvements in performance of supersonic transport shapes had come from aerodynamic refinements at NASA Langley Research Center, nasa announced. Applied to the wing design of supersonic transport concept known as “Scat 15,” the refinements achieved much better flight characteristics and more than 15 per cent increase in range. The improved concept—Scat 15F—was now regarded more favorably in comparison with the two established concepts, Scat 16 and 17. (nasa Release 64-120)
The Hermann Oberth Award, presented annually by the Alabama chapter of AIAA, was awarded posthumously to Hugh M. Taylor, former special assistant to the Chief of the Guidance and Control Division, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Taylor, who had worked at Redstone Arsenal since 1951, was killed in a plane crash July 9 near Newport, Tenn. {Marshall Star, 11/11/64, 1, and 11/25/64, 1)
nasa announced selection of 23 scientific and technological experiments to be flown aboard Gemini spacecraft, selected by NASA Manned Space Flight Experiments Board from almost 100 proposals made by scientists and engineers in NASA, dod, and the scientific community at large. 13 of the experiments—eight scientific and five technological— were sponsored by nasa; ten experiments, all technological, were sponsored by dod. (nasa Release 64-78)
NASA announced $1 million facilities grant to Texas a&m Univ., which would build an activation analysis laboratory for use in its space-related research program for remote analysis of materials through nuclear activation, (nasa Release 64-102)
NASA released to industry its first technology utilization report, entitled “An Improved Precision Height Gage.” NASA Ames Research Center developed the report. (NASA SP-5001)
One-year program of general orientation for 60 recent university graduates beginning their professional careers at NASA Langley Research Center began with ceremony presided over by LaRC Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson. (LaRC Release)
Speaking at commencement exercises at New Mexico State University, University Park, N. Mex., Dr. George Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, noted that the NASA program for manned space flight has recorded 16 successes in 16 attempts. He explained this record: “A rather simple formula has contributed to the success to date. We fly a spacecraft, manned or unmanned, only after a comprehensive set of ground and flight tests has been completed and every deviation from expected performance has been explained. We are continuing to follow that policy.” (Text)
Analyzing the U.S. aerospace industry Richard Rutter said in New York Times: “There have been some reductions in employment here and there and some production cut-backs. On the whole, however, the aerospace-defense industry remains not only very healthy but still growing. . . . “Change, of course, has been the hallmark of the aerospace industry almost since its very beginning. This characteristic continues. At present, for instance, there is some shift in production and procurement from aircraft and missiles to space vehicles and related space projects. This is not yet a sharp trend, but it may be indicative of the industry’s future course. . . .” (Rutter, NYT, 8/16/64, FI)
nasa Electronics Research Center was formally activated in Cambridge, Mass., and Dr. Winston E. Kock took the oath of office as Director. Electronics Research Task Group from NASA Hq. and NASA North Eastern Office in Cambridge were absorbed in the new Center to form initial nucleus of 80 personnel. Design and construction of the facility would begin late this year and be completed in four or five years, (nasa Release 64-219; NASA Announcement 64-189; NASA Circulars 320, 321)
NASA granted Dr. George Wharton, Ohio State Univ. scientist, nearly $70,000 for a three-year research program to determine the least amount of water necessary to sustain earth life. {Wash. Daily News, 6/18/64)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said at University of Cincinnati: “We have reached a state where we can do a lot more things [in space exploration] them we may be allowed to do. . . . “The work of my office is to develop the concepts. I can only say what can be done. It may never be approved. . . . “The scientist and engineer cannot answer what is next. He can only answer by outlining the options which science will permit as the next Btep. “What is in fact done next must be determined by an assessment of the scientific, social, economical and political implications of these options. . . .” (Text)
usaf Captains Albert R. Crews and Richard E. Lawyer emerged from twoweek stay in simulated-space cabin at GE Space Technology Center, Valley Forge, Pa. Officials said test showed that man can perform more tasks in extended space flight than previously supposed. (Wash. Post, 9/2/64)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded an honorary degree by Iowa Wesleyan College. (MarshaU Star, 6/17/64,1)
NASA Technology Utilization Report (SP-5005) on the retrometer, a new system of voice communications transmitted on a beam of light, was published. Invented at NASA Langley Research Center by Numa E. Thomas, the retrometer differed from previous light beam-communications systems in that the originating station required no power other them the human voice. The T—U Report described the system, gave instructions for building experimental retrometers, and suggested many possible applications of the system.	(NASA T—U Rpt. SP-5005; NASA Release 64-82)
nasa announced granting 28 waivers of U.S. commercial rights to inventions resulting from work performed under nasa contracts, bringing total of nasa’s patent waivers to 74. Under policy “designed to encourage prompt public and industrial benefit from the scientific byproducts of its research and development activities,” NASA granted the patent rights to 12 companies, one university, one research organization, and two individuals (jointly). NASA retained royalty-free license for any governmental use of the inventions. (NASA Release 64-52)
Republican six-man study group headed by former Secretary of Defense Neil H. McElroy released report charging that Kennedy-Johnson Administration had neglected research and development of new weapon systems. In reply to the charges, dod issued statement saying it was “pursuing a vigorous and effective research and development program designed to keep this nation the strongest in the world ...” and citing more than 200 major new projects initiated since 1961. (AP, NYT, 10/20/64)
B. K. Heusinger of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center said in Astronautics & Aeronautics article about present arid future improvements in Saturn launch vehicle propulsion: “First and foremost, the Saturn-I testing program has already made possible an additional payload capability of approximately 4300 lb. without major redesign efforts. A substantial portion of this gain has come from altered operational and procedural techniques developed during the normal course of static and flight testing. The impact of major redesigns will not be felt, as a result of the lead times involved, until the first of the Satum-IB vehicles. . . .”	(A&A, 8/64,/ 20-25) During August: J. S. Butz, Jr., said in Air Force and Space Digest article on the future of aviation: “Aeronautics in the 1970s and 1980s promises to eclipse anything of the past in both scope and the performance of individual aircraft. Although missile and space systems will continue to furnish strong competition for national support, aviation activity in the decades ahead will be much more extensive and important than it is today. . . . “The revolutionary effect of the new technology on future aircraft can be best illustrated by discussing two key areas. One is propulsion. The other is materials. Light, more powerful engines, and lighter, stronger structures always have been key design objectives. This is still true. . . .” He quoted Dr. Alexander H, Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development: “‘It is possible today to begin the development of lightweight gas-turbine engines with a thrust-to-weight ratio of better than 10 to 1.’ Dr. Flax points out that installed thrust-to-weight ratios apparently can rise to higher than 20 to 1 on the second generation of future engines. “Ten years ago such a statement would have got him laughed out of most scientific and engineering meetings. A few people may still argue that the estimate is high. But the main argument now is over how best to achieve this truly stunning performance rather than over the possibility of achieving it.” He detailed some of the r&d areas with great potential for future aircraft, then said: “Technical evidence abounds to prove that an aeronautical revolution is at hand and that the first step in that revolution can have great economic importance. It clearly is time for more resolute action. Britain and France, and possibly the Soviet Union, have approximately the same opportunity as the US to capitalize on what is known now. In western Europe, at least, engine and materials technology is well advanced. . . .” (AF Mag., 8/64)
NASA announced grant of $1,125,000 to Univ. of Illinois to finance construction of research laboratory facilities as wing to university’s Coordinated Science Laboratory. To be called Aerospace Research Center, the facilities were to be for investigations of ionosphere properties, propulsion, molecular densities, rendezvous problems, and plasma physics, (nasa Release 64-169)
Evidence of the impact on education of achievements in space technology was cited by James V. Bernardo, Director of NASA Educational Programs Div., at the Michigan Education Association Meeting in Detroit: (1) greater demand for scientists, engineers, and technicians; (2) examination and revision of the science and mathematics courses in high schools and colleges to include new concepts and to provide enrichment of basic principles through space-related materials; (3) recognition of the need for better teacher training to meet the increasing needs of science and technology in our society; (4) recognition that science should be a basic part of general education for all students and that we must develop a science-literate public; (5) effort to develop a well-balanced national effort in science, technology, the social sciences, and the humanities; (6) need for advancing scientific research activities related to space exploration problems, including the development of training programs for scientists, engineers, and technicians. (Text)
USn’s f-111b fighter aircraft, originally designated tfx, was given its first test flight over Long Island at 2,000-mph for an hour and 18 min., during which the variable wing-sweep of the craft was tested. (Wash. Post, 5/19/65, 11; upi, Wash. Post, 5/20/65, 2)
XB-70a research bomber, leaving Edwards afb, flew 1,700 mph at 65,000-ft. alt. on its 13th test flight. It landed three minutes earlier than planned because of a possible leak in a hydraulic system, (ap, Balt. Sun, 6/17/65)
usaf xb-70a research bomber reached a speed of 1,850 mph at 66,000	ft. in a test flight at Edwards afb. (afftc Release 65-7-18)
DOD announced that U.S. would sell United Kingdom: (1) F^l (Phantom II) fighter/close-support aircraft and (2) c—130e combat assault transport aircraft. It had also been agreed that the two countries would expand existing program of cooperation in defense research and development. Serious consideration would be given to joint development of advanced life engine for vertical- and short-takeoff aircraft. (dod Release 80-65)
. . . The last two Gemini missions have shown clearly that the U.S. manned space flight program has come of age technically. They also demonstrated the operational flexibility that can be achieved in long-duration manned missions,” wrote Robert Hotz in Aviation Week. “With each new manned mission, the Gemini program is forging a record that insures its place in space history as the great leap forward in space flight that transformed the role of man himself from that of a surviving passenger to a useful performer of vital functions in the space environment. . . . “It was really the conclusive demonstration that adding a long-term manned capability would improve satellite reconnaissance by orders of magnitude that finally forced the decision to proceed with mol after nearly two years of delay under the guise of ‘further study.’ ” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 9/6/65,17)
The Jodrell Bank Observatory, British tracking station, was visited by a group of six Soviet scientists led by M. V. Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, (ap, Boston Globe, 2/17/65)
S. Walter Hixon, Jr., Supervisory Employee Development Officer at the NASA Langley Research Center, was selected for his educational activities as the Federal Civil Service Employee of the Year in the Hampton Roads area. Hixon had conducted four major programs at Langley including graduate study, advanced in-house training, a cooperative college education plan, and an apprenticeship training system. (LaRC Release)
President Johnson, on the advice of Defense Secretary McNamara, and contrary to the opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had decided to postpone the production order for the Nike-X missile defense system, Neal Stanford of the Christian Science Monitor asserted. $2 billion had already been spent on the R&D phase of the Nike-X and an additional $20 billion would be required to produce and deploy it. The fy 1966 budget provided approximately $400 million for continued research and development on the Nike-X system pending the decision on whether to put Nike-X into production. (Stanford, CSM, 1/28/65)
U.S.S.R. was building a spaceship designed not for space flight, but for exhibition in a new space museum to be built at the site of Moscow’s Space Monument. Inside the model cabin, which would have a seating capacity of 100, a movie showing the earth as it appeared from space would he shown to visitors, (ap, San Diego Eve. Trib., 4/9/65, 22)
Fourth Chrysler-assembled Saturn ib first stage left NASA Michoud Assembly Facility aboard the nasa barge Palaemon for static-firing tests at Marshall Space Flight Center. Trip would take about seven days, (msfc Release 65-295)
Dr. Fred Whipple, director of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, had suggested landing on a comet. Dr. Whipple also speculated that if a space vehicle were sent near a comet scientists could use a low-velocity probe that could be put into an orbit in the comet’s vicinity for a week or more to study the velocities of gas and dust particles boiled off the comet by solar radiation. The probe would also be able to take core samples of the comet to give direct measurement of one of the oldest physical processes in the solar system, Dr. Whipple said. (NYT, 2/14/65, 50)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director of NASA Electronics Research Center, retired as a U.S. naval commander. He had been assigned to detached duty with NASA by USN in 1960 and would continue with erc as a civilian. (Boston Globe, 7/1/65)
Six out of ten Minnesotans said in a recent survey conducted by the Minneapolis Tribune's Minnesota Poll that the U.S. should at least maintain its $5 billion a year budget for space exploration. 59% felt the U.S. had outdistanced the U.S.S.R. 10% considered the “space race” about even. {Minn. Trib., 7/4/65)
A $1,366,511 contract for construction of a high temperature heat load testing facility at nasa Flight Research Center was awarded to Santa Fe Engineers, Inc. The facility would be capable of producing temperatures up to 3,000°F on small isolated areas of aircraft; larger areas could be heated up to about 600°. Contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers, which was administering it for NASA, (frc Release 9-65)
NASA engineers Harry Carlson and Francis E. McLean believed the sonic boom problem in the operation of the supersonic transport could be solved by fattening the fuselage just forward of the wing, thereby altering the air flow in such a way as to cut the boom to an acceptable level, reported Richard P. Cooke in the Wall Street Journal. Fattening the Sst fuselage forward of the wings, said the NASA engineers, would also help the lift and might permit room for more seats. (Cooke, WSJ, 5/20/65)
A turbocompressor, first flight-weight hardware for an eight-kilowatt space power generating system, arrived at NASA Lewis Research Center for testing. It would use a 30-ft. solar mirror to gather the sun’s rays and operate on a Brayton cycle with an unreactive gas as its working fuel. In space, heat source could be a reactor, a radio-isotope, or a solar heat receiver supplied by concentrated sunlight reflected from a mirror. Turbocompressor was built for NASA by Air Research Manufacturing Co. as part of NASA’s Advanced Technology Program, (lrc Release 65-64)
NASA and the U.S. Army had entered into an agreement which would establish a joint effort in the area of low-speed aeronautical research to be accomplished in facilities at NASA Ames Research Center, Ames reported. The program would be conducted in cooperation with personnel of the U.S. Army Materiel Command, (arc Astrogram, 6/24/65, 1)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, speaking in Minneapolis, Minn., before the Twin Cities Section of aiaa, said: “We believe that activities in the exploration of space, a modern social need recognizable from the passage of the National Aeronautics and Space Act and the appropriation of large sums of money by the Congress, provide the essential environment to accelerate greatly the growth of theoretical and experimental science in many areas. It is true that this accelerated growth in science and technology is essential to the on-going development of space capability, but of deeper significance is the complex dynamic interaction between science, technology, and space exploration, which is essential to the growth of science, technology, and space exploration. In this case, as in the cases previously cited, to use an analogy from bacteriology, there has to be a nutrient solution (money and employment opportunities) to feed the scientific and technological effort, and as soon as this environment is provided, many latent efforts in science and technology begin to assert themselves and move forward. “I believe that this interpretation of certain aspects of the space program is more significant and meaningful than the current concepts of technology utilization and technological spinoff as incidental or serendipitous benefits of space exploration.” (Text)
NASA announced closing of its Santa Monica and Dallas Area Professional Staffing Offices and moving of its New York office to Boston to assist in recruitment program for new Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, (nasa Release 65-156)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala., received an honorary doctorate of laws from Iona College. (NYT, 3/17/65, 38)
Dr. Winston E. Kock, Director of NASA Electronics Research Center, was guest of Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, on a tour of MSC facilities. While in Houston, Dr. Kock addressed the annual banquet of the Institute of Navigation. In his speech he revealed ERC would investigate possibilities of new guidance techniques for future ion-propelled (or other low-thrust) spacecraft, employing Mossbauer radiation as an accelerometer to monitor systems performance on the spacecraft. He termed Mossbauer radiation “the most precise electromagnetic frequency yet known” in guidance applications, (msc Roundup, 5/14/65, 7)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Douglas Aircraft Co1, for nine additional s-ivb flight stages to be used as the third stage of the Saturn V launch vehicle being developed at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Work would also include related spares and launch support services. Value of the S-IVB contract presently totaled some $312 million. The new work was expected to exceed $150 million. (nasa Release 65-209; msfc Release 65-162; Marshall Star, 6/30/65, 1)
NASA announced appointment of Bernard Moritz, NASA Assistant General Counsel for Procurement, as Assistant Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs. S. Neil Hosenball, Chief Counsel at NASA Lewis Research Center, would succeed Moritz, (nasa Release 65-387)
U.S. Chamber of Commerce released a report entitled “Criteria for Federal Support of Research and Development,” which proposed the establishment of a forum for debating scientific and technical issues (such as space exploration and desalting of the oceans) before they became national policy. The council, to be composed of representatives of industry, labor, the Government, and the academic industry, would investigate the inherent worth of proposed programs and their value to society to increase public understanding of issues that were usually decided by the Government alone and debated afterward. (Clark, NYT, 1/11/65, 46)
Soviet Union had asked the Federation Aeronautique Internationale to officially confirm two spacecraft world records established by the crew of VOSKHOD II on March 18, 1965, reported Interavia Air Letter. Applications were for first extravehicular activity of a man from a spacecraft in orbit and a new altitude record of 497.7 km. (309 mi.). {Interavia Air Letter, 9/22/65, 6)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, predicted in a luncheon address to participants in the National Youth Science Camp “a revolution in aeronautics within the next 15 years” as a result of advances being made now. Breakthroughs being made in development of more powerful rockets, heat resistant metals, and more sophisticated engines would soon lead to vertical takeoff craft capable of undergoing sustained flight at speeds up to 12 times the speed of sound, General Schriever postulated. (Text; Wash. Eve. Star, 7/9/65)
NASA and U.S. Army Materiel Command adopted an agreement for joint participation in low-speed and Vtol aeronautical research. The research program was centered at NASA Ames Research Center, (nmi
Formation of a Voyager Landing-Capsule Task Team at Ames and Langley Research Centers to assist JPL during early phases of the design was announced by NASA. This would include research and analytical support, (arc Release)
Theo E. Sims, Manager of NASA Langley Research Center’s Project Ram, reported results of reentry communications blackout research before the IEEE national convention in New York. Sims said significant progress had been made toward understanding the fundamental nature of the blackout problem and suggested that vehicle shape selection, signal frequency choice, use of static magnetic fields, and material addition to the flow field were all possible solutions. Flight experiments, he indicated, had shown the materials addition technique to be useful at speeds up to 12,000 mph, and an experiment to be flown on the first manned Gemini spacecraft would attempt to demonstrate the effectiveness of water addition at even higher speeds. (LaRC Release)
Dr. Winston E. Kock, Director of NASA Electronics Research Center, announced that NASA had authorized architects to proceed with detailed designs for a 26-story tower building, a three-story microwave laboratory, and an auditorium-cafeteria building at ERC. Construction would begin next spring, provided approval were given for urban renewal proceedings in the Kendall Square-Cambridge site. The buildings would be built with $15 million already approved by Congress, (erc Release 65-31)
Two Presidential citations were among 12 awards presented to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center employees recently, msfc announced. Ralph Butler of the Aero-Astrodynamics Laboratory had suggested an improved method of measuring local atmospheric conditions by using radio-controlled model airplanes. Franklin Williams of the Saturn V Program Office had made two cost-reduction proposals, one concerning x-ray radiation protection and the other recommending an inexpensive covering for clean room insulation. Butler and Williams saved the Government an estimated $306,000. (msfc Release 65-182)
A prototype experimental life-support system enclosed in a simulated space cabin was placed on a ship in San Diego for delivery to NASA Langley Research Center. Designed and constructed by the Convair Div. of General Dynamics Corp., the system was intended for use in a research program to enlarge the scope of life-support technology. Within the device were subsystems to:	(1) extract oxygen from the carbon dioxide exhaled by the occupants; (2) convert waste liquids and humidity condensates to drinking water; (3) provide control of internal temperature and humidity; (4) allow storage and handling of a freeze-dried food supply for four test subjects for 90 days at a time; (5) remove from the cabin atmosphere all contaminating vapors which might be generated; and (6) provide personal hygiene facilities. (LaRC Release)
Max Quatinetz of nasa Lewis Research Center addressed International Powder Metallurgy Conference in New York. He discussed LRC research in adding fibered metals to tungsten to strengthen that metal, which has a high melting point but is brittle and difficult to work. Quatinetz described a new method of producing the fibered compounds —extrusion of powdered metals. Researchers had formed tungsten composites containing high-temperature additives such as oxides, borides, nitrides, and carbides; they had noted increases in the metal’s stress-rupture life of up to 50 times. Quatinetz observed that the new method of fibering would have wide potential application in materials research, (lrc Release 65—45)
Twenty Llrv Program personnel at nasa Flight Research Center were honored at an informal ceremony. Six employees received plaques for special and outstanding contributions to the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle project. ( frc X-Press, 2/19/65, 1)
The first major Saturn V flight component, a 33-ft.-dia., 60,000-lb. corrugated tail section which would support the booster’s five 1.5-million-lb.-thrust engines, arrived at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center from NASA Michoud Operations, near New Orleans. The section was one of five major structural units comprising Saturn V’s first stage. (Marshall Star, 1/27/65, 1)
Aerospace industry would probably increase its employment of scientists and engineers by more than seven percent this year, announced Karl G.	Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Association. He made public a study which indicated that employment of scientists and engineers in aircraft, missile, and space fields would increase by about 13,000	from March to December, reaching a total of 190,000 by the end of the year. He said total aerospace employment would increase by 9,000 from 1,123,000 in March to 1,132,000 in December. This forecast contradicted other recent surveys which had predicted a decline. (Text; ap, NYT, 9/5/65, 5)
The communications blackout problem was discussed by Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg, NASA Director of Research, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology: “One of the phenomena that occurs in gases at high temperatures is ionization, that is, electrons are torn away by the highspeed collisions of the gas atoms and molecules. . . . The free electrons, produced by the high temperatures in the shock layer around a reentry vehicle, interfere with and block the propagation of radio signals. . . . This effect produces the communications-blackout problem. To understand what is going on and to eliminate, or at least minimize this communication difficulty, one must be able to calculate the distribution of free electrons about the body in order to predict when the plasma sheath will become opaque for certain radio frequencies. This calculation cannot be made until the flow field (temperature, density, pressure and velocity) about the body is known. A significant part of the fluid physics program is concerned with the investigations of flow fields. The results of these studies also give us better information on the heat transfer to reentry bodies. “As a possible remedy for the communications blackout, we are studying the characteristics of various gases, called electrophylic gases, which have the unique property of capturing free electrons. Such a gas, which effectively reduces the electron concentration when injected into the flow, might solve the problem. . . . This work is tied closely with the work on radio attenuation going on at the Langley Research Center and the technique is being adapted to test a variety of fluids suggested by the work at Langley.” (Testimony; 1966 NASA Auth. Hearings, 447-62)
Technical Systems Office had been newly established by MSFC to handle launch vehicle technical systems problems, MSFC announced. Dr. J. C. McCall, deputy director of Research and Development Operations, would serve as acting director of the office until Oct. 1, when L. G. Richard, assistant director of the Astrionics Laboratory, would become director, (msfc Release 65-193)
nasa Electronics Research Center had accomplished a promising advance in microwave research by generating higher frequency microwaves by interaction of hot electrons in solid-state component material. Technique applied low voltage across a bulk gallium arsenide semi-conductor crystal less than one-thousandth of an inch thick and might improve microwave signal transmission efficiency in space, (nasa Release 65-373)
Two hrs. and 20 min. of radio signals from Jupiter were received around midnight New Year’s Eve as predicted by George A. Dulk of the Univ. of Colorado. The signals were received at the Altitude Observatory of the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, which had kept its radiotelescope operating for the event. (Osmundsen, NYT, 1/2/65, 1)
Astronomers of the Pulkovo Observatory, Leningrad, had completed installation of a more powerful telescope, Tass announced. Diameter of the instrument’s main mirror was 440 mm. (17.3 in.) ; its focal length, 17.5	m. (57.33 ft.). The new telescope would be able to produce spectrograms from any sector of the sun and simultaneously measure the magnetic field. (Tass, 7/21/65)
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory announced the discovery in England of a new comet. Discovered Sept. 26 by astronomer G. E. D. Alcock (and named after him), the lOth-magnitude comet appeared as part of the constellation Hercules, (ap, Wash. Post, 9/28/65, Al)
nasa announced the appointment of Robert F. Thompson as Mission Director for the future Gemini missions and Col. C. H. Rolender (usaf) as Mission Director for the first and second Apollo/Saturn IB flights. Thompson and Bolender were assigned to the Mission Operations Organization in the Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA Hq., and would have overall responsibility for directing assigned missions. Christopher Kraft would continue in his regular assignment as Flight Director for Gemini missions. Thompson was Chief, Landing and Recovery Div., NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, before receiving this assignment. Col. Rolender had directed a studies group in the office of the usaf Chief of Staff and had engaged in extensive guided missiles and aeronautical systems work, (nasa Release 65-211)
A. J. Hayes, president of the International Association of Machinists, said at a Dallas briefing of industry sponsored by dod and the National Security Industrial Association that Federal procurement officers were meddling in negotiations of labor and the aerospace industry to the extent that free collective bargaining was being eroded away. He said the affected unions would not settle this year for less than the 57-cent package in wage increases and fringe benefits recently worked out for the United Auto Workers, (ap, Denver Post, 4/15/65)
NASA Lewis Research Center planned to buy enough Vg-in.-dia. pingpong balls to fill a bucket-like device 12 ft. in dia. and 19 ft. deep. The miniature pingpong balls would be used to cushion experiments in lrc’s 500-ft.-deep zero-gravity shaft. Experiments would be recovered intact for evaluation and later reuse. The pingpong balls, it was hoped, could cushion up to 6,000 lbs. (lrc Release 65-34)
The U.S. GEMINI v mission established eight new world records: (1) longest manned space flight—190 hrs., 55 min.; former record, 119 hrs., six min. held by U.S.S.R.; (2) national man hours in space—641 hrs., 24 min.; former record, 507 hrs., 16 min. held by U.S.S.R.; (3) longest multi-manned space flight—190 hrs., 56 min.; former record, 97 hrs., 48 min. set by U.S.; (4) most revolutions for a manned space flight—120; former record, 81, set by U.S.S.R.; (5) most manned flights—9; former record held by U.S.S.R., 8; (6) first man to make a second orbital flight—L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) ; (7) individual with most space flight time—Col. Cooper; (8) individuals making the longest single space flight—Cooper and Conrad (Lcdr., usn) ; former record held by U.S.S.R. (ap, NYT, 8/30/65, 17)
NASA Ames Research Center was conducting tests on a Douglas f5d aircraft with a specially designed planform wing that might minimize landing speeds for the proposed supersonic transport. A tornado-like flow, called “vortex airflow,” and resulting from the sharp difference between the low pressure on the top of the wing and the high pressure on the underside, was generated along the leading edges of the “S”-shaped wing. Engineers said use of the sharply angled wings with tornado effect on top had these advantages: (1) the tornadoes affected air flow over the entire aircraft and eliminated turbulence that would make other aircraft directionally unstable when coming in nose high for a landing; (2) the tornadoes made it almost impossible for the wings to lose their lift completely. Also, it was felt this wing shape took maximum advantage of the cushioning effect produced in compressing air between the underside of the wings and the ground which would make it necessary to level off sharply at the last moment before touching down. Existence of this tornado-like flow along the leading edges of the wing encouraged the belief that a supersonic airliner might be built without resorting to variable-sweep wings. In current design competition for supersonic transport under Government auspices, the Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had taken the first approach. The Boeing Co. had a design with movable wings, (arc Release 65-3; Witkin, NYT, 1/30/65)
NASA established an Office of Industry Affairs at the Pentagon by arrangement with the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Installations and Logistics), to coordinate dod-nasa mutual interest procurement and contract management matters, including quality assurance. Clyde Bothmer, who formerly directed management operations in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, became Director, (nasa Release 65— 55; NASA Ann. 65-35)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center awarded ibm a 5-yr. 8175,125,000 contract for integration and checkout of instrument units for Saturn IB and Saturn V programs. Initially announced in 1964, the contract would give IBM the additional responsibility for structural and environmental control systems and integration of all systems, (msfc Release
U.S. Army’s Nixe-X Project Office at Redstone Arsenal announced appointment of Dr. Oswald H. Lange as Chief Scientist and Charles E. Richardson as Chief Engineer. Lange was returning to the Army after more than five years with NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, where he directed the Saturn vehicle project and for the past two years was assistant msfc director for scientific and technical analysis. Richardson was formerly chief of the Nike-X Project’s Test and Range Operations Div. (Marshall Star, 9/29/65, 1)
Dr. Willard F. Libby, chemist and Director of UCLA Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, advocated emphasis on manned scientific missions in the U.S. space program. “In my opinion, space is a great unknown from which we will obtain many new scientific discoveries.” He approved of the use of scientist-astronauts, “but they must be backed much more wholeheartedly by the entire scientific community, particularly the academic community, than is at present the case. Education will help to accomplish this eventually, but there is a particular urgency to determine the post-Apollo objectives in the near future.” A solution to the immediate problem, which had been proposed to and adopted by NASA: formation of a “Scientific Task Force,” made up of scientists about the same age as the astronauts, to work and live at msc and be closely connected with the astronauts, msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of the Office of Space Sciences Dr. Homer E. Newell, and the Advisory Committee for Science and Technology. The Scientific Task Force would educate the scientific community with the manned space flight program and thereby acquire its ideas on the subject, and acquaint the NASA directors with the ideas for scientific experiments suggested by the academic community. (A&A, 4/65, 70-75) During April: Martin Summerfield, Princeton Univ., said in aiaa editorial that most of the critics of the U.S. space program were erecting and knocking down “straw men.” Some of the attacks on the space program were designed to divert space funds “to other, supposedly more important purposes,” and these viewpoints are “pushed too hard and can lead the nation in dangerous directions.” The more significant criticism on scientific grounds was that ground-based instruments (supplemented by unmanned probes) can gather data about space, the moon and other celestial bodies more effectively than rocket-launched exploration. This criticism, he said, “misses the mark completely because it takes for granted that the national space program—or at least the NASA part of it—was conceived simply as a scientific venture. . . .” He recalled the words of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, which provided “clearly . . . the overriding intent to develop the technology of space flight as an extension of the former naca’s commitment to aeronautical flight. . . . “The real issue is whether the nation should continue to develop the technology for flight in space, capitalizing on such useful applications as seem practical from time to time. The answer can only be ‘yes,’ and nothing less than a vigorous program will do. It makes no sense to insist that so broad a program be evaluated in competition with telescopes or unmanned scientific probes. Advances in space science will not substitute for flying capability. Each of these efforts is important in its own right. . . .”	(A&A, 4/65, 23)
Six rhesus monkeys exposed to a total radiation of 500 rads during a 10-day simulated space flight experienced no performance decrement, reported Heather M. Davis in Missiles and Rockets. Radiation was administered at rate of 2 rads per hour from an 80-curie gamma radiation source at the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Thirty-day physical examinations just conducted showed the animals were still in good health. (David, M&R, 9/27/65, 38)
NASA Flight Research Center issued requests for proposals for two preliminary feasibility studies of a manned lifting reentry vehicle to 16 industrial firms. Primary objective of the proposed studies would be to determine problem areas and their influence on design and to provide accurate estimates of the weight, cost, and developmental schedule involved with such a research craft, (frc Release 5^65)
The first photographs taken at the Yale-Columbia Observatory in the Andes in western Argentina had fulfilled the “best optimistic expectations,” reported Professor Dirk Brouwer, director of the Yale Observatory. Brouwer said three test photographs of Orion, nebulae, and Omega Centauri had indicated the lenses apparently were the best of their kind. Principal mission of the Ford Foundation-financed observatory was to make two-hour exposures of the Southern Hemisphere sky to obtain positions of the stars in our galaxy against a background of distant galaxies, (upi, NYT, 9/6/65, 31C)
3C-9, a quasar (quasi-stellar radio source) receding from the earth at 149,000	mps or 80% of the speed of light, had been discovered with the 200-in. telescope at Mt. Palomar Observatory, Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times. It was the most distant of a new generation of five quasars which included cta-102, the object Soviet astronomers had suggested might be transmitting signals under intelligent control. All appeared to be so distant that their life had probably ended during the billions of years required for their light to reach earth. Dr. Allan R. Sandage of Mt. Palomar Observatory said his studies of brightness and velocities of these five quasars and four others previously calculated resulted in evidence supporting the “oscillating universe” theory. Data on the nine quasars’ velocities largely was the work of Dr. Maarten Schmidt, Mt. Palomar Observatory. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/18/65, 1, 2; 5/23/65, 6E)
Lt. Gen. Frank A. Bogart (usaf, Ret.) was appointed Director of Manned Space Flight Management Operations. Since joining NASA on December 1, 1964, General Bogart had served as Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, (nasa Announcement 65-30)
Jack G. Webb was named director of the Federal Aviation Agency’s National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center near Atlantic City, N.J., headquarters for FAA’s research and development activities. (faa Release 65-97)
Over 500 contractors shared the work in NASA’s SI.35 billion Gemini manned space flight project, it was reported. The biggest contractors were aircraft companies, but computer manufacturers, major airlines, telephone companies, and small businesses, manufacturing highly specialized items were included. (Hines. Wash. Sun. Star, 3/21/65 )
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn. ) disclosed in speech before Washington Section, National Association of Science Writers, that the House Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development (of which he was chairman) was planning an investigation of the National Science Foundation. He said: “For some years, there has been the need to review its work and to determine if it were, in fact, thoroughly successful in promoting the progress of science, the national health, prosperity and welfare and for other purposes.” ( Wash. Post, 4/28/65, C9)
U.S. Senate passed a bill (H.R. 7717) authorizing appropriations to nasa for fy 1966 totaling $5,196,826,350, as follows:	$4,533,350,000 for research and development; $67,376,350 for construction of facilities; and $596,100,000 for administrative expenses. (CR, 6/2/ 65, 11816)
Venus’ surface was dry, radio astronomers at Cal Tech reported, probably consisted of sand or porous rock, and was much too hot for any known form of life—up to 675° F. The planet’s cloudy atmosphere was at least 40-mi. thick consisting mostly of carbon dioxide with some nitrogen and a trace of water vapor. Observations were made at Cal Tech’s Owens Valley Radio Observatory by Dr. Barry Clark of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., and Dr. Arkady Kuzmin of the Lebedev Institute of Physics in Moscow. (ap, NYT, 8/7/65, 10)
VENUS H 2,123-lb. unmanned space probe was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. into a heliocentric orbit on a three-and-one-half month journey toward Venus. Tass announced that the trajectory was “close to the prescribed one” and that all onboard equipment was functioning normally. During its flight, VENUS II “would carry out an extensive space research program using onboard scientific instruments.” (Tass, 11/12/65; NYT, 11/13/65, 10)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a $4,514,295 modification to its existing contract with Boeing Co. to provide services in Saturn V ground support. Tasks included analysis of ground support equipment, monitoring equipment qualification testing, acceptance testing, conducting design verification, and interface and installation control documentation, (msfc Release 65-234)
Ball and roller bearings assembled according to the Lewis Hardness Differential Guide could be expected to have four to five times greater fatigue life, NASA announced. The Guide was developed by a NASA Lewis Research Center team of engineers whose tests showed that bearing load capacity and fatigue life were greatest when the rolling elements of the bearing were between one and two points harder (measured on the Rockwell C Scale) than the races. Manufacturers usually made bearings with balls and races of the same hardness. (NASA Release 65-246; lrc Release 65-51)
Clarence A. Syvertson had been named Director of NASA’s new Mission Analysis Division of the Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Technology. NASA announced. He would be responsible for study of future missions for research and technology programs. The Mission Analysis Division, to be located at NASA Ames Research Center, would be staffed by outstanding scientists drawn from all NASA Centers and would be organized along aeronautical and space mission lines. (NASA Release 65-46; NASA Ann. 65-341
Dr. Michel Bader, nasa Ames Research Center scientist, reported that comet Ikeya-Seki had apparently suffered no structural deformation as a result of its close passage to the sun October 20. The tail of the comet now appeared to be about 12° (25 million miles) in length, (arc Astrogram, 10/28/65, 1)
The successful use in modern surgery of plasma probes developed for the U.S. program by High Temperature Instruments Corp. under contract to NASA Lewis Research Center was reported by Dr. Walter T. Olson, Assistant Director for Public Affairs at lrc. The temperature-sensing elements of these tiny probes were used in a cryogenic cannula for treating Parkinson’s Disease, a malady involving control centers in the brain. The surgical probe, through which low-temperature liquid nitrogen flows, is used to destroy parts of the brain by freezing without affecting adjacent tissue. It also permits the neurosurgeon to probe at an intermediate temperature; once located, the selected brain tissues can be frozen by using the thermocouple to monitor the temperature. (lrc Release 65-50)
Urban Renewal Div. of Massachusetts Department of Commerce and Development approved Cambridge’s Kendall Square urban renewal project, thereby opening the way for construction of NASA Electronics Research Center there. (Boston Sun. Globe, 10/10/65)
NASA announced it had extended the Scout Reentry Heating Project to include one more ballistic flight and had invited industry to submit proposals for the design of the spacecraft. Sub-orbital reentry experiment was scheduled for 1967 and would be sixth in the Langley Research Center project. It would require launching of a 13-ft.-long, pointed cone from Wallops Island, Va., using a modified three-stage Scout launch vehicle with no heat shield. Reentry would take place near Bermuda at a velocity between 12,000 and 13,000 mph. (NASA Release 65-384)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced $40 million modification to contract held by General Electric Co. for the design of electrical equipment for Saturn vehicle launch support. Modification would cover the design portion of the work involved in providing electrical support equipment for Saturn IB and Saturn V launches, (msfc Release 65-100)
First successful flight test of a miniature mass spectrometer specifically for biomedical and environmental use was made at NASA’s Flight Research Center. The system weighed 46 lbs., measured 10 x 10 x 20 in. with vacuum system, and could monitor and chemically analyze samples of gases that might be encountered in either the cockpit environment of the spacecraft or in the pilot’s respiratory system. It could detect buildup of harmful gas or absence of necessary life support gas. The mass spectrometer was built by the Consolidated Systems Corporation, Monrovia, California, (frc Release 6-65)
The appearance is deceptive. Actually, we are in a critically important germination period of research and development of future missile systems.’ ” Rutter noted that the shift in the missile program “does not mean . . . that its wings have permanently been clipped or that the scores of companies with a stake in the missile field face a bleak future. The missile era, in fact is still aborning.” (Rutter, NYT, 10/15/65, 65, 69)
AEC reported it had decided not to build a new type of breeder nuclear power reactor that had been considered as a source of electricity for pumps for California’s water project. The reason given was that technical problems had been encountered in research and development. The reactor would have used thorium as the key fuel. It would have been designed to breed more fuel than it consumed and run about nine years on one fuel charge, (aec Release H288; AP, NYT, 12/28/ 65, 4)
NASA had awarded one-year, cost-plus-incentive-award fee contracts to nine firms for engineering, fabrication, and institutional support services to six laboratories and three offices of Marshall Space Flight Center. Cost of work was estimated at $58.5 million for one year and was primarily in support of the Saturn/Apollo launch vehicle program. The firms were Sperry Rand Corp., Brown Engineering Corp., Vitro Corp., Hayes International Corp., Northrop Corp., Spaco, Rust Engineering Co., RCA Service Co., and Management Services, Inc. (nasa Release 65-77; msfc Release)
Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev told a Moscow news conference that VOSKHOD ix had been scheduled to land after 16 orbits, but that there was an inaccuracy in “the solar system of orientation” that prevented use of the automatic landing system. He said he then had to obtain radioed permission from the Soviet space center to land by manual control after the 17th orbit. The landing site was overshot “by a certain distance” Belyayev said without disclosing how much. Belyayev said success of the gt-3 flight of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young “was a national achievement of the United States.” He congratulated “the courageous American cosmonauts,” and said: “May the flights of both ours and American cosmonauts be dedicated to unraveling the mysteries of the universe in the interests of science and for the good of all mankind.” Belyayev said voskhod ii was capable of maneuvering in space as did the U.S. Gemini iii but that this was not in the Soviet flight plan. Leonov described time outside the ship saying “it is too early to call it a pleasant walk. It could not have been done without hard training.” He reported his small push on voskhod ii to move away from it after going out of the hatch started the spacecraft into slow rotation. In pulling himself back to the voskhod ii by his cable, Leonov disclosed he had yanked rather vigorously and had to put his hand out to avoid collision with the spacecraft. Belyayev said he and Leonov were found by a helicopter 21/2 hrs. after a soft landing in snowy woods near Perm. He said voskhod ii was airlifted back to the launch site at Baikonur in Soviet Central Asia and could be used again if necessary, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/26/65; Shabad, NYT, 3/27/65; Flight International, 4/8/65,542—44)
Month-long experiment for NASA to test man’s ability to withstand rotational stress ended at U.S. Navy School of Aviation Medicine. Capt. Ashton Graybiel, Research Director, expressed satisfaction with results of the test which confined four U.S. Navy men in a windowless, circular room, equipped with all necessary living accommodations. The room began rotating at 2 rpm’s and in 16 days built up to 10 rpm’s, stopping three times daily for meals. This pattern of speed build-up had no adverse affect on the men and produced no nausea or significant discomfort. This test, one of a series conducted by Naval School of Aviation Medicine, was to check new procedure for conditioning men for space flight. Since long space voyages could require rotating spacecraft to create artificial gravity, scientists wanted to determine spinning rate man could endure without discomfort. (NASA Release 65-84)
Ground test version of the Saturn V launch vehicle’s first stage (s—ic—1T stage) was static fired for its full flight duration of about 2V2 min. at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. S-IC-T, designed by msfc and the Boeing Co., generated its full thrust of 7,5-million lbs., equivalent, at maximum flight velocity, to about 160 million hp. Firing was the second conducted by the Boeing Co., MSFc’s prime contractor for the s-ic. All early firings were conducted by the msfc Test Laboratory, which directed today’s test, (msfc Release 65-287)
Statement by President Johnson on the delay of the Gemini VI flight: “We are all disappointed that Gemini 6 did not go off as expected. But our disappointment is exceeded by our pride in Astro-auts Walter Schirra and Thomas Stafford and the flight directors of NASA. With the world watching, they acted with remarkable courage in the face of danger and potential disaster. Their eager desire and determination to try again proves once more that men are the real heroes—and the essential factor—in space exploration.” {Pres. Doc., 12/20/65,587)	_
tsr-2, Britain’s tactical and reconnaissance bomber, broke the sound barrier for the first time. The aircraft was flown to more than 1,400 mph over the Irish Sea, to a landing at Wharton. This was the 14th test flight of tsr-2 by its manufacturer, British Aircraft Corp. (Reuters, NYT, 2/23/65, 53)
Dr. Jeanette Piccard’s 1934 balloon Bight, establishing the still current women’s world altitude record for a balloon, was celebrated in Dearborn, Mich., by a ceremony and placing of a marker near the takeoff site. The balloon had a 600,000 cu. ft. volume, reached 57,559 ft. altitude, and took Dr. Piccard from Dearborn, Mich., to Cadiz, Ohio. {CR, 5/18/65, A2465)
Army Lockheed XH-51a, fastest helicopter in the world, demonstrated its rigid rotor system and auxiliary jet engine in a successful test flight. It had a top speed of 272 mph. Without thrust from the engine, the XH-51a could be operated as a helicopter. (Wash. Post, 5/27/65, A7)
Following the gt-3 space flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at a press conference: “This particular flight is noteworthy for many reasons. Perhaps most importantly it is the first manned flight of a Gemini vehicle and it represents, then, the first step in the remaining twelve Gemini flights. In this flight ... we did for the first time carry out an orbital maneuver in space. Another first was the first demonstration of reentry control. We did control reentry landing point on this mission. Another first was the use of Syncom for communications with the Coastal Sentry Quebec during the course of the flight.” (NASA Transcript)
Nucleus of comet Ikeya-Seki had split into three pieces, all of which were traveling together in parallel courses into deep space. The three-piece break, observed Nov. 4 and 5 by Howard Pohn at U.S. Geological Survey Observatory in Flagstaff, had been confirmed by Mt. Palomar Observatory and Boyden Station, South Africa. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 11/15/65, 74)
NASA Langley Research Center announced it would negotiate with Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., an $8 million incentive contract to provide complete system management for the Scout launch vehicle. The contract would continue support services and materials LTV had provided under several contracts. It would include systems engineering, logistic support, operational support, test program support, payload coordination, preflight planning, data reduction and analysis, standardization and configuration control, reliability and quality assurance, vehicle modification, checkout, and delivery, (nasa Release 65-54)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center was readying its first Saturn V S-IC stage, designated S-ic-t, for static firing late this spring, NASA reported. The s-ic-t, a static test stage, would be hot-fired on a captive test stand in MSFc’s West Test Area and would be ground tested repeatedly over a period of many months to prove out the propulsion system, (nasa Release 65-27)
nasa Langley Research Center scientist Windsor L. Sherman proposed conversion of Project Mercury spacecraft into unmanned, recoverable orbiting telescope platforms. Equipment would include a 76-cm. Cassegrainian telescope, a camera recording system, and an attitude control system. The system would weigh approximately 4,700	lb. and would be aimed for a 300-mi. orbit. The observatory would remain in orbit 100-200 days, exposing four frames of film on each orbit for a total of 6,000 frames. After all film was exposed, the system would be braked out of orbit and would descend into the Bermuda recovery area of the Eastern Test Range, using the same recovery techniques developed for the manned Mercury landings. In addition to its capacity to perform a variety of such astronomical observations as high resolution photography, photometry, and spectroscopy, Sherman said, the recoverable observatory would permit reuse of capsule, optical, and control systems. It would allow study of space effects on equipment, and the system could serve as a test bed for advanced orbiting telescopes. (Av. Wk., 1/11/65, 23)
NASA announced selection of Documentation, Inc., Bethesda, Md., to operate its Scientific and Technical Information Ficility, the world’s' largest collection of aerospace literature, in a Government-provided building in College Park, Md. Contract negotiations were expected to result in a cost-plus-award fee contract for approximately $3.6 million. In Fiscal Year 1965, the contract figure was $4.9 million. Mission of the facility was to acquire and organize worldwide technical reports in the aerospace sciences, indexes, abstracts, and items on space exploration; prepare announcement journals; process selected items on microfilm; and provide a central reference service to nasa and its contractors. (nasa Release 65—263)
Article in Science discussed “factors pressing France toward greater emphasis on international collaboration” in space exploration, then said: “Hence there was warm, if somewhat skeptical, interest in France when, in October, a Soviet scientific delegation brought up the idea of launching French payloads on Soviet rockets. It appeared, according to the one authoritative account of this proposal (Le Monde, 11 November), that the Soviet scientists did not envisage French requests for precise knowledge about acceleration and vibration from Soviet rockets so that the payload design could proceed, nor did they expect that French scientists would wish to be present in Soviet launch-bases and tracking stations ... it was expected that the negotiations would be long and delicate. . . .” (McElheny, Science, 12/24/65, 1700-01)
aec entered into 33 mo. contracts with Combustion Engineering, Windsor, Conn., and Atomics International, Canoga Park, Calif., for joint research and development work on the heavy water-moderated, organic-cooled reactor concept. This concept could lead to construction of large central station power plants and applications to large-scale water desalting operations, (aec Release H-12)
NASA Ames Research Center was spending over $20 million in an expansion program designed to provide the necessary research tools to stay ahead of the industry’s hardware designers, reported Robert Lindsey in Missile Space Daily. Major facets included a new advanced space flight guidance simulator costing more than $12 million, a $4.2 million life sciences building, and a $1.4 million supersonic transport flight simulator. Space-related research would account for about 75% of the center’s projects, but arc was continuing a broad-based program in atmospheric flight, ranging from V/Stol research to a current major study of hypersonic transports. (Lindsey, M/S Daily, 7/27/65, 1, 2)
Soviet Premier Aleksey Kosygin was asked in an interview at the Kremlin by New York Times associate editor James Reston if expenditures for space exploration were questioned by Soviet government officials. He replied : “I would say that man will always go on seeking a solution to the problems of the universe. There will always be funds that will be set aside to resolve the problems relating to the world and the universe; this is all to the good, if it’s purely scientific. . . . We. don’t have any contradiction in the Soviet Union between appropriations for space research and for the needs of the population. The funds appropriated are relatively small compared with the funds serving the needs of the population on education and such. They are negligible on the over-all expenditure. Space expenses do not detract from the needs of the population.” Asked if the U.S.S.R. wanted to go forward with peaceful space arrangements, Kosygin said: “We have expressed our view on this. We are in favor of peaceful, not military, uses of outer space. Now, to insure that peaceful research in space does not place too much of a burden on us, states might reduce military expenditures and channel the funds into peaceful space explorations.” Reston queried: “You have made great progress in space with the use of the most sophisticated and complicated computers and other modern science, yet your speech on Sept. 27 was highly critical of the lag in the use of modern science in Soviet industry. Why this discrepancy?” Kosygin replied: “I don’t understand your distinction between space and economic and industrial development. We judge our economy as a whole—we include all spheres. It is true that not everything is going satisfactorily in science and technology. Not everywhere are the most advanced methods being used. We are now taking all possible measures and we shall remedy this situation. For this it is necessary to utilize all the achievements of engineering thought. We are doing our utmost to insure the further rise of our economy and our technology. In four months I will make my report to the party congress on our forthcoming five-year development plan. In this plan our most advanced scientific and technical achievements will be mobilized.” (Text, NYT, 12/8/65, C20)
Scientists at NASA Lewis Research Center had successfully operated a high-field-strength cryomagnet having a volume many times larger than any previously known, NASA announced. The cryogenic magnet would provide research facilities for magnetics, solid state physics, and plasma physics. Effects of' high-strength magnetic fields on life could also be examined, using plant life, fruit flies, and small animals placed in the field, (nasa Release 65-170; lrc Release 65-38)
In New York Times Richard Witkin said F-lll variable-sweep-wing plane, intended as the mainstay of U.S. fighter forces before 1970, had developed problems with engines and with the inlets that feed air to the engines. Officials maintained that problems were normal in any development, but conceded that fewer difficulties had been anticipated because of record number of wind tunnel tests. The two prototypes tested, one of which was supersonic, had continuously run into two main difficulties: (1) air flow through compressors of engines had become disturbed, causing erratic power output; and (2) combustion in afterburner section had been suddenly stopping. Otherwise, officials contended that flight tests, including tucking wings far back for high-speed runs, had been going better than anticipated. (Witkin, NYT, 3/14/65, 58; Chic. Trib., 3/15/65)
Western Electric Company had received a $90,644,200 modification to an existing cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for research and development of Nike-X missile system, dod announced, (dod Release 3-65)
NASA announced award of $15 million contract to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. to build an additional Orbiting Astronomical Observatory. Grumman already was building three Oao spacecraft under a previously awarded contract, (nasa Release 65—154)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, told a National Space Club luncheon that he had met with nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller and had reached a formal agreement on cooperation in R&D, including Mol experiments. Discussions were also underway, he said, for joint use of NASA and DOD global range facilities—tracking station, communications, and other supporting units—in the Apollo and Mol programs. “Now we are in the beginning stages of two new ventures, the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and the c-5a large transport aircraft. . . . “Both the mol and the c—5a have great potential significance for our continuing national security. They also promise to yield a number of ‘fallout benefits’ of a scientific or economic nature. The knowledge gained from the MOL program, in addition to its possible defense applications, should also prove very useful for future manned scientific ventures into space. The C-5a transport not only will greatly increase our ability to respond to military crisis situations and other emergencies such as earthquakes or floods in remote areas, but also may prove quite attractive to the commercial airlines. . . .” General Schriever said he felt a follow-on to the b-52 was needed; that an Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft (Amsa) would have considerably longer range than a contemplated B-lll and would be superior; and that a maneuverable ferry vehicle for supplying Mol could very well come out of the Start program. (Text; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/20/65, E8; M/S Daily, 10/20/65)
S-IVB stage of the first Saturn IB launch vehicle—first piece of flight hardware from Douglas Space Systems Center at Huntington Beach—had been shipped aboard nasa barge Orion to Douglas Sacramento Test Flight Center for flight readiness testing. The stage, 58 ft. long and 21.5 ft. in dia., had single Rocketdyne J-2 engine, developing 200,000 lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 65-104)
Faa released the first two volumes of a comprehensive five-part report on the sonic boom public-reaction study conducted in Oklahoma City in 1964. Their main conclusion: weather had a greater effect in determining the strength of booms than suspected, but the effect was within a corrective capability. The first volume, “Sonic Boom Exposures During faa Community-Response Studies Over a Six-Month Period in the Oklahoma City Area,” prepared by NASA Langley Research Center, said measurements taken directly under the flight path of the supersonic fighters showed that about 80% of the booms were lower in intensity than scientists expected. About 20% equalled or exceeded the anticipated levels. “Meteorological Aspects of the Sonic Boom,” prepared by the Boeing Co., revealed that: weather had a greater effect on booms generated by planes flying less than mach 1.3 than those produced by aircraft exceeding mach 1.3; overpressures were increased by headwinds but decreased by tailwinds and crosswinds, with variations as much as 20%, particularly in the mach 1.3 range; under some atmospheric conditions, including such factors as wind, temperature, and even the time of day, sonic booms may vary from a complete cut-off with no boom heard to heavy overpressures concentrated over a small area or spread almost unlimited over a wide lateral area; turbulence had the effect of distorting booms and increasing or decreasing intensity and distribution, (faa Release 65-15; UPI, Minn. Trib., 2/12/65)
nasa Flight Research Center awarded separate lifting body study contracts to McDonnell Aircraft Co. and Northrop Norair. The two separate six-month studies would investigate a vehicle concept whose sole mission would be the basic research involved with reentry of a manned lifting body from orbital flight. Preliminary objectives included determination of problem areas and their influence on design. Both contracts were fixed price; McDonnell received $152,496 and Norair $150,000. (frc Release 11-65)
NASA’s Flight Research Center engineers had made direct comparison of the noise levels generated by the xb-70 and a 707-120B commercial jet transport under the same atmospheric conditions. NASA made the measurements as part of its general study of runway noise conditions for use in the design of a supersonic transport, (frc Release 8-65)
NASA's Convair 990 airborne research laboratory photograph of solar eclipse. First indications were that the mission was a complete success; detailed analyses of data from 13 observation projects would be made. Most obvious phenomena were large prominences on the sun, Jupiter shining brightly in the sun’s corona, and long corona streamers flashing with surprising brightness. Scientists in the mission were from Belgium, The Netherlands. Italy, Switzerland, and the United States, (nasa Release 65-178; ap, NYT, 6/1/65, 20)
The new Magnetic Field Components Test Facility at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center—which would create the precisely-controlled magnetic environment necessary for testing and calibrating spacecraft instruments intended to measure the low magnetic fields in outer space— became operational. The facility was also equipped to demagnetize the spacecraft carrying the magnetic measuring instruments, (gsfc Release G—16-651
NASA had selected the Bendix Field Engineering Corp., Owings Mills, Md., to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for continued operation, maintenance, and support services of the NASA Manned Space Flight Network of tracking stations. Contract was valued at about $36 million over two years. (NASA Release 65—48)
Tass reported that astronomers at the Vladivostok Observatory had taken clear photographs of the Ikeya-Seki comet. Iupi, Wash. Post, 11/ 12/65, C4)
NASA selected three aerospace firms to develop a concept and prepare preliminary designs for hypersonic ramjet research engine:	Garrett Corp., General Electric Co., and Marquardt Corp. Total value of first phase of contract would be about $1.5 million. During 9-mo. parallel studies, opening phase of NASA’s Hypersonic Ramjet Experiment Project, the companies w'ould prepare engine development plans that would serve as technical proposals for the second phase of the program. The ramjet engine, because of its relative fuel economy at hypersonic speeds, was expected to be useful for hypersonic transport aircraft, boosters, and spacecraft flying within the atmosphere. Flight research with the engine mounted on the X-15 aircraft was planned. Hypersonic Ramjet Experiment Project would be under the technical direction of NASA Langley Research Center, with the assistance of NASA Ames, Lewis, and Flight Research Centers, (nasa Release 65-110)
At the Seventh International Conference on Phenomena in Ionized Gases in Belgrade, NASA Lewis Research Center scientist Charles M.	Goldstein outlined the effect of collisions on a monoenergetic elec-tronbeam current in the presence of a low-density neutral scattering gas. Research had been conducted in connection with electromagnetic propulsion studies, (lrc Release 65-56)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a ten-month, $10,934,377, cost-plus-award fee contract to Mason-Rust Co. to continue support services at Michoud Operations, New Orleans, and at its Computer Operations Office in Slidell, La. (msfc Release 65-84)
A $1,260,000 contract to build an addition to Central Computer Facility at Slidell, La., had been awarded by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to Quinn Construction Co., New Orleans, La. The computer facility was used to support the Michoud Operations in New Orleans and the Mississippi Test Operations, Hancock County, Miss, (msfc Release 65-48)
NASA Ames Research Center discussed for the press the major significant advances in aeronautics and space-oriented research accomplished by the Center during 1964. Accomplishments cited were: (1) establishing feasibility of manned control of large boosters; (2) problem definition for hypersonic transport; (3) design of new takeoff and landing aid to precisely locate aircraft position on the runway; (4) design of probe vehicle to define Mars atmosphere; (5) improvement of m-2 maneuverable atmosphere entry craft; (6) discovery that Mars contamination problem is probably not severe; (7) development of system for measuring stress in humans; (8) demonstration of need for special training for jet transport pilots to combat severe air turbulence; (9) discovery in meteorite of an extraterrestrial mineral unknown on earth; (10) feasibility demonstration of moon and planet mission navigation by hand-held sextant; (11) formulation of certification requirements for supersonic transport take-off; (12) design of ducted-fan to provide efficient airflow for flight from hover to high subsonic speeds; (13) formation of organic material under Martian conditions; (14) development of a new magnetic field chamber; (15) derivation of formula for simple calculation of convective (friction) heating of spacecraft in planet atmospheres; (16) tests of radiative heating in simulated planet atmospheres; (17) improvement of techniques for prediction of heat shield performance; (18) development of a low-power, high-performance magnetometer; (19) measurements of solar wind on imp-b and OGO n; (20) feasibility demonstration of new pod for vertical-lift engines for Vtol aircraft at flight speeds up to 170 mph. (arc Release)
An accelerated reservoir light-gas gun had set a world speed record of 25,300	mph for controlled flight of a visible object, of known mass and shape, and over a known distance in a ground facility in tests at nasa Ames Research Center, Ames announced. The shot was 3,200 mph faster than the previous record. In the light-gas gun used, an explosive charge was set off in a cylinder behind a plastic piston. The explosion pushed the piston into a chamber of hydrogen gas, compressing it, and the gas in turn pushed the projectile out of the firing tube. A light gas must be used because it has low mass and would expand at the highest speed after compression. With the ability to move objects this fast, researchers could extend their knowledge of space flight problems, (arc Release 65-13; ARC Astrogram, 4/29/65, 1, 2)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, nasa Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics that “although space research, development, and operations have absorbed much of our resources within the past few years, the NASA has been and will continue to be dedicated to a strong program of aeronautical research keyed to the Nation’s needs.” He testified:	“. . . The [aeronautics] program embraces the entire spectrum of flight from lowspeed private and v/stol aircraft to hypersonic vehicles. I have already described . . . our part in the evolution of the xv-5a and F-lll aircraft, in the evaluation of supersonic transport proposals, and in the solution of jet transport rough air problems. Looking ahead to fy 1966, we are requesting $42.2 million in Research and Development for aeronautics. This figure can be separated into two categories:	one funds a broad and continuing effort in the scientific disciplines underlying advances in all areas of air transportation, civil and military; the other funds a more concentrated attack on specific advances in air transportation whose potential is identified by research in the various scientific disciplines. . . . “Throughout the aeronautics program budget, provision has been made to support the direct requests of the Department of Defense and the Federal Aviation Agency. It can be pointed out that although the Research and Development request in FY 1966 for aeronautics is $42.2 million, we expect to spend a total sum of $106.2 million in this field. The difference is accounted for by Administrative Operations and Construction of Facilities funds as well as supporting research and technology directly applicable to aeronautics in fields such as electronics, human factors, basic research, and others. Approximately 1600 direct personnel will be engaged in aeronautical research in FY 1966. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 213-269)
Soviet spaceships make their landings on terra firma, and practically everybody in the space flight business agrees that this is much more desirable than splashing down in the ocean,” wrote the Washington Evening Star. The article said that water landings by U.S. spacecraft proved that “U.S. manned spacecraft lack the capability to come back to land.” (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/7/65, A6)
First Phoebus 1a nuclear reactor test was conducted at NRDS, the reactor operating successfully at full power for 10JA min. The reactor was damaged during shutdown when the facility liquid hydrogen supply was unexpectedly exhausted. Test was part of nasa-aec Phoebus program to extend graphite reactor technology developed under the Kiwi series to higher power and temperature, ultimately leading to high-thrust nuclear engine system for space exploration. (Rover Chron.; Atomic Energy Programs, 1965, 145)
Ground test version of Saturn V’s first stage, s-ic-t, was captive fired for the 14th time at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. This was a full-duration firing in which the unit developed 7.5-million lbs. thrust for 150 sec.; it was conducted by Boeing Co., s-ic prime contractor, (msfc Release 65-301)
Life Sciences Research Laboratory dedicated at NASA Ames Research Center. The laboratory was organized into divisions for exobiology, environmental biology, and biotechnology. In the dedication address, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) said that “the work done at Ames is a reaffirmation of the avowed goals and aspirations of a world that is painfully searching for peace and hope.” Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said during the ceremonies: “This new structure represents many things. It represents efficiency and economy for it brings together a staff and associates numbering almost 250 who formerly were scattered about in 22 separate quarters. It represents a grouping of new research tools which can be used for new advances in science and technology; but most important, I believe, this Life Sciences Laboratory, placed within the complex of physical laboratories, represents the interdisciplinary approach to solving new problems.” (nasa Release 65-394; Text; arc Astro gram, 1/6/66, 1)
Excerpts from comments on management of research and development activity by Dr. L. R. Hafstad, director of General Motors Research and Defense Research Laboratories, appeared in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “In the modern laboratory the basic research activity is essentially an information-gathering intelligence operation. The operatives must be trained to speak, and allowed to speak, the language of the area on which they are expected to keep informed, and to interact with other researchers in the same area. It is this apparently excessive freedom of action on the part of employees which makes for the concern of students of administration about the management of research, or the lack thereof. My conclusion is that most of this problem evaporates once it is realized that a director of research directs the research program—but certainly not the individual researchers. “The partnership of science, engineering and industry is really a rather new concept developed since the turn of the century and only now reaching maturity. An even newer concept is the partnership of science, engineering, and government. A problem we must face up to —whether we represent industry, government or science—is the effective use of research in creating a better future for everyone. “There is never a dearth of projects—the difficulty is to pick worthwhile projects. It is here that I feel that the discipline of the profit and loss statement is essential. . . .” (Av Wk., 4/19/65, 21)
First full-duration static test of Saturn V first stage at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center.
Creation of an Institute for Earth Sciences to conduct advanced and applied research in seismology, geomagnetism, and geodesy, was announced by Dr. Robert M. White, Administrator of the Environmental Science Services Administration (essa). Under the direction of Dr. Leroy R. Alldredge, the Institute would actively seek new knowledge of the properties of the earth’s interior and develop methods of using this knowledge to predict earthquakes, (essa Release 65-7) Week of November 21: msc remote site flight controller teams for the Gemini vil/vi mission began deploying to the seven locations around the world where they would exercise detailed real-time mission control during the upcoming flights of the two Gemini spacecraft, (msc Release 65-109)
Telephone calls between two Moscow city exchanges would be routed soon over a three-mile-long laser beam, the newspaper Trud reported. The laser link, developed by the Soviet Central Scientific Research Institute of Communications, was already in experimental use. (NYT, 10/31/65, 26)
Representatives of 27 firms interested in providing computer services to support NASA Michoud Assembly Facility and NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s Mississippi Test Facility attended a pre-proposal conference at the New Orleans installation. The computer services contract, which would cover a one-year period with three one-year renewal options, would include operation or maintenance of about 20 digital and analog computers, a data transmission system, a data reduction system, and related electronic equipment, (msfc Release 65-211)
A five-week technical assessment of supersonic transport air-frame designs proposed by the Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. was begun by an 82-member Government technical team with representatives from NASA, faa, usaf, and usn. Formed under the FAA Director of Supersonic Transport Development b/g J. G. Maxwell (usaf), the group would emphasize operational performance of the proposed configurations in terms of program objectives for a safe, economical aircraft compatible with present airports, airline operating requirements, and engine noise and sonic boom criteria. Performance characteristics of each design would be examined in detail, both analytically and through wind tunnel tests at nasa Langley Research Center and NASA Ames Research Center. Results of the assessment would provide guidance for further contractor programing in the present detailed design and hardware test phase of the Sst development program which called for prototype construction to begin by the end of 1966. (faa Release 65-110)
The first industry-produced Saturn I first stage (s—I—8) arrived at Cape Kennedy aboard the NASA barge Promise after a six-day trip from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. The stage, which was 80 ft. long and 21.5 ft. in diameter, had been built by the Chrysler Corp. (msfc Release 65^16; ap, NYT, 3/1/65, 12)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced successful test of a large-scale facility to investigate the boiling of liquid sodium. Test was just one milestone in the complex and extensive research being conducted on the properties and engineering performance of liquid metals. Liquid alkali metals, having excellent heat-transfer capabilities and large liquid range, were being considered as working fluids in future advance electric power systems in spacecraft, (lrc Release 65-46)
dod Advanced Research Projects Agency had selected three contractors for research programs in the materials field: Martin Co., awarded $1 million, subcontract with the Univ. of Denver and conduct a three-year program on the high energy rate of forming metals; Union Carbide Corp., with $2.5 million, would subcontract with Case Institute of Technology and the Bell Aerospace Corp. and conduct a three-year research program on carbon composite materials; Monsanto Research Corp., awarded approximately $2 million, would subcontract with Washington Univ. of St. Louis, Mo., and conduct a two-year research program on high-performance composites, (dod Release 193-65)
A new alloy of hafnium and tantalum had been developed which could withstand temperatures as high as 4000° F. It would raise temperature limits formerly placed on such engine components as nozzles and throat inserts by the lack of reliable protective coatings. Application of the alloy was developed on a NASA contract by the IIT Research Institute, (nasa Release 65-365)
Brig. Gen. Julian H. Bowman (usaf, Ret.) was appointed Special Assistant to the NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. General Bowman would handle special management problems in areas such as program manpower and organization, career management, and industry relationships. (NASA Hq. Bull., 7/20/65)
A Group Achievement Award was presented at NASA Langley Research Center’s annual awards ceremony to Eugene Schult, Head of the Scout Project Office, in recognition of “the outstanding Scout vehicle success record during the past eighteen months.” (LaRC Release)
Evaluating the controversy on manned versus unmanned exploration of space, Robert Colburn said in International Science and Technology: “I see no meaningful issue between (unmanned) space science and (manned) space exploration. The real question is what sort of space science contributes best to the success of space exploration. More concretely, the question is not whether to investigate the moon with an unmanned Surveyor shot or a manned Apollo; it’s whether an extra Surveyor mission now would significantly reduce the cost or danger of the eventual Apollo mission and, if not, whether it may be wasteful to send a Surveyor now when the same information can be had more easily later, once there is a man on the moon to help.” Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.), member of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, inserted Colburn’s editorial in the Congressional Record. (CR, 9/14/65) During September: NASA’s Technology Utilization Div. published a 66-page illustrated book outlining potential uses of space telemetry techniques in the biological and medical fields. (NASA Release 65-309)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.), speaking on the floor of the House, compared the states in distribution of Federal research and development funds per scientist employed: “Of the seven states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin only Illinois exceeds the national average of approximately $25,000 in research and development funds per scientist employed in educational institutions in this area. Even then this one state exceeds the average distribution by only $4,600. The shares of other states range from a high of $15,000 per scientist in Michigan down to only $9,000 in my own state of Indiana. In between these we find Minnesota, $13,000; Ohio, $11,000; and Wisconsin, $10,900. “Leading the national list is New Mexico with $163,000 per scientist followed by Nevada with $109,000 and California with $63,000 per scientist. At the very bottom of the list is Maine with only $4,000 per scientist. “. . . this matter of the uneven geographic distribution of Federal research and development funds is involving our national interest.” {CR, 3/18/65, 5186)
Continuation of Weather Bureau-Navy Project Stormfury during the 1965 hurricane season was announced. Hurricanes and cumulus clouds would be seeded to investigate the feasibility of modifying clouds and tropical storms. The hurricane research program began in 1961, included experiments on hurricanes Esther (1961) and Beulah (1963) and on tropical clouds (1963). Objectives for 1965 were to intensify the hurricane-seeding experiments and to begin new experiments on hurricane rainbands. (Commerce Dept. Release wb 65-100)
Fred P. Strother, in charge of requirements for Boy Scout merit badges, announced that details of a space exploration merit badge were being worked out with NASA. (NYT, 3/6/65, 27)	*
A 707 jet transport, owned and fitted by the Boeing Co. with extensive instrumentation, including an analog computer and a 15-ft. needle-like nose extension to make it an in-flight dynamic simulator, had arrived at NASA Langley Research Center for a four-month program of supersonic transport experiments. The research program would assess simulated landing approaches with both the fixed-wing and variable-sweep concepts, including conditions such as emergency use of cruise sweep-back during a landing. (NASA Release 65—233)
Educators from various elements of nasa and a group of 65 lecturers employed in the NASA Spacemobile program began a week-long training session at NASA Langley Research Center. (LaRC Release)
NASA Langley Research Center scientists Harry W. Carlson and Francis E. McLean said that for the first time there was hope for a significant reduction in the sonic booms expected from proposed supersonic airliners. A plane flying faster than the speed of sound compresses the air around it into shock waves trailing from the nose, wings, engine inlets, tail, and any other protuberances. Near the plane there would be separate waves, producing “near field effects.” Traced on a graph to show changes in pressure, the waves would make a jagged line resembling the letter “N.” As the waves traveled toward the ground, they would coalesce into two powerful waves—one appearing to trail from the nose and one from the tail—producing “far-field effects” also shaped as a letter “N” in terms of pressure patterns. The sharp peaks of this N-shaped wave were suspected of causing most of the annoyance and structural damage possible from sonic booms. Carlson and McLean discovered that planes the length and shape of supersonic airliner designs would not fly far enough away from the earth for their far-field effects to be felt on the ground, leaving only the less bothersome near-field effect to be taken into account. It was hoped that this new finding would mean that designs currently submitted to the Government in the design competition for supersonic transport, or minor refinements of them, would fit within Government-imposed sonic boom limitations and that still further improvement through design changes would bring further decreases in the boom. Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, LaRC Director, called what had been learned “significant new knowledge” and said it could, under the best of circumstances, “have great significance.” He pointed out that the best of circumstances were seldom found in designing an airplane— particularly the supersonic transport, which he said was “at least as sophisticated technically as the Apollo.” (Clark, NYT, 1/14/65, 1, 12)
Soviet pilot Natasha Prokhanova, flying an e-22 supersonic jet trainer, climbed to 79,000-ft. altitude, exceeding the world altitude record for women of 56,073 ft. set by U.S. pilot Jacqueline Cochran in 1961 at Edwards afb in a Northrop t-38 Talon supersonic jet trainer.	(NYT, 5/31/65, 24)
Remarkable adaptability of some fungi and bacteria to life in atmosphere containing high concentrations of ammonia and methane was discovered by Dr. S. M. Siegel and Miss Constance Guimarro of the Union Carbide Research Institute and reported in Icarus. The report suggested there might therefore be life on Jupiter, where extremes of temperature and a dense atmosphere of these noxious gases would seem to make life-forms resembling those on earth unlikely. The research was supported by nasa contract. (Schmeck, NYT, 5/12/65; Icarus, iv/1965, .37—40) During May: Carl Sagan, Harvard Univ. and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, and Sidney Coleman, Lyman Laboratory of Physics, Harvard Univ., reviewed the need for sterilization of Mars-bound spacecraft to protect that planet from contamination. Using probability theory, Sagan and Coleman specified formulas to provide predictions of onboard-experiment and Mars-contamination relationships. (.A&A, 5/65, 22-27)
NASA announced it had approved a grant of $100,000 for establishment of a Technical) Utilization Program at the Univ. of Minnesota. Along with funds to be provided by private business concerns, the NASA grant would support the development and experimental testing of newT ways in which developments in space science and technology could be rapidly transferred to and assimilated by business and industry. North Star Research and Development Institute would participate in part of the program. (NASA Release 65-69)
Three Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched vapor trail experiments from Wallops Station, Va., as nasa completed a five-shot, two-day series of experiments to measure wind direction and velocity over the Atlantic coast as part of its meteorological research program. Payloads also contained instrumentation to compare electron densities with wind dispersion and to measure electron temperatures. Experiments were conducted for the GCA Corp. under contract to NASA. (Wallops Release 65-39)
mariner iv’s ion chamber experiment failed completely, Jet Propulsion Laboratory officials reported. Count-rate of the Geiger-Mueller tube portion of the experiment had become abnormal in February. The experiment had been designed to measure proton and electron radiation. Otherwise the spacecraft was operating normally; all other high-energy radiation detectors aboard were continuing their interplanetary measurements. In its 110th day of flight, mariner iv was traveling 27,743 mph relative to earth and was 35,000,004 mi. from earth. It had traveled more than 178,000,000 mi. (nasa Release 65-90)
Army Corps of Engineers awarded Fisher Construction Co. a NASA-funded $1,497,728 fixed-price contract for construction of Lunar Mission and Space Exploration Facility at Manned Spacecraft Center. (dod Release 220-65)
dod had asked NASA to consider using Minuteman I missiles scheduled to be removed from their silos, as launch vehicles, Missiles and Rockets reported. NASA Hq. transferred study to Langley Research Center. LaRC was expected to complete its feasibility investigation in three to four weeks. (M&R, 4/26/65, 7; LaRC)
Officials at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory confirmed discovery by two Japanese astronomers of a new comet, Ikeya-Seki, named after its discoverers, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 9/22/65)
Soviet President Anastas Mikoyan sent President Johnson congratulations on the Gemini Gt-3 space flight, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/25/65)
Col. Jack Bollerud (usaf) was appointed Deputy Director of Space Medicine, Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA Hq. He would be deputy to Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace n. (nasa Release 65-207)
Over 50 security guards at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center—members of the International Union of United Plant Guard Workers of America —went on strike over wage and contract issues with their employer Wackenhut Services, Inc. Wackenhut, operating at GSFC under contract, provided additional guards; there was no breakdown in security. Some 250 guards at NASA test sites near Las Vegas, Nev., also went on strike against Wackenhut. They were members of a separate local union. (Wash. Post, 7/2/65, A3; DJNS, Balt. Sun, 7/2/65; Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/65)
NASA and usaf announced agreement for extended XB-70 flight research beginning next spring in joint project to' obtain supersonic operational flight information impossible to get in ground facilities. Among the items of interest were skin friction, stability and control, drag, boundary layer flow, air loads, thermal environment, sonic boom, landing, and crew workload, (nasa Release 65-393)
A newly-created Manpower Utilization and Administration Office, headed by Keith Wible, became operational at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Wible had been assistant manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility from November 1961 to February 1965. (msfc Release 65-181)
NASA had awarded an $8,150,833 contract modification to General Electric Co. for supporting the Computation Laboratory at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, (msfc Release 65-169)
Arthur D. Little, Inc., released a 54-page study entitled “Strategies for Survival in the Aerospace Industry,” which predicted that in the next five years the production portion of the defense budget would decline about 30 per cent and research and development would decline about 15 per cent. The report recommended that “in view of a declining market and fewer opportunities within the market, the aerospace industry’s principal objective within the next few years should be to achieve stability, rather than to search for growth opportunities.” (Duggan, N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/12/65)
$13-million, 140-ft.-wide radiotelescope, one of the largest in the world, was dedicated at Green Bank, W. Va., by the National Radio Astronomy Observatory. It would be able to amplify radio emissions from deep space. (Wash. Post, 10/14/65, A15)
usaf XB-70 No. 2, flying at 2,000 mph, reached 70,000-ft. altitude for three minutes in 112-min. test flight from Edwards afb to determine how aircraft would handle during increasingly longer periods at top speed. Flight broke record set by XB-70 No. 1 Oct. 15, 1965. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/4/66)
Five-man Observatory Class Spacecraft Review Board had been appointed by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications. Robert F. Garbarini, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Engineering), would head the board, established to "study all phases of design, development, testing and space operations procedures of the orbiting observatory spacecraft.” Other Review Board members were: F. John Bailey, Chief, Flight Safety Office, Msc; Jack N. James, Director for Lunar and Planetary Programs, jpl; Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director, erc; and Francis B. Smith, Assistant Director, LaRC. (nasa Release 66-91)
In answer to charge that the "rush of Jodrell Bank Observatory to distribute Luna IX pictures and of scientists both in the U.S. and U.K. to comment on the pictures can only be considered a breach of ethics [see Feb. 4 and 5],” Sir Bernard Lovell said in an open letter in Science: "We did not 'rush’ to distribute the Luna IX pictures in advance of the Russians. Our pictures came off the facsimile machine several hours after the Russians had convened a large press conference in Moscow to show the pictures which Luna IX had transmitted the previous night. Why they did not do so, or publish them in Izvestia the following morning remains a mystery. As for commenting on the pictures before the Russians, my only remarks were that the lunik seemed to be resting on a hard surface with little evidence of dust, and these comments had previously been made by scientists in Moscow. Any suggestion that we published a scientific analysis of the results before the Russians is absurd.” (Science, 3/25/66, 1477)
L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth flew X-15 No. 2 for 81 sec. in test to measure stability and control of X-15 with ventral fin attached. He reached 3,689 mph (mach 5.43) and 99,000-ft. altitude. Flight was 158th in nasa/usaf X-15 research program, (frc; X-15 Proj. Off.)
Arthur G. Wimer, Jr., assistant deputy chief of staff for science and technology in the Air Research and Development Command, was named chief scientist for AFSC, replacing Dr. Bernhard H. Goethert who had resigned to become director of Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute. (afsc Release 206.66)
Pratt & Whitney Div.’s entry in Sst engine competition—the JTF-17A—was operated for the first time at p&w’s Florida Research and Development Center, W. Palm Beach, Fla. Twin-spool turbofan "was started and operated for the programmed time.” (p&w Release, 4/1/66)	_
New NASA-developed technique for making biomedical checks on test pilots was being used at Univ. of Kansas Medical Center. Method, which replaced bulky sensors with bare wires acting as their own electrodes, permitted doctors to send instrumented patient home after office visit and record biomedical data while patient resumed normal activities. Wires were applied in three-minute operation. Data obtained in this way—rather than while patient was on operating table—were considered more meaningful by some physicians. Technique was conceived by Dr. James A. Roman, chief of biomedical research at NASA Flight Research Center, and introduced to the Univ. of Kansas by Midwest Research Institute, mri was under contract to nasa’s Technology Utilization Div. in its program of transferring aerospace technology to the public, (nasa Release 66-116)
Dr. Winston E. Kock, first director of ebc, had resigned to return to Bendix Corp., effective Oct. 1. James C. Elms, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, would replace him. (nasa Release 66-247)
International Union of Electrical Workers acceded to Government request to remove pickets at ksc from entrance gates used by building trades workers. Electricians had struck for higher wages April 18 after expiration of contract with United Technology Center. (NYT, 4/21/66, 27) April 20: H. Julian Allen, Director of NASA Ames Research Center, was among 27 elected to National Academy of Engineering "in recognition of their outstanding contributions to engineering theory and practice or to the pioneering of new and developing fields of technology.” (nae Release, 4/20/66)	_
Sharing of research with U.S. industry under NASA’s technology utilization program was commended in Petroleum Today article by Clay Hor-nick. December 1965 Conference on Selected Technology for the Petroleum Industry at Lewis Research Center, Hornick said, had encouraged utilization of space research discoveries in fields of combustion, lubrication, and nuclear resonance. (Hornick, Petroleum Today, Summer 1966, 16-19)
Multi-foil high-performance insulation system to reduce supercold propellant "boil off” in space had been successfully tested for 96 hrs. at msfc in a vacuum chamber at pressures approaching the vacuum of space. Since liquid hydrogen propellant, already used in Saturn IB and Saturn V upper stages, was being considered as a propellant on longer-duration missions, cryogenic technology was being extended at msfc to meet the needs of future space exploration programs, (msfc Release 66-41)
Of President Johnson’s State of the Union message, Robert Hotz said in Aviation Week: "The President’s statement that he will 'propose a program to construct and to flight test a new supersonic transport plane that will fly three times the speed of sound, in excess of 2,000	mph.’ came as somewhat of a surprise in view of the stretched out program he had been sponsoring. Apparently, this statement means that some funds for actual prototype supersonic transport construction will be requested in Fiscal 1967, although the size of this request may dismay the management entrusted with the task of building the prototype in time to remain competitive with the Anglo-French Concorde.” (Hotz, Av. WL, 1/17/66, 21)
Data transmitted from NASA’s pioneer vii spacecraft (launched from etr Aug. 17) to Johannesburg dsn station indicated spacecraft had penetrated earth’s magnetic tail at 3.25 million mi. from earth, nasa Ames Research Center announced. Spacecraft measurements of solar wind flux suggested pioneer vii had emerged from and repenetrated tail several times, pioneer vi (launched Dec. 16, 1965) had observed that solar wind does not flow from the sun in straight lines but blows magnetic tail from side to side; this "flapping” was reason spacecraft entered tail several times, (arc pao, 9/26/66)
Heinz Kaminski, chief of the Bochum Observatory, West Germany, said the emergency abort March 16 of the gemini viii mission showed that control systems onboard the spacecraft as well as on the ground were versatile enough to cope with even the most serious trouble: "The Americans now have realistic data on space emergencies and. . .the mission has been very successful. The emergency has been a blessing in disguise.” (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 3/18/66)
Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko, member of Soviet delegation to iaf Congress, told press conference in Madrid that U.S.S.R. was "doing very serious preparatory work” for another manned mission that would be "a serious new step in space exploration.” He disclosed no details but indicated mission might include extravehicular activity. Asked why there had been no Soviet manned spaceflight since March 18, 1965, voskhod ii mission, Gazenko explained it reflected Soviet desire to make a major advance with each flight rather than repeat proved techniques. (Wilford, NYT, 10/15/66, 11)
Calculations by computer at Astronomisches Rechen Institut, Heidelberg, Germany, and Yale Univ. Observatory had helped astronomers rediscover Tempel-Tuttle Comet responsible for Leonid meteor showers each November. Comet had been found 100 yrs. ago and not seen again until summer 1965. Meteor shower was expected to be spectacular in November 1966; it would occur close to time of comet’s return to vicinity of earth. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 6/19/66, 26)
"The lunar research program by means of Luna 9 has been fulfilled and successfully concluded,” Tass reported after LUNA ix had completed 48 hrs. of active life transmitting a total of 10 panoramic photographs of lunar surface. Several hours after the announcement, jodrell Bank Experimental Station reported it had received 2H more photos of poor quality. Third picture transmitted by luna ix’s instrument package Feb. 4 was shown on Moscow television. During transmission, camera was inclined toward horizon and sun was to the east. Part of spacecraft was visible in the lower left-hand corner of the picture and another part in the lower light, but out of focus because of short distance from camera lens. Soviet astronomer Nikolay Barabashov told Tass photographs confirmed his theory that moon’s surface was "highly pitted, porous and probably covered with numerous rocks and fragments.” luna ix "has proved beyond doubt that the upper layer of lunar soil is a spongelike rough-textured mass scattered with individual sharp-edged fragments of various sizes.” (NYT, 2/7/66, 1, 15; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/7/66, Al, A5)
nasa appointed George J. Howick Director of Technology Utilization Div. He would succeed Dr. Richard L. Lesher, Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization who, in addition to his other duties, had been serving as Acting Director of the Technology Utilization Div. Howick was formerly manager of industrial technology services for Midwest Research Institute, (nasa Release 66-5)
Prof. Emilio Segre of Univ. of California, Berkeley, reviewed postwar physics in Science-. ". . . many illustrious men of science, physicists in particular, have made the mistake of thinking that the end of physics was in sight. They have consistently been proved wrong by the opening up of completely new fields. . . . Space exploration and the study of the interior of the earth are new departures. Here we do not yet see any new phenomena, but we are penetrating in unexplored regions. It is possible that these regions will not yield anything extraordinary, such as extraterrestrial life. However, they present phenomena on scales impossible to reproduce in the laboratory, and a change in orders of magnitude is a well-known source of surprises. Furthermore, we must not forget that particle physics originated .with the study of cosmic rays.” (Science, 3/4/66, 1052-5)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, who directed the development of usaf’s strategic missile force, would retire this summer, the White House announced. General Schriever, retiring for personal reasons, would be replaced Aug. 31 by L/G James Ferguson, usaf Deputy Chief of Staff for Research and Development. (AP, NYT, 4/23/66, 5; Norris, Wash. Post, 4/23/66, A2)
25 scientific experiments for sixth Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (ogo-f), scheduled for launch into polar orbit in 1968, were selected hy Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, on recommendation of ossa’s Space Science Steering Committee. Fifty-five scientists at U.S. and foreign universities, industrial firms, and Government laboratories would make correlative experiments of near-earth space phenomena based on data from the ogo-f experiments, (nasa Release 66-36)
On the floor of the Senate, Sen. Daniel B. Brewster (D-Md.) paid tribute to the late Hugh L. Dryden and proposed "that Wallops Island be renamed Dryden Island, as^an appropriate memorial to his immense contribution to space exploration.” Dr. Dryden was born on the Maryland Eastern Shore in Pocomoke City. (CR, 1/19/66, 583)
ComSatCorp signed agreements to purchase 210-acre site in Montgomery County, Md., for $7- to $ 10-million Research and Development Center. Construction would begin in 1967. (ComSatCorp Release)
"Nobody has yet found any space goals that will stir the Europeans the way manned space flight and the race toward a lunar landing have generated tremendous technical impetus in the U.S. and U.S.S.R.,” Robert Hotz reported in Aviation Week. "If new fomulae can be found to fit changing European requirements, the prospects for applying the spearhead technology of the aerospace industry will never be brighter. For the United States, this will require a more realistic government policy in permitting more first-line technology to be exported to our allies. For Europe, it will require a more realistic appraisal of how its technical resources can be applied to compete successfully in the world market.” (Hotz, Av.Wk., 9/5/66, 21)
Helicopter-like atmosphere-entry-and-descent system employing unpowered rotor was undergoing wind tunnel testing at ARC as means of returning to earth from space. System could land on any solid, level surface and return vehicles of wide range of shapes from orbit; most of the lift would be supplied by auto-rotor and not by aerodynamic shape of vehicle. In orbit, blades for rotor system would be folded and stowed. On approaching earth, blades would be released and passage through atmosphere would start them turning, (nasa Release 66-217)
nasa oso II Orbiting Solar Observatory, activated by gsfc officials, transmitted scientific and engineering data from four of its eight experiments. Launched from etr Feb. 3, 1965, oso n had exceeded its six-month life expectancy by 50% before it was turned off Nov. 3. (gsfc Release G-10-66)
124,000-mi.-long cluster of sunspots which could affect weather and radio and television signals was detected by West Germany’s Bochum Observatory. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/3/66, B7)
Arnold Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs and U.S. representative to the Working Group of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, supported U.S.S.R. proposal for an international conference in 1967 to commemorate the first decade of space exploration, further international cooperation in space, and promote the practical benefits of man’s exploration of space. He suggested four topics for the conference: (1) appraisal of contributions of scientific research in space to practical applications and international cooperation; (2) opportunities for participation in space exploration through space research and cooperative projects; (3) applications and economic implications of space research; and (4) impact of space exploration on education. (SBD, 1/27/66, 170)
nasa and dod signed memorandum of agreement establishing Manned Space Flight Experiments Board (msfeb) to coordinate scientific, technological or nonmilitary experiments on dod and NASA flight missions. Board would recommend approval or disapproval, assignment, and relative priority of experiments submitted, after screening, by sponsoring nasa or dod Program Offices. Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, would act as chairman; other members would be Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology; Daniel J. Fink, dod Deputy Director for Strategic and Space Systems; and Gen, Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander. (Text; nasa nmi 1154.4, 4/27/66)
nasa Langley Research Center would negotiate $450,000 study contract with Martin Co. for 11-mo. study of "costs, crew size, and complexity of a flight research program using a manned lifting body vehicle.” In conducting the study, the firm would be required to consider an HL-10 lifting-body concept capable of carrying one, two, four, six, or eight crew members. HL-10 was considered representative of advanced lifting entry vehicles. nasa had specified Titan II, Titan in, and Saturn IB as potential launch vehicles. For study purposes, Rogers Dry Lake at Edwards afb would be a probable landing site, (nasa Release 66-82; LaHC Release)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Business Council in Washington, D.C., that "so far as overall manned space flight manpower is concerned, we have passed our peak” in engineering, we’re "reaching our peak in manufacturing,” and we’re "at our peak in total manpower costs.” He added: "One of the anomalies of the space program is that we must begin to 'go out of business’ before we fly our first operational vehicle. ... By the time manned flights begin, the employment level will be quite low in comparison with the peak, which occurred in 1965. . . .” Commenting on post-Apollo plans, he said: "The budget for the coming fiscal year permits nasa to hold open the option for a program to procure additional flight vehicles beyond those now programmed, so as to employ the Apollo hardware and capabilities at least through 1971. If we do not exercise this option, in the decision for the [FY] 1968 budget we will have to begin a phase down of the manned space flight activities and the 'mothballing’ of some of our facilities.” (Text)
Astronomers in six European countries—Denmark, Sweden, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, and West Germany—had agreed to share the expense of constructing $7-million observatory on Lasilla, a mountain peak several hundred miles north of Santiago, Chile. (Reuters, NYT, 4/2/66, 27; Reuters, Wash. Post, 4/2/66, A16)
Dr. Jan H. Oort, recipient of Columbia Univ.’s 1966 Vetlesen Award for his work in earth sciences, told Washington Post that Univ. of Leiden Observatory, which he directed, was building world’s largest radiotelescope. A one-mile-long row of twelve 83-ft.-dia. parabolic disks in a remote area of the Netherlands, device would enable Oort and his colleagues to extend their explorations beyond earth’s galaxy. 1968 was scheduled completion date. (Wash. Post, 12/18/66, B19)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, after conferring with President Johnson, told newsmen at the Texas White House that there was "considerable evidence” that U.S.S.R. was building and deploying an antiballistic missile system around its cities, which might require an increase in U.S. offensive capacity. He said the Administration would probably recommend to Congress that U.S. begin production and deployment of Poseidon missile—a large submarine-launched missile with greater power to penetrate sophisticated defense system than Polaris missile. The Secretary reported that no decision had yet been made on deployment of Nike-X antimissile missile, on which $500 million had already been spent for research and development. (Semple, Jr., NYT, 11/11/66, 1, 19; Wilson, Wash. Post, 11/11/66, Al, A10; Horner, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/11/66, Al)	.
On floor of House, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) paid tribute to surveyor I and Gemini ix-A mission successes and said they were possible because of "the unity of purpose that exists between the aerospace industry and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.” (CR, 6/15/66)
nasa extended for one year a contract with Documentation, Inc., to operate its College Park, Md., Scientific and Technical Information Facility •—containing world’s largest collection of aerospace literature—during FY 1967 at cost of $5,150,000. Monitored by NASA Hq. Scientific and Technical Information Div., contractor would also operate Selective Dissemination of Information Program, using computer techniques to notify nasa scientists and engineers individually of new developments of direct interest to their work, (nasa Release 66-227)
Fred J. Drinkwater III, aerospace research engineer, scientist, and test pilot at NASA Ames Research Center, received the Flight Safety Foundation’s Richard Hansford Burroughs Test Pilot Award for his "significant contributions to the safety and efficiency of flight testing.” Award was established by United Aircraft Corp. (Av. Wk., 1/3/66, 13)
Some 1,000 meteors a minute were recorded at height of Leonid shower by Northwestern Univ.’s Observatory near Las Cruces, N. Mex., Dr. J. Allen Hynek reported. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/18/66, 39M)
Reports by Volunteer Flight Officers Network—new tracking system in which 22,000 commercial pilots on 51 airlines searched the skies for reentering space hardware-—had proved valuable to Smithsonian Institution’s Astrophysical Observatory and usaf in improving computer methods and clearing records. Network was founded by amateur astronomer Herbert E. Roth, director of Denver Moonwatch team. (Clark, NYT, 9/4/66, 68)
New York Univ. announced completion of New York Univ.-NASA aerospace laboratory in Bronx was scheduled for June 1966. One-story, 15,000-sq.-ft. facility constructed with $582,000 NASA grant would include wind tunnel capable of duplicating speeds of up to 14 times the speed of sound for four seconds; models of supersonic transports, spacecraft, and other advanced aerospace designs would be tested there. (NYT, 3/16/66, 55)
usaf awarded Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., $46,000 contract to continue studying methods of eliminating six-minute communications blackout caused when friction of the atmosphere envelops reentering spacecraft in a ball of hot, electrically charged gases. Dr. Ronald Row, Sylvania Electronic Systems Applied Research Laboratory, told the New York Times in a telephone interview of the development of a device to simulate the flow of charged gases around typical spacecraft antenna. He said Sylvania was considering shortening pulses of signals so they could penetrate gases or covering antennas with plastic or ceramic shrouds that would shield them from gases and heat but still permit radio signals to penetrate. (Wilford, NYT, 3/7/66, 19) During week of March 6: Possibility that residents of communities afflicted by jet noise might develop psychotic symptoms because their dreams were interrupted at night was suggested by Dr. Julius Buchwald, psychiatrist, and Dr. Howard M. Bogard, psychologist, at a hearing held by New York State Assembly’s Mental Hygiene Committee. Dr. Buchwald said that everybody dreams at least five times a night. If a person is awakened and prevented from having his dreams, psychotic symptoms from mild to "more severe” could occur, including paranoidal delusions, psychoses, hallucinations, and suicidal and homicidal impulses. Dr. Bogard said persons prevented from dreaming would "tend toward true psychoses.” He urged study of whether residents near airports "lose out on dream time,” whether such communities become "disoriented” by people leaving, and whether family life is disrupted because of interruptions of ordinary communications. (Hudson, NYT, 3/13/66, 66)
nasa Langley Research Center awarded a $5-million contract to Virginia Associated Research Center to operate nasa Space Radiation Effects Laboratory—a $15-million facility established by LaRC for research in support of national programs in space technology—through mid-1970. (LaRC Release)
NASA Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr reached 102-mi. (165km.) altitude in GSFC-Princeton Univ. Observatory experiment to study ultraviolet radiation from the star Epsilon Canis Majoris. Although spectrograph recording was limited by rocket’s low altitude, good spectral resolution was obtained and wavelength limit was extended shortward to lines never before observed, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Editorial comment on U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement on space law treaty announced Dec. 8. New York Times: "No one has yet demonstrated that there would be any military advantage to placing bombs either in orbit or on celestial bodies. But there is a clear need both for space law and for reducing the wasteful competition in space exploration. The ability of Moscow and Washington to reach agreement . . . offers hope of further East-West cooperation on space problems.” (NYT, 12/10/66, 36C) Washington Daily News: ". .. reason and peacefulness have prevailed. And we will all benefit. There will be no military bases or forts, no testing of weapons and tactics—nor their threat or expense. And no claims to territory in space, and thus no arguments and battles over conflicting claims.” (Wash. Daily News, 12/10/66) Washington Post: ". . . the treaty can be applauded for the good that it has achieved as of today; and it can be praised for the larger good that it will do tomorrow when the practical aspects of space relations have become infinitely more pressing. The world will surely have occasion to look back to this day as one that set the nations on the right path and on which the great powers made a wise decision to shun the military exploitation of celestial bodies and of outer space for narrow, nationalistic purposes.” (Wash. Post, 12/10/66)
Proposal for an "international research program for the establishment of contact with extraterrestrial civilizations” was sent to International Astronomical Union by unidentified Soviet astronomers, Tass reported. The scientists believed search for extraterrestrial life should concentrate first on radiation from stars within 1,000-light-yr. radius from the three nearest galaxies. Kommunist, party’s major theoretical journal, said that question of the existence of other civilizations, and the establishment of contact with them was one of three "fundamental problems” confronting astrophysics. (Zorza, Wash. Post, 2/5/66, A7; AP, NYT, 2/3/66, 9)
Dr. Ivan L. Bennett, Jr., Deputy Director of White House’s Office of Science and Technology, warned in speech at seminar on Research in the Service of Man in Oklahoma City that unless scientists "educated” the President and "other intelligent, concerned laymen” about the applicability of their work, their fields of research would suffer. Science, he said, could no longer hope to exist "through some mystique, without constraints or scrutiny in terms of material goals, and isolated from the competition for allocation of resources which are finite.” (Sullivan, NYT, 10/25/66, 78M)
nasa Lewis Research Center had awarded General Dynamics’ Convair Div. a $15,565,331, fixed-price contract to fabricate and assemble five additional Centaur stages for future space missions, (nasa Release 66-253)
LaRC awarded 7-mo. study contracts, valued at $390,000 each, to Northrop Corp. and Fairchild-Hiller Corp. to design V/Stol aircraft for research on handling qualities and operation during instrument approach in the terminal area. Aircraft would be used by NASA and usaf to gather flight research information necessary to improve operation of V/Stol jet aircraft in hovering and transition speed range. (nasa Release 66-259)
Independent Offices Appropriations Bill H.R. 14921 for FY 1967 was reported to the House and scheduled for floor action May 10. Appropriations Committee recommended $4,245,000,000 for NASA research and development, compared to $4,248,235,000 authorized by House; $75,000,000 for construction of facilities, compared to $94,419,000 authorized by House; and $630,000,000 for administrative operations, compared to $644,210,150 authorized by House. Total recommendation was $4,950,000,000, compared to $4,986,864,150 authorized by House. (Text; nasa lar V/75, 5/5/66)
Gov. Edmund Brown of California told aerospace executives meeting in Los Angeles of plans to create state-level Office of Science and Technology to provide liaison between Government and industry in using aerospace skills to solve civilian problems. Five state contracts had been let for preliminary study of the problems, using the aerospace "systems engineering” approach. Brown said state’s studies "not only demonstrated that the systems analysis concept would work” but also that "in some cases it was the only concept that would cut through the red tape and the customs arising from generations of solving social problems in the same old ways.” (Sederberg, L.A. Times, 8/26/66; CR, 8/29/66, 20129-30)
First new comet in 1966 was discovered by Stephen Kilston, recent Harvard Univ. graduate, at Lick Observatory, San Jose, Calif., and confirmed Aug. 9 by Central Telegram Bureau, Smithsonian Astro-physical Observatory. Named for its discoverer, Comet Kilston had a magnitude of plus 10.6 and could be seen in the constellation Hercules, apparently moving southeast. (AP, NYT, 8/10/66, 5; AP, Wash. Post, 8/10/66, A5; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/10/66, B4)
usaf pilots Col. Robert L. Stephens and L/Col. Walter F. Daniel received official certificates from President Johnson for establishing three absolute and six jet-class world records May 1, 1965, in YF-12A aircraft. Col. Stephens had set new speed record of more than 2,070 mph and new altitude record of 80,259 ft. Col. Daniel had set new speed records for straight course of over 2,000 mph and on closed course of 1,688 mph. Records were formerly held by U.S.S.R. (Pres. Doc., 8/1/66, 1000)
European Space Research Institute (esrin) had begun operations in a temporary location in the Park Hotel, Frascati, Italy. A center of the European Space Research Organization (esro), it would work initially on plasma physics and its application to spacecraft control as well as plans for proposed esro astronomical observatory. Permanent facilities were planned near the Italian Atomic Energy Authority’s research center. (M&R, 1/24/66, 7)
1966’s second new comet—first with a tail—had been discovered by Dr. Roberto Barbon, Italian astronomer visiting Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar Observatories, and confirmed by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Named for its discoverer, ninth magnitude object was in constellation Cetus. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 9/6/66, 46)
N. A. Zakharov, chief of Soviet Civil Aircraft Research Institute, announced that U.S.S.R. would construct 220-passenger, 560-mph Tu-154 subsonic airliner to replace the Tu-104, 11-18, and An-10. New Yak-40 short-haul aircraft, designed to carry 24 passengers up to 375-mi. distances at 275 mph, was already under construction and would replace the Li-2 and An-2. (Pravda, 8/1/66, 6)
Col. Jack Bollerud (usaf) was named Acting Director, Space Medicine, NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, and would assume all duties assigned to the late Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace. He would also continue to discharge the functions of Deputy Director, Space Medicine, a position he had held since May 1965. (NASA Hq. Bull., 2/14/66, 2)
Giss marked fifth anniversary with lecture by Dr. Harold C. Urey, prof, of chemistry at large, Univ. of California, La Jolla. Reception preceding lecture had honored Dr. Urey’s 73rd birthday on April 28. (Goddard News, 5/30/66, 8) During April: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Special Assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb and aiaa President, sought to define the role of a professional and of a professional society in an editorial in Astronautics & Aeronautics. ". . . in my reading of the history of science and technology, I have been impressed by the key role of individuals who related science and technology to social needs. I would suggest that they are the professionals, and that a true profession deliberately exercises science and technology to meet social needs. "Unlike most professional and technical societies, aiaa composes a wide variety of engineers and physical and life scientists. Yet definite social concerns bind us in a single profession—society’s expressed need to transport goods and people by atmospheric flight and to explore space. . . .” (A&A, 4/66, 30-31)
NASA Langley Research Center had invited four aircraft manufacturers— Boeing Co., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Douglas Aircraft Co., and General Dynamics Corp.—to submit by Sept. 30 proposals for a research program to reduce noise generated by commercial jet transports, (nasa Release 66-242)
M2-F2 lifting body mated to B-52 launch aircraft at NASA Flight Research Center, in preparation for flight tests. for a space mission, Sedov said it would be economically and scientifically feasible, but "we don’t have any plans for joint launchings. The situation is not technical but political and I think the international situation in these days cann'ot change this.” (Wilford, NYT, 10/13/66,12) October 12: iaf conferees toured the nasa-inta Robledo de Chavela Space Tracking Station outside Madrid. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/14/66, 1)
President Johnson, in 10th anniversary edition of Russian-language America Illustrated, published by usia for distribution in U.S.S.R., appealed to Soviet people for new era of friendship and understanding between the two countries. Johnson said "constructive steps” toward that goal would be "progress in the field of disarmament and in greater cooperative efforts ... in space exploration, medical research, and communications.” He added: rfWe’ve got to get into the habit of peaceful cooperation. The test ban treaty was a significant step. There have been others since 1963. We have agreed not to put bombs in orbit, we are working together on . . . desalination, weather information, exchanges of scientists, artists, and yes, magazines.” (Pres. Doc., 10/3/66, 1360-3)
usaf XB-70 research bomber flew at 45,000-ft. to 47,000-ft. altitudes in test flight from Edwards afb, to collect data for development of supersonic transports, (upi, NYT, 1/16/66, 60)
A $50-million, 18-mo. flight research program involving afsc’s supersonic XB-70 experimental aircraft was scheduled to begin in spring 1966, afsc announced. Joint usaf-nasa effort would acquire experimental data on flight dynamics, flight loads, structures, propulsion and air induction, and environmental factors. Overall direction would be by afsc’s Aeronautical Systems Div. (asd) ; technical direction would be by nasa. (afsc Release 15.66)
gsfc selected Brush Instruments Co. for $900,000 contract to provide 22 Unified S-Band (Usb) Systems Monitors for NASA’s Manned Space Flight Tracking Network. Systems, composed of high-speed, finite sensing and recording devices, would provide "immediate reading of critical subsystems performance while simultaneously recording operating events as they occur,” pinpoint and record trouble or failure, and serve as diagnostic tool for remedial action, (gsfc Release G-ll-66)
An 8,189-hr. test of cesium electron-bombardment engine performed for LRC by Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., ended when supply of cesium fuel was exhausted. Conducted in space simulation chamber, test was part of NASA’s electric engine research program. Studies had shown that such systems could result in increased payloads in unmanned and manned spaceflight missions, (nasa Release 66-306)
Employment in the aerospace industry would reach 1,349,000 in December 1966—an increase of 11 per cent over December 1965—Aerospace Industries Assn, estimated in a semiannual survey. Estimate was based on reports from 267 plants and facilities of 59 companies which represented nearly 80 per cent of entire industry, (aia Release 66-55)
New program to disseminate information to industry was initiated by NASA and aec’s Argonne National Laboratory. Purpose was to identify technological innovations resulting from Argonne’s research and development projects; prepare brief, business-oriented summaries of innovations; and distribute them to industry. Summaries—to be known as aec-nasa Tech Briefs—would contain information not customarily reported in scientific literature such as descriptions of devices, processes, and techniques developed to meet specific or engineering needs at Argonne and would be combined with similar information currently published by nasa. (nasa Release 66-183)
U.S.S.R.’s "period of inactivity in manned space flight” received editorial comment in Kansas City Star: "About all the West can do is wait until something happens. Meanwhile, the U.S. program moves ahead with significant achievements. But while guessing can be fun, a word of caution: Let’s not make the mistake of counting the Russians out of the space race.” (Kansas City Star, 9/26/66)
NASA successfully launched 550-lb. Project Scanner instrument package from Wallops Station to 380-mi. (612-km.) altitude on 13.5-min. suborbital flight: two-channel radiometers measured infrared energy emitted from earth’s horizon by carbon dioxide and water vapor; star-mapper telescope provided attitude orientation data. Managed by LaRC, Project Scanner was advanced research program to obtain data for designing and developing improved horizon-scanning instrumentation for space missions. (Wallops Release 66-43)
nasa had begun contract negotiations with TRW Systems to convert the prototype Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo) into a flight observatory. Negotiations might also include option to fabricate an additional flight observatory. Contract was expected to be for $9 million. (NASA Release 66-16)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. reached impasse over question of access to tracking facilities that would be part of U.N. treaty on space exploration. U.S. Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg blamed U.S.S.R. for halting agreement on treaty, voicing U.S. contention that tracking facilities must be negotiated by bilateral agreements and not guaranteed by treaty. Compulsory access to tracking facilities, Goldberg said, would constitute sovereignty violation. Soviet Ambassador Platon D. Morozov defended proposal as means to correct a discriminatory situation in which U.S. had certain advantages because of its alliances with other nations. (Teltsch, NYT, 9/17/66; Sanger, Wash. Post, 9/17/66, A4)
Nike-Apache launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 59-lb. instrumented payload to 108-mi. (174-km.) altitude and impacted 67 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Conducted for essa and Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, Dallas, the experiment sought to obtain ionospheric electron density profile measurements using a plasma resonance probe and to obtain data concerning sporadic E phenomenon in the valley region between the E- and F-layers of the ionosphere. Data were telemetered to ground stations during flight. Experiment was first of three to compare techniques for measuring characteristics of upper atmosphere and ionosphere. (Wallops Release 66-16; nasa Rpt. srl)
Commenting on the Federal budget for FY 1967, Science said it was the first budget since the middle 1950’s which had not carried a request for an increase in total funds for research and development: "This downturn in what for about a decade has been a steadily ascending curve reflects the major rationale of the new budget: to provide funds to support a military buildup in Southeast Asia without underfinancing new education and welfare programs enacted during the past two sessions of Congress. ...” (Science, 1/28/66, 425)
Wilhelm Forster Observatory (West Germany) reported that on 127th orbit, Soviet spacecraft cosmos cxm returned to earth and soft-landed at Baikonur, Kazakhstan. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/30/66, A14)
President Johnson, in World Meteorological Day statement, said: "This day symbolizes for us—and for all mankind—a new dawn of hope for a better, safer, and more meaningful life. It looks to the time when all our science and technology, and all the wonders of the space age, will give us the power of which man has always dreamed—not the power of one nation over another, but the power of the human race over the forces of nature. "The instrument of this program is the World Meteorological Organization—a specialized agency of the United Nations with a membership of 127 countries. Through the World Meteorological Organization, the concept of a World Weather Watch is now taking shape. On this occasion, I am proud to say that the United States strongly supports international cooperation in this vital field.” {Pres. Doc., 3/28/66, 439)	;
Role of Venus in NASA’s future space sciences program was reviewed in report by ossa to House Science and Astronautics Committee. Report suggested that NASA might increase interest in Venus with combinations of Mars-Venus flights and single missions to Venus using Mariner, Voyager, and advanced Automated Biological Laboratory spacecraft to investigate "the possibility of life forms. . . . From almost every aspect . . . Venus is an important, puzzling, and paradoxical planet, meriting continued examination by space flight missions.” (Text; Tech. Wk., 9/12/66, 18-9)
Sunspots as large as 12 times the earth’s diameter were detected by Bochum Observatory, West Germany. One group reportedly measured about 97,200 mi. across; smaller sunspots were about 27,000 mi. wide. (Reuters, NYT, 11/15/66, 61; Reuters, Wash. Post, 11/14/66, A23)
HL-10 lifting body vehicle, designed and developed by nasa Langley Research Center to help solve control problems of future manned spacecraft entering earth’s atmosphere, was formally delivered to nasa by its builder, Northrop Corp., in ceremonies at company’s Hawthorne, Calif., plant. The 22-ft.-long, 4,600-lb., wingless, tri-finned research vehicle would be dropped from B-52 aircraft for flight tests at 45,000-ft. altitude and mach .8 (530 mph). (LaRC Release)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, former NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology and new aiaa president, wrote his first "President’s Message” in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "One of the dilemmas of modern times is that science and technology can do a multitude of things—many of which the community may not necessarily desire and so will not support. As professionals we have tended to preoccupy ourselves with the potential of science and technology rather than the expressed needs of the community. A responsible professional society of the future must find . . . the wisdom among its members to relate its technologies to human needs. A wise professional society . . . will convey the legitimate aspirations of its thinkers and men of action to the community at large. . . .” (A&A, 2/66, 29)
NASA Langley Research Center awarded General Electric Co. $3,000,000 incentive-type contract to build the sixth spacecraft in nasa’s Scout-launched reentry heating flight series. The 13-ft. conical spacecraft would be launched to measure heating rates associated with turbulent air flow close to vehicular surface, which could not be simulated with ground equipment. (LaRC Release; NASA Release 66-54)
U.S. physics was facing severe shortage of funds necessary to sustain progress in research and education, concluded nas Physics Survey Committee in its report Physics: Survey and Outlook. Report recommended that physics support by Federal agencies be increased by 1969 to two and one-half times the 1963 1500-million level for physics and astronomy. Assessing U.S. strength in six subfields, report noted for astrophysics "a pressing need for more observational facilities.” Based on 1964-65 studies by an 18-member group headed by George E. Pake, Provost of Washington Univ., St. Louis, report stated: "Our strength in observational astrophysics with optical telescopes has long been established with the 200-in. telescope on Mount Palomar, but we have many more bright astrophysicists and astronomers than have access to the two US telescopes most suited for frontier research. Our relative strength will be altered with the implementation of plans for construction of several large telescopes in the Soviet Union. Any nation can, by placing a large telescope in the Southern Hemisphere, assume leadership in the observational astronomy of stellar evolution and cosmology, because the Magellanic Clouds are the nearest of all external galaxies. The United States has taken the initiative in the expensive but highly promising field of space-based optical and x-ray astronomy. "In radioastronomy the United States now has an impressive group of major radio telescopes, but the US position is not preeminent. Even the new instruments nearing completion at the California Institute of Technology and the National Radio Astronomy Observatory are inferior to existing instruments in Australia and the Soviet Union and to large new crosstype arrays nearing completion near Sydney and Moscow. The US position in space physics and cosmic radiation is good, with some question whether present conditions permit further strengthening of that position. Research on gravitation is at present not a large sector of research, but the US effort is of very high quality and is being increasingly recognized.” (nas Release; Science, 3/18/66, 1363-6; Physics Today, 4/66, 23-36)
Rep. Mark Andrews (R-N.D.) introduced a resolution calling for nsf to make recommendations for wider geographic distribution of Federal funds for research and development. (CR, 3/16/66, 5755)
Catalog identifying and locating every known star in the heavens down to the ninth magnitude, providing astronomers with instant reference to the entire sky, was published by gpo. Compiled by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory under NASA grant, 2,700-page, four-volume catalog unified 50 different sources to provide position, photographic and visual magnitude, spectral type, and other essential data for 250,000	heavenly bodies. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 5/5/66, 21)
Astronomers at Bochum Observatory, West Germany, reported they had sighted a giant new sunspot at the approximate center of the solar disc. Visible to the naked eye in early morning or just before sunset, sunspot had 88,000-mi. dia. and was expected to affect weather conditions and radio communications on earth during the next few days. Sunspot was unexpected since 1966 had been designated "year of the quiet sun” and scientists had expected only a minimum of solar disturbances, (upi, Chic. Trib., 3/21/66)
Thorough knowledge of cosmic dust, particularly interplanetary dust particles near the asteroid belt, was necessary for space engineers to successfully design manned and unmanned probes, wrote M. J. S. Belton of Kitt Peak National Observatory in Science. He stressed the importance of cosmic dust in theoretical and observational astrophysics: "It is apparently an important factor in the process of star formation. The polarization of starlight which is induced by aligned particles of interstellar dust gives information about the magnetic field in galactic systems, including our own. ... In the solar system, the presence of dust in planetary atmosphere may lead to misinterpretations of photometric and polarimetric data that would otherwise give important information about the total mass of the atmosphere. . . . And finally, dust is responsible for such interplanetary phenomena as the F corona, zodiacal light, gegenschein, and type-II comet tails. . . .” (Belton, Science, 1/7/66, 35-43)
Dr. Serge A. Korff, director of New York Univ.’s cosmic research program, told a youth science seminar at the Explorer’s Club in New York that he believed many Ufo sightings had been of giant balloons sent aloft by nyu to test the upper atmosphere: ''[They] are 300 to 400 feet across and because they are partly inflated, assume strange shapes as they ascend. At high altitudes they often reflect sunlight and become visible to viewers below in areas where the sun has set or before it has risen.” (NYT, 10/30/66, 45)
Quasars are relatively small objects 10 million to 1 billion yrs. old and 30 million to 300 million light years from earth that have been shot at super speeds out of another galaxy by a titanic explosion, astronomer Dr. Halton C. Arp, Mt. Palomar Observatory, contended in Science. Arp’s theory contradicted prevailing view that quasars could enable man to see the ends of time and space and possibly glimpse the secrets of creation because they were on the rim of the universe—10 or more billion light yrs. away—and were almost as old as the universe—8 billion yrs. Astronomers believed that the quasars’ "red shifts” in light-—changes toward red end of the light spectrum as objects speed away—were caused by extremely rapid motion away from our own galaxy. Arp suggested that quasars might be very dense and compact, exerting a strong gravitational attraction for their size which could shift wavelengths to produce "red shifts.” (Science, 3/11/66; Weil, Wash. Post, 3/12/66, 2; Sullivan, NYT, 3/11/66, 28; Ubell, N.Y. Her. Trih., 3/11/66)
Quasars, which radiate as much light and energy as a galaxy, appear to have a diameter only 1% as large as galaxies, scientists from U.K.’s Royal Astronomical Observatory and Royal Radar Establishment reported in Nature. Theory was based on measurements of radio signals of 30 quasars, obtained by using two radiotelescopes 80 mi apart in combination as if at extreme ends of single instrument. Data indicating quasars are smaller than previously believed compounded the problem of explaining their enormous quantities of energy. (W Post, 2/26/ 67) .
Naval Research Laboratory scientists reported the Milky Way galaxy was not capable of producing numerous new stars; instead, its star-producing days were virtually over, based on data gathered from rocket-borne instrument, a Far-Ultraviolet Image Intensifier Spectrograph [see Mar. 16]. Mission of spectrograph was to measure amount of invisible, gaseous, molecular hydrogen in interstellar space along the Milky Way; should bountiful amounts of hydrogen be indicated by the spectrograph, proof of Milky Way’s capability to produce numerous new stars would have been obtained. Instead, spectrograph measurements had found no such evidence. (AP, NYT, 5/14/67)
Lewis Research Center issued rfp’s on system employing 2,000- to 6,000-lb comsats which could broadcast directly to home TV sets from 22,300-mi-altitude synchronous orbits. Successful proposal would receive study contract. (LeRC Release 67-6)
Chimpanzees could survive sudden exposure to near vacuum according to tests performed by 6751 Aeromedical Research Laboratory at Holloman afb. Visual inspection of the eeg as well as power spectral density computer analysis indicated the expected greater subcortical resistance to anoxia when compared to cortical responses. Results showed that all subjects not only survived the exposures in excellent health but recovered within 4 hr after rapid decompression and were able to execute a complex behavioral schedule at a preexposure level of performance. Central nervous system damage was absent or negligible. (Text)
West Germany’s 1966 budget for space technology and research shown on Finance Minister’s summary report revealed that, while $57 million had been available, only $44.3 million had been spent, according to Interavia Air Letter. Aerospace industry complained government was so slow to issue contracts that firms themselves had to provide about 50% advance financing. Contracts were not officially approved until the end of each year. (Interavia, 11/16/67, 3)
Office of Science and Technology released an interim report on usaf test flights at Edwards afb to study the effects of the sonic boom June 3-23, 1966, and Oct. 31, 1966-Jan. 17, 1967, 11 types of aircraft made 367 supersonic and 261 subsonic flights. Report concluded that flights caused little or no physical harm to test structures, 393 test subjects, or 220,570 test animals, and noted relative annoyance of booms of differing intensity and of booms compared to jet aircraft engine noise. Between 33% and 98% of the test subjects objected to booms in the 2.0- to 3.5-lb-psf overpressure range that ssts were expected to produce under the worst possible conditions. Other preliminary conclusions: (1) sonic booms sounded louder outside than inside; (2) walls of houses were more effective in blocking out jet engine noise than sonic booms; and (3) annoyance increased faster with increasingly bigger booms than with increasingly louder engine noise. (Text; Clark, NYT, 8/3/67, 1, 24)
According to National Aeronautic Assn., Soviet authorities had filed with Federation Aeronautique International two new world speed records and one new world altitude record for their Mikoyan E-266 twintailed fighter aircraft. Pilot Peter Ostapenko had completed 1,000-km (621-mi) closed course with 4,410-lb load at average speed of 2,910 km/hr (1,808 mph). With same load, pilot Mikhail Komarov had completed 500-km (311-mi) closed course at 2,928 km/hr (1,820 mph). Alexandr Fedotov reached an altitude of 98,462 ft. (Av Wk, 12/18/67, 54-5; naa/pio)
NASA rejected industry bids ranging from $13.6-14.9 million for construction of four buildings at NASA’s Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, Mass, erc Director James C. Elms said that difference between bids and $10.4-million, Government estimate was too great to be adjusted and that building plans would have to be revised. (McElheny, Boston Globe, 4/6/67)
Jerome F. Lederer, NASA Manned Space Flight Safety Director, received Flight Safety Foundation’s Distinguished Service Award for distinguished service in achieying aircraft uses under safer conditions. (NASA Hq WB, 50)
NATO intelligence had learned that French President Charles de Gaulle would begin extensive cooperation with U.S.S.R. in the field of space exploration, including the orbiting of nuclear weapons, Henry J. Taylor reported in the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin. Taylor claimed U.S.S.R. was devoting a “substantial percentage” of its total military budget to the orbiting of nuclear weapons. (Taylor, P EB, 8/30/67)
NRL announced world’s lowest recorded temperature—less than onemillionth of a degree Kelvin above absolute zero—had been achieved by Naval Research Laboratory scientists Dr. Arthur Spohr and Edwin Althouse through use of magnetic cooling technique, described as nuclear cooling. Previous lowest recorded temperature had been about 1.3 millionths of a degree above. The difference was of great significance because in this range most physical properties, including degree of orientation of atomic nuclei, varied markedly with even a slight change of temperature. At absolute zero, nuclei of most materials would have the highest state of order possible for the material. New record at Naval Research Laboratory would further advance development of an apparatus to study interaction forces between nuclei and to examine effects of oriented nuclei, (nri. Release)
Successful simulation of a meteor was achieved when tiny manmade iron pellet fired by Trailblazer launch vehicle reentered earth’s atmosphere at unprecedented speed of 38,180 mph and landed on target. Launched from NASA Wallops Station, six-stage Trailblazer reached 190mi (306-km) altitude before firing one-gram pellet on downward leg of ballistic trajectory. Artificial meteor was visible for two seconds. Experiment was part of LaRC-Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory program to study luminosity and ionization of simulated meteors, thereby increasing scientists’ knowledge of natural meteoroids. (LaRC Release)
Informed sources reported that U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 supersonic transport would not be ready for the Paris International Air Show in May as upi reported March 7 but would still fly before the Anglo-French Concorde and U.S. SST, according to AP. First test flight of Tu-144 would be in late 1967. (AP, NYT, 4/19/67,73)
usaf reported that an SR—71 strategic reconnaissance aircraft was missing and presumed down after test flight from Edwards AFB. (UPI, W Post, 1/7/67,3)
usn F-111B fighter aircraft crashed on takeoff in test flight at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp.’s Calverton, N.Y., flight test center. Both Grumman pilots were killed. Adapted for use by usn and usaf, the F-lll (formerly tfx) had been subject of continued controversy between Congress and DOD since Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara insisted that the F-lll be used by both services and overruled military leaders’ objections to selection of General Dynamics Corp. for construction of the aircraft. Crash was first for USN test model, which had been stripped to remove excess weight; USAF test model (F-lllA) crashed in January, killing one crew member. (Wilson, W Post, 4/22/67, A5)
Lift-drag space vehicle had been gaining more attention, Space/Aeronautics reported; reasons were said to be: “X-15 hypersonic tests, unmanned lifting-body reentry, manned subsonic glides and wind tunnel research.” For manned spacecraft, atmospheric lift would put an end to worldwide recovery alerts as in Mercury/Gemini experience. (S/A, 2/67, 52)
USA—USAF—usn X-22A v/stol research aircraft designed and built by Bell Aerosystems Co. under USN contract completed its 100th successful test flight at Niagara Falls (N.Y.) International Airport. The four-engine, dual-tandem, ducted-propeller aircraft had made 239 vertical and 100 short takeoffs and 245 vertical and 94 short landings. During 40.9 hrs of actual flying time 54 vertical/horizontal transitions had been conducted. Present aircraft was second of two models in X-22A program; first model crashed Aug. 8, 1966, after completing 15 flights. Second model would be tested through 1968 and would then be delivered to a tri-service group at Patuxent (Md.) Naval Air Test Center for further evaluation. (Bell Release 92; NYT, 12/25/67,42)
Lane was developing a new airfoil that could improve performance of advanced variable-sweep-wing fighter aircraft, increase efficiency of subsonic jet transports, reduce helicopter blade tip stalling, and virtually eliminate local shock wave formation, B. K. Thomas, Jr., reported in Aviation Week. Airfoil, which was actually a “transonic wing,” delayed boundary layer separation at high subsonic speeds, thereby delaying the rapid rise in aerodynamic drag in the transonic region. It was currently undergoing wind tunnel tests at LaRC, but no aircraft flight testing was planned before FY 1970. (Thomas, Av Wk, 1/24/61, 25)
NASA and usaf were expected to sign an agreement in fall 1967 for a joint lifting-body vehicle research program, Technology Week reported. nasa would probably have overall management responsibility of program, which would include test flights by USAf’s SV-5P and NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicles. {Tech Wk, 6/19/67,3)
U.S.S.R. had invited U.K. to help track its Venus probe, Venus IV, in telegram from Mstislav V. Keldysb, President of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, to Sir Bernard Loved, Director of Jodrell Bank Observatory, reported Washington Post. U.S.S.R. did not furnish code to signals; Sir Bernard had said that tapes of signals would be sent to Moscow. Keldysh’s telegram referred to “this experiment’s extraordinary importance and significance for mankind.” Sir Bernard speculated that U.S.S.R. might attempt softlanding on planet Venus. Not since launch of Venus I in 1961 had the Soviets requested British working assistance. (Schmidt, NYT, 10/17/67, 13; W Post, 10/17/67, A17)
AIAA President Harold T. Luskin, in Astronautics and Aeronautics editorial, proposed a joint Soviet-American safety program to reduce hazards of manned space flight. He urged that representatives of U.S. and U.S.S.R. meet to exchange technical data on spacecraft safety features, to set up a common communications network for use in emergencies, and to plan joint rescue operations. “Cooperation for safety could be a step forward in promoting the greatest possible success of manned space exploration. The world would regard it as a meritorious indication that nations can find ways to compete and cooperate at one and the same time. . . . “Let both countries work toward the day when a flight crew is saved through cooperative action. That event would be the finest space spectacular, the best space first!” (A&A, 7/67,33—4.)
Findings of 14-mo study by Denver Research Institute (dri) , under NASA contract, of methods governing acquisition of new technology in 62 firms in four industries—electric batteries, printing and reproduction, industrial controls, aqd medical electronics—were summarized in Science. Report, “The Channels of Technology Acquisition in Commercial Firms and the NASA Dissemination Program,” concluded that (1) few organizations were vigorously seeking to acquire new technological know-how from space research; (2) little had been done to increase the technical awareness of the manufacturer outside the space and military fields; and (3) the technologist faced with an immediate problem was inclined to use information in standard manuals two to five years behind the state of the art. The report noted that “most individuals felt it too difficult to retrieve relevant material from the mass of government publications and indicated that they expected to learn of important government-developed technology through trade and professional channels. In several firms, those interviewed felt it wasn’t really practical to keep up with and use government technology unless one’s firm had government R&D contracts.” (Greenberg, Science, 9/15/67,1016-18)
The creation of a European Institute of Science and Technology to help narrow the technological gap between U.S. and Western Europe was proposed at a Deauville, France, conference of 70 U.S. and European businessmen, scientists, academicians, and public officials. Institute, which would be supported initially by private funds, would offer one-year postgraduate course. Faculty and student body would be international. Conference concluded that such an institute would be “a considerable stimulant for the various European educational systems and a rich source of trained engineers.” Meeting was sponsored by North Atlantic Assembly’s Science and Technology Committee and Univ. of Pennsylvania’s Foreign Policy Research Institute. (Mooney, ATT7,5/30/67,25)
A fir tree had been tested in the Royal Aircraft Establishment’s wind tunnel at Farnborough, U.K., to study the effects of high storm winds on forests. (Can Press, NYT, 1/21/61,3)
Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, Acting Under Secretary of Commerce and Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology, had been appointed President of Oklahoma Univ., effective Sept. 1. (AP, NYT, 5/23/67, 32)
A 236-in-wide mirror which would be used by U.S.S.R. in world’s largest reflector telescope was nearing completion, Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times. After cooling from a molten state for D/> years, mirror had been cut to produce concave, parabolic configurations and was currently undergoing final grinding at a factory near Moscow. It would soon be shipped to a new observatory in the northern Caucasus, which would be operated directly by the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Largest reflector telescope in use at present time was 200-in-wide instrument at Mt. Palomar Observatory. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/11/67, 15)
Hall of Aerospace Art would become “an integral part” of the new National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution announced. Permanent collection already included paintings and drawings of NASA manned space flight projects by Norman Rockwell and Chesley Bonestell and 18th and 19th century prints illustrating balloon flight. (Smithsonian Institution Release)
Italy’s space effort for 1967-68 was detailed in Interavia Air Letter. National research program ($2.72 million) included studies of solar winds, ionosphere’s electronic composition, albedo neutrons, x-rays and cosmic rays, solar and galactic gamma radiation, and stellar uv radiation. Other research would cover celestial mechanics, propulsion systems, and telemetry. For international programs, $3.52 million had been approved for Phase B of San Marco project and for launching San Marco C in joint effort with NASA. Supplementary funds ($1.3 million) probably would go for Bologna Univ. and nasa effort using oso-G to measure x-rays and cosmic rays. Italy’s share in 1967 eldo funding would be $10.2 million, and in esro $5.63 million. For esro programs, Italian industry would supply antennas and telemetry equipment for tracking network, pcm telemetry equipment, and radars for launching base at Kiruna, Sweden. (Interavia, 11/14/67, 3)
Hawker Siddeley P—1127 Kestrel vtol strike fighter crashed on ferry mission over Great Britain with heavy damage. Pilot, Sqdn. Ldr. Hugh Rigg, ejected and sustained cuts and bruises. In U.S., LaRC had decided against repairing one of two P-1127s obtained for flight testing; NASA’s aircraft had crashed at WS Aug. 21 with heavy damage. Parts would be used as spares for remaining aircraft. (Av Wk, 10/2/67,17) Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Science, Research, and Development Subcommittee, addressed House Seminar on Technology Assessment: “The past few years have brought a change in attitude toward science and technology, both in the public which is more technically literate, and in the Congress with its enhanced understanding. Faith in science, and awe of technology, have been supplanted by a recognition of a grave responsibility for decision—that is, what should we do with what we know? Technology assessment is a major key to discharging that responsibility. We are now turning to the natural sciences and asking them to move further in achieving a collective wisdom with politics, law, economics, and social interests for the management of technology. . . . The technical community must introduce a concern for public policy impacts and methods of operation—at an early point and in considerable detail. We believe that technology assessment will involve the scientific method and will be largely accomplished by scientists and engineers. But the purpose of assessment is to enable decisions for the public good.” (Text)
F-111A aircraft, lent by usaf to nasa to obtain basic flight research data for the design and development of advanced variable sweep wings, was delivered to frc. (nasa Release 67-7)
At the insistence of Sen. Albert Gore (D-Tenn.), the Senate Foreign Relations Committee agreed to qualify in its forthcoming report its interpretation of two clauses in the space law treaty [see March 7]. One clause questioned said benefits of space exploration “shall be the province of all mankind”; the other said that each nation would be liable for damages to another caused by its space vehicles. Committee specified that (1) nothing would “diminish or alter the right of the United States to determine how it shares the benefits and results of its space activities”; and (2) damage “pertains only to physical, non-electronic damage.” Senator Gore had suggested that if there were two competing U.S. and Soviet space communications networks, one nation might sue the other for damage from electronic interference of one system on the other. (W Post, 3/14/67, A7; Finney, NYT, 3/14/67, 20)
JPL scientist Sidney J. Slomich, writing in Astronautics and Aeronautics, emphasized need for national purpose to apply the highly advanced technology of space. “New impetus would be gained through the establishment of a coordinating national organization, governmental or private, to take advantage of the potential of advanced technology through modern communication techniques. The situation calls for a comprehensive national effort, with leadership coming from the highest levels of government to break down further interdisciplinary, interagency, organizational, and psychological and occupational barriers and to check out in detail a wide variety of potential applications like those cited above, relating them to the country’s and the world’s most pressing problems. . . . Emphasis should he on the application of the vast array of existing techniques, not on the development of new ones, and on nearterm objectives—no longer, say, than two or three years. Government agencies, the universities, publicly and privately supported research centers . . . must be banded together into a cooperative effort devoted to applying to the problems of our age the many solutions the new high technology makes possible. There is needed ... a public or private national organization, a research center, and, above all, a national purpose to bring this about.” (Slomich, A&A, 12/67, 54-8)
Dr. Mac C. Adams, nasa Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, was featured speaker at MIT conference sponsored by Electronics Industries Assn, to acquaint aerospace industry with NASA’s requirements for electronic systems on future space missions. He outlined objectives of nasa’s electronics research program: (1) stabilization systems to maintain orientation in space environment and to point telescopes and other experiments at celestial bodies with precise accuracy; (2) communications systems to translate data acquired in space activities over millions of miles and at rates comparable to exchange of information on earth; (3) communications and navigation satellites to meet increasing demands in commercial air transportation; (4)	data-handling systems to quickly and efficiently store, catalog, analyze, and edit data produced by space exploration; (5) instrumentation systems to detect and measure environmental characteristics over broad ranges of temperature, pressure, and density; and (6) components and technology which could operate reliably for long periods of time despite extremes in radiation and temperature. (Text; NASA Release 67-103)
General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. engineers said NASA had tentatively selected its double delta wing design for a hydrogen-fueled hypersonic aircraft of the future. Aircraft would weigh 500,000 lbs and cruise at six times the speed of sound. (AP, NYT, 3/2/67)
Charges that many specifications for construction of $25-million tank chamber at Plum Brook Station were being compromised were denied by Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of NASA Lewis Research Center which operated station. Charges, made by Plum Brook employee and referred to Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio), were being investigated by GAO. Silverstein said almost all the allegations were “not true” or represented a difference in judgment between himself and the complaining employee: “It’s a matter of his judgment against ours, and I don’t have to accept it.” (Thomson, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 1/20/67)
Western Electric received a $43.4 million addition to an existing Nike-X research and development contract. Approximately $18.0 million of this was initial implementation of the decision announced Sept. 18 by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara to deploy a Communist Chinese-oriented abm system. The remainder of the announced addition of $43.4 million would be for continuing research and development on the Nike-X system, supplementing the FY 1968 contract signed early in September. Under that contract Western Electric had received initially $215.3 million for continued research and development effort on Nike-X. The Communist Chinese-oriented abm system would consist of two types of radar and two interceptor missiles, (dod Release 992-67)
Scientists at National Radio Astronomy Observatory (nrao), Green Bank, W. Va., and Naval Research Laboratory successfully demonstrated new technique to obtain high-resolution pictures of quasars. Radiotelescopes at both locations were focused simultaneously on a quasar 240 trillion mi away, and radio signals beamed to earth by the quasar were recorded on magnetic tape at both centers; processed by a computer; and matched to form a single, clearer tape. NBAO Director Dr. David Heeschen speculated that facilities even farther away could be combined for sharper pictures: “Using this technique, there’s no reason why we can’t link up two telescopes 1,000 miles apart and improve our resolution 100 times over what we had.” (O’Toole, W Post, 5/25/67, D18)
Employment in the aerospace industry would reach 1,384,000 by September 1967—a 3.4% increase over September 1966—Aerospace Industries Assn, predicted. Forecast, based on survey of 60 companies representing 80% of entire aerospace industry, cited continuing demand for civilian aircraft; stable levels of missile and space sales; and increases in nonaerospace activities as reasons for steady growth in number of employees, (aia Release 67-17)
U.K. had agreed to buy 40 more F—111 supersonic military aircraft from U.S. at total cost of $785 million, Anthony Lewis reported in New York Times. Ten F-lll’s had been ordered March 31, 1966, with a one-year option to purchase 40 more. Deliveries were expected to begin in 1969. To offset impact on U.K.’s balance of payments, U.S. had agreed to buy $785 million worth of British equipment during the next 10 yrs or help U.K. get orders elsewhere. (Lewis, NYT, 4/1/67, 1) During March: Aerospace praised NASA’s contributions to U.S. aeronautical research: “Since the United States started sending experimental vehicles beyond Earth’s atmosphere nine years ago aeronautical research has been overshadowed by space exploration as far as the annual budgets of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration are concerned. . . . But dollar comparisons fail to tell the whole story. For its space work, NASA has had to build from scratch a variety of expensive ground facilities and equipment and to make heavy outlays for complex, nonreusable flight hardware. NASA’s aeronautical teams spend little on flight equipment and what they do buy is reusable; furthermore, they operate from facilities for the most part built and paid for prior to the Space Age. There is no question but that space has played the dominant role in nasa’s programs, but the aeronautical research effort has been far more substantial—and more rewarding—than an examination of budget figures would indicate. In the coming year, assuming Congressional approval of the pending budget, it will be increased.” (Aerospace, 3/67, 3)
The Senate had unanimously passed S.J. Res. 109, which would mark the 50th anniversary of the Langley Research Center in October 1967. (NASA lar VI/102)
NASA was consulting with Aerospace Industries Assn, (aia) and with individual aircraft companies on a proposed research program which would support areas of general aviation, Technology Week reported. At the request of several users, NASA had identified a number of technical areas where the application of advanced technology seemed warranted but emphasized that NASA’s efforts should be with aircraft designers and it should have no responsibility for the application of technology. (Tech Wk, 6/12/67, 3)
NASA announced that Oso HI Orbiting Solar Observatory, launched from ksc March 8, had not only achieved but exceeded its primary and secondary objectives. Primary objective was to obtain high-resolution spectral data from pointed solar experiments during major portion of one solar rotation and adequate operational support of spacecraft subsystems to carry out acquisition of these scientific data. Secondary objective was to obtain useful data from the non-pointed experiments, and to obtain data from pointed experiments during more than one solar rotation. Oso III had operated satisfactorily for over two solar rotations and was continuing to acquire useful scientific data from both pointed and wheel experiments, (nasa Proj Off)
Using $55,000 nasa grant, ucla had purchased a 24-in telescope with photometer and spectrograph for observatory at Thacher School, Qjai, Calif., New York Times reported. Telescope was 15th largest in California and already had produced the most complete spectrographic coverage of stellar explosion of star Nova Delphini. (NYT, 11/19/67, 73)
NASA released “Opportunities for Participation in Space Flight Investigation” (nhb 8030.1A) describing opportunities available to scientists and technical groups for including their experiments and equipment on NASA missions. Handbook, which superseded earlier edition published in July 1965, described each of NASA’s present flight programs and noted opportunities available in automated and manned flights and in flight-related programs so that scientists would have an up-to-date review of missions currently being sponsored by NASA and could develop compatible experiments. (nasa Release 67—169)
President Johnson signed Executive Order 11381 enlarging Federal Council for Science and Technology to include representatives from dot, hud, and Dept, of State for more effective operation. (PD, 11/13/67,1537-8)
Lewis Research Center awarded two one-year award-fee contracts totaling $22,500,000—$17,665,000 to General Dynamics Corp. and $5,171,000 to Honeywell, Inc.—for management and sustaining engineering services on Centaur launch vehicle (nasa Release 67-43)
Dept, of State announced appointment of Office of Outer Space Affairs Director Robert F. Packard as director of new Office of Space and Environmental Science Affairs. This office would be a part of the International Scientific and Technological Affairs offices, whose responsibility is to advise and assist the Secretary on scientific and technological factors affecting foreign policy. Packard would be responsible for the international aspects of U.S. programs in space, atmospheric science, marine science, and earth sciences. Packard had served from 1961 to 1962 in the Office of the Special Assistant to the Secretary for Atomic Energy and Outer Space. (State Dept. Release, 9/13/67)
U.S.S.R.’s Venus IV planetary probe (also designated Venera IV) entered atmosphere of planet Venus at 12:34 am edt and ejected instrumented capsule intended for softlanding on Venus. After aerodynamic braking, automatic parachute system provided gradual descent through 15-mi dense, hot, windy atmosphere, and capsule made [purported] softlanding at 2:08 am edt. Mstislav Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, later presented scientific proof for softlanding [see Oct. 30]. Launched June 12, the 2,438-lb Venus IV had traveled trajectory of more than 210 million mi; 49 million mi would be covered by transmitted signals from capsule to earth antennas. According to Soviet scientists, atmosphere as recorded by instrumented capsule had almost whole carbon dioxide composition with about 1.5% oxygen and water vapors; no significant traces of nitrogen; and a temperature range of 104-536° F. Reports indicated no noticeable magnetic field and no radiation belt, but detectable weak hydrogen corona. “Because Venus rotates so slowly around its axis [purported to be once in 244 earth days] half the planet is cold,” said Soviet scientist Josif Shklovski. Because the other half heated to “monstrous temperature,” he said surface of Venus would appear to be “a dry hot desert.” He noted that temperature extremes would cause constant winds on Venus “of about 450 mph” [accounting for large amount of drift of capsule during descent]. Moscow news reports from Izvestia and Tass said: Venus IV’s mission had been accomplished and instruments had ceased functioning after radioing data from softlanding site on heat, pressure, and carbon dioxide hostile to most forms of life; mother spacecraft burned in Venus’ atmosphere. Some reports did not claim softlanding. Soviet astronomer Vitali Bronshtein’s claim that radio contact was being maintained with instrumented capsule was unconfirmed. Also, cessation of signals from instrumented capsule received varied explanations from international sources. Tass reported antenna of package had failed to point in the right direction and that package’s bulk had blocked direct contact with earth. Jodrell Bank Observatory Director Sir Bernard Lovell expressed doubt that any electronic device could withstand high temperatures on Venusian surface. (Friendly, W Post, 10/18/67, 1; Kamm, NYT, 10/19/67, 1; Bishop, WSJ, 10/19/67, 4; AP, B Sun, 10/20/67; AP, W Star, 10/22/67, A3; SBD, 10/24/67, 283-5)
Paper model of “possible lifting re-entry vehicle design” had flown at 17 times the speed of sound and withstood 4,000° F temperature and pressure equal to 177,000-ft altitude in test to check out recently repaired wind tunnel at LTV Aerospace Corp. in Dallas. Designed by ltv scientist Charles J. Stalmach, model emerged after *4-sec test with only the nose and leading wing edges slightly blackened, (upi, NYT, 3/17/67)
Langley Research Center engineers at jpl, after repeated efforts to reactivate Lunar Orbiter Ill’s photo system which failed March 2, had concluded there was virtually no hope for transmission of further photos from the spacecraft. Analysis of events indicated failure had originated with momentary fluctuation in spacecraft’s electrical power which disturbed photo system logic by turning the film advance motor memory to forward mode. Cause of fluctuation had not been identified. Motor, following incorrect logic, stalled as it attempted to move film which was being mechanically held in a fixed position while readout was in progress. During stalled condition, motor overheated to failure point. Despite termination of photo transmission, Lunar Orbiter III continued to serve as a tracking target, providing practice for nasa Manned Space Flight Network stations, and to record information on radiation and meteoroids in moon’s vicinity, (nasa Release 67-76)
Committee on Science, Engineering, and Regional Development had been formed from persons working on problems of science and technology impact for nas and nae. Among other projects, Committee would examine “effects on given region of different kinds of institutions— university, not-for-profit laboratories, industrial and government laboratories [and would assess] . . . role of r&d institutions [and] . . . other factors . . . such as risk capital, entrepreneurial skills, and political leadership.” The 14-member committee would be chaired by Univ. of Illinois Graduate College Dean Daniel Alpert. (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 12/67,8-10)
Australia would be able to maintain its prominence in radio-astronomy with a new 150-in optical telescope to be constructed at Siding Spring, New South Wales, the New York Times reported. Construction of the $11,760,000	telescope, a joint British and Australian project, was expected to be completed in six years to provide Australian scientists-—who currently had to send findings to Mt. Palomar (Calif.) Observatory for verification—with a suitable size optical telescope to check their observations. {NYT, 5/14/67, 37)
More than 2,000 major construction and supply firms in the U.S. received invitations to bid on the second phase of NASA’s Electronics Research Center at Kendall Square, Cambridge, Mass., announced the New England Division Engineer, Corps of Engineers. The construction package would include three brick-faced buildings: one at least 10 stories high to house laboratories, offices, and cafeteria; 350-seat auditorium; and a center support building for service utilities. The Electronics Research Center had been in operation since Sept. 1, 1964, in temporary quarters at Technology Square near the permanent site in Kendall Square. (USA Release, 9/22/67)
Aerospace industry must develop new type of management to cope with its record $26-billion workload during 1967, Robert Hotz wrote in Aviation Week. “What makes the current management problem so acute is the fact that military demands are reaching a peak at the same time that commercial aviation is soaring on the greatest boom in its history. During 1965, the aerospace industry actually manufactured slightly more commercial airframe pounds than military—a historic milestone. The industry also has under development six new types of airline jet transports for which there were no prior military programs and which must be financed from privately raised funds. This is another unprecedented task for aerospace managements to tackle. . . .” (Hotz, Av Wk, 1/2/67, 11)
Sprint, launched from underground cell as the high-speed, short-range missile for Abm system, completed successful test flight at wsmr when it hit intercept point in sky after several planned sharp maneuvers. Interception simulated actual one for incoming enemy missile and was programmed into computer for 27-ft-long missile. Sprint tests had been conducted since March 29,1965. (dod Release 1040-67)
Electronic machine was developed by erc contractor Dr. Huseyin Yilmaz of Arthur D. Little, Inc. Machine visually displayed spoken word profiles on small oscilloscope, with objective of eventually allowing voice commands to maneuver spacecraft. Used to teach deaf and retarded people, machine helped deaf person to correct his speech by “seeing” his voice, and NASA scientists would use this project and similar studies to categorize and encode speech patterns, (erc Release 67—39)
NASA’s work on advanced air-breathing engines was aimed at development of significantly improved propulsion systems, primarily for second-generation supersonic transports, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Based mainly at LeRC, advanced engine component research program was designed to improve overall performance by improving efficiencies of individual components such as the compressor, combustor, turbine, and nozzle. Although program was directed primarily to supersonic powerplants, most anticipated improvements were expected to be applicable to future subsonic jet engines. (Av Wk, 9/4/67, 64-71)
nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell and ossa Director of Space Applications Programs Leonard Jaffe discussed impact of space research on science and technology in Science. As a result of space research, they said, science and technology could contribute to the arts by furnishing new media for human expression; enrich the humanities hy furnishing new media for broader basis for understanding himself and his place in nature; provide the historian with a better approach to history because of scientific methodology; and enable archeologists more accurately to date materials and identify their sources. As the entire world “absorbs the increased understanding of man and nature that science generates, and reflects that understanding in its literature, its social, political, and economic institutions, and its application to human daily living ... it may be hoped that this common bond will . . . give increased motivation to solve peaceably the problems that beset the world . . . [and] provide increased means for doing so. . . . To use properly and effectively these powerful tools of our times is an inescapable challenge to men and governments the world over.” (Newell, Jaffe, Science, 7/1/61, 29-39)
Aerospace industry sales in 1967 would total $27.3 billion—a 13% increase over 1966 sales—and in 1968 would reach $29.2 billion, Aerospace Industries Assn, (aia) predicted. Commercial transport aircraft production and DOD procurement had increased significantly in 1967, while NASA sales had declined from $4.9 billion to $4.1 billion, (aia Release 67-55)
Col. Maynard E. White (usaf, Ret.), former Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel, usaf Hq. in Europe, was appointed Director of Manned Space Flight Program Control, OMSF. (nasa Ann)
Astronomer Dr. Gerritt L. Verschuur, with aid of National Radio Astronomy Observatory, had measured for first time strength of Milky Way’s magnetic field as it existed in far reaches of the galaxy, to help explain theories of star formation, radio wave propagation, and cosmic ray acceleration unprovable previously. (W Post, 9/10/68, A10)
National Radio Astronomy Observatory astronomers at Green Bank, W. Va., disclosed discovery of first pair of pulsars, near Crab Nebula, 6,000 light yr from earth. Through association with the decayed star, they might provide clue as to pulsars’ identity. (Cohn, W Post, 11/7/68, A4)
Dr. Ernest Harry Vestine, expert on geomagnetism who had joined RAND Corp. in 1957 after 20 yr with Carnegie Institution, died in Santa Monica, Calif., of heart attack at age 62. He had been an originator of 1957—58 International Geophysical Year and had served as consultant to DOD, NASA, and Dept, of Commerce. He had been one of leaders of 1933 International Polar Year expedition, which established observatory to measure earth’s magnetic field. (W Post, 7/19/68, B6)
New York Times said article in December issue of Australian Quarterly by Australian National Univ. lecturer Robert Cooksey had suggested U.S. “space research facility” at Pine Gap near geographical center of Australia might be station designed to guide orbital missiles fired from U.S. to targets in Communist China. Article had caused flurry of questions about base in Australian press. Later New York Times story said U.S. officials in Washington had denied suggestion and said Pine Gap installation was joint U.S.-Australian space research facility established by agreement in 1966. (Trumbull, NYT, 12/29/68, 30)
British Minister of Technology Anthony W. Benn announced in House of Commons that U.K. would underwrite production of Anglo-French Concorde supersonic aircraft with $180- to $240-million loan for working capital, bringing total U.K. commitment to more than $1 billion. He later revealed first test flight would be delayed until summer 1968. First flight of U.S. sst had been postponed until 1972 [see Feb. 22]. (Lee, NYT, 2/28/68, 5)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told British Interplanetary Society in London: “I believe that the exploitation of space is limited in concept and extent by the very high cost of putting payload into orbit, and the inaccessibility of objects after they have been launched. Therefore I would forecast that the next major thrust in space will be the development of an economical launch vehicle for shuttling between earth and the installations, such as the orbiting space stations which will be operating in space.” Dr. Mueller said efficient earth-to-orbit transportation system would be needed to shuttle thousands of tons of material in and out of space, operating in mode similar to that of large commercial air transports and compatible with airports. Same technology could be applied to terrestrial point-to-point transport. (Text)
Demonstrated success of lunar module’s (lm) initial unmanned test flight in earth orbit Jan. 22 and of subsequent ground test analysis by NASA Manned Space Flight Safety Office had eliminated need for second unmanned lm flight, NASA announced. First manned lm flight using Saturn V launch vehicle was planned for late 1968. (nasa Release 68-50; upi, W Star, 3/17/68, A4)
New York Times article said at least eight nations, including U.S. and U.S.S.R., were building astronomical observatories in Chile, which had been termed ideal site because of its latitude, near 30° South. Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc. (aura) , dependency of NSF, had invested $19 million thus far in observatory of Cerro Tololo. Other groups were European Southern Observatory (eso, consortium of West Germany, France, Holland, Belgium, Sweden, and Denmark) and Soviet Astronomical Mission. A 36-in-telescope at U.S. observatory already had photographed powerful ray-emitting star whose existence previously had been only suspected. (NYT, 11/24/68, 27)
nasa successfully completed month-long laboratory test of Biosatellite capsule which would maintain primate in space for 30 days in 1969. Fully instrumented, 15-lb, pigtailed monkey which made simulated space flight was alert and responsive when removed and was undergoing postflight examination and physiological measurements identical to those planned to follow actual flight. Test had been terminated after 28 days when biomedical instrumentation measured less urine than monkey would normally secrete. Biosatellite D primate flight would duplicate most routines of manned flight to provide data on effects of prolonged weightlessness. During simulated flight, monkey ate pellets, drank water, and performed two 30-min tasks each day. Test was conducted by Biosatellite experimenters at UCLA with support from NASA and General Electric Co. arc was managing project, (nasa Release 68-142; AP, B Sun, 8/29/68, A4)
In New York Times, Walter Sullivan said President-elect Richard M. Nixon’s entourage had discussed creation of Cabinet post for science and technology. “The science adviser, in the view of the Nixon entourage, has been unable to streamline the machinery for making science policy. Science, and the problems relating to it, has outgrown its old boundaries. The big problems are interdisciplinary. Their solution requires expertise in many fields, and the cooperation of many departments of government. This has led to a proliferation of interdepartmental committees.” However, “because the creation of a Cabinet post would have major repercussions within the scientific establishment, it is unlikely that such a step will be taken until there has been an extensive study, lasting perhaps a year or more.” (ATT, 12/8/68, 3E)
Lockheed-Georgia Co. test pilot Leo J. Sullivan successfully flew C—5 Galaxy, world’s largest aircraft, on 94-min first test flight from Dobbins AFB over Georgia countryside at speeds ranging from 143-mph takeoff to 230 mph and reaching 10,000-ft altitude. No attempt was made to reach maximum speed of 550 mph. C—5, powered by four TF—39 turbofan jet engines, each delivering 41,000 lb of thrust, could carry 265,000-lb payload over 2,875-mi range or 100,000-lb payload over 6,325-mi range at cruising speed of 506 mph. Military version would carry 350 fully equipped troops, usaf had ordered 58. “We like to talk about a commercial plane similar to the C—5 which could carry nearly 1,000 passengers,” said Lockheed-Georgia President T. R. May, but he found idea of carrying both passengers and freight attractive. “We have preliminary plans for airplanes weighing over a million pounds. But it is fairly clear that the world is not quite ready for a
Defense Projects Support Office (dpso) was established in Special Programs Office at nasa Hq. to manage specialized tasks where nasa’s unique capabilities could provide needed support to a limited number of dod projects. M. J. Raffensperger, Director of Advanced Manned Missions Planning and Operations, Office of Manned Space Flight, was appointed Deputy Director of Special Programs Office and Acting Director of dpso. (nasa Release 68—66; nasa Ann, 4/17/68)
Soviet economist Dr. Viktor A. Cheprakov had published in Izvestia what appeared to be rebuttal to prognosis by Soviet nuclear physicist Prof. Andrey D. Sakharov of convergence of communism and capitalism by year 2000 [see July 22]. In “Problems of the Last Third of the Century,” translated by New York Times, Dr. Cheprakov foresaw sharpening of struggle between the two ideologies and discussed role of science. “Science and technology are endowed with tremendous possibilities. ... a new achievement ... is being recorded every 25 seconds. We have figures on what and how much can be extracted from the earth, on the benefits to be derived from new methods of food production . . . and on the undoubtedly vast prospects of using the resources of seas and oceans. But the realization of all these potentialities will require the victory of socialism . . . for only socialism makes it possible to funnel vast funds into scientific research and into the practical use of its results in the interest of the peoples.” (Anderson, NYT, 8/19/68,1)
Pig-tailed monkey was in good health after May simulated test flight, with 15-day medical countdown and 5-day postflight monitoring. Monkey, identical to one scheduled for 50-day orbit of earth on NASA’s Biosatellite D in 1969, had been instrumented with two dozen sensors. In photo, primate is seated in test fixture. maintain highest safety standards possible in national aerospace program by solving technical safety problems and providing NASA and its contractors with current information on safety data and procedures. Institute would be directed by I. Irving Pinkel, consultant on aircraft safety to usaf and faa and former ApoUo 204 accident investigator and consultant, (nasa Release 68—79; LeRC Release 68—32)
nasa selected Computer Sciences Corp., Lockheed Electronics Co., Computer Applications, Inc., and Service Technology Corp. (ltv) , for competitive negotiations on $1-million one-year renewable contract to provide computer support services at Electronics Research Center, (nasa Release 68-99)
National Science Foundation released Research and Development in Industry, 1966. Total 1966 industrial r&d expenditure was $15.5 billion, with industry accounting for 70% of nation’s R&D performance. Federal Government R&D performed in industry reached $8.3 billion, 53% of industrial total. In January 1967, 163,900—30% of total—industrial scientists and engineers were engaged in R&D directly supported by Federal Government. In 1966, NASA and DOD financed work of 89% of R&D scientists and engineers employed by industry on Federal projects, with 54,000 working on NASA projects, an increase of 50% over 1963. DOD-financed scientists and engineers decreased 23% in same period. (Text)
A 15-lb pig-tailed monkey, like one scheduled to orbit earth for 30 days on board Biosatellite D in 1969, had successfully completed simulated space flight fully instrumented with some two dozen separate biological sensors. Test, first joining of instrumented primate and its complete array of biological instrumentation with flight-type spacecraft, met all objectives, including 15-day medical countdown, 3-day simulated flight, and 5-day monitoring, (nasa Release 68—76; W Post, 4/26/68, A19)
Clifford C. Furnas, President of Western New York Nuclear Research Center and member of nae, was appointed to newly created position of Vice Chairman of National Research Council (nrc), in which he would “assist the Chairman, nas President Frederick Seitz, in the general administration of the nrc and help coordinate activities” between nae, nas, and nrc. (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 3/68,5: nas pio)
Formal establishment of Science and Public Policy Studies Group temporarily housed at mit became effective. Group was designed as focus of interest and information for scholars, universities, and government officials engaged in teaching and research in science and public policy. Any university with active teaching and research program in science and public policy could become affiliate. Some 50 had indicated interest. Funding for two-year period was from university contributions and matching Sloan Foundation grant. Prof. Eugene B. Skolnikoff of MIT would serve as chairman. (Group Ann)
In Baltimore Sun William J. Perkinson warned against “A Czechoslovakia In Space.” He said experts explained U.S. and other free-world nations “must insure that future Russian leaders will never be able to blackmail nations or whole continents of nations into submitting to the will of such Soviet leaders the way the leaders of the Kremlin forced Czechoslovakia to yield through the invasion of that country on the night of August 21.” By marrying technology of “spook,” or hovering, satellite with that used to produce mirv and by use of more powerful rockets, “it would be possible to launch truly ‘orbiting men-of-war’ that could be used far more effectively to cow any nation than the most powerful of gunboats were able to do in the days of ‘gunboat diplomacy.’ ” Blackmail might not occur, if arms limitation treaties granted each nation right to board and inspect all heavy satellites in orbit. “But even that right would have to be backed up by means of spacecraft and spacemen capable of exercising that right. That ... is why the invasion of Czechoslovakia is certain to spark new interest in manned space flight.” (B Sun, 9/1/68, 3)
Charles J. Donlan was named Acting Director, Advanced Manned Missions Program, NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, replacing Edgar M. Cortright. He would serve in addition to his duties as Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Technical). (nasa Ann)
Univ. of Virginia announced it would use $100,000 NASA grant to finance construction of 40-in astrometric telescope at its observatory south of Charlottesville, Va. Additional funding would come from estate of Leander McCormick, who provided funds for its 26-in telescope built in 1882. (AP, W Star, 7/3/68, A20)
NASA selected Nortronics Div. of Northrop Corp. and Fecker Div. of Owens-Illinois Co. for competitive negotiations for $2.5 million cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to design, build, and install 36-in aperture infrared telescope in NASA’s high-altitude observatory aircraft. Aircraft, modified Convair 990 jet transport, was operated by arc as national facility for astronomers and other scientists. Telescope would provide information on planets, comets, asteroids, solar surface, stars, nebulae, and galactic phenomena. Above interference of most of earth’s atmosphere, it would gather information in infrared portion of spectrum not available from ground observatories, (nasa Release 68—144)
President Johnson sent to Congress Marine Science Affairs—A Year of Plans and Progress; The Second Report of the President to the Congress on Marine Resources and Engineering Development and reported on FY 1969 budget, which included $516 million for marine science and technology programs. Increased funding was requested for program on application of spacecraft technology in oceanography and improved observation and prediction of ocean environment. (PD, 3/18/68, 489-90)
Eighth anniversary of NASA’s largest Center, Marshall Space Flight Center. It became operational July 1, 1960, with 4,400 employees and facilities valued at estimated $100 million. On eighth anniversary MSFC had 6,500 employees. Plant value was estimated at $400 million, with real property values accounting for $140 million and capital equipment for remaining $260 million. Achievements during first eight years included development and successful flight of Saturn I, Saturn IB, and Saturn V launch vehicles, (msfc Release 68-143)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded ibm’s Space Guidance Center $1,303,758 contract for spare parts and logistics support of instrument units that guided Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles, (msfc Release 68—63)
Washington Evening Star said U.K. and Australian governments had drawn up joint plans for largest telescope in Southern Hemisphere, 150-in optical telescope at Siding Spring Mountain Observatory of Australian National Univ. It would cost $10.5 million. (W Star, 11/21/68, A6)
Cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for Cal Tech’s operation of Jet Propulsion Laboratory as a major NASA installation was renewed by NASA and Cal Tech through Dec. 31, 1971. Cal Tech staffed and operated JPL; property, facilities, and equipment were owned by Government. (NASA Procurement Off; NASA Release 69—2)
Naval Research Laboratory scientists Dror Sadeh, Stephen Knowles, and Benjamin Au reported in Science observations made in two experiments in which an apparent decrease in frequency of radio or light waves was detected when optical path was in vicinity of a mass. Radio waves skirting earth and sun appeared to increase in wavelength, leading scientists to reason that all lights crossing portions of universe would be similarly affected by mass of objects along the way. Effect could account for part of “red shift” (shift in spectra of distant galaxies as they receded from earth), chief tool for measuring expansion rate of universe which, in turn, was used to measure age of universe. Thus, if observations by nrl scientists were confirmed, they could necessitate revision of long-standing estimates of age and expansion rate of universe. Experimenters, however, indicated their findings appeared inconsistent with results from “round-trip” experiments, such as those obtained during past year when radar impulses were bounced off Venus and Mercury. (Science, 8/9/68, 567—9; Sullivan, NYT, 8/10/68, 27)
Lawrence A. Hyland, Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., received naa’s Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1967 on behalf of Hughes Surveyor Program Team, JPL, and other companies and organizations involved in project which citation said, had “put the eyes and hands of the United States on the Moon.” Award was presented by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey for greatest annual achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in U.S. In ceremonies at Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum, Humphrey called U.S. space program “a splendid challenge and a noble mission . . . one whose practical benefits for today are exceeded only by its promise for tomorrow. “I urge every American to support the future development of our space program, and I . . . shall do so with pride and vigor.” Humphrey said Nation had decided to commit resources “to venture in space for one primary reason: We believe that this mission to the far-out will produce many down-to-earth benefits for men. ... In fact . . . the nation that is first in science and technology has a chance to be the first to overcome some of the perplexing problems that have beset mankind since the beginning of civilization.” Space research “has vastly expanded our capabilities in navigation, communication and meteorology. It has given us new products and processes in such fields as agriculture, photography, metallurgy, and oceanography.” Techniques “that are going to put a man on the moon are . . . exactly the techniques that we are going to need to clean up our cities . . the systems analysis approach ... is the approach that the modern city of America is going to need if it’s going to become a livable social institution. “So maybe we’ve been pioneering in space only to save ourselves on earth . . . maybe the nation that puts a man on the moon is the nation that will put man on his feet first right here on earth. . . . “I think a certain extravagance of objectives—a will to push back
NASA scientists working with Deep Space Network (dsn) had quadrupled distances over which signals from three Pioneer spacecraft currently in interplanetary space could be heard. Pioneers could view sun from every side. Improvements in DSN receivers so far had allowed return of 50% more of their data than had been planned. All three Pioneers— now 29, 116, and 182 million mi from earth—could be heard through DSN antennas, ensuring return of data until they wore out. Together they had, to date, amassed 55 mo in orbit, measuring particles and fields of sun’s atmosphere and returning seven billion bits of data. Change of polarization of tracking antennas from circular to linear had doubled received signal power, (arc Release 68—13; ARC Astrogram, 8/29/68, 1)
Scientists from Stanford Univ. and Univ. of California, using telescope at Lick Observatory atop Mt. Hamilton, Calif., and telescopes on Kitt Peak, Ariz., had found one of four recently discovered pulsars flashed visible wavelengths of light at half the rate of its radio pulse. Discovery was disclosed by Univ. of California at Berkeley astronomer, Dr. David Cudaback, at pulsar meeting in New York sponsored jointly by NASA Institute for Space Studies and Belfer Graduate School of Science, Yeshiva Univ. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/21/68, 14; 5/22/68, 24; 5/26/68, 12) .
Newsweek commented on break-up of European Launcher Development Organization: “The seven-nation . . . [ELDO] which never really got off the pad, will be buried early in October. Efforts to get Britain to remain only made clear the reason for her withdrawal: France refused to accept Britain as a member of Euromart and the British pulled out. The Netherlands backs Britain’s move in the face of De Gaulle’s stubbornness, and Italy has already expressed reservations about the project. If Western Europe wants launchers for scientific space exploration in future, it will have to buy them from the U.S.” (Newsweek, 9/30/68, 20)
NASA announced retirement, effective Nov. 1, of Werner R. Kuers, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center’s Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory since 1961. (msfc Release 68—257; Marshall Star, 10/30/68, D '	...
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, in statement before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, pointed to “establishment of a Manned Space Plight Safety Office ... to focus all our safety activity at the highest level of management.” NASA, he said, was ensuring “that quality assurance and reliability officials have direct access to contractor management and nasa management.” (Testimony)
National Science Foundation released Federal Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities: Fiscal Years 1967, 1968, and 1969. Federal obligations for basic research, applied research, and development (plant excluded) totaled $16.5 billion in FY 1967 and were expected to total $16.2 billion in FY 1968, first drop since 1955. Obligations had been expected to total $17.3 billion in FY 1969, but, because of appropriations and apportionment actions, probably would be even less than in 1968. Basic research obligations totaled $2.0 billion in FY 1967 and were expected to be $2.1 billion in 1968. Applied research obligations totaled $3.3 billion in FY 1967, with $3.3 billion estimated for 1968. Originally expected increases in FY 1969 obligations, to $2.4 billion for basic research and $3.6 billion for applied research, probably would not occur because of cutbacks in FY 1969 budget. Development obligations were $11.3 billion in 1967, highest ever reported, but were expected to drop to $10.8 billion in 1968. Originally expected rise to $11.3 billion in 1969 probably would not be achieved. In FY 1967, obligations for r&d plant totaled $620 million, with estimated $517 million for 1968 and $777 million for 1969. dod, nasa, and aec provided bulk of r&d funds, with 90% average share during 1960—66 and 85% during 1967—69. dod, NASA, and aec together supported 60% of Federal research total and more than 95% of development total in 1968. During 1967—69, 80% of Federal R&D funds were scheduled for extramural performers, chiefly U.S. industrial firms. In 1968 they received 60%. (Text)
LaRC was conducting operational research program at NASA Wallops Station to evaluate runway grooving as a means of reducing aircraft hydroplaning, loss of friction during high-speed landing because of water or slush film. Aircraft landed on specially prepared runways with grooves % in wide, % in deep, and 1 in apart and braking effectiveness was recorded by instruments on aircraft and on ground. Research indicated grooving helped to alleviate all known phenomena which resulted in low tire-ground friction, but scientists were concerned that undesirable vibrations might be introduced into aircraft. (Langley Researcher, 5/17/68,4)
MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, discussed “The Outlook for Space Exploration” addressing National Space Club’s Goddard Memo
F—111 A aircraft crashed near Edwards afb, Calif., on test flight. Crewmen, Col. Henry W. Brown (usaf) and L/Col. Joe B. Jordon (usaf), parachuted to safety in escape compartment. Crash was fourth for F—111; one F—111B and two F—lllAs had crashed previously. (AP, NYT, 1/4/68, 74)
Harvard College Observatory scientists Dr. George R. Huguenin and Dr. J. H. Taylor became first U.S. scientists to identify a new pulsar when they discovered HP 1506 in northern sky near Little Dipper. Pulsar, similar to four pulsars discovered in 1967 by U.K. scientists, had pulse rate of one every 0.7397 sec, each lasting 0.020 sec. Pulse rate of other four pulsars ranged from 0.25 to 1.4 sec, with each pulse lasting 0.020 sec. Harvard scientists used National Radio Astronomy Observatory antenna at Green Bank, W. Va. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/19/68, 20)
mit physicist and radioastronomer, Dr. Bernard Burke, and teams of scientists using 140-ft “Big Dish” antenna at National Radio Astronomy Observatory began first radioastronomy test of Einstein’s general theory of relativity in attempt to discover gravity’s effect on universe. Among three basic tests proposed by Einstein to test his theory to account for action of all bodies under gravitational force was one to measure bending of light from distant source as it passed an energetic body like the sun. Dr. Burke’s experiment measured signals from newly discovered quasars to determine amount of bending they underwent in passing the sun. If light, in form of quasar radiowaves, was bent, Einstein theory would receive added support; if it was not bent as much as he predicted, or if astronomers were unable to detect significant bending, theory would remain intact until further proof was provided, (nrao Proj Off; Lannan, W Star, 10/1/68, A9)
NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology James M. Beggs dedicated new $3.5-million Flight Control Research Facility at LaRC. Facility, connected to LaRc’s data analysis and computation center, would be used for guidance and control research in support of manned flight. During ceremony, Center’s Digital Computer Complex Group received LaRC Group Achievement Award for “outstanding performance and dedicated efforts in combining unique concepts in computer organization and operating systems” contributing to “one of the most outstanding research computer installations in the United States.” (Langley Researcher, 7/26/68, 1, 4)
President Johnson released Noise—Sound Without Value, report of Federal Council for Science and Technology task force, and challenged industry, universities, and public authorities to attack noise in environment from many sources. He directed Federal departments and agencies to undertake or expand noise abatement programs. Among recommendations endorsed by President, report said: NASA should complete studies of community response to airport noise, in addition to hew, dot, and hud studies of effects; nasa and dot should continue air transport noise abatement research; DOD and NASA should continue to study and set standards for noise in special situations; and DOT should develop sonic-boom-control standards. (Text; PD, 11/11/68,1575-6)
Aerospace Daily survey showed most experts considered military r&d funds prime candidate for budget cuts. Services had been told to slash $900 million from FY 1969 requests as their part in $6-billion reduction demanded by Congress, which exhibited little support for either Manned Orbiting Laboratory program or Sentinel abm system. Federal Contract Research Center also was likely to be cut, though Pentagon sought $48 million, $3 million less than FY 1968. Government was spending estimated $17 billion annually on research and there was “rising general Congressional reluctance to approve more funds or even to provide additional money merely to keep pace with the inflation of the economy.” (Aero Daily, 5/27/68, 26)
Harold T. Luskin, chief advanced design engineer at LockheedCalifornia Co. and former AIAA President, was named NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Technical), effective March 18. Luskin would be responsible for ensuring technical excellence and would share responsibility for overall planning and direction of Manned Space Flight Program with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight and his other deputies, (nasa Release 68—39)
Senate Report No. 957, Aeronautical Research and Development Policy, sponsored by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, concluded NASA should increase its aeronautical effort, particularly in the development phase, and carry it on to “proof-of-concept testing as a means of providing a larger variety of options to aircraft designers and systems engineers.” Report called for NASC to act as focal point for development of more comprehensive and better coordinated aeronautical R&D policy and recommended that NASA’s aeronautical activity be upgraded to major office level and directed by an Associate Administrator. (Text)
Univ. of California scientist Dr. David Cudaback, in telephone interview, said rhythmic light flashes coming from one of newly discovered pulsars, which he described at nasa pulsar meeting May 21 in New York, had turned out to be rhythmic effect from his tape recorder. However, Kitt Peak National Observatory, which reported flashes at same meeting, still argued they seemed real. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/8/68, 32)
In letter to President Johnson, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), Chairman of House Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development, urged reorganization of environmental science activities of Federal Government and asked that responsibility for development of weather modification programs be given to Environmental Science Services Administration (essa). His committee, originator of NSF Amendments Act of 1968 which became effective July 18, was interested in implementing section which relieved NSF of that responsibility as of Sept. 1. Rep. Daddario stated three beliefs: “1. The weather modification program involves the development of environmental understanding which is crucial to the protection of our planetary resources; it should be supported and pursued without significant hiatus. 2. In light of the nature of the program and the present administrative organization of the executive branch, it seems clear that weather modification should become part of the portfolio of the Environmental Science Services Administration. 3. At the same time, there is considerable doubt whether the Environmental Science Services Administration should remain part of the Department of Commerce; therefore consideration should be given to executive reorganization which might either relocate the Administration or give it independent status.” (Text; W Star, 8/23/68, A4)
Sen. Gaylord Nelson (D-Wis.), member of Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, on Senate floor praised Construction of Wisconsin Regional Space Center as “a place where the layman can acquire information about the developments and our accomplishments in the space age.” He inserted in Congressional Record article by Barbara E. Kocjan, stenographic coordinator of projects for Center, describing Center as “a highly effective teaching laboratory that can readily be tied into the on going programs of tens of thousands of elementary and secondary schools and hundreds of colleges and universities.” (CR, 3/22/68, E2151)
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory dedicated multipurpose astronomical station at Mount Hopkins, Ariz. Station, supported by nasa Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition and Office of Advanced Research and Technology, would be site of experimental series on laser communications to be conducted by NASA and Smithsonian. (Smithsonian pao)
NASA established Office of Facilities, merging facility functions and applicable staff elements of Office of Manned Space Flight, Office of Space Science and Applications, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, and Facilities Management Office. New office, under direction of m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), would encompass planning, design, acquisition, construction, repair, alteration, maintenance, operations, utilization, and disposal of facilities including land and collateral equipment. It would report to the Assistant Administrator for Administration. (NASA Ann)
AEC refused comment on Science and Citizen report U.S. had set off 3 and U.S.S.R. 22 undisclosed underground atomic tests in 1964 through 1967, bringing total underground tests to 168 for past three years. Magazine, published by Committee for Environmental Information in St. Louis, Mo., said source of information was publication of Research Institute of Swedish National Defense and that three undisclosed U.S. tests had occurred in 1964. All subsequent U.S. tests had been reported. {W Post, 5/7/68, 7)
Report called 2% for planetary exploration out of NASA FY 1969 budget “totally inadequate.” It recommended diversion of funds from manned missions to instrument exploration, including biennial flights to orbit Venus and Mars until 1975; dropping capsule on Mars in 1973 to detect life signs and a major lander later, perhaps in 1975; multiple-drop probe of Venus’ surface in 1975; Mercury flight in 1973; and priority Jupiter flybys in 1972 and 1973. Panel advocated pursuit of planets in economical way: use of existing Pioneer spacecraft in Venus and Jupiter missions, elimination of second spacecraft in all missions unless “clear gain . . . will result from such double launches,” and use of single launch for both Venus and Mercury missions by scheduling them when planets were in alignment (same technique could be used for “Grand Tour” of major planets in 1977, when they would be aligned in space). Referring to U.S.S.R. exploration, report said, “We certainly believe we cannot abandon this broad area of space activities to our competitors.” Report also recommended strong support for radioastronomy, including development of major new observatory primarily for planetary study, and continued support of ground-based optical planetary astronomy. It proposed coordinated, informal contact with Soviet scientists on possibility of joint planning of planetary exploration. (Text; NRC Release; Lyons, NYT, 8/15/68, 17; O’Toole, W Post, 8/15/68, Al; Lannan, W Star, 8/15/68, C8; Carter, Science, 8/16/68,671—3)
Guidance and control equipment used during Gemini XI reentry Sept. 15, 1966, was being flight-tested at nasa Wallops Station to set up system performance requirements for automated landing for v/stol aircraft. Tests were part of long-range NASA research program to develop all-weather aviation electronics systems for v/stol aircraft, (erc Release 68—12; WS Release 68—14; Marshall Star, 8/14/68, 2)
nasa and France’s Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (onera) had agreed on cooperative research project on tilt-rotors for vertical-flying aircraft. Data were expected to assist in design of rotors and propellers for v/stol aircraft. NASA would provide rotors, hardware, and instrumentation for tests, minimum engineering support, and basic computations of structural strength; onera would conduct tests in Modane, France, wind tunnel at no cost to NASA. (NASA Release 68-104)
Harold D. Babcock, 40-yr member of Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar Observatory staffs, died. He was specialist in study of spectra of sunspots and discoverer of fact that magnetic field of sun reversed polarity periodically. (nas—nrc—nae News Report, 5/68, 10)
Rare photographic zenith tube, pzt, which provided almost exact measurement of astronomical time, had been installed at Dominion Observatory, Priddis, Alberta, Canada. It would be used in conjunction with another pzt at Royal Greenwich Observatory near Herstmonceux, U.K., to study continental drift by establishing exact measurements between two points on same latitude and observing whether distance changed with time. (Can Press, NYT, 6/15/68, 20)
nasa announced organizational change effective May 19. Functions and personnel of Procurement Management Div. of Management Operations Directorate, Office of Manned Space Flight, was transferred to Office of Industry Affairs. Procurement Office would become Program Support Div. (omsf), reporting to Director of Procurement, (nasa Ann)
Retirement of H. Julian Allen as Director of Ames Research Center, announced Oct. 25, would be deferred, NASA announced. Allen would be Special Assistant to Associate Director, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, and would serve as Acting Director of arc for indefinite period. ARC Associate Director James F. Parsons, named to be Acting Director after Allen’s retirement, had become seriously ill. Parsons died March 2, 1969. (nasa Ann, 12/2/68; arc Memo from Director to Staff, 3/3/69)
Aerospace Industries Assn, released its 1967 Annual Report, reviewing “industry’s continuing pattern of growth”: 11% increase in sales over 1966, to $27.2 billion; maintenance of 1,400,000-man work force, making aerospace industry largest U.S. manufacturing employer; and $575-million increase in exports, to $2.2 billion, including 42.9% increase in civilian aircraft, to $789 million. (Text)
NASA acknowledged it was reviewing proposed orbital flight of monkey with transplanted heart. Project was one of two based on work of Dr. Christiaan Barnard, South African surgeon and heart transplant pioneer. Second Barnard-based study would deal with effects of space flight on mechanism of rejection of foreign tissues in living organisms. Both proposals had been submitted by General Electric Co. Reentry Systems Div. (W Post, 10/16/69)
Senate confirmed appointment of Dr. Lee A. DuBridge as Director of Office of Science and Technology. (CR, S1536—7)
Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf) piloted usaf X-24.4 lifting-body vehicle on its first glide flight. The wingless craft, which depends on shape and speed for aerodynamic lift, was air-launched from a B-52 aircraft at 45,000-foot altitude and mach 0.66. Designed for maximum speed of mack 2 and altitudes to 100,000 feet, the X—24A was one of three wingless experimental vehicles in the joint usaf—nasa research program studying concepts for reusable and maneuverable reentry spacecraft.
President Nixon authorized immediate $10-million increase in expenditure ceiling placed on National Science Foundation by Johnson Administration in 1968. He said: “The colleges and universities of this Nation provide a critical resource which needs to be fostered and strengthened. Our higher educational system provides the advanced training needed for tomorrow’s leaders in science and technology, industry and government, and also conducts the basic research which uncovers the new knowledge so essential to the future welfare of the country. It is essential that these programs of education and research be sustained at a level of high excellence.” (PD, 2/10/69, 224-5)
msc Deputy Director George S. Trimble announced his resignation, effective Sept. 30, after 2% yrs with NASA. He had been Director of Advanced Manned Missions Program in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight before appointment to msc post Oct. 13, 1967. (msc Release 69-70; W Post, 8/28/69, A8; NASA Ann, 10/13/67)
Inaccurate signals from controlling gyro mechanism had caused Sept. 17 destruction of AH—56A helicopter inside wind tunnel at arc, nasa announced. Investigation board, appointed by arc Director, Dr. Hans Mark, had determined accident did not result from malfunction of rotor control system or of wind-tunnel systems and equipment. Board recommended greater use of computers to analyze rotor systems before test, study of safety systems and hazards and procedures for windtunnel crews in emergencies, and addition of metal barriers to protect control room and sections near tunnel. It said visual close observation of tests should be minimized. AH—56A was under study for stability and control at USA request. (NASA Release 69-154)
Oso VI Orbiting Solar Observatory (launched Aug. 9) was adjudged successful by NASA. All spacecraft systems had operated satisfactorily and all primary objectives had been met. Spacecraft had been operating at slightly lower than expected temperatures and elevation motor current was higher than on previous flights. As result, elevation servo jitter was less than 2 arc secs, zero to peak, best achieved on any OSO flight, (nasa Proj Off)
Dr. Vesto M. Slipher, astronomer who headed team that discovered planet Pluto in 1930 and discoverer of aurora-like radiations of night sky, died at age 93. He had been director of Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Ariz., 1916—1954. (upi, LA Times, 11/10/69)
At confirmation hearing on his appointment as Director of Office of Science and Technology before Senate Labor and Public Welfare Committee, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge said he would place his energies on analysis of weapon systems, environment and effect of technology and pollution on environment, and utilization of science and technology by Government departments. He planned to concern himself with social problems and hoped to increase social scientists on President’s Science Advisory Committee from one to two. He hoped for increased funding for hud and dot, and regretted allocations for basic research were declining in dod, NASA, and aec because such agencies “will profit by good relations with universities.” (Nelson, Science, 2/14/69, 657)
Specific objectives of lunar exploration were discussed in testimony by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Evaluation of natural resources on 14.6-million-sq-mi lunar surface would include minerals of yet undetermined nature and unique combination of high vacuum and gravitational field one-sixth as strong as earth’s. “On the results of our evaluation will depend our decision some years from now as to whether there is sufficient potential to justify establishing a lunar base.” NASA also would investigate use of moon as “island near our shores to which we can voyage ... to develop man’s potential to function as an explorer throughout the solar system.” (Testimony)
Aerospace Industries Assn, released Annual Report 1968: Aerospace industry had gained “in virtually every major category”: sales reached record $30.1 billion, up 10.5% over 1967, with turbine-powered commercial aircraft sales accounting for $3.73 billion, up 211% over 1965. General-aviation aircraft sales reached 13,698 units valued at $426 million. Civil helicopter production increased to 528 units valued at $59 million, dod sales reached $16.9 billion, up nearly 7% over 1967; nonmilitary sales decreased 3.7%, to $4,047 billion. Backlog at end of third quarter was due primarily to commercial transport orders. (Text)
Ogo VI Orbiting Geophysical Observatory, launched into low-altitude polar orbit June 5, was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had completed first diurnal cycle and had provided data on global characteristics of neutral atmosphere; association of electric fields with ionospheric irregularities; airglow emissions associated with oxygen, sodium, and molecular nitrogen; and propagation of proton whistlers. Performance of Ogo VI subsystems had been excellent and instrumentation for 23 of 25 experiments was operational. Active three-axis stabilization had been maintained since initial acquisition and gas usage was consistent with one-year operation. To extend attitude-stabilized lifetime beyond one year, operations plan had been modified to include manual control of gas jet firing, (nasa Proj Off)
Systems approach was needed in applying “human and technological resources to domestic problems,” Space/Aeronautics said. Growth areas for aerospace industry spinoff included urban, environmental, surface-transportation, medical, and ocean systems. Lessons to be learned in dealing with these systems were: (1) massive problems required efforts on massive scale; (2) R&D cycle for civil system was always longer than political cycle being counted on to support it; and (3) even when system was built jurisdictional prerogatives could “make a mess of the implementation.” Aerospace companies should employ their capabilities “to assess their experience in high technology and their managerial skills” and apply experience “to new systems challenges.” (S/A, 1/69, 106-7)
NASA announced selection of RCA Service Co. to receive two-year, costplus^award-fee contract with one-year option for logistic support to Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan), Manned Space Flight Network (msfn), and nasa Communications Network (nascom). Contract was expected to exceed $17 million, (nasa Release 69-127)
U.S.S.R.’s supersonic transport, Tu-144, made second test flight. Of 50-min duration, flight did not achieve supersonic speed, according to Pravda. (Reuters, NYT, 1/11/69, 65)
nas released Scientific Uses of the Large Space Telescope, report of ad hoc committee of nas—nrc Space Science Board appointed to consider scientific functions and practical feasibility of placing in earth orbit or on lunar surface diffraction-limited, optical telescope with 120—in aperture. Committee concluded lst would make dominant contribution to understanding content, structure, scale, and evolution of universe and provide important, decisive information in other astronomical fields; efficient space astronomy program would also require continuing series of smaller telescopes; and most effective utilization of powerful space telescope would require substantial increase in ground-based instruments. (Text)
President Nixon approved “Policy on Expanded Use of Federal Research Facilities by University Investigators” which directed Federal agencies to make equipment in Federal laboratories more readily available to qualified university scientists. He directed Dr. Lee A. DuBridge to monitor execution of policy with help of Federal Council for Science and Technology, which had recommended adoption. (PD, 3/3/69, 304)
Tass quoted unidentified Soviet space scientist, described as chief designer of automatic interplanetary stations, as saying U.S.S.R. favored manned space flight, but only in earth orbit “so far.” It would continue probing planets with automatic apparatus. (Reuters, B Sun, 5/19/69,
NASA announced selection of Heliodyne Corp. and Wolf Research and Development Corp. for final negotiations leading to one-year $1-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract with two one-year options to operate National Space Science Data Center at gsfc, (nasa Release 69-118)
New York Times editorial: “Now it appears that the solution to the cosmic ray mystery may be intimately related to the explanation for the strangest astronomical phenomena discovered in recent years, if not all history, the pulsars.” Present favored explanation “views pulsars as neutron stars composed of matter packed so tightly that a mass the weight of the earth would be a sphere with a diameter of a few hundred feet. The extremely swift rotation of a neutron star, it is now theorized, produces both the periodic radio emissions of the pulsars and the super-energetic cosmic rays.” (NYT, 5/9/69, 46)
AH—56A helicopter, under development by Lockheed California Co. for USA, was destroyed when it broke loose and moved downwind inside wind tunnel at ARC. Flying debris punctured steel wall and injured two men in control room. (NASA Release 69—154)
Two photometers on board NASA’s Ogo V orbiting geophysical observatory (launched March 4, 1968) had successfully scanned Lyman-alpha radiation, nasa announced. Data were expected to provide new information on Lyman-alpha emission from Milky Way and to help determine what portion of observed radiation was from geocorona and what portion was from outer space. On Sept. 12 Ogo V had pointed at sun and spun slowly while scanning mirror in Univ. of Paris experiment rotated, covering 30° of celestial sphere. On Sept. 14 spacecraft returned to normal three-axis-stabilized operation, where it would remain until December when second series of maneuvers would be conducted to cover remaining portion of sky and provide first complete mapping of extraterrestrial Lyman-alpha radiation. Univ. of Colorado photometer, which provided broader coverage of Lyman-alpha radiation at 180° to Univ. of Paris experiment, would be used to confirm measurements and verify calibration levels. Ogo V had 18 of 24 onboard experiments still operating. It had provided first measurements of electric fields in earth’s bow shock and comprehensive data on particles and fields in earth’s magnetosphere. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69—137)
In Bonn during European tour, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman addressed enthusiastic crowd of 1,500 students and government officials after film showing on lunar mission in Beethoven Hall: “I believe this research will teach us that we are first and foremost not Germans or Russians or Americans but earthmen.” Borman met West German Chancellor Kurt Georg Kiesinger at lunch and later discussed space research with Scientific Affairs Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg. He attended evening reception given by West German Air and Space Research Institute. (Falbe, B Sun, 2/12/69)
Laser range-finding equipment was installed at afcrl’s Lunar Laser Observatory near Tucson, Ariz. Constructed largely with nasa funding, Observatory was built specifically for lunar laser-ranging experiments. (oar Research Review, 3—4/70, 31)
NASA announced appointment of Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, as Acting Associate. Administrator for Manned Space Flight, replacing Dr. George E. Mueller. (nasa Ann)
usaf and Lockheed Georgia Co. jointly announced six-month delay in C—5A production schedule attributed to labor strikes and material shortages caused by Vietnam war. First aircraft would be delivered to USAF in December rather than June. Announcement followed successful test flight during which 250-ton aircraft reached complete stop on 1,500 ft of runway—44 distance required by conventional 85-ton airliners. (Lindsay, NYT, 2/26/69; AP, W Post, 2/27/69, A18)
Dr. Caryl P. Haskins, Carnegie Institution President, announced 40-in telescope of advanced design would be erected atop 8,000-ft Las Cam-panas Mountain in north central Chile. It would be first telescope of Carnegie Southern Observatory, which eventually would house 200-in reflector similar to that at Mt. Palomar Observatory in California. New telescope, expected to be operational in one year, would be equipped with ultrasensitive photoelectric instruments to measure light from remote sources and with digital data system. (Carnegie Institution Release)
Dr. Murray Gell-Mann of Cal Tech was named winner of 1969 Nobel Prize in physics for “fundamental work in nearly all domains of his field,” especially for “discoveries concerning the classification of elementary particles and their interactions.” Dr. Gell-Mann, who would receive $72,800 award, had introduced concept of quark—hypothetical particle from which other particles of nucleus of atom were made—and had proposed eightfold-way theory that many particles might change places and their differences from each other lay in their energy quotient. Dr. Gell-Mann was member of NASA Physics Advisory Committee from 1964 to 1969. Chemistry prize was awarded Prof. Derek H. R. Barton of Imperial College of Science and Technology in London and Prof. Odd Hassell of Univ. of Oslo for work to develop and apply concept of conformation in chemistry. (Getze, LA Times, 10/31/69; AP, W Star, 10/30/69, Al; nasa ossa)
During day climaxed by shots from what U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry called “schizophrenic” gunman, Soyuz IV and V Cosmonauts Vladimir Shatalov, Boris Volynov, Yevgeny Khrunov, and Aleksey Yeliseyev flew from Baikonur Space Center, Kazakhstan, to Moscow for Kremlin ceremony honoring success of Soyuz missions. Attack occurred as motorcade escorting cosmonauts approached Kremlin’s Borovitsky Gate. Reports said driver of cosmonauts’ limousine and security guard had been injured by bullets and that Cosmonaut Beregovoy had been slightly injured by flying glass. Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and Soviet President Nikolai V. Podgorny, riding several cars behind cosmonauts, were not injured. Western newsmen had already been admitted to Congress Hall for ceremony at which cosmonauts received Medal of the Order of Lenin. Reports said gunman had been apprehended, (upi, W Star, 1/22/69, A13; AP, W Star, 1/23/69, Al; NYT, 1/23/69, 10; Shabad, NYT, 1/24/69, 1; Shub, W Post, 1/24/69, Al)
In first large-scale attempt at radar mapping of ice-buried continent surrounding South Pole, scientists of Scott Polar Research Institute in Cambridge, England, would make at least 20 flights with airborne-radar-equipped usn C—130 Hercules aircraft from McMurdo Sound in Antarctic, New York Times said. Radar equipment already had penetrated more than 14,800 ft of ice, recording profile of mountains and valleys underneath. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/1/69, 30)
NASA announced it had extended $69,692,000 contract with Bellcomm, Inc., to provide systems analysis, study, planning, and technical support of manned space flight. Value of one-year cost-plus-fixed-fee contract extension was $11,483,000. (nasa Release 69—25)
NASA announced appointment of l/g Frank A. Bogart (usaf, Ret.) as msc Associate Director, succeeding Wesley L. Hjornevik, who had been nominated Deputy Director of Office of Economic Opportunity. Bogart would be succeeded as Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Management) at NASA Hq. by Harry H. Gorman, msfc Deputy Director (Management). (NASA Release 69—144)
President Nixon announced intention to appoint Stanford Univ. physicist Hubert B. Heffner as Deputy Director of Office of Science and Technology, succeeding Ivan L. Bennett, Jr., who had resigned. Nomination was submitted to Senate June 9. (PD, 6/9/69, 806; 6/16/69, 845)
nsf released Technology in Retrospect and Critical Events in Science (traces), report by Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute which traced key scientific events leading to five major technological innovations: magnetic ferrites, video tape recorder, oral contraceptive pill, electron microscope, and matrix isolation. In all five, nonmission, or basic, research “provided the origins from which science and technology could advance toward the innovation which lay ahead.” Approximately 70% of key events documented were nonmission research, 20% mission-oriented, and 10% development and application. Ten years before innovation-—i.e., shortly before conception of that innovation—90% of nonmission research had been accomplished. (Text)
Supercritical wing would be flight-tested on usn F—8 fighter at FRC, NASA announced. Airfoil shape had been developed in four-year wind-tunnel studies at LaRC by Dr. Richafd T. Whitcomb. If wind-tunnel performance was achieved in flight, wing could improve performance and efficiency of future aircraft, particularly jet transports. It would allow efficient cruise flight near speed of sound at 45,000-ft altitude and reduce operational cost of subsonic flights by increasing operational range or permitting less fuel and more payload on faster schedules. Supercritical wing shape was developed to delay rise of drag force and onset of buffeting at high speeds. Flattened top was designed to reduce intensity of airflow disturbances; downward curve at rear of wing supplied lift lost by flattening. Flight program would evaluate behavior of wing in actual flight with both high-lift maneuvering and off-design performance, and determine sensitivity of supercritical wing to wing-contour variations associated with manufacturing processes and deformations due to flight loads, (nasa Release 69—27)
In Science, Bryce Nelson reviewed Science Policy in the USSR, study sponsored by Directorate for Scientific Affairs of Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (oecd). It indicated, he said, that Soviet scientists and political leaders “need to spend considerable time thinking about how to correct imbalances in their R&D system.” U.S.S.R. had succeeded outstandingly in aviation rocketry, space exploration, atomic energy, machine tools, and iron and steel technology but its R&D system seemed sluggish. Main bottleneck was relative Unavailability of testing facilities. Central planning system in U.S.S.R. reinforced separation between R&D establishments and industry and contributed to reluctance of factories to innovate. Increasing use of contract system, with industries placing growing number of R&D contracts with institutions of higher learning, was helping bridge gap between research centers and industry. (Science, 2/28/69, 917—8) During February: In Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial written just before his appointment as Secretary of Air Force, incoming aiaa President, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said: “I believe that to understand adequately the challenges that confront those of us in aeronautical and aerospace activities, we must take as our perspective the commitments that challenge the nation as a whole. President Eisenhower, President Kennedy, and President Johnson, each in his own way, had a major impact on aeronautics and astronautics. And for each, his support of aerospace was a function of his belief that such efforts were instrumental in the accomplishment of national goals. In the future, as in the past, governmental support of aerospace will be based largely on its demonstrated relevance to the needs of the nation.” (A&A, 2/69, 26-7)
Eugene Luther Vidal, who as Director of Air Commerce of Dept, of Commerce (1933—1937) promoted growth of U.S. civil aviation, died, at age 73 in Palos Verdes, Calif. He had furthered construction of airports and beacons, encouraged private flying and manufacture of small aircraft, advanced commercial aviation, and reorganized Government control of commercial flights. After leaving Commerce Dept, he had established research laboratory near Camden, N.J., where he developed process for making airframe parts from molded plywood. (NYT, 2/21/69, 43)
NASA announced the supercritical wing, a new airfoil shape developed in four years of wind-tunnel studies at Langley Research Center, would fie flight-tested on a USN F-8 fighter at the Flight Research Center. Dr. Richard T. IF hit comb, inventor of the design expected to improve performance of subsonic fet transports, stood with his model in the test section of the wind tunnel at Lane. ■	Meteorite broke into fragments in air and fell near Pueblito de Allende, Chihuahua, Mexico. Scientists at MSC Lunar Receiving Laboratory and Oak Ridge National Laboratory later reported from tests of fragments that meteorite was chondrite (C3 and C4) with opaque and microcrystalline matrices. Gamma rays from short-lived isotopes were observed in specimens brought to low-background gamma counter less than 41/2 days after fall. (Science, 2/28/69, 928-9) ■	Boeing Co. test pilot Jack Waddell flew 355-ton, $20-million prototype of 490-passenger Boeing 747 jet transport from Paine Field, near Seattle, Wash., for 1 hr 15 min of scheduled 2^-hr maiden flight. Waddell returned aircraft to field after encountering “minor malfunction” of wing surface control while lowering wing flaps to 30° angle. Later he said aircraft was “a pilot’s dream” which could be “flown with two fingers” and indicated flap misalignment would not delay further testing. The 210-ft-long 747 used only 4,500 ft of runway to become airborne at 170 mph. Spectators were impressed with quietness of its engines. (W Post, 2/10/69, 1; AP, W Star, 2/10/69, A5)
M2—F2 lifting-body vehicle damaged in accident May 10, 1967, would be repaired, modified, and returned to service as M2—F3, NASA announced. Modifications would include center-stabilizing fin, special equipment for use as test bed for lateral control systems research, jet reaction roll control system, and improved internal components for precise maneuvering by pilot. M2—F3 would rejoin HL-10 and X—24 in NASA—usaf flight research program to evaluate wingless vehicles for manned horizontal landings at airfields after return from space. (NASA Release 69—15)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, addressed 25th Annual General Meeting of IATA in Amsterdam, Netherlands. “Within the next ten years we can expect the full effect of the space age to be felt. New insights into our complex environment will spur the development of new industries, new products and the new jobs which we need to gainfully employ our expanding population.” Air transportation would be one of first areas “dramatically affected” by space experience. “An inertial guidance system fundamentally the same as that which carried Apollo 11 to the moon is now being installed in the Boeing 747. Data concerning the flammability of nonmetallic materials, accumulated for use in the Apollo Modules, is being utilized for interior fittings. . . .” Other space-to-aviation transfers included composite materials to withstand stresses and temperatures not previously encountered, optical tooling for large structures, welding with new materials and by new processes in new aircraft, and general-purpose onboard digital computers. “The use of solid-state large-scale integrated circuits for multiplexing and self-checking circuits will eliminate most cabling and much maintenance.” Desired characteristics of space shuttle, which could be operational by 1976, would anticipate those of next generation of air transports, possibly, global transport “so that no place on earth would be more than an hour from any other.” (Text)
Dr. Frederick Seitz, nas President, appointed 12-member Universities Organizing Committee for Space Sciences, chaired by Frederick T. Wall, Vice Chancellor of Graduate Studies and Research at Univ. of California at San Diego. It would serve NAS as national Board of Governors of Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex., establishing policy, reviewing operations and budgets, and advising Institute’s director on program development. Committee also would draft objectives and procedures for consortium of universities operating the facilities for research, development, and education associated with space science and technology, (nas—nrc—nae News Rpt, 2/1969, 2)
NASA Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight, chaired by Dr. Charles H. Townes, published Proceedings of the Winter Study on Uses of Manned Space Flight, 1975—1985, Vol. I—■ Proceedings: NASA program for next two decades must project state of technology for that period. Program must be balanced in use of manned and automated operations. “The benefits to the nation, both internal and international, dictate that the United States remain in the forefront of all major categories of space activities,” space sciences, exploration of solar system, manned space flight capability, and economic applications of space flight. Study said it was reasonable to use to 1% of gnp to support civilian space flight program of which major elements were: (1) aggressive-automated planetary exploration program as recommended by nas—nrc Space Science Board, with options for manned phase to follow early automated phase; (2) economic applications program as recommended by 1968 Summer Study on Space Applications by nas; (3) continuation of lunar exploration after Apollo landing as recommended by Lunar and Planetary Missions Board of nasa; (4) vigorous program of astronomical observations in earth orbit as recommended by NASA Astronomy Missions Board; and (5) extension of manned space flight capability in earth orbit to longer duration for scientific and technological purposes. Achievement of manned low-cost transportation system deserved high priority. Study recommended use of long-duration manned space station designed to support men in weightless condition “unless unexpected biomedical problems are encountered or overwhelming engineering advantages for artificial gravity are discovered.” It agreed on advisability of placing observatories and laboratories in earth orbit but noted, “Relative emphasis among these activities and the extent of manned attendance desirable in each, must be decided by appropriate studies and experiments.” “To provide a focal point for structuring a manned planetary program a target date of 1982 and the Mars landing mode . . . are assumed here for discussion. Achievement of the operational capability in that year would require initiation of system design in about 1975.” (Text)
Conclusion that rings of Saturn were water ice of extraordinarily low temperature was announced by Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, Director of IJniv. of Arizona Lunar and Planetary Laboratory. Researchers had ruled out earlier theory that composition could be ammonia ice by comparing spectra of rings and ices of number of compounds. Team had studied infrared reflection of spectrum of rings with interferometer attached to 61-in NASA telescope at lpl observatory near Tucson. (Univ. of Arizona Release 6911.29 dh)
U.S.S.R. publicly demonstrated Tu-144 supersonic airliner in 90-min test flight from Moscow’s Sheremetyevo Airport. Test pilot Eduard V. Yelyan said aircraft had not yet exceeded speed of sound although it was designed for speeds to 1,600 mph (mach 2). At airport press conference Boris Savchenko, head of U.S.S.R. aircraft export agency, said production had started on 120-seat, 130-ton airliner. In New York Times, Bernard Gwertzman said observers believed purpose of demonstration was to dispel Western reports of accident to aircraft. (NYT, 5/22/69, 94; upi, W Post, 5/21/69, Cll)
NASA published A Long-Range Program in Space Astronomy: Position Paper of the Astronomy Missions Board (nasa SP—213), which Board had submitted to NASA in July. Board of 19 leading U.S. astronomers— chaired by Dr. Leo Goldberg, Harvard College Observatory Director— had been appointed by NASA in autumn 1967 to consult scientific community and propose program for 1970s. Astronomy had “far greater potential for advancement by the space program than any other branch of science.” Astronomical instruments in space could reach regions of electromagnetic spectrum unable to penetrate earth’s atmosphere; thus, “most fundamental problems of astronomy may be brought within range of solution.” Board provided guidelines for minimum balanced program costing $250 million annually in 1970s and optimum program “proceeding at fastest possible rate consistent with available scientific and technical manpower” and costing $500 million annually during same period. Proposals included “careful assignment of priorities and balanced allocation of resources in order to optimize scientific progress on such problems as the origin of the universe; the course of stellar evolution, including the ultimate destiny of the Sun and solar system; the existence of other planetary systems, some of which may support other forms of intelligent life; and other problems with deep philosophical significance which are of great interest to everyone and are therefore properly supported by public expenditure.” Board recommended increased effort in x-ray and gamma-ray astronomy using Explorer spacecraft with large payload capability; optical uv astronomy program leading to large space telescope in 1980s; r&d of detectors and small cooling systems for infrared astronomy from spacecraft to complement ground and aircraft observations; observation of astrophysical objects in longwave radio portion of spectrum; more sophisticated solar spacecraft to extend observations of solar surface and study effects of solaf activity on earth; continued observations of planets from earth orbit using OAOs and Small Astronomy Satellite; more advanced observation of interplanetary medium, cosmic rays, and magnetic fields, with astronomy instrumentation on planetary and Explorer spacecraft; and augmented experiments using aircraft, balloons, and suborbital rocket launches. (Text; nasa Release 69—149)
Some NASA scientists were helping their communities and hiding their aid projects “as tho they were sinful,” Ray Cromley said in Washington Daily News. Scientists were using space-acquired skills “to help their fellow men in ways they were uniquely qualified.” Projects included applying systems analysis to air pollution problem, planning school expansion to meet population expansion, applying systems concept to town management and to city police force problems, developing new concepts for airport planning and new technique for vandalism prevention, developing improved communications systems for city emergency departments, and helping an agency develop ways of evaluating proposals for study and development contracts with private industry. (W News, 9/4/69, 23)
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission opened three-day hearings in Los Angeles on extent of racial discrimination in aerospace industry. Commission’s figures showed only 177, or 0.9%, of 20,000 officials and managers in Los Angeles aerospace industry in 1968 were black. (Pasadena Star-News, 3/13/69)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. Hans M. Mark, Chairman of Dept, of Nuclear Engineering, Univ. of California at Berkeley, as Director of Ames Research Center. He would succeed H. Julian Allen, who had announced retirement Oct. 25, 1968, but had remained as Acting Director. Dr. Mark, expert in nuclear and atomic physics, was also Reactor Administrator of Univ.’s Berkeley Research Reactor, research physicist at Univ.’s Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, and consultant to USA and NSF. Clarence A. Syvertson, Director of Astronautics at arc, was appointed to newly created position of arc Deputy Director. Both appointments were effective Feb. 28. Because of prior commitments, Dr. Mark would spend one-fifth of his time at arc until July 1969. (nasa Release 69—32; arc Astrogram, 2/24/69, 1)
Swedish aircraft constructor Has Fancher had said that in 1944 Adolf Hitler took delivery of first Junkers 390 aircraft with 14,400-hp engine constructed specially to bomb New York, Washington Daily News reported. Fancher, pilot on aircraft’s nonstop test flight between Germany and South America, said plane weighed 93 tons with bombs and had planned range for nonstop flights from Bordeaux in occupied France to New York and return. Aircraft, delivered too late for use in war, had been burned by Germans. Comparable aircraft was not built until 1956, Fancher said. (W News, 9/3/69)
Commission on Marine Science, Engineering and Resources recommended in report Our Nation and the Sea creation of new agency, National Oceanic arid Atmospheric Agency (noaa), to coordinate and accelerate oceanology research and development. It proposed agency be composed initially of U.S. Coast Guard and Bureau of Fisheries, plus some functions of Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife, National Sea Grant Program, U.S. Lake Survey, National Oceanographic Data Center, and essa. (Pasadena Star-News, 1/12/69; Nelson, Science, 1/17/69, 263-5)
Washington Evening Star said: “As man’s horizon of space expands, the costs of maintaining an effective program expand in direct proportion. Already, the first limited steps have resulted in an economic burden that the richest nation in the world finds almost intolerable. If the adventure is to continue much longer, it will have to be as an international effort. Nixon’s inaugural statement raises the possibility that some international body, a sort of United Nations for space exploration, could be established to pool the talents and the resources of all nations. It is an idea well worth pursuing. (W Star, 2/6/69, A10)
usaf’s C—5A Galaxy jet became heaviest aircraft flown, in test flight from Dobbins afb, Ga., with 728,100-lb takeoff weight. Manufacturer, Lockheed-Georgia Co., said weight exceeded design gross takeoff load by 100 lbs. Its previous record was 703,826 lbs. (AP, W Star, 5/22/69, A5)
Astronomers at Univ. of Arizona detected for first time existence of rapidly flashing star in Crab Nebula with rhythm coinciding with that of pulsar observed by radio telescope at same position. Flashing was confirmed during week by McDonald Observatory of Univ. of Texas and by Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona. Presumably star and pulsar were identical. Discovery was first unequivocal observation of pulsar in visible light. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/21/69, 29)
In Duke Univ. lecture, Dr. Peter van de Kamp, Director of Sproul Observatory at Swarthmore College, Pa., described discovery of fourth planet-like body found outside solar system. Existence had been deduced from 30 yrs telescopic observation of irregularities in Barnard’s Star, six light years from earth. (NYT, 4/15/69, 16; AP, W Post, 4/17/69, F13)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from WSMR to conduct stellar x-ray studies. Nike-Apache carried Dudley Observatory payload and Aerobee 150 carried University of Wisconsin payload. (NASA Proj Off)
Christian Science Monitor reported interview with Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, President-elect Richard M. Nixon’s Science Adviser-designate: “The balance between manned and unmanned [space] exploration has to be studied. But there comes a time, place, and activity where the judgment and quick reaction of men are needed to do the job or make emergency repairs. There may even be situations in which it is cheaper to have men do this than to have automated instruments. That time has not yet arrived. Manned flight is still very expensive. But I foresee the time when you will run beyond the ability of automatic instruments to do a job either adequately or economically in space exploration.” (Cowen, csm, 1/17/69)
New York Times said dot had received detailed proposals for construction of 150- to 300-mph, air-cushioned vehicle guided by track or guideway. Agency hoped to design vehicle that could avoid problems of steel train , wheels and rails, which lost traction and spun at speeds of 150—200 mph. dot expected to award contract for Tracked Air Cushion Vehicle (tacv) within three months, with completion of prototype and several miles of test track by mid-1971. (NYT, 5/31/69, 46) During May: Space/Aeronautics said: “Reshaping of the budget, in combination with a flurry of new activity among NASA, the Air Force and the President’s in-house and specially commissioned science advisors, has left no doubt that the Administration favors continuation of a strong manned space flight program and a total space effort much more national in character than the current one. The latter point involves greater pressure on the Air Force and NASA to bring their future programs together, particularly in the space station and support areas. “Although manned space flight was the clear victor in the Republican amendments to the NASA budget, the surgery on the unmanned sectors was artfully performed.” Although $41 million was cut from ossa, none of it came from Earth Resources Survey satellite program. Although $14 million was cut from oart, none came at expense of nerva program. Only notable individual reductions in areas other than manned space flight came in deferral of Sunblazer program, cancellation of Biosatellite-F, and deferral for one year of new Planetary Explorer project. In net increase in omsf, NASA essentially traded off slippage in AA program for resumption of Saturn V production and insurance that lunar exploration would continue into early 1970s. (S/A, 5/69, 31-6)
nas—nrc Space Science Board had formed 13-member standing Committee on Space Medicine to respond to requests from NASA on problems in manned aspects of national space effort, nas—nrc—nae News Report said. Chairman was Dr. Shields Warren of Cancer Research Institute of New England Deaconess Hospital, Boston, who was noted for his work on effects of radiation, (nas—nrc—nae News Rpt, 5/69, 1)
nsf released Federal Support to Universities and Colleges, Fiscal Year 1967, prepared for Office of Science and Technology. Federal support to universities and colleges totaled $3.3 billion in 1967, up 9% over 1966 but below increases of 32% and 42% in previous two years. Federal support of academic science activities reached $2.3 billion, up 6%, with two-thirds for science education and institutional development and one-third for operating and plant costs for R&D projects. Nonscience activities reached $987 million, or 30% of total. While hew, Dept, of Agriculture, aec, and nsf increased aid to higher education, NASA decreased spending by $11 million (8%) and dod by $37 million (12%). (Text)	_
NAS announced formation of Universities Space Research Assn, (usra) —national consortium of 48 universities—to foster cooperation among universities, other research organizations, and Government for advancement of space research [see Jan. 10]. It would acquire, plan, construct, and operate laboratories and other facilities for R&D and education in space science and technology and had submitted proposal to NASA for management of Lunar Science Institute in Houston, Tex. Existing contract between NASA and nas would expire in autumn. (nas Release)
NASA announced award to Bendix Field Engineering Corp. of $30 million, one-year, cost-plus-award-fee contract extension for operation and maintenance of major portion of Manned Space Flight Network. Extension was third exercised under option and brought total funding to $139,215,832. (nasa Release 69—100)
Sen. Claiborne Pell (D-R.I.) introduced on Senate floor S.R. 33 calling on U.S. representatives to U.N. to place before U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Seabed and Ocean Floor set of detailed principles to govern activities in ocean space of all nations of world. Resolution was referred to Committee on Foreign Relations. (CR, 1/21/69, S597)	> Fifth of eight spacecraft launched in NASA’s oso program to provide direct observation of sun during most of 11-yr solar cycle, Oso V weighed 636 lbs, carried eight experiments, was designed with six-month lifetime, and had two main sections—wheel (lower) section, which provided stability by gyroscope spinning and housed telemetry-command equipment, batteries, gas-spin control arms, and five experiment packages; and sail (upper) Section, which contained solar cells and solar pointing experiments and was oriented toward sun. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of preceding OSO spacecraft, were provided by University College (London) and Univ. of Leicester, Univ. of Paris, Univ. of Colorado, Univ. of Minnesota, Naval Research Laboratory, and gsfc. Both tape recorders were turned on and were operating satisfactorily and all spacecraft subsystems were operating nominally, nrl wheel x-ray experiment was turned on during 11th orbit and was obtaining good data. By Jan. 29 Oso V had received 707 commands and had completed 102 orbits. All eight experiments had been turned on and obtained good scientific data. All spacecraft systems—including raster scan and both tape recorders—had operated satisfactorily. Data from gsfc x-ray experiment were being used to plot spectrum of sun. Data from NRL uv pointed experiment had been used to obtain Oso P’s first Lyman-alpha spectroheliograph. Oso I (launched March 7, 1962) and Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965) had surpassed their six-month design lifetimes and, together, provided 6,000 hrs of scientific information. Oso III (launched March 8, 1967) and Oso IV (launched Oct. 18, 1967) continued operating satisfactorily, each providing 7% hrs of real-time data daily, oso program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction. (NASA Proj Off; nasa Release 69—13)
French scientists, using “world’s most powerful laser” at Limeill Weapons Research Center of French Atomic Energy Commission near Paris, had generated succession of tiny thermonuclear explosions, Walter Sullivan said in New York Times. It was important step toward taming hydrogen bomb energy. It also underlined concern of some scientists that lasers might simplify design of devastating nuclear weapons. (NYT, 9/19/69, 1)
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge, Mass., said comet Tago-Sato-Kosaka, discovered Oct. 10 by Japanese astronomers, was being observed by astronomers in Southern Hemisphere and should be visible to naked eye throughout U.S. in mid-January 1970. It was first comet visible without telescope in more than two years, (upi, W Star, 12/14/69, A33)
Richard W. Cook, Deputy Director for Operations in Science and Engineering Directorate, MSFC, would become Deputy Director, Management, to msfc Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc announced. He would succeed Harry H. Gorman, new nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Management), for one or two years, or until permanent replacement became available. (MSFC Release 69-232)
Basic research program conducted by Dr. Wilhelm Rindner had led to development of cardiovascular pressure transducer, erc reported. Tiny device had been placed in arteries and hearts of laboratory animals to measure blood pressure while using 100 times less power than conventional devices. Medical team headed by Harvard Univ. cardiologist Dr. Bernard Lown, in collaboration with NASA, said device was significant advance in monitoring important blood flow changes. Eventually it should be possible to implant device in human beings to observe blood flow and pressure in persons suffering from hypertension and other blood pressure disorders, including heart attacks. Discovery of properties of device was made during erc study of effects of pressure on semiconductors. Properties would also be important in space applications; sensing of acceleration already had been demonstrated, (erc Release 69—9)
Federal Council for Science and Technology transmitted to nasa “Policy on Expanded Use of Federal Research Facilities by University Investigators” approved by President Nixon Feb. 21. (nasa Off of Policy Memo, 3/14/69) Vice President Spiro T. Agnew told American Management Assn, briefing on oceanography in Washington, D.C., that Nixon Administration was not yet ready to endorse concept of “a wet nasa”—marine-oriented Government agency. As Chairman of National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development he was studying opinions of advocates of such an agency, as well as [Jan. 11] report by Commission on Marine Science, Engineering and Resources. (Smith, NYT, 2/25/69, 53) February 24—March 3: First documented pulsar acceleration was discovered in Pulsar PSR 0833—45 in Vela constellation in southern sky by JPL radio-astronomers Paul Reichley and Dr. George S. Downs, using 85-foot dish antenna at Goldstone, Calif. While pulsars normally showed moderate but steady slowing in pulse rate, Vela’s rate accelerated, then slowed at slightly faster rate than before, during week’s observation. Findings in NASA-sponsored research were confirmed by Parkes Observatory astronomers in Australia, (jpl Release BB—513, 4/16/69)
nsf published Research and Development in Industry, 1967: Funds, 1967; Scientists and Engineers, January 1968 (nsf 69—28) : Historically, about 70% of U.S. R&D had been performed by industrial sector. In 1967, industry spent $16.4 billion for R&D, four and half times 1953 level of $3.6 billion. Federal agencies financed 51% of 1967 total, or $8.4 billion. Ratio was down from 1959 high of 59%. NASA and dod furnished 89% of Federal funds to industry in 1967 and supported 89% of 158,000 R&D scientists and engineers working on Federal programs in January 1968. NASA’s R&D cost was $55,400 per scientist or engineer, while DOD spent $51,600. Industry spent $8 billion of its own funds for R&D in 1967, 11% more than in 1966 and 265% more than in 1953. In January 1968, 387,900 full-time-equivalent R&D scientists and engineers were in industry sector, of which 59% worked on company-financed R&D projects. Industrial spending for basic research reached $655 million in 1967, 5% higher than previous year and more than four times 1953 level. (Text)
U.S. and France had agreed on program to launch series of 18 NikeCajun sounding rockets from France’s space center in French Guiana, French National Space Study Center announced. Launches would begin in February or March 1971. (upi, WPost, 10/5/70)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center was study mg subsfjfuf/on of a thermal reactor for the standard manifold on an automobile engine, to reduce pollution from exhaust. In the photo technician Warren A. Moore connected a temperature sensor to an experimental reactor during testing on a VS engine at LeRC. The reactor burned up the carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons formed during combustion. funds for firm orders. British and French governments had put $1.5 billion into project in seven years and were ‘‘increasingly reluctant" to see Concorde spending spiral. Result might be “that everybody concerned (except the French and British manufacturers) will be contenttosee the program slow down." British prototype 002 had been fitted with more powerful Olympus 593 engines and was undergoing runway testing. French prototype 001 was undergoing engine refitting and was scheduled to fiy again in September. Together, two prototypes had logged 225 hrs in 120 test flights. French model had logged 170 hrs in air, 30 at supersonic speeds. Neither had flown at mach 2 but this would become possible with engines now being fitted. Testing would be over 1290km (800-mi) “boom corridor” from Northwest Scotland to tip of Cornwall over Irish Sea. Flight plan called for 25 runs at mach 2 within 50 days. Measurements would be taken of sonic boom, noise level at takeoff, and smoke emission. (WPost, 8/9/70, El)
Portuguese Government announced plans to establish permanent study committee on space exploration. Committee would collect, collate, and study information on space travel, promote training of scientists and technicians, and maintain contact with world organizations on space exploration. (Reuters, WPost, 1/22/70, A7)
NASA announced selection of Bendix Field Engineering Corp. to receive $85-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for operation of 10 stations of NASA’s Manned Space Flight Network. Contract covered three years with two one-year options, (nasa Release 70-161)
dot takeover of nasa’s Electronics Research Center was discussed in Science: Since inception in September 1965, erc had built up to about 825-member staff including 420 professionals. “If the NASA and dot proponents are right it may not require so wild a transition to bring space electronics research down to earth and deploy it against problems of air traffic control. There seems to be a fair amount of optimism that the technical problems of developing effective control systems will yield to electronics research, but dot, which plans a budget of about $20 million next year for the center, is likely to encounter the practical problems of getting research funds equal to the task.” (Science, 4/3/70, 100)
Discovery of hydrogen cyanide in radio emissions from space was described by Dr. David Buhl of National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Kitt Peak, Ariz., during interview with New York Times. Dr. Buhl, with Dr. Lewis E. Snyder of Univ. of Virginia, had used 11-m-dia (36-ft-dia) dish antenna at Kitt Peak to locate second or
At NASA Hq. briefing, NASA and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory officials displayed and described 10-kg (22-lb) meteorite found by Prairie Network [see Jan. 9], Observatory’s Dr. Richard Mc-Crosky said meteorite was “not sucked into earth by gravity.” It had flamed through atmosphere on direct collision course and was “almost a direct hit. Earth’s gravity had a very little role.” Eight billion meteors struck earth’s atmosphere daily, but most burned out and only few remaining ones were discovered. NASA official said Lost City, Okla., meteorite was “freshest” ever examined. (NASA pao; WPost, 1/14/70, A7)
Bronzite chondrite meteorite weighing 10 kg (22 lbs) was found by Gunther Schwartz, field manager of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Prairie Network, near Lost City, Okla., 73 km (45 mi) east of Tulsa, six days after it had been photographed by network’s automatic cameras [see Jan. 3]. Schwartz found meteorite less than three fourths kilometer (half mile) from impact point predicted by Smithsonian Observatory scientist Dr. Richard E. Mc-Crosky. (sao Release 70-01)
Photos of falling meteorite were taken by automatic cameras at Hominy, Okla., and Pleasanton, Kans., field stations of Prairie Network operated for NASA by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Sao). Fireball was observed over large area of midwestern U.S. Observatory scientist Dr. Richard E. McCrosky later predicted from film records probable impact point near Lost City, Okla. Meteorite entered earth’s atmosphere at 56 300 km per hr (35 000 mph), creating trail that was visible for nine seconds. (SAO Release 70-01; McElheny, Boston Globe, 1/20/70)
Approximately 155 representatives from industry, universities, and government attended pre-proposal briefing on proposed High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) at MSFC. (msfc Release 70-58)
Lidar, new light detection and ranging device to detect air pollutants, was described in New York Times interview of meteorologist Ronald Collins of Stanford Research Institute. Device sent energy signal outward to bounce off air particle and return to receiver on ground. Returned signal was then translated from energy pulse into visual pattern seen on picture tube. Unlike radar, which used longer microwave, lidar used wavelengths measuring 0.6943#*, which picked up extremely small particles in concentration too thin to be seen with naked eye. It was even possible to track some gases in atmosphere with lidar. (Blakeslee, NYT, 12/14/70, 53)
DOT’S SST development environmental impact statements and comments received by DOT on draft statement from other agencies were transmitted to Council on Environmental Quality by James M. Beggs, DOT Under Secretary of Transportation. Statement, required by National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, said development of two prototype SSTs “will not give rise to any long-range environmental problems.” Possible adverse environmental consequences arising from fleet operation of SSTS represented “only possible effects on long-term productivity of environment.” Such effects “remain in the realm of speculation at this time.” Prototype development “would not involve an irreversible commitment of any environmental resources.” Prototype would demonstrate performance, economics, safety, and environmental qualities of sst design before large-scale production of ssts. Government research application to sst environmental factors included; LaRC r&d program to determine feasibility of tubular noise-suppression technique for sst engines, noise reduction and control at source program, system analysis of aircraft noise abatement, university research program to develop and expand noise research interest within educational institutions, theoretical and experimental studies of structure and turbulence levels of ssts to reduce sideline noise and turbomachinery noise, LeRC, studies of noise reduction potential of suppressors and engine cycles, and work on control and evaluation of noise on receiving end, including human factors. Other sst environmental programs were: dot-nasa-usaf high-altitude-radiation research program and noaa air-transportation atmospheric weather-modification research program. NASA and dod gave unqualified support to draft impact statement. hud said it would support prototype development on assurance that new airports would not be needed tor ssts. State Dept, felt “insufficient information exists now to negate all possible significant adverse environmental effects.” Dept, of Commerce said there were still significant questions about sst effects on climate and atmosphere. Dept, of Interior endorsed impact statement after dot had met its previous objections. (Text; dot Release)
usn F-14 Tomcat fighter aircraft crashed and burned after developing hydraulic problem during second flight from Grumman Corp. test flight facility at Calverton, N.Y. Aircraft had made maiden flight Dec. 21. Grumman Corp. officials and engineers said aircraft was not dawned by major design errors. Both pilots ejected at 90 m (300 ft) and parachuted to safety. (Hoffman, W Post, 12/31/ 70, Al)	_
nsf issued Research and Development in State Government Agencies, Fiscal Years 1967 & 1968 (nsf 70-22). State government agencies spent $131 million in FY 1967 and $155 million in FY 1968 for r&d and additional $5.1 million in 1967 and $4.5 million in 1968 for supporting r&d plant. Expenditures had grown at 20% annual rate since 1964, when expenditures were $77 million. Federal agencies provided funds for nearly one half of state agency r&d expenditures in both years. Applied research activity represented 50% of state agency r&d expenditures; development accounted for 20% of total in 1968 and basic research 23%. (Text)
Semiannual aia employment analysis said aerospace industry payrolls would drop by 374 000 persons to 1 044 000 by March 1971. Industry would remain largest manufacturing employer in U.S. despite drop from 1968 peak of 1 418 000 employees. (Corddry, B Sun, 11/12/70, A7)
MiT-sponsored group of U.S. and European scientists concluded month-long environmental study at Williams College to advise 1972 U.N. Conference on Human Environment and other national and international conferences. In preliminary report, Study of Critical Environmental Problems, group recommended that large-scale operation of supersonic transport aircraft be delayed until serious questions about potential for environmental contamination could be ' answered. Study had indicated increase of water vapor induced into stratosphere by supersonic aircraft favored formation of clouds and that fine particles from jet engine exhaust would double global averages of particles, with unknown effects. Particles reflected sunlight back into stratosphere and tended to warm it. Report recommended program to measure lower stratosphere for water vapor quantities and sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide, and hydrocarbons—fine particle matter. Study also found increasing carbon dioxide in atmosphere had caused little climate change. Earth’s oxygen supply remained fairly constant. (Webster, NYT, 8/2/70,1)	_
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Nov. 12 confirmation by jpl radioastronomers of Einstein theory of relativity: “nasa scientists who have confirmed the general relativity theory as well as the critical scientists who have thought it to be in error, have alike based their calculations on the most sophisticated and expensive
Harry H. Gorman had accepted, in permanent capacity, position of NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Management) to which he acceded in October 1969, MSFC announced. Richard W. Cook had been named to fill Gorman’s former post as MSFC Deputy Director, Management, pending Hq. approval. (MSFC Release 70-129)
ESSA announced it had assumed control of Solar Particle Alert Network (span) from NASA. Network, which originated in 1966 in support of NASA space flight programs, included observatories in Canary Islands and Carnarvon, Australia, and at essa’s Space Disturbance Laboratory in Boulder, Colo. Under ESSA management, principal observatories would have identical optical and radio solar telescopes to provide continuous coverage of sun. Three stations were connected by voice-quality communications links to allow real-time transmission of data and observations, and all stations were equipped to photograph sun in hydrogen (H-alpha) light. Stations could be supplemented by standby observatory at msc. essa also had accepted responsibility for processing, storing, and distributing photographic data and radio data from span observations, (essa Release 70-74-238)
President Nixon had asked Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Science Adviser, to explore future use of erc, Office of Science and Technology announced. (ostpio)
Establishment of Charles S. Draper Research Center and appointment of mit scientist Dr. C. S. Draper as its President were announced by Dr. Jerome P. Keuper, President of Florida Institute of Technology, site of new center. Dr. Draper would continue as Vice Director of MIT Instrumentation Laboratory, which had been renamed Charles S. Draper Laboratory, with cognizance of dod projects and responsibility for advanced technology in control navigation guidance, (fit Release)
U.S.S.R. and West Germany signed agreement in Moscow calling for exchange of scientists and direct contacts between institutes and laboratories. At news conference after signing, Chairman Vladimir A. Kirillin of Soviet State Committee for Science and Technology said countries planned to cooperate in physics, physical chemistry, astronomy, biology, medicine, oceanography, computing techniques, problems of information, and education. (NYT, 9/29/70, 3)
nsf Released Research and Development in Industry, 1968: Funds, 1968; Scientists & Engineers, January 1969 (nsf 70-29). of 36% of industrial scientists and engineers in r&d activities in January 1969, about two fifths worked on Federally financed r&d projects. For first time since 1956, companies financed over half of tneir r&d work with their own funds, spending $8.9 billion in 1968. Company funds increased 23% between 1966 and 1968, while Federal spending remained nearly level. Pattern was expected to continue from 1968 to 1970, with company r&d financing expected to rise about 20% and Federal support possibly declining slightly. In 1968, 90% of $8.6 billion in r&d funds furnished to industries by Federal agencies came from dod and NASA, dod funded 104 600 r&d scientists and engineers in 1968, at an average cost of $51 800 per r&d professional. NASA projects averaged $66 000 per r&d professional and included 35 000 persons. Industrial firms spent $3.7 billion on research, both basic and applied. Federal Government furnished 32% of these funds. In 1968, 72% of applied R&D funds was devoted to five product fields—guided missiles and spacecraft, electrical equipment and communication, aircraft and parts, machinery, and chemicals (not including drugs and medicine). (Text)
Rep. Charles H. Wilson (D-Calif.) introduced in House H.C.R. 710, “to utilize more effectively the expertise and abilities” of NASA scientists and engineers in “fight against environmental pollution.” (CR, 8/12/70, H8191)
Harold G. Miller, Chief of Mission Simulation Branch in MSC’s Flight Control Div., received AlAA’s DeFlorez Training Award in Cape Kennedy for “contributing significantly to the United States space flight programs through development of flight controller training techniques and capabilities.” (aiaa Release, 3/11/70)
Scientists at Royal Observatory in Edinburgh unveiled Galaxy, machine conceived by Dr. P. N. Fellgett of Reading Univ., Scotland, to measure star images at rate of 10 000 per hr. Machine had found 1103 stars less than 28 million yrs old in constellation Perseus, where only 15 had been found previously. Galaxy contained Elliot 4130 computer linked to 406-mm (16-in) Schmidt telescope and could measure accuracy of star’s position to one micron. British scientists said they believed machine established world lead in astronomy for U.K. (WPost, 1/21/70, A3)
Second fragment of Lost City, Okla., meteorite weighing 277.8 g (9.8 oz) had been found by farmer Philip Halpain in Lost City pasture, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory announced. It had been flown to Richland, Wash., for analysis of short-lived radioactive byproducts of radiation in outer space. (McElheny, Boston Globe, 1/20/70)
Sud-Aviation test pilot Andre' Turcat flew Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport to mach 2 (2125 km per hr; 1320 mph) for first time during 90-min, 102nd test flight from Toulouse-BIagnac Aerodrome. Soviet supersonic transport Tu-144 had flown at 2150 km per hr (1336 mph) May 26. (Farnsworth, NYT, 11/5/70, 94)
National Air and Space Museum was victim of “shocking lack of attention” by Smithsonian Institution management, Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said on Senate floor. He said that museum received “extremely meager share,” about 1.7% of $40-million-plus annual Smithsonian appropriation, and was undermanned, with “only 31 people on board.” Museum attracted at least one third of visitors to Smithsonian Park. It had no director “even though it has been 24 months since the last Director gave notice of his planned retirement”; museum had been put into arts and humanities wing of Smithsonian for years rather than being considered science and technology component; in 1969, Smithsonian management had threatened to expel museum from Mall. Most museum exhibitions were badly housed and deteriorating rapidly, and program for construction of permanent Air and Space building was ‘‘at dead center.” In words of ‘‘Paul Johnston, the last Director of the museum, the project ‘may never get off the ground.’ ” (CR, 7/22/70, SI 19116) .
During April: Science and Technology: Tools for Progress, report to President Nixon by President’s Task Force on Science Policy, was released. Report, submitted Dec. 10, 1969, recommended that President enunciate as national policy, need for vigorous, high-quality science and technology and continuing leadership in science and technology “relevant to our other national goals and purposes”; that President direct Federal departments and agencies to strengthen capability to use science and technology in attack on social, urban, and environmental problems; and that U.S. achieve effective and consistent commitment to long-range research, uninterrupted support of graduate education, improved use of Federal laboratories, and improved process for establishing priorities in Federal support of science. Report further recommended President enunicate policy of increasing long-term participation by private institutions—particularly business—in social, urban, and environmental programs and direct appropriate departments and agencies to identify deterrents to private investment of capital and technology in these programs; suggest incentives for action and remedies for each deterrent; enunciate policy of increased emphasis on r&d for national security, if necessary; and continue encouragement of new science-based foreign policy initiatives and opportunities for international cooperation. Administration should make clear policy of technical assistance to underdeveloped nations to help them establish their own scientific research, education, and technical training institutions. Task Force recommended President direct his Science Adviser to develop, for his approval, broadly-based program for continuing development of national science policy. (Text)
Flight model of Skylab multiple docking adapter was flown from msfc to Martin Marietta Corp. Space Center in Denver, Colo., aboard Super Guppy aircraft. It would be outfitted with controls and display panels for solar astronomy and earth resource experiments, storage vaults for experiment film, and thrust-attitude control system. When completely equipped, adapter would be mated with Sky-lab airlock flight version at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. in St. Louis, Mo., and unit would perform simulated mission in altitude chamber, (msfc Release 70-237; msfc pio )
Concorde 002, British prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport aircraft, reached its fastest speed—1600 km per hr (1000 mph) during test flight. French Concorde 001 had already reached 1600 km per hr. (Reuters, NYT, 8/24/70,6)
The U.S. Navy's F-14 Tomcat fighter made a successful /0-minute maiden flight from the Grumman test flight facih'ty in Ca/verfon, N.Y. Capable of mach 2 speeds, the F-14 would be successor to the F-4 Phantom and the F-l I IB. composed of quadrants separated by explosives lining seams. Each panel had to be ejected without touching Skylab vehicle in flight. Plum Brook vacuum chamber had been selected for shroud test because tank, 36.6 m (120 ft) tall and 30.5 m (100 ft) wide, could produce hard vacuum equivalent to 483-km (300-mi) altitude and easily house shroud 17 m (56 ft) high and 6.7 m (22 ft) wide, (nasa RgIc&sc 70-214)	■
NASA announced selection of Computer Sciences Corp. for $5 million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to provide programming and computer support services for Manned Space Flight Network (msfn) Central Computing System at gsfc. Contract covered two-year period, preceded by six-month phase-in, with option for one-year extension. (NASA Release 70-187)
nsf released Federal Support for Research and Development at Universities and Colleges and Selected Nonprofit Institutions, FY 1968: A Report to the President and Congress (nsf 69-33). Federal Government had obligated $1.4 billion for r&d in FY 1968—5% increase over FY 1967. Average annual increase of Federal obligations to universities and colleges for r&d 1955-1967 had been over 21%. Dept, of Agriculture and dod reported cutbacks in academic R&D funding in FY 1968, including $21 million in defense R&D. Number of academic institutions receiving Federal support rose 8%, from 573 in FY 1967 to 620 in FY 1968. One hundred top-ranking institutions received 93% of R&D totals obligated by NASA and aec and 88% of dod r&d total in 1968. mit was largest recipient again, with $80 million, “three-fourths of which was obligated by dod and NASA.” (Text)
Full-scale hypersonic research engine (hre) under development by NASA was tested for first time in 8-Foot High-Temperature Structures Tunnel at LaRC. Mach-7.4 speed was reached at temperature of 1800 K (2000°F) and pressure of 6.2 meganewtons per sq m (900 psi). NASA project would demonstrate technology needed for engines to propel future aircraft at hypersonic speeds—more than five times speed of sound. (Pres Rpt 71; NASA Photo Release 70-H-1362)
U.S.S.R. was constructing astrophysical observatory atop 5633-m (18 481 -ft) Mt. Elbrus in Caucasus mountains to house 599-cm (236in) altazimuthal telescope, Los Angeles Times said. Instrument would be largest optical telescope in the world. Its mirror would be tested in autumn 1971, with observations to begin in autumn 1972. Telescope would be used for extragalactic exploration; study of nebulae and stars, particularly faint stars; and planetary research. (Bengelsdorf, LA Times, 2/17/70)
House Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development submitted to Committee on Science and Astronautics Technology Assessment: Annotated Bibliography and Inventory of Congressional Organization for Science and Technology. Bibliography was designed to identify selected items on technology assessment as part of public policy. Citations dealt with concept of technology assessment, proposals made for organization of technology assessment mechanisms in Government, and examples of technology assessments completed or in progress. (Text)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Nixon Administration’s cut in space funding: “The lowering of the sights in space is regrettable. It is unfortunate that, with the new frontier now open to us, we cannot move out to the full extent of our technical ability. But the decision to cut down on expenditures and to spread out the enormous cost of space exploration was no mistake. ... The planets and the ocean of space beyond have endured for quite some time. They will wait undisturbed for man’s intrusions. The economy is not so accommodating.” (W Star, 1/17/70, A4)
President Nixon announced transfer of Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, Mass., from NASA to DOT, effective July 1. James C. Elms would continue as Director and Center would be renamed Transportation Development Center. Later, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced dot would use center for r&d efforts on systems and equipment to automate air traffic control system more highly, economically feasible collision avoidance system for commercial and private aircraft, sensors to measure and monitor air pollution caused by transportation elements, automatic landing systems for aircraft, system analysis on urban transit systems and highway traffic control, ocean-data buoy systems to transmit weather and oceanographic data, and auto-driver simulation systems to study accident causes and prevention. (PD, 3/30/70,446; dot Release 6870)
Concorde 002, British prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport, reached mach 1.54 speed in test flight over North Sea. Concorde 002 flew for two hours at 12 500-m (41 000-ft) altitude in seventh flight of series to prove aircraft could fly at up to 2250 km per hr (1400 mph). (AP, B Sun, 8/30/70)
AIAA Board of Directors meeting in Denver Colo., created two new committees: Technical Committee on Application of Aerospace Technology to Society would report through Technical Activities Committee (tac); Committee on International Cooperation in Space Flight would “foster international cooperation in space activities among the engineers and scientists of the world.” (A&A, 6/70,76)
Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) certified establishment of two space flight records by U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz VI, VII, and VIIImission (Oct. 11-18, 1969). One was for group flight of two spacecraft, with five men logging 35 hrs 19 min 33 secs over 989 242-km (614 685.3-mi) distance. Second was for group flight of three spacecraft, with seven men for 4 hrs 24 min 29 secs over 123 425 km (76 692.6 mi). (SBD, 4/27/70,268; fai)
Pravda said new 3-m (10-ft) wide telescopic mirror being installed at Zelenchuk Observatory in northern Caucasus could pick up glimmer of candle 24 900 km (15 500 mi) from earth and enable astronomers to see parts of universe never before viewed by man. Largest of its kind, mirror was cut from 64-metric-ton (70-short-ton) mass of glass and was cooled in furnace from 518 K (472°F) to room temperature during 18-mo casting period. (Reuters, B Sun, 6/27/70)
Dr. W. Ross Adey, head of ucla Brain Research Laboratory and principal investigator for NASA Biosatellite III primate experiment launched June 28, 1969, had filed $2-million defamation of character suit against United Action for Animals, Inc. (antivivisectionist group), Washington Post reported. Group had accused Dr. Adey of “savagery” in death of Bonny, pigtailed monkey used in experiment. Suit had been prompted by feeling among researchers that attacks on scientists by antivivisection movement should be discouraged. (Auerbach, WPost, 9/19/70)
President Nixon sent to Congress annual report on marine resources and engineering development. Budget request for FY 1971 would provide $533.1 million for marine science and technology activities to improve management of coastal zone, expand Arctic research, develop program for restoring damaged lakes, expand collection of data on ocean and weather conditions, and undertake other projects. Funds also would support U.S. participation in International Decade of Ocean Exploration. (PD, 4/13/70, 518)
Mt. Palomar Observatory and Mt. Wilson Observatory were collectively renamed Hale Observatories, in honor of founder George E. Hale. As California facilities operated jointly by Cal Tech and Carnegie Institution of Washington, Mt. Palomar housed 5080-mm (200in) Hale telescope, world’s largest optical telescope, and Mt. Wilson, 1524-mm (60-in) reflection telescope, (upi, W News, 1/19/70, M) .
Fvii-scate hypersonic research engine (Hre) was tested for the first rime in Langley Research Center’s 8-Foot High-Temperature Structures Tunnel, which produced a stream of hot gases moving faster than seven times the speed of sound, nasa project would demonstrate technology needed for future hypersonic aircraft. The test engine incorporated advanced technology in structure and materials and a cooling system that circulated liquid hydrogen through engine parts to protect them from the intense heat of hypersonic Sight. Coolant was then burned as fuel. tacular areas. And while politicians may glare at each other, the technologists are finding common interests.” (NHav Reg, 10/20/70) October 21: Two solid fuel rockets, carrying cloud-measuring payload triggering device, were launched from ksc in lightning study, but electrical field was too low for triggering payload to ignite lightning discharge. Launches were first in NASA Mighty Mouse program being conducted by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency to study feasibility of discharging lightning potential from clouds before lightning could damage vulnerable areas, such as launch pads. (KSC Releases 354-70,337-70)
Imaging photopolarimeter for Jupiter probe was being developed by Santa Barbara Research Center for ARC, Armed Forces Journal reported. Instrument for Pioneer F and G spacecraft to be launched in 1972 and 1973 would map density and distribution of “asteroidal debris,” measure gas above Jupiter’s cloud layers, and transmit two-color spin-scan images of planet. (AFJ, 2/7/70, 2)
Observation of nighttime lightning activity from Oso II orbiting solar observatory (launched Feb. 3, 1965) by monitoring light in 10° field of view of four telescopes was described in Science by Univ. of California at Berkeley physicists. Positions of nighttime thunderstorms determined from detection of optical radiations by Oso II had revealed that 10 times as many lightning storms occurred over land areas as over sea. (Vorpahl, Sparrow, Ney, Science, 8/28/70,860-2)
Science editorial noted that President’s Council of Economic Advisers had projected increase in Federal expenditures from $189 billion in 1970 to $206 billion in 1975. It was “within this budgetary situation—one so cramped as to allow little room for maneuvering—that future research funds must be considered. The President’s budget for 1971 calls for $15.8 billion of R&D funds, an amount which constitutes a smaller percentage of the total federal budget than in any year since 1959. Research and development funds hit a high of 12.6 percent of the federal budget in 1965 and have been decreasing by an average rate of 0.8 percentage point a year, to 8.7 percent in 1970 and a requested 7.8 percent in 1971. Any statistical projection of r&d funds for the next several years looks bleak, and there is little that can be done to improve matters for the coming year.” (Wolfle, Science, 4/3/70, 69)
Discovery of cyano-acetylene molecules in gas cloud Sagittarius B2 near center of Milky Way was announced by Dr. Barry E. Turner of National Radioastronomy Observatory in Green Bank, W. Va. Discovery, made through radiotelescopes on earth, suggested that planets and life were being created in Milky Way galaxy and brought to seven the number of chemical radicals (incomplete molecules) and chemical molecules found in deep space. Dr. Turner said radio emissions from cyanoacetylenes, most complex chemicals yet found in space, were stronger than background radiation filling all of space. He thought they were remnants of radiation from fireball that created the universe billions of years ago. (O’Toole, W Post, 10/4/ 70, A5)
Gen. James Ferguson, AFSC Commander, discussed role of military in current controversies over cost and efficiency of F-lll and C-5A aircraft during Seventh Space Congress at Cocoa Beach, Fla.: “If we in military development have been remiss, I would say it is because we not only failed to fully communicate the difficulties involved in pushing the state of the art, but we also neglected to stress the uncertainties between known design parameters on paper and the hardware that ultimately results. To the intense competition for finite resources, and to a flood of paper studies, we reacted with overoptimism and neglected to properly qualify the normal uncertainties of development or the technical risks involved.” Advancing state of the art was “synonymous with working beyond the boundaries of the certain and the known. As long as we operate at these outer limits of science and technology, performance, schedule and cost are inevitably going to be, at best, elastic parameters. The alternative is to stand pat with the F-4, the B-52, and the C-141. Such an alternative would be hardly supportable in even a static world.” (Text)
Discovery of carbon monoxide in five regions of Milky Way was made by scientists of Bell Telephone Laboratories using National Radio Astronomy Observatory telescope at Kitt Peak, Ariz. Carbon monoxide was sixth molecular substance identified in outer space. nsf later said discoveries would “stimulate further work by chemists as well as astrophysicists, looking toward better understanding of the chemical processes taking place in space, and eventually more knowledge of the possibilities of life elsewhere in the universe.” (upi,W Star, 4/11/70, A14)
Dr. Cyril A. Ponnamperuma, heading a team of Ames Research Center Scientists, reported the first positive identification of amino acids formed outside the earth's environment. A meteorite that fell near Murchison, Australia, Sept. 28, 1969, was found to contain these constituents of living cells and was probable proof of extraterrestrial chemical evolution—chemical processes preceding the origin of life. research project under way to insure against damage. Further progress on tne part of the United States in the sst field will give this country a much stronger voice with regard to any iong range effects on the environment than if we permit other nations to take over the entire field. . . .The sst is an airplane that will bp built and flown. The issue is simply which nation will build them." (PD, 12/7/70, 1630)
Soviet and West German talks on future cooperation in science and technology would begin in Moscow in November, Hans Leussink, Minister of Science and Education in Bonn, West Germany, said at news conference. (NYT, 10/1/70,6) During September:	Scientists at frc, LaRC, arc, and msfc were conducting flight-test programs and studies into ways to alleviate trailing vortex hazards from large transport aircraft, NASA reported. Research was concentrating on understanding trailing-vortex-sys-tem movement and attenuation for different aircraft, operation modes, and meteorological conditions; developing remote monitoring technique for trailing-vortex position and wind intensity; and discouraging formation of high-density vortices by aircraft design or artificially induced impedances. Theoretical descriptions of trailing-vortex-system behavior would be developed from flight-test programs at frc and LaRC. arc was experimenting with wing design to reduce trailing-vortex intensity and with effects of induced impedances near aircraft path. MSFC was attempting to adapt laser Doppler technology to flight research programs and to development of remote monitor for trailing vortices in airport areas. (NASA Aviation Fact Sheet, 9/70)
In Astronautics and Aeronautics, Herbert Friedman discussed pulsars and their implications in new astronomy. “Even with the modest payloads of small rockets it is possible to instrument for pulsar detection at periods as short as 1 millisecond.” X-ray astronomers had been eager to have NASA provide program of high-energy astronomy payloads in 4500- to 9000-kg (10 000- to 20 000-lb) class that would be launched by vehicles of Titan-Centaur capability. Large x-ray detector could “very likely detect thousands of weak sources and discover high-frequency pulsar characteristics, if present. Such a program,” heao (High Energy Astronomy Observatory), “was to have begun in 1970 but has been a casualty of the present budgetary squeeze.” (A&A, 4/70, 22-5)
Four Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched by NASA from Kiruna, Sweden, carrying AFCRL and Dudley Observatory payloads to study noctilucent clouds. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Article by woman cosmonaut Valentina V. Tereshkova-Nikolayava published in January UNESCO magazine Impact asserted equality of sexes in space, New York Times reported. Cosmonaut—who had orbited earth 48 times in June 16-19, 1963, mission—said that “a woman can stand all the conditions of space flight as well as a man.” Women had endured silence and isolation as well as men and had adapted to weightlessness more quickly, although takeoff and landing of spacecraft should be timed to consider menstrual cycle. (NYT, 4/4/70,20)
Soyuz IX Cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Vitaly Sevas-tyanov returned to Moscow and complained of having “heavy bodies” in adjusting to earth gravity after 17-day space flight and 1 day on ground. Doctors escorted cosmonauts to hotel for extensive physical examinations and start of 10-day debriefing. Later Tass said cosmonauts were “quickly adapting. What was heavy an hour ago is becoming light.” Initial results of debriefing under precautionary quarantine indicated “condition of health, working efficiency and the general tone of the cosmonauts are much higher than medical men expected.” (upi, C Trib, 6/21/70; W Post, 6/21/70, A22)
By vote of 180 to 37, House passed H.J.R. 1421 making further continuing appropriations for FY 1971. Resolution would provide additional $51.7 million to DOT for SST development funding through March 30,1971. (CR, 12/31/70, H12603-6; NYT, 1/1/71,1) During December: Discovery of two galaxies possibly only 10 million yrs old—one thousandth the age determined for galaxies under “big bang” theory that all material in universe had exploded in one place 10 billion yrs ago—was reported in Astrophysical Journal by Hale Observatory astronomers Dr. Wallace L. W. Sargent and Dr. Leonard Searle. Galaxies, about 100 light years in diameter against 100000 for larger galaxies, contained only 1000 to 100 000 stars of short-lived blue type. Milky Way galaxy contained 10 billion stars, including those capable of living billions of years. If newly discovered galaxies were young, they would provide first evidence that galaxies evolved from infancy to old age and that galaxies could be created after “big bang.” Dr. Sargent and Dr. Searle tentatively concluded that galaxies were “dense intergalactic clouds of neutral hydrogen in which the formation of massive stars is proceeding vigorously while the formation of low-mass stars is suppressed.” (As-trophysical Journal, 12/70, LI 55-9)
NASA announced selection of Hughes Aircraft Co. for $22-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for new, more advanced series of Orbiting Solar Observatory (OSO) spacecraft, Hughes would deliver three flight spacecraft, oso I, J, and k, for missions in 1973, 1974 and 1975; provide ground support equipment; and perform launch services. (NASA Release 70-218)
First radar receiver developed by Naval Research Laboratory scientists was presented to Smithsonian Institution’s Hall of Electricity by Capt. James C. Matheson, Director of nrl. Device had been successfully tested first on April 28, 1936, when it detected and ranged aircraft in flight at 40-km (25-mi) distance. (Naval Research Reviews, 7/70, 31)
msfc announced appointment of Robert E. Lindstrom as Deputy Director of Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory, Science and Engineering Directorate. Lindstrom had worked in aerospace industry since his resignation from NASA in 1963. (msfc Release 70-10)
Feasibility of high-speed, efficient, digital message transmission through troposphere had been confirmed by afsc scientists, afsc announced. Findings were result of research program conducted at AFSC Rome Air Development Center near Niagara Falls, N.Y. (AFSC Release 151.70)
Financial plight of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. was “symptomatic of a far more pervasive malaise spreading in the aerospace industry,” Robert A. Wright said in New York Times. Because of “intricate interwoven pattern” of subcontracting common to large defense programs, Lockheed’s problems would affect other companies including 2000 that supplied or made parts for C-5A cargo aircraft. “In the current atmosphere of defense spending cuts and political criticism of the so-called military-industrial complex, the attention generated by Lockheed’s problem is unlikely to enhance the poor prospects of the depressed aero-space industry.” (NYT, 4/12/70, FI)	.
Concorde 002, British prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport, reached mach 1.68 (1770 km per hr; 1100 mph) and created double sonic boom in test flight over Oban, Scotland. It was first time British Concorde had broken sound barrier in current test series. No sonic boom damage was reported. (AP, W Post, 9/2/70, A19)
Decline to 2.3%—lowest point in several years—of U.S. aerospace industry profits in first quarter of 1970 was reported by Space Business Daily. Net income of entire manufacturing industry had declined, but profits remained at 4.0%. Aerospace backlog at first quarter’s end was $27.1 billion, off $1.2 billion from end of preceding quarter, and down $4.3 billion from end of first quarter of 1969. (SBD, 10/16/70,199)
Use of radiotelescopes to identify pollutants in atmosphere had been advocated by astronomers Dr. David Buhl of National Radio Astronomy Observatory and Dr. Lewis E. Snyder of Univ. of Virginia, Washington Evening Star reported. Astronomers believed pollutants from oxides of nitrogen to sulfur dioxide and small particles could be measured day and night in all weather at low cost, but radioastronomers did not have background “to do the chemistry.” They recommended modification of equipment to survey regional atmosphere or known polluting sources unattended, by use of receivers feeding into computerized data banks via microwave links. Identification and quantification of pollutants could be instantaneous and single-dish antenna could be electronically controlled to “sweep” wide range of pollutants at regular intervals. (Lannan, W Star, 8/10/70, A4)
MSFC announced selection of Grumman Aerospace Corp. and TRW Systems Group for negotiation of $250 000 fixed-price contracts for one-month definition and preliminary design studies of 10 000-kg (22 000-lb) High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao), scheduled for launch in 1972. MSFC also announced award of three contracts for continuation of nuclear shuttle definition studies: $343 000 to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for completely modular concept with earth-to-or-bit shuttle to transport modules for in-space assembly; $245 000 to NR Space Div. for nuclear stage with 10-m (33-ft) diameter to be orbited by Saturn V and refueled by earth-to-orbit shuttle; and $282 000 to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. for both types, (msfc Releases 70-97, 70-98)
Identification of molecule magnesium tetrabenzporphine in outer space as forerunner of chlorophyll by Dr. Fred M. Johnson, California State College spectroscopist, was reported in Washington Post. Dr. Johnson had analyzed spectral lines taken of Milky Way from Lick Observatory optical telescope during 18-yr effort to identify nitrogen-bearing hydrocarbons among hydrogen clouds in interstellar space. He had succeeded after analyzing spectral line surrounding hot, young star in Orion constellation. Finding, Dr. Johnson believed, might provide clue to building blocks of life in universe. “Whatever mechanism occurs here occurs throughout the universe and you can be sure it occurs in the solar system.” (O’Toole, W Post, 10/26/71, A3)
NASA announced it had issued RFPs for automated HEAO to study high-energy radiation from space. Proposals were due Aug. 27 at msfc and contract would be awarded early in 1972 if heao became approved project in FY 1972. Single contract for two spacecraft would continue through launch and mission operations support for seven years. Contract called for system engineering of heao payload; design and development of spacecraft; procurement and integration of orbit adjust stage and shroud; integration of experiments; design, development, and delivery of one set of heao ground support equipment; and launch operations support. Winning contractor also would provide mission operations support for observatory for up to two years for each mission, (nasa Release 71-127)
MSFC announced selection of Itek Corp. to perform large space telescope definition study under $400 000, 12-mo contract. High-resolution optical telescope 3 m (120 in) in diameter would be placed in 630- to 810-km (391- to 503-mi) orbit aboard research and applications module (ram) by reusable shuttle vehicle or Titan III launch vehicle in late 1970s as national facility for operation by many astronomers. (msfc Release 71-219)
First combination of modern radar data from observations of inner planets with existing optical observations of sun and planets made between 1750 and 1970 had shown that Pluto’s mass could not be determined reliably from existing data, MIT scientists M. E. Ash, Irwin I. Shapiro, and W. B. Smith reported in Science. Total 300 000 measurements had been made during experiment which also included available observations of asteroids Eros and Icarus. Radar data were from MIT’s Millstone Hill and Haystack facilities; optical data were from original observatory reports transformed over six years into machine-readable form. Results had shown “insufficient basis for the widespread conclusion that Pluto’s average density is greater than, or even comparable to, the earth’s.” (Science, 11/5/71, 551-6)
President Nixon in message transmitting FY 1972 budget to Congress said: “Science and technology can make major contributions to the public by developing creative solutions to a wide range of national problems.... I am proposing in this budget a substantial expansion in outlays for federally supported research and development.” President recommended increased funding to “make greater use of our scientific and engineering capabilities and resources to cope with.. . pollution, crime, health, transportation, and other environmental and social problems; strengthen research essential to the advancement of our technology and economic productivity; and increase our investment in fundamental science which leads to the long-term progress of our society.” President recommended increase in nsf budget from $506 million in 1971 to $622 million in 1972. In 1972, defense spending would increase but, even with increase, would “drop from 36% of total spending in 1971 to 34% in 1972.” Human resources programs’ share would be 42% of total. Budget proposed “sharing Federal revenues with States and communities,” “national strategies to improve health care” and to ensure “an income floor for every family,” and efforts toward “full-employment in peacetime with relative price stability.” (PD, 2/1/71, 130-9)
Discovery of hydroxyl molecule in interstellar dust between stars of M—82 and NGG—253 galaxies 97 billion km (60 billion mi) from earth by use of big dish radio telescopes, was reported by Dr. Leonid N. Weliachew, visiting fellow at Cal Tech from Meudon Observatory in France. Discovery implied that chemical evolution was proceeding throughout universe. Hydroxyl was considered a chemical essential to evolution of life, (latns, W Post, 7/15/71, A3; B Sun, 7/19/71)
Moscow Trud published account of test flight by Soviet pilot Oleg Gudkov of new supersonic fighter aircraft to ascertain whether aircraft could be brought out of spin. Test had been successful. (fbis-Sov—71-149, 8/3/71, Ml)
Aerospace industry sales continued anticipated decline in 1971, to $23.3 billion from $24.9 billion—decrease of 6.3%. Commercial aerospace sales, primarily jet transports, increased 7.1% in 1971, from $4,578 in 1970 to $4,903 billion. Increase reflected increased deliveries of wide-bodied jet transports. Space sales continued decline, to $3,220 billion from $3,580 billion in 1970. Aerospace industry remained nation’s largest manufacturing employer during 1971, despite continuing drop in employment from 1 069 000 workers in December 1970 to estimated 931 000 in December 1971. (Aerospace, 12/72, 3-5)
NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from wsmr. One carried Univ. of Colorado and gsfc experiment to study airglow, and one carried Dudley Observatory and gsfc experiment to collect micrometeoroids. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
usaf X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Cecil A. Powell (usaf) in joint nasa-usaf research program, reached 21000-m (70 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.35 during 26th flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft from frc. Objectives were to determine lateral-directional derivative with rudder bias at 2° toe out, check out lateral acceleration feedback to control system, and check out automatic mach schedule for upper flaps, (nasa Proj Off)
nasa announced it had begun joint program with USA Air Mobility Research and Development Laboratory to develop flight research vehicle to test various rotors in actual flight under controlled conditions with provision for extensive engineering measurements during maneuvers. LaRC had issued rfps for two parallel design studies requiring 10 mos to determine feasibility of attaining Government’s research goals and provide development plan for further phases of program. Joint NASA-Army team would base detailed specifications for vehicle preliminary-design competition on results of predesign studies. (NASA Release 71—152)
NASA released Goals and Means in the Conquest of Space by R. G. Perel’man (nasa Technical Translation F-595 dated May 1970). Translation of Tseli i Puti Pokoreniva Kosmosa, “Nauka” Press, Moscow, 1967, concluded: “The time will come when space liners will be sent across interstellar routes, but the achievements of Soviet science and technology will never be forgotten, since they first made it possible for man to set foot in the universe, and since the labor of every Soviet citizen is involved.” (Text)
Perspective in science funding was drawn by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator, in Science editorial: “The funding proposed for 1972 for basic science ($2.4 billion), or even that for the entire space exploration program ($3 billion), is a very small fraction of the funding that is proposed for efforts to ameliorate societal problems today ($90 billion). The real need is not so much for additional dollar attention as it is for attention of a different kind. Ideas, new approaches, and new insights into the wise management and utilization of our human and natural resources are what is required. Many experimentally before application to human patients recovering from open heart surgery, (nasa Release 71-69)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate James H. Wakelin, Jr., as Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology succeeding Myron Tribus, who had resigned in November. Nomination was submitted to Senate Jan. 25. (PD, 1/25/71, 84; 2/1/71, 141)
Retirement of Jerome F. Lederer as NASA Director of Safety Jan. 14, 1972,	was announced by NASA. Internationally recognized authority on air and space flight safety had joined NASA as Director of Flight Safety for omsf June 1, 1967, after having been Director of Flight Safety Foundation since 1947. Lederer, who had received NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1969, would return to Flight Safety Foundation as part time consultant, (nasa Release 71—224)
Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory, launched by NASA Sept. 29, had completed more than 850 orbits of the earth and was officially adjudged a success. Primary objective, to obtain high-resolution data from solar corona in particular spectral bands in EUV and in visible regions during one solar rotation, had been achieved. Fulfillment of secondary objective, of investigating intensity and spectrum of solar and cosmic x-rays from nonpointed instruments beyond one solar rotation, continued. All spacecraft systems, including star-tracker— gyro night-pointing feature new to OSO—had operated satisfactorily. Tape recorder No. 1, inoperative when first interrogated on seventh orbit, had not recovered despite several attempts to operate unit. Tape recorder No. 2 had performed required data storage and readout functions satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
usaf YF-12 aircraft, one of two in joint nasa-usaf aeronautical research program to advance technology of supersonic military and civil aircraft, crashed on routine flight from Edwards AFB, Calif. Both pilots parachuted to safety. Coincidentally, nasa announced addition of another usaf YF—12 to program. New aircraft was specially instrumented for inflight propulsion studies of engine internal flow dynamics, propulsion and airframe interreactions, air inlet dynamics, atmospheric turbulence and temperature variations, rapid airflow changes, and factors affecting inflight stopping and restarting of engines, (afsc pio; frc Release 16-71; Aero Daily, 6/28/71, 316)
Three men would spend up to 56 days in MSC altitude chamber in early 1972 to obtain medical data and evaluate medical experiment equipment for Skylab program, NASA announced. Test would closely simulate Skylab conditions so that differences observed during actual flight might be attributed to causes such as weightlessness which could not be simulated in chamber tests. Test would evaluate 16 medical experiments and selected items of experiment equipment and aid in training ground-based medical operations team for their participation during actual space flight. Chamber was 6 m (20 ft) in diameter and was being modified to resemble Skylab Workshop crew quarters. Atmosphere would be 70% oxygen and 30% nitrogen at 34.5 kilonew-tons per sq m (5 psi) pressure with 45% to 60% humidity, (nasa Release 71-86)
msfc announced it was checking out extreme uv coronal spectroheliograph, first flight instrument to be delivered for atm solar observatory. Instrument was one of two designed by Ball Brothers Research Corp. from nrl concepts. Second nrl flight instrument—extreme uv spectrograph—would be shipped to msfc in March 1971. (msfc Release 71-7)
British Aircraft Corp. said in London that Concorde test flights had “met with success unique in the annals of commercial aircraft flight development.” bac chief test pilot Brian Truhshaw told press conference he was optimistic since British and French prototypes had flown total 393 hrs 56 min, including 92 hrs 35 min at supersonic speeds. Aircraft had maintained directional stability at twice speed of sound and on stalling two of its four engines at same speed. Modifications would he made on nacelles before next phase of test flights because of Jan. 22 incident to French prototype 001 at mach 2 over Atlantic. Air pressure had broken off forward intake ramp of No. 4 engine and engine had fallen off into sea. (Berger, B Sun, 2/16/71, C6)
usn announced cause of Dec. 30, 1970, crash of F-14 Tomcat fighter aircraft on second test flight was two pencil-thin hydraulic lines that ruptured after severe vibration. Findings confirmed those of aircraft manufacturer, Grumman Aerospace Corp, usn said problem could be corrected without major redesign or changes. (AP, NYT, 2/15/71, 44)
Impact of aerospace industry slump and termination of lunar excursion module project on Grumman Corp. and Long Island, N.Y., area was described by New York Times. With 26 000 employees, Grumman Corp., “reaches out into every corner of the economy of Nassau and Suffolk Counties and, as one of the nation’s largest aerospace combines, even far beyond those two counties that jointly claim Grumman as their own.” Nearly 1000 subcontractors depended on Grumman’s patronage. Firm was “largest real estate taxpayer in Nassau County, the largest customer for the Long Island Lighting Company and hundreds of smaller corporations. And in salaries for its employes alone it pumps nearly a third of a billion dollars each year into the Long Island economy.” Grumman figures indicated that for every person laid off, 4Y2 persons somewhere in U.S. economy lost their jobs, including 2V2 in Nassau or Suffolk Counties. From December 1969 to December 1970 nearly 5700 persons at Grumman had lost jobs; 14 250 elsewhere on Long Island had lost jobs as result. (Andelman, NYT, 10/21/71, 45)
nasa announced reorganization of Office of Manned Space Flight to reflect new management requirements for future manned flight programs. Reorganization established two new technical support offices, Engineering and Operations Office and Quality and Safety Office; established two functional offices, Administration Office and Program Analysis Office; and abolished Mission Operations, Field Center Development, Institutional Operations, and Space Medicine organizations. m/g John D. Stevenson (usaf, Ret.), Director of Mission Operations, became Deputy Director of Engineering and Operations. Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Director of Field Center Development, became Special Assistant to Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Space Medicine Office had been combined with other life science activities under Dr. James W. Humphreys, Director of Life Sciences, as announced Dec. 3, 1970. (nasa Release 71-10)
msfc announced award of $2 249 700, one-year contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to supply and deliver liquid hydrogen for all Government aerospace use in eastern U.S. (msfc Release 71—55) During March: Prestige of U.S. science was being undermined by assaults from many sides—which might leave U.S. “a second-rate power and a third-rate place to live”-—Lawrence P. Lessing wrote in Fortune article. Funds had been “damagingly cut in such basic areas as the life and medical sciences . . . while a large amount of advanced but abstract technology, which could begin to solve the problems of overcrowding, energy, pollution, transportation, and waste, . . . are going neglected.” New hostility to science and technology had arisen among many “ordinary Americans,” even from within science itself, and among young activists. But if man’s store of knowledge were torn down, man would “backslide not a few centuries but two hundred thousand years.” Severe cutback in research and development because of Vietnam war, inflation, and contracted economy—with Federal r&d expenditures declining in real dollars by more than 20%—possibly endangered whole structure of science. Decline followed post-World War II growth that had produced antibiotics, atomic power, cryogenics, computers, jet planes, rocket vehicles, radar, transistors, masers, and lasers and had spurred U.S. to do its own basic research. “From . . . only a sparse dozen Nobel Prizes in the forty years up to 1940, U.S. scientists went on in the next thirty years to win forty-five.” “While men and talent are . . . going to waste the things that need doing . . . keep piling up.” U.S. was beginning to lag behind other nations in high-energy physics, radioastronomy, plasma physics, conventional energy research, space science, transportation, and life sciences. “With two of the later, more scientifically oriented Apollo moon flights canceled, though equipment is hought and paid for, work on NASA’s forward-looking space station, nuclear-powered rocket, and unmanned planetary exploration vehicles has been so cut back that after 1975 almost nothing will be scheduled. And research funds in life sciences were still lagging 20% behind research capacity—in field that ^ held promises for much safer biological insecticides, genetic repair of congenital defects, and basic attacks on cancer and heart disease. (Fortune, 3/71, 88-9, 153-5)
Nixon Administration’s New Technology Opportunities Program “expected to be announced early next year” was described by New York Times. Basic concept was to define technologies that could help solve domestic problems, establish r&d priorities accordingly, and provide incentives for industry to pursue technological goals. Times said program could be major step toward making Government partner for first time in industries outside aerospace and defense, result in greater Federal r&d funding, and constitute counterattack against “those who increasingly criticize science and technology as disruptive and destructive forces in society.” (Wilford, NYT, 10/31/71, 1)
NASA issued rfps to major airframe manufacturers for design and fabrication of two experimental transport jet STOL aircraft to start Quiet-STOL program to relieve airport noise and congestion. Aircraft, incorporating propulsive lift principles, would provide technological data and experience for developing environmentally acceptable, economical, and safe fan-jet STOL transport system in NASA—DOT— faa—USAF program. Program would implement major recommendations of joint nasa-dot Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Study by providing industry with basis for stol development, Government regulatory agencies with rules for STOL certification and operation, and usaf with modernized tactical airlift capability. (nasa Release 71-146)
ost released Final Report of the Ad Hoc Supersonic Transport Review Committee of the Office of Science and Technology, March 30, 1969. Release of previously secret report was prompted, ost said, “by continued public interest and certain impressions that the government may be concealing factual data on the sst program.” Report recommended “termination of the development contracts and the withdrawal of Government support from the sst prototype program.” Reasons given were: sst operating costs would exceed those of then-available subsonic aircraft; “attendant surcharge makes the airline market uncertain”; program was unattractive to private financing and “substantial government involvement is likely to be sought in the supply or guarantee of some S3—5 billion of capital for the certification and production of a U.S. sst”; there was “substantial uncertainty regarding the range and payload and the environmental effects” of sst and “costs and duration of the program are both likely to increase” in attempt to develop production aircraft; there was “substantial doubt that the present configurations of the Concorde and the TU—144 will become commercially viable aircraft”; balance of payments argument was not sufficiently strong to warrant Government investment in sst; U.S. leadership in aviation did not depend upon affirmative sst decision in near future; and, “when the right combination of technology and market demand appears, the U.S. aircraft industry may well decide on its own to proceed with the development and production of an sst.” (Text)
Mrs. E. Margaret Burbidge would become first woman director of Royal Greenwich Observatory in 1972, Washington Post reported. British-born former professor of astronomy at Univ. of California would not inherit title of Astronomer Royal, traditionally bestowed upon Observatory Director. She would direct staff of 200, including 25 women scientists. (Nossiter, W Post, 11/19/71, A26)
Dr. Dennis Gabor, winner of 1971 Nobel Prize for physics, said in Bridgeport, Conn., that space exploration was “strictly a dead end occupation.” It was “extremely uninteresting—the only interesting place is earth.” Dr. Gabor made comment during interview at Univ. of Bridgeport honors convocation, (upi, W Post, 11/5/71, A7; W Star, 11/6/71, A7)
Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, MSFC Director, announced establishment of temporary heao Office in MSFc’s Program Management Directorate to plan High Energy Astronomy Observatory. Office would replace heao Task Team formed in spring 1971. (msfc Release 71-148)
usaf X-24A lifting-body vehicle had completed flight-test program and would be reshaped and renamed X-24B, frc announced. Decision to end flight operations and reshape vehicle had been made by joint NASA—USAF flight research team. X-24A was one of three lifting-body vehicles in joint nasa-usaf program managed since 1967 by frc. Vehicle had made 28 flights— 10 glide and 18 powered—since beginning test program April 17, 1969, reaching 1687 km per hr (1048 mph) and 22 000-m (71 000-ft) altitude. New X-24B would be built around existing basic X—24A structure, but outward appearance would be changed dramatically, with sharply pointed flat-iron shape replacing bulbous one. New shape would also have improved hypersonic lift-to-drag ratio that would permit investigation of how well vehicle designed for good hypersonic performance would perform at low supersonic, transonic, and subsonic speeds, with emphasis on landing. Other changes would include 4.6-m (15-ft) extension of nose, removal of rear center fin, 1.5-m (5-ft) widening in rear, and 680-kg (1500-lb) increase in weight. Modifications would be completed by Martin Marietta Corp. in about one year, (frc Release 18-71)
nsf released Research and Development in Local Governments, Fiscal Years 1968 & 1969 (nsf 71-6): Local government r&d expenditures doubled between 1966 and 1969, from $20 million to $40 million. Approximately 50% of funds spent by local governments for r&d came from Federal Government. Life, social, and engineering sciences were largest fields in local government R&D. (Text)
French President Georges Pompidou was passenger aboard Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic airliner, in 75-min flight from Paris to Toulouse. Aircraft reached twice speed of sound. Later, Concorde 002, British prototype, was forced to turn back after taking off from Toulouse because of faulty landing gear. Aircraft circled for half hour at 600 m (2000 ft) but made perfect landing 38 min after takeoff. (Reuters, B Sun, 5/8/71)
New $200-million international airport at Kansas City, Mo., was being built under NASA-developed management system, NASA announced. Midwest Research Institute, management consultant for project, was using It Cl Management Information Center—fully equipped briefing room that resembled itsc’s—as repository for reference data on airport project, (nasa Release 71-232)
Senate passed H.R. 7960, $706.5 million FY 1972 nsf authorization bill. Bill included $2.5 million for Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) ; $4 million for Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico; $7.7 million for Kitt Peak National Observatory; $2.5 million for Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in Chile; $7 million for National Radio Astronomy Observatory; and $19 million for National Center for Atmospheric Research. Report accompanying bill described program of Research Applied to National Needs (rann) established by nsf during FY 1971 to coordinate research in selected environmental, social, and technological problems. Major research efforts consolidated to form RANN were: weather modification, earthquake engineering, interdisciplinary research relevant to problems of our society (irpos), and other efforts formerly funded under scientific project support. (CR, 6/28/71, S9974-81; S Rpt 92-232)
nasa announced plans for first launchings of nasa sounding rockets from French Guiana Space Center at Kourou in cooperative France-U.S. upper-atmosphere research project. Project would launch 20 French Centaure and NASA Nike-Cajun rockets to obtain data on structure and circulation of equatorial atmosphere between 30- and 95-km (18- and 60-mi) altitudes. Under agreement between French National Center for Space Studies (cnes) and nasa, ones would provide Centaure rockets with sodium vapor payloads, F— 1 launcher, launch team, and tracking and ground support. NASA would be responsible for Nike-Cajuns with grenade and ozone payloads, one Nike with an inert 2nd stage, and ground support for payloads. Each agency would bear cost of its agreed responsibilities, (nasa Release 71—53)
New York Times editorial advocated reimbursement by Government of airlines’ investment in SST: “The bill which the sst lobby seeks to amend is a Supplemental Appropriations bill that contains money for the Government’s closing costs arising from cancellation of the contract for the plane. The bill does provide an opportunity for the Government to consider its debt of honor to the airlines. They were strongly advised by the Department of Transportation in 1967 to advance money to the Boeing Company, to be credited against the future purchase of sst’s. The airlines realistically recognized that this was risk capital if the plane should prove a technological failure, but in view of the Federal Government’s insistent if unwise pressure in behalf of the plane, they had good reason to rely upon continued Government backing for the project. Although the $58.5-million involved is not a legal obligation, Congress should honor this commitment.” (NYT, 5/11/71)
LeRC was studying blown-flap stol aircraft using series of fans mounted atop each flap semispan, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Concept was similar to fan/flap arrangements studied in wind tunnel tests-. Bleed air from main engines was ducted to periphery of each fan nacelle and drove fans through tip turbines. Flow from fans then passed over flaps, which could be deflected up to 60° for landing. (Av Wk, 4/5/71, 44)
nasa’s supercritical wing, flown on TF-8A aircraft piloted by NASA test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, successfully completed 10th flight from frc. Objectives of 40-min flight were to obtain additional pressure distribution and performance data at high subsonic speeds and evaluAugust 27; Noise tests of NASA’s experimental, quieter jet aircraft engine were under way in Peebles, Ohio, the Lewis Research Center announced. The project sought to develop an engine of 97 850-newton (22 000-pound) thrust that would operate at }5 to 20 decibels quieter ikon engines used in present subsonic air transports. In the photo the engine was being checked out before the General Electric Co. noise tests. A probe inserted in the exhaust nozzle (left) measured the smoke produced. ate flutter characteristics at low supersonic speeds. Aircraft reached 12 000-m (40000-ft) altitude, with pressure distribution and performance data obtained from mach 0.80 to 0.97 and flutter characteristics evaluated at mach 1.05 and 1.10. (NASA Proj Off)
President Nixon’s FY 1972 science budget was analyzed in Science: Budget proposed selective increases for r&d which would “start the federal science budget upward again after several years of virtually static financing.” Impact in FY 1972 spending would not be dramatic “since there is a lag of as much as 2 or 3 years between the obligation and actual spending” but budget served as “declaration of intentions.” Nixon Administration showed “inclination to maintain high-quality capabilities for research but to restrain expansion of research and, particularly, of manpower training except in areas judged to contribute to the solution of major nation problems.” Priorities were indicated by choices of agencies and programs for major increases: nsf budget would exceed $600 million for first time, with major portion of increases going to additional support of research grants. New cancer research program would receive $100 million. Substantial increases would provide funds for research on environmental problems, highway safety, air traffic control, and crime reduction, dod r&D spending would be increased with additional funds split between work on strategic and tactical weapons. Obligational authority for total Federal science budget would rise to $16.7 billion from $15.6 billion in FY 1971, but estimated expenditures would rise only from $15.3 to $15.6 billion, nsf would get new obligational authority of $622 million in FY 1972 but would spend estimated $546 million. (Science, 2/5/71, 459-60)
Assembly of solar radio telescope 10 m (33 ft) in diameter was nearing completion at Baldone, Latvia, Riga Sovetskaya Latviya reported. Parabolic antenna would enable Latvian Academy of Sciences Radio-astrophysical Observatory scientists to study all fluctuations of sun’s radiowaves. (fbis-Sov-70, 10/22/71, L4)
ARC-developed oximeter—device to measure oxygen content of blood by light absorption of blood circulating through ear—was being used by National Cancer Institute’s Leukemia Service for early detection of shock, nasa announced. Device had been introduced to Cancer Institute by Biomedical Application Team (bateam) of Research Triangle Institute. Team was employed by NASA to exchange space-developed technology between physical and medical sciences. Oximeter had been developed in 1960s to study effects of rapid acceleration in centrifuge on subjects, to determine reactions to simulated manned space flight conditions, (nasa Release 71—132)
Senate Committee on Nutrition asked Federal Government to provide emergency food for highly skilled professionals in Seattle, Wash., who had been hit by aerospace industry unemployment. Committee, investigating Seattle situation after Dept, of Agriculture had refused request from State of Washington for free distribution of surplus food in Seattle, said many families were going hungry. (Reuters, W Post, 11/29/71, A6)
usaf X—24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Cecil Powell (usaf) , reached mach 1 and 18 300-m (60 000-ft) altitude during 24th flight from frc in joint nasa-usaf research program. Purpose of powered flight was to determine lateral-directional derivatives with power on and to determine longitudinal derivatives at mach 0.6 (nasa Proj Off)
nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences had agreed on substance and mechanics of future exchanges of medical and biological data on their experience in manned space flight, NASA announced. Agreement’s details were contained in recommendations of joint working group on space biology and medicine which met in Moscow Oct. 9-13. Group—cochaired by Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director for Life Sciences, and Dr. N. N. Gurovsky of U.S.S.R. Ministry of Health and Academy of Sciences—recommended that meetings be held at least once annually, with next meeting held in U.S. during May 1972; working sessions be held to consider ways to predict state of human organism during and after space flights, response of certain body systems to space environment, techniques of dysbarism prevention, methods of preflight and postflight medical observations, and methods and results of biological experiments; and cochairmen explore possibility of an exchange of one or two specialists to work in laboratories doing similar biomedical research in space programs of U.S. and U.S.S.R. (nasa Release 71-251)
aia Aerospace Research Center published National Technology Support: A Study of Research and Development Trends and Their Implications: New patterns were emerging in magnitude and direction of R&D in U.S. “Recent R&D trends reflect diminishing governmental leadership in R&D which could lead to an erosion of the national research effort. The impact of continued inflation, the higher costs and longer leadtimes associated with increasingly sophisticated projects, plus accelerated efforts to meet specific national goals, suggest an even greater degradation of the total R&D effort than an examination of expenditures would indicate.” Recent growth of industrial financing and leveling of Federal funding indicated shift in direction of national R&D activities. “Whereas industrial research and development has focused primarily upon product improvement and product development, most of the nation’s basic research and the high risk, high cost activity has been financed by the Federal Government. Although their respective r&d programs frequently are complementary, certain technological projects traditionally initiated or sponsored by the Federal Government are beyond the financial scope of private enterprise. Consequently, a reduction in Federal r&d activity could have a negative impact on the level of sophisticated effort nationally.” Investments in higher education, level and nature of Federal r&d support, and utilization of existing manpower “provide some indication of the long-term scientific and technical capability of the nation. Previous Federal support of certain programs has had a feedback effect on the desirability of pursuing certain careers. Thus the failure to consider the long-term relationship among various fields of science implies future imbalances.” Establishment of longer range R&D priorities and well defined national technological strategy was needed. (Text)
NASA announced award of seven-month study contracts totaling $1 387 576 to nine universities and one NASA center to define requirements for seven astronomy experiments for proposed High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao). (msfc Release 71-52)
New York Times editorial praised end of sst: “This action expresses a sound sense of national priority and of concern with ecological values. It also exposes last week’s surprise vote in the House to revive the SST as a political power play that reflects no credit on the leadership of either party. To reopen a major issue without advance warning to opponents was highhanded; to do so without getting up-to-date cost estimates from the Boeing Company was frivolous.” (NYT, 5/21/71) May 21-22: Application of laminar air-flow techniques in medical surgery was discussed during symposium on Clean Room Technology in Surgery Suites at icsc. (nasa Special Release 5/14/71; ksc pao)
KSC tourist facilities were described in New York Times travel section: “In these days of popular denigration of space exploration, the tourist is likely to approach this vast space-age outdoor science museum in a defensively skeptical frame of mind. Three or more hours later he is likely to leave the center convinced that it was a valuable and exciting experience.” KSC was “one of the least commercialized major tourist attractions of the world.” NASA was “selling ... on tapes and in guide lectures, but not offensively and not at the expense of information you want.” There was little evidence of security “and the guides emphasize that you may photograph anything you see.” (Fried-lander, NYT, 4/25/71)
Sen. Edmund S. Muskie (D-Me.) introduced, for himself and cosponsors, S. 1382, “to authorize the Secretary of Transportation to carry out a special program of transportation research and development utilizing the unique experience and manpower of the airframe and defense industries.” (CR, 3/25/71, S3900)
NASA announced it was expanding its airborne research program by acquiring two Lockheed U-2 high-altitude aircraft under loan agreement with usaf and concentrating flights over four ecological test areas in U.S. Program objectives were to simulate data output of erts scheduled for 1972 launch, collect data simultaneously over various test sites with passes of erts and Skylab after they were orbited, support earth resources survey programs of other agencies, and make observations in astronomy, atmospheric physics, and geophysics for nasa’s physics and astronomy programs, (nasa Release 71-60)
Tass announced construction by Soviet scientists of “world’s first operating installation” to convert atomic energy directly into electricity. Installation had produced “several kilowatts” for “new major achievement of Soviet atomic science and technology.” aec said later that, while U.S. had done same thing on smaller scale, U.S.S.R. might be closer to building unit large enough to power giant, multichannel comsats, long-range space missions, or compact power station under sea or in remote places. (Cohn, W Post, 3/26/71, Al)
Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport, left Toulouse for Cayenne, French Guiana, on first leg of first transatlantic test flight, to Rio de Janeiro. Flight would promote sale of aircraft in South America and continue performance testing and long-range flying in context of commercial airports. (BAC-Aero-spatiale France Release 17C/71)
LaRC awarded $3 934 000 contract to Carey General Contractors, Inc., and Metropolitan Construction Co. of Missouri for joint construction of 4200-sq-m (45 500-sq-ft) Aircraft Noise Reduction Laboratory. Research facility, to be completed by November 1972, would include acoustics physics laboratory, applications area with anechoic room and reverberation room, and external effects simulation laboratory. (NASA Release 71-133)
nsf published Research and Development in Industry, 1969: Funds, 1969; Scientists & Engineers, January 1970 (nsf 71-18). In 1969 industry spent $18.5 billion for r&d—6% above 1968 level of $17.5 billion and 5 times amount spent on r&d in 1953. Increase in 1968-1969 was due to increase in companies’ own funds. Between January 1969 and January 1970 full-time equivalent number of r&d scientists and engineers employed in industry dropped from 387 100 to 380 600. Decline —first recorded by nsf in 13-yr series of reports, was primarily caused by cutbacks in personnel working on Federal r&d programs. Most of r&d unemployment among scientists and engineers occurred in aircraft and missiles industry. Number of R&d professionals in dod programs remained level between 1968 and 1969. Federal Government was source of 47% of r&d dollars spent by industry during 1969, down from 59% in 1959. dod and NASA furnished 89% of Federal r&d funds to industry in 1969 and supported 89% of industrial scientists and engineers working on Federal programs, at average annual cost of $56 200 each. In 1969 industry financed 53% of its r&d with its own funds, increase from 41% in 1959. Industry allocated 3% of its 1969 r&d funds to basic research with more than 50% of this amount spent on physical sciences. (Text)
Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport, landed at Rio de Janeiro after successful first transatlantic test flight, piloted by French test pilot Andre Turcat [see Sept. 4]. Turcat told newsmen aircraft had flown at mach 2 for nine minutes during 3240-km (2015-mi) flight. (AP, NYT, 9/7/71, 62)
Cambridge Univ. astronomer Dr. David Dewhirst said in Cambridge that irregularities in orbit of Neptune, eighth planet from sun, indicated possible presence of another body. “But I must emphasize that at present this is only a notion.” Dr. Dewhirst said U.S. Naval Observatory had supplied photos for study, (upi, W News, 11/18/71, 15)
Astronomers had asked Tucson, Ariz., to modify its outdoor lighting so their view of heavens would not be obstructed by nighttime glare, Science reported. Astronomers at Kitt Peak National Observatory, National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Steward Observatory, Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had complained. (Bazell, Science, 2/5/71, 561))
Rep. Glenn M. Anderson (D-Calif.) introduced Emergency Conversion Loan Act to aid victims of aerospace industry depression. Legislation would immediately qualify jobless engineers, scientists, and technicians for conversion loans from banks in amounts up to 60 °/o of prior salary, but not to exceed $12 000. (CR, 5/24/71, E4915)
Possibility of using electrically controlled optical sensors and signal processes—techniques used to guide military missiles to targets—was being examined as substitute for sightless eyes by Huntington Institute of Applied Medical Research team led by Dr. Robert H. Pudenz, New York Times reported. Electrical impulses, as coded messages, would stimulate visual cortex of central nervous system and communicate pulses of information to brain by way of optic nerve. Artificial system would bypass eyes and optic nerve and radio signals directly to brain. (Holies, NYT, 4/26/71, 23)
FRC announced award of $211260, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to LTV Aerospace Corp. for design and construction of side fairings for NASA’s supercritical wing test aircraft, modified F-8 jet. Installation of side fairings would improve overall aircraft with area ruling, an aerodynamic design feature that would permit aircraft to fly more efficiently, and provide more desirable test environment for evaluating aerodynamic characteristics of supercritical wing near speed of sound. (frc Release 29—71)
usaf’s X—24A lifting body was shipped by air from frc to Martin Marietta Corp.’s Denver plant, where it would be modified and redesignated X-24B. Modified vehicle, of new shape with improved hypersonic lift-to-drag ratio, would be delivered to frc in early fall 1972. X-24A had completed 28 flights in joint NASA—usaf research program, reaching 1676 km per hr (1048 mph) and 21 600-m (71000-ft) altitude, (frc Release 30-71; SBD, 12/17/71, 215)
U.S. and Canadian scientists were planning to build $12- to $15-million upper-atmosphere observatory to study relationship of space energy to weather, radio communications, and other phenomena on earth, Science reported. Transmitter and four receivers would be erected near Great Lakes, “where the earth’s magnetic field causes ionized layers of the upper atmosphere to form a low-density ‘trough.’ ” Preliminary engineering studies for observatory, which was scheduled for completion in 1974, were being conducted under $99 950 nsf grant. (Science, 4/16/71, 244)
Discovery of galaxies Maffei 1 and Maffei 2 about 3 million light years from earth was reported in Astrophysical Journal by team of Univ. of California at Berkeley, Cal Tech, and Carnegie Institution astronomers headed by Robert Landau of Univ. of California at Berkeley. Galaxies previously had been obscured by interstellar dust in Milky Way. Team had begun study after Landau read 1968 report of Italian astronomer Paolo Maffei that two strange objects had been observed on infrared photo Maffei made of region between constellations Perseus and Cassiopeia. Using Mount Palomar and Lick Observatory telescopes and advanced astronomical tools and research techniques, team had located galaxies twice as far from earth as Andromeda, nearest galaxy to Milky Way. Team believed brighter of new galaxies might be larger than either Milky Way or Andromeda and thus possibly largest member of local group of galaxies, measuring 50 000 to 100 000 light years in diameter. (Astrophysical Journal, 1/1/71, L25-31)
MSFC announced new projects in research program on application of remote sensing techniques. Land-use survey of five north Alabama counties would photograph area from air with remote sensing camera to study how land was being used. Results would be used by Top of Alabama Regional Council of Governments. In “ground truth survey” with Alabama A&M Univ., MSFC would supplement aerial photography; university personnel would make sample ground study to correlate remote sensing information, (msfc Release 71—79)
NASA and DOT released information given in Joint DOT—NASA Civil Aviation Research and Development Policy Study Report dated March 1971.	Study had been recommended by Congress and made by NASA,
Completion of arrangements for exchange of four computer programs between NASA and Japan’s Hitachi Central Research Laboratory was announced by NASA. Exchange, negotiated by NASA oart and Computer Software Management and Information Center (cosmic) operated at Univ. of Georgia under NASA contract, would make two Japanese programs available to U.S. users in exchange for two NASA programs that had been available to U.S. public for several years. (nasa Release 71—148)
nasa announced it had awarded Bellcomm, Inc., 17-mo, $11.5-million extension to contract for systems analysis, study, planning, and technical support to manned space flight program. Extension, which would continue through May 1972, brought total value of contract since March 1962 to $91 million, (nasa Release 71—17)
NASA announced award of $>4-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract modification to Ball Brothers Research Corp., Inc., for changes in oso—H Orbiting Solar Observatory to increase experiment capacity. Change orders definitized by contract included larger physical volume to handle larger experiment packages, improved command system security, and increased power for instruments. OSO-H would be launched in mid-1971. (NASA Release 71—2)
U.S.S.R. announced that Soviet supersonic transport Tu-144 had reached designed 2400-km-per-hr (1500-mph) speed at 16 700-m (55 000-ft) altitude during test flight Nov. 12, 1970. {NYT, 3/29/71, 53)
NATO intelligence had reported U.S.S.R. was flight-testing swing-wing supersonic strategic bomber designed to fly at twice speed of sound and equipped for low-level penetration of enemy defenses, New York Times said. Aircraft, christened “Backfire” by NATO, could become operational late in 1973. Western military intelligence specialists believed Backfire marked “emergence of entirely new Soviet air weapons system.” (Szulc, NYT, 9/5/71, 1)
Soyuz 11 accident in which crew lost lives [see June 6-30] might have been “greatest setback in Soviet space flight activity in past several years,” Space Business Daily reported. October, traditionally “bumper month for Soviet flight programming” had seen “relative depression” this year. In October 1970 U.S.S.R. had recorded 12 missions. This year, “up to last Week, there had been only 4 missions recorded.” (SBD, 10/26/71, 194)
NASA announced issuance by Ames Research Center of request for proposals for studies on four proposed Pioneer-class missions to Venus in late 1970s. Proposals would cover design studies for entry probes and orbiting spacecraft. Two contractors would be selected to perform parallel, $500 000 design studies, (nasa Release 72—53)
Industrial Research magazine’s IR—100 award for 1972 had been awarded to Lewis Research Center and Arthur D. Little, Inc., for process for producing pure, very-high-strength, single-crystal, refractory ceramic fibers, LeRC announced. Award, given annually to developers of 100
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by Cecil Powell, completed 24th flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Flight objectives were to check out pilot and to obtain stability and control data at mach 1.1 and mach 0.9. All objectives were met. Vehicle reached 21000-m (69 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.25. (nasa proj off)
NASA TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, resumed flight program at Flight Research Center after three-week halt for improvement of fuselage area distribution and installation of pressure survey rakes. Purpose of flight— 28th in series—was to check out new instrumentation and angle-of-attack and airspeed calibrations. Aircraft reached 10 700-m (35 000-ft) altitude, instrumentation was activated, and calibrations were made at mach 0.90, 0.95, 0.97, 0.99, and 1.2. (nasa proj off)
Two NASA research aircraft, each equipped with five cameras, were photographing State of Arizona—area of more than 295 000 sq km (114 000 sq mi)—from 20 000-m (65 000-ft) altitude. NASA, Dept, of Interior, and State of Arizona project to develop land use inventory system for natural resource management included acquisition of film for development of orthophotoquads—large photographic maps of entire state— for use by Arizona agencies. Arizona Land Use Experiment would make comprehensive analysis based on remotely sensed data; document social and economic benefits of experiment; prepare manual on application of remote sensing to solving resource management problems; and provide plan for updating information by including data from spacecraft, high- and low-flying aircraft, and ground surveys. Arizona had appropriated $400 000 to project. Film processed by Ames Research Center was sent to U.S. Geological Survey laboratories, where orthophotoquads were to be prepared. (NASA Release 72-129)
Aerospace industry outlook for 1972 was described in Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial: “Much of the political miasma and public criticism . . . appears to be dissipating. The cruel bite of unemployment . . . has made it politically less attractive to attack technology. The legislators who were glad to equate their anti-technology votes with a blast at skin cancer now find these votes equated with stimulating unemployment. The industry will continue to be under vigorous public and legislative scrutiny and deserves it. But it has shown the first signs of fighting back and beginning to state its own very valid case. Hopefully, this will continue during the election year in an effort to force politicians to assess technology more accurately in their appeals to the electorate.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 1/3/72, 7)
National Science Foundation released National Patterns of R&D Resources: Funds and Manpower in the United States 1953-1972 (nsf 72—300). Research and development expenditures were expected to reach $28.0 billion in 1972, up from $26.8 billion in 1971, increase of 4.3%; 1970 to 1971 increase had been 2.1%. r&d was expected to account for 2.5% of estimated 1972 U.S. gross national product (gnp), down from 2.6% in 1971. In 1964, r&d and gnp ratio reached 3.0%. Approximately 54% of national r&d effort was supported by Federal funds, primarily from Dept, of Defense and NASA. Industrial sector was second largest source. Companies were expected to provide two fifths of total U.S. r&d funds in 1972, up steadily from 31% in 1964. Estimated 519 000 scientists and engineers in U.S.—more than one third—were employed in r&d during 1971, 5% fewer than in 1970. Nearly 70% of these professionals worked for industrial firms. Basic research expenditures for 1972 were projected at $4.1 billion, with applied research at $6.4 billion. In 1971, $4.0 billion and $6.1 billion had been spent on these activities. Universities and colleges were expected to perform more than 55% of national basic research effort during 1972, up slightly from 1971. (Text)
National Science Foundation reported rise in share of Federal research and development (r&d) expenditures on functions other than space and defense. During 1963—1973, 10 other budget functions shifted upward in R&d program emphasis. Until 1966 space research and national defense spent 90% of Federal R&d total. Joint share of these two functions was expected to be 77% in FY 1973. Share of other 10 functions had risen 5% between 1970 and 1973 alone, (nsf Highlights, 4/25/72, 1)
Laser Doppler airspeed indicator 10 times more precise than best systems in commercial aircraft was being tested by Ames Research Center in Global Atmospheric Research Program, nasa announced. System— proved accurate to one tenth of one per cent—focused carbon dioxide laser beam 18 m (60 ft) ahead of aircraft where air was undisturbed by bow wave, detected backscatter from small aerosols, and measured Doppler shift in frequency proportional to aircraft’s airspeed. Doppler shift was then measured digitally and recorded by digital data system. (nasa Release 72-228)
Manned Spacecraft Center’s Cellular Analytical Laboratory had developed system to improve early detection of illness and assess flight crew health before and after Skylab missions, nasa reported. Unique medical research effort under direction of Dr. Stephen L. Kimzey used sophisticated instrumentation in spectrophotometry, cytofluorometry, and electron microscopy to supplement existing laboratory analyses in detection and identification of cellular elements of blood by structural and chemical analysis. Laboratory would coordinate Skylab Ml 10 hematology experiment series of five experiments and seven scientific investigations outside NASA and would complete one experiment, M115 (special hematologic effects). Experiment would evaluate influence of long-duration space flight on mem’s immunological and hematological systems. Program would use complete electron microscopy facility to examine red blood cells for structural changes and x-ray analysis to detect alterations of internal electrolyte composition. Red cell represented model system to evaluate functional state of other body tissues and processes. Laboratory would improve medical care available to public by cooperating with medical schools in msc area and with Government agencies throughout U.S. Studies with Univ. of Texas Medical Branch had applied Laboratory’s procedures to evaluation of lymphocytes of burn patients to determine their cellular resistance to infection; early detection of disease program was under way with Baylor Univ. College of Medicine; and work with Texas Children’s Hospital would evaluate changes in muscle potassium and sodium concentrates associated with malnutrition. Joint effort with Environmental Protection Agency and Oak Ridge Laboratory would identify and quantitate early response of sputum cells exposed to agents having carcinogenic potential, (nasa Special Release)
About 150 engineering students from universities in Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee, and Mississippi attended special Fluid and Thermal Engineering Seminar at Marshall Space Flight Center, held to acquaint them with hardware and system developments in fluid and thermal engineering related to their studies. Group included 22 foreign students representing 6 foreign countries, who were students at Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute, (msfc Release 72-21)
Development of small-scale water-reclamation units for home use from NASA-developed technology was forecast by Langley Research Center scientist Richard H. Weinstein in Astronautics & Aeronautics. NASA had begun in late 1950s to develop regenerative systems for purifying and recycling water for long-term space missions. “Research programs have been concentrated on . . . physio-chemical systems. . . . Using largely existing water-processing concepts, the development has gone toward making the concepts efficient on a small scale and adapting them, where necessary, to zero gravity.” NASA systems were “far cry from the integrated, simplified systems needed for domestic water reclamation of the future” but provided “base from which to work.” (A&A, 3/72, 45-51) April 1:	Soviet news agency Tass reported Washington, D.C., interview with Dr. Philip Handler, President of U.S. National Academy of Sciences. Dr. Handler had praised scientific cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R: “Collaboration with their Soviet colleagues in so many fields—high energy physics, space research, and medical sciences, among others—promises markedly to benefit the work of U.S. scientists. ... We are pleased that new opportunities are being arranged for joint enterprises ... in space exploration, cardiovascular and cancer research, environmental monitoring, while we continue to explore the unique opportunities for mutual benefit in the broader enterprises in the international scientific unions.” (fbis-Sov, 4/1/72, LI)
Prominent Soviet astrophysicist Kronid A. Lubrasky had been sentenced to five years in labor camp for anti-Soviet activities, dissident sources in Moscow said. (AP, H Post, 11/1/72) During October:	Lunar Science Institute released Post-Apollo Lunar Science, report of July study by LSI scientists who met at Univ. of California at San Diego. Study had examined progress in lunar science, identified objectives for future work and drafted preliminary plan for long-term lunar science. Major recommendations were that NASA continue to “preserve and describe the samples, data, and photographs, and to make them available to the scientific community” through Lunar Receiving Laboratory at Manned Spacecraft Center; that Apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep) network and subsatellite be operated continuously as long as they provided significant new findings; that selected raw photographic observations be processed to ohtain usable scientific product; that lunar science program be continued at “substantial” level; that advisory panels be continued and augmented to emphasize geophysical and photographic data analysis; and that “small, selective program of mission planning be maintained” concurrently with instrument definition program “to provide the desired continuity between the present and the future.” LSI also recommended high priority for high-inclination orbital mission to determine geophysical, geochemical, and geological variables on planetwide scale, and joint and multinational lunar missions. (Text)
National Science Foundation published Federal R&D Funding Continues To Rise (nsf 72—314): Upward trend since 1970 in Federal research and development support was clearly established. Federal R&D obligations, exclusive of plant, were expected to rise from $15.5 billion in FY 1971 to $16.8 billion in FY 1972 and to all-time high of $17.8 billion in FY 1973. Figures showed increase of 8% in FY 1972 and 6% in FY 1973. Upward trend reversed downward trend from FY 1967 through 1970. (nsf Highlights, 8/11/72)
Portable, high-intensity light to illuminate Skylab workshop interior for motion picture photography during long space missions was being tested at Marshall Space Flight Center. Developed by iota Engineering, 8-kg (17-lb) light produced concentrated illumination of proper color balance for use with fast daylight film scheduled for Skylab. (msfc Release 72-15)
Extremely sensitive low-light-level image-intensification tube was being used by Hale Observatory astronomers to aim 500-cm (200-in) telescope atop Mt. Palomar at most distant objects in universe. Tube, developed to detect enemy troops in Vietnam, amplified faint light from remote celestial objects 2000 or more times. Tube had been adapted to astronomical use by Dr. Edwin W. Dennison of Hale Observatory and Cal Tech, (latns, W Post, 11/23/72, H9)	_ _
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed flight from Flight Research Center. Flight was made with wing vortex generators off at constant g of 200 from mach 0.50 to 0.99 and altitudes of 4800 to 14 000 m (16 000 to 46 000 ft). Windup turns and a few stick pulses with augmentation system off were performed. Pilot reported no significant differences in handling qualities and buffeting between flight with vortex generators on and off but said pitch seemed softer with generator off. (NASA proj off)
NASA announced appointment of J. Lloyd Jones, Jr., as Director of Aerodynamics and Vehicle Systems Div., Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, effective Aug. 6. Jones had heen Research Assistant to Director of Ames Research Center since 1970. (nasa Release 72—147)
Dr. Robert T. Jones of Ames Research Center stood by the wind-tunnel model of a conceptual aircraft being developed in computer and wind-tunnel studies. The fan jet transport’s wing would rotate <15” or more above a center pivot as the speed increased, in attempt to achieve supersonic speed without high fuel consumption and noise. By taking off with the wing perpendicular to the fuselage, the aircraft would require one fourth the takeoff energy of comparable delta-wing transports. would continue theoretical computer and wind-tunnel studies using models “flown” at speeds to mach 1.4. (NASA Release 72-104)
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed flight from Flight Research Center. Performance data were obtained at 10 700-m (35 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.95-0.99. Wing pressure distributions were recorded at altitudes from 8800 to 9100 m (29 000 to 30 000 ft) at mach 0.95-0.99. (nasa proj off)
Ames Research Center scientist Dr. Robert T. Jones was testing theory that antisymmetrical wing pivoting on center point might convert aircraft to supersonic transport without high fuel consumption and noise of conventional sst, NASA announced. Aircraft would have conventional straight wing at right angles to fuselage during takeoff on medium-length runways and would require about one fourth the takeoff energy needed by comparable delta-wing jet transports with similar payloads. As aircraft reached speed and altitude where swept wings were efficient, entire wing would rotate about 45° so that wing on one side would point in direction of flight and wing on other side would trail. Studies had indicated that cruising in this configuration at supersonic speeds to mach 1.2 would not produce sonic boom and could be accomplished with fuel economy similar to that of current jet aircraft at subsonic speeds. Conceptual aircraft could cruise up to mach 1.5 over ocean where sonic effects were not detrimental, arc
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $9.8-million contract modification to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for work on backup Skylab Workshop. Modification included production completion and post-manufacturing verification of backup hardware and launch site support operations through completion of second manned mission, (msfc Release 72-5)
Paralytic patients at Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Tex., were using system developed at Langley Research Center to adjust their immediate environment, United Press International reported. System used paddles and switches activated by patients’ eye movements and breath to control room lights, radio, TV, and other electronic devices. (C Trib, 1/29/72)
Plans for Upper Atmosphere Observatory for U.S. and Canadian scientists were described in Science by Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist J. V. Evans. Ground-based observatory would be close to U.S.-Canadian border, near magnetic 60° latitude. It would provide first opportunity to measure all parameters important in upper atmosphere—■ altitude to 1000 km (620 mi) over north-south expanse of 1000 km. Users could observe two distinct parts of upper atmosphere and transition between them, one part coupled to earth by magnetic field and second part loosely held and subject to particle bombardment from outside earth. Observatory’s applications would include long-distance radio communications, long-range weather prediction, and international cooperation in research and education. Facility, costing $14 million, would complement Global Atmospheric Research Program (carp). {Science, 5/19/72, 463-72)
Termination notices effective June 29 were sent to 198 employees at Marshall Space Flight Center; 115 were downgraded or reassigned in manpower reduction that would bring msfc employment level to 5317 by June 30. Further reduction of 103 was planned for June 1973. (Huntsville Times, 5/11/72)
First results of new radar astronomy technique for accurately measuring lunar topography from earth were described in Science by Haystack Observatory astronomer Stanley H. Zisk. Earlier techniques had measured radar backscattering properties by analyzing lunar echo simultaneously in both time and delay Doppler frequency. New technique extended earlier technique to three-dimensional measurement using radio-interferometer receiver for lunar echo signals. Technique had been used to measure lunar area that included craters Ptolemaeus, Alphonsus, and Arzachel and portions of Mare Nubium. Results had shown evidence of late episode of volcanism that had partially filled two craters through crustal fault of Imbrian origin. Other features coinciding with local gravitational anomalies could be correlated with flow events. Science cover photo of lunar topography showed floor of crater Ptolemaeus to be higher than large mare to its left. Lunar elevations were indicated by lighter shades of gray on black-to-white /photo. (Science, 12/1/72, cover, 977-80)
Lewis Research Center issued requests for proposals for first phase of three-phase effort to demonstrate that lower aircraft engine emissions could be reached without sacrificing combustion efficiency or combustor’s ability to reignite in flight. Firm selected would receive 15-mo contract to conduct screening tests of various combustor designs and modifications. Contractor would consider LeRC-developed “swirl can” design, which provided many fuel-injection points and premixed some fuel and air and could be operated to temperatures twice as hot as standard combustors with significant reductions in pollutants. Second phase of project would test best designs from phase one. Third phase would test best design as part of a complete engine, (nasa Release 72-38)
Flight Research Center announced successful remote-control landing of 1600-kg (3500-lb) modified Piper Comanche (PA-30) aircraft at FRC. Safety pilot was on board aircraft. Landing test demonstrated new technique to provide safer and more economical means of testing advanced aircraft and spacecraft when risk to aircraft or pilot was high or when costs precluded manned full-scale flight test vehicle. PA-30 was equipped with preliminary version of system that used telemetry to send control commands to aircraft and flight information to pilot displays in ground “cockpit” several miles away. Ground pilot used TV and radar to navigate aircraft. In later tests, large-scale models up to 9 m (30 ft) long would be launched from carrier aircraft. Test pilot on ground would “fly” remotely piloted research vehicles (rprv) using TV and telemetry, (frc Release 16-72)
Use of M518 multipurpose electric furnace developed by Marshall Space Flight Center for Skylab would permit increase in number of metals and metal-processing experiments to be carried on earth-orbiting station in 1973, NASA announced. New furnace would accommodate original composite casting experiments and 10 others to explore possibility of manufacturing and processing materials in zero g. Furnace would be delivered to NASA in December by principal contractor Westinghouse Corp. It would facilitate experimentation in solidification, crystal growth, composite structures, alloy structural characteristics, and other thermal processes that altered materials in weightlessness, (nasa Release 72-196)
Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Director of National Atmospheric and Oceanic Administration’s Environmental Research Laboratories, outlined space modification techniques at international meeting of Society of Engineering Science in Tel Aviv, Israel. Techniques would modify nearearth space environment to make it safe for manned space flight. “In the last few years experimenters have artificially modified the space environment. We can now produce artificial aurorae. We can change the population of the Van Allen radiation belt. We can artificially modify the ionosphere from the ground and our other ideas about artificial experiments for the future stretch as far as trying to copy the sweeping action being carried on naturally by Jupiter’s moons.” Other possible man-made changes in near-earth space environment included releasing beam of energetic particles from satellite to produce electromagnetic waves in space, injecting thermal plasma at high altitudes to change radiation population in space, and transmitting electromagnetic waves from earth to disturb particles trapped in Van Allen belt. Experiments would provide data on natural processes that caused geomagnetic storms on earth, permit improved predictions of radar clutter and quality of polar radio communications in future naturally occurring storms, permit modification or attenuation of naturally occurring storms, and enable scientists to make near-earth space environment safe for prolonged manned space flight and study. (noaa Release 72^83)
Federal Pay Board rejected contract settlements that would have provided first-year increase of 12% to more than 100 000 aerospace industry workers in 1973. (Shabecoff, NYT, 1/6/72, 1)
NASA Flight Research Center was testing new curved, steep, instrument landing approach for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to reduce noise discomfort and airport congestion. Approach could begin at various locations close to airport and would provide better aircraft separation, more landings per given time, less en route time, and lower airline operating costs by shortening terminal-to-terminal times. Approaches began at altitudes between 1200 and 1500 m (4000 and 5000 ft) and were flown to approximately 15 m (50 ft) above ground, (frc Release 7—72)
Semiannual survey released by Aerospace Industries Assn, said sharp three-year decline in aerospace industry employment had leveled off at slightly more than 900 000. Between June 1972 and June 1973, aerospace employment was expected to decline from 923 000 to 914 000, or one per cent. During previous three years more than 500 000 employees—one third of total aerospace work force—had been dropped from payroll. Survey projected December 1972 employment at 917 000, somewhat above earlier forecast of 887 000. Between June 1972 and June 1973, production workers were expected to decline by 1.8%, scientists and engineers by 0.6%, and technicians to increase by 1.6%. By June 1973 estimated 157 000 scientists and engineers would be employed; 1967 peak had been 235 000. (Text)
Panel of Geophysics Research Board of National Research Council released Summary Report of the Ad Hoc Panel on (NOx) and the Ozone Layer. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration had asked Panel to review paper by Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist Dr. Harold S. Johnston [see Aug. 1] and to consider research to resolve uncertainties that existed in Dr. Johnston’s hypothesis that nitrogen oxides from exhausts of supersonic transport aircraft could have destructive effects on ozone concentration. Uncertainties existed because dynamic processes might distort chemical equilibrium model based on static atmosphere, rates of some reactions in scheme of chemical kinetics might not be known, and estimations of SST engine exhaust products seemed uncertain to order of magnitude, at least. Panel had concluded: “There appears to be general agreement that Harold Johnston’s conclusions . . . are credible, but with the reservations cited.” Possibility of serious effects on the normal ozone could not be dismissed. “To the extent that existing information permits, Johnston has done a very careful and detailed analysis.” It was evident “that we suffer from serious ignorance of many fundamental aspects of the chemistry and dynamics of the stratosphere when we attempt to make quantitative assessments of the pollution consequences of high-altitude aircraft operations.” (nas—nrc-nae News Rpt, 10/72, 2)
Aerospace industry sales increased for first time since 1968. Sales for 1972 were $23.5 billion, up 5.9% over 1971. Commercial aerospace sales increased 11.6%, to reach estimated $4.8 billion. Increase reflected increase in deliveries of helicopters and general-aviation aircraft. Major aerospace sales included $13.8 billion to Dept, of Defense, up from $12.6 billion to DOD in 1971; missile sales to DOD at $5.2 billion, up from $4.7 billion; and military aircraft sales at $8.1 hillion, up from $7.4 billion. Space sales continued to decline in 1972, to $3.0 billion from $3.2 billion in 1971. Utility and executive aircraft sales increased from $321 million in 1971 to $500 million—up 55.8%. Units delivered increased 23.2%. Civilian helicopter sales increased from $69 million in 1971 to $95 million in 1972, gain of 37.7% Aerospace exports declined for first time since 1964—from $4.2 billion in 1971 to $3.9 billion, 6.6% decrease. Major reason for decline was drop in military aerospace exports—down 23.8% from $1.1 billion in 1971 to $854 million in 1972. Aerospace imports in 1972 were valued at $500 million, increase of 34.0% from $373 million in 1971. Aerospace industry profits were expected to increase from 1.8% in 1971 to 2.2%. Aerospace industry employment declined from 924 000 in December 1971 to estimated 917 000 in December 1972, but industry remained Nation’s largest manufacturing employer, (aia Aerospace, 3/73, 3)
NASA was working with Dept, of Transportation (dot) to define characteristics of clear-air turbulence (cat) better and to develop methods of detecting it in flight, Flight Research Center announced. Instrumented B-57 aircraft—equipped with dot prototype radiometric sensor able to detect cat up to 80 km (50 mi) ahead of aircraft—was being flown at altitudes up to 15 000 m (50 000 ft) in areas over western U.S. where cat was expected. Aircraft also carried Univ. of Wyoming aerosol and ozone detector to determine relationship between presence of aerosols or ozone, or both, and atmospheric conditions that caused cat. Since tests began one year before, B-57 had completed 13 flights. February 2r Flight. Research Center flew a B-57 aircraft equipped v.’ith Department of Transportation prototype radiometric sensor and Univ. of Wyoming aerosol ozone detector in a nasa-dot program to develop methods of detecting clear-air turbulence. When cat was encountered, 30-min flight pattern was flown to record data in turbulent area, (frc Release 1—72)
Pravda published interview with unidentified designer of U.S.S.R.’s Venus 8 Venus probe (launched March 27). “The vehicle was designed for prolonged work on the planet’s surface. Everything is aimed at delaying the apparatus’ ‘thermal death.’ New devices and additional scientific instruments were fitted to the descent apparatus. Therefore, the task was to reduce some of the weight and lighten the apparatus chiefly at the expense of the body. A new system for releasing the cover from the parachute section and an improved parachute system are used on the . . . descent apparatus. The parachutes were tested on a special stand . . . like a wind tunnel with a gas current heated to 500 degrees [centigrade; 773 kelvins] being blown through it. Carbon dioxide—the chief component of the Venusian atmosphere— was passed through the tube. With the help of sensors and a movie camera the testers thus had the opportunity of observing the behavior of the parachute system under near natural conditions.” Spherical capsule had been repeatedly tested in high-pressure chamber that simulated physical conditions of Venus landing. (fbis-Sov, 8/8/72, L2)
NASA announced establishment of joint Civil Aeronautical Research and Development (card) Review Group by National Aeronautics and Space Council, Dept, of Transportation, and NASA to help maintain close relationships among agencies with interests and responsibilities in aeronautics, (nmi 1052.160)
Development by Ames Research Center scientists of simple aperture method that made microscopic details of atomic dimensions clearly visible under transmission electron microscopy was announced by nasa. Method permitted perception of distances of one angstrom instead of resolutions of three angstroms normally obtained with standard electron microscopes. Cancer researchers had obtained best results using nasa technique, (nasa Release 72-59)
Lewis Research Center Deputy Director Eugene J. Manganiello was introduced as new President of Society of Automotive Engineers at SAE banquet in Detroit. (NASA Activities, 2/15/72, 35)
Science and Technology Div. of New York Public Library was closed after failing to meet $86 000 budget deficit by $9000. Library officials had said previously they expected to raise required funds and reopen by mid-January. (Andelman, NYT, 1/1/72, 18; nypl pio)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $26 923 contract to Huntsville (Ala.) Hospital to equip room with NASA-developed devices to test applications in aiding quadriplegics. When room was completed, immobile patient would be able to open and close doors and windows, control room temperature, change channels and control volume on TV set, dial telephone, adjust bed position, signal nurse at remote station, and turn pages in a book. Devices provided by msfc included sight switch operated by looking into sensor on eyeglass frame, panel switch operated by touching panel with head, foot switch, breath switch operated by blowing against small paddle, and pneumatic switch operated, by rolling head against pillow to depress airbag behind ear. Contract expenses would be shared, with msfc contributing $15 450 and hospital and Univ. of Alabama at Huntsville contributing balance. (msfc Release 72-25)
Deployment tests of Skylab Workshop meteoroid shield were under way at Astronautics Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Shield, thin sheet of aluminum wrapped around outer wall, would protect Skylab crewmen from micrometeoroids and ensure comfortable temperature in space, (msfc Release 72-19)
Adm. Thomas H. Moorer (usn), Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff, warned of possible U.S.S.R. nuclear superiority in testimony before closed session of Senate Committee on Armed Services considering FY 1973 military authorization bill: “The mere appearance of Soviet strategic superiority could have a debilitating effect on our foreign policy and our negotiating posture. It could erode the confidence of our friends and allies in the deterrent power of our strategic forces, upon which the entire structure of free world defense essentially rests.” (Corddry, B Sun, 2/17/72, A4) February 17:	First fully automatic landings hy full-scale manned helicopter at predetermined spot had been made by team of Langley Research Center engineers and pilots at Wallops Station, NASA announced. Accomplishment was milestone in research program aimed at permitting helicopters and future vertical takeoff and landing aircraft to fly routine missions under poor visibility. Landing approaches were fully automatic from 3 to 5 km (2 to 3 mi) from intended landing spot. Automatic system was engaged in level flight at 96.5 km per hr (60 mph) at 244-m (800-ft) altitude. When helicopter intercepted landing guidance path, system automatically locked on to start landing approach. At predetermined range helicopter began automatic deceleration to zero ground speed, came to hover 15 m (50 ft) above landing spot, and descended vertically to touchdown, (nasa Release 72-34)
Langley Research Center’s award of contracts to study technology requirements for future supersonic commercial aircraft was announced by NASA. One-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts—$316 415 to Boeing Co., $259 000 to McDonnell Douglas Aircraft Corp., and $231 015 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp.—were for independent and systematic assessment of existing aeronautical technology to determine state of readiness of supersonic transport and identify areas for additional research. Studies would seek ways to use advances in aerodynamics, propulsion, structures, materials, flight controls, and configurations to reduce sst noise and air pollution. Studies were part of NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology advanced planning to ensure existence of technology to maintain U.S. leadership in world aircraft market. Parallel studies in advanced propulsion technology would be managed by Lewis Research Center, (nasa Release 72-203)
Ames Research Center. Langlev Research Center, and Manned Spacecraft Center had received over 250 proposals for using space-related technology to solve problems of air pollution, water pollution, solid waste management, and clinical medicine, NASA announced. Proposals were in response to reauest for ideas to demonstrate possible applications of NASA-developed technology to public problems. They would be reviewed by experts and one or more projects in each category might be selected for maximum $75 000 contract, (nasa Release 72-3)
July 31:	Volunteers at Lewis Research Center were being trained to recognize odor intensity and character of jet engine exhaust gases. Project— Jet Combustor Exhaust Study—was part of overall program at LeRC to determine emissions of pollutants from jet aircraft and was being conducted by LeRC and Arthur D. Little Co. Findings were expected to help in reducing odors around airports caused by jet engine exhaust. Other studies were checking possible correlation between combustion efficiency and odor intensity. Project director Helmut F. Butz said best instrument “for attacking the odor problem ... is still the human nose, but the nose has to be trained.” Volunteers, on cue, opened sniffing port in special odor chamber, took short whiff, and recorded what they smelled. Classes of chemical compounds responsible for odor would be determined by analytical tests. (LeRC Release 72-78)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans to implement Center reorganization, pending NASA Hq. concurrence. Reorganization, necessitated by changing msfc roles and missions, included elimination of Program Management (pm) with major program offices reporting to Office of msfc Director; creation of Space Science Projects Office to ' furnish management and technical direction to High Energy Astronomy Observatory and Large Space Telescope projects; reassignment of Michoud Assembly Facility to Saturn Program Office; redesignation of Administration and Technical Services Directorate as Administration and Program Support; and consolidation of Contracts Office with Purchasing Office to become Procurement Office, (msfc Release 72-82)
NASA U—2 reconnaissance aircraft from Ames Research Center, equipped with high-resolution cameras using black-and-white and infrared film, photographed forest fire raging in Big Sur country of California’s Monterey County. It was first use of U—2 for forest fire reconnaissance. Photos made from altitudes of 20 000, 14 000, and 8000 m (65 000, 45 000, and 25 000 ft) were used by forestry officials to make plans for fighting fire. Photos and dense fog cover had helped firefighters contain 50% of fire by Aug. 3 and eventually fire was extinguished, (arc Release 72-55; LA Times, 8/4/72, 18; jpl Hist Off)
Lyudmila liquid-hydrogen chamber at joint nuclear research institute in Dubna, U.S.S.R., had been completed, Tass reported. Institute scientist Aleksander Baldin had said chamber would be used with world’s largest nuclear accelerator at Serpukhov to study photo-birth of particles—crushing of one proton by high-energy protons, (fbis-Sov, 1/10/72, LI)
California Lt. Gov. Ed Reinecke in press release announced progress in application of NASA-developed technology to management of California’s environment. Reinecke, chief aide to Gov. Ronald Reagan in developing use of new technology for solution of state problems, said Gov. Reagan had pronounced NASA technology vital to resource management. Series of symposia held in cooperative effort by State of California, Ames Research Center, and Univ. of California at Berkeley was examining environmental problems, including smog, (arc Release 72-16)
National Science Foundation published Federal Scientific, Technical, and Health Personnel in 1970 (nsf 71—47).	Federal scientists, engineers, and related nonprofessional personnel numbered 271000 in October 1970, 1% below 274100 employed in October 1969. Figure for 1970 included 79 300 scientists and 83 000 engineers—about 10% of total scientists and engineers in national economy. Decline of professional and nonprofessional personnel in Federal Government in 1970 followed several years of relative stability. Decrease in Federal scientists and engineers between 1969 and 1970 centered in Dept, of Defense, largest employer of such personnel. In 1970 dod employed 74 400 scientists and engineers, 3% below 76 000 in 1969. NASA decline was from 13 900 in 1969 to 13 400 in 1970. Engineers accounted for almost all of 1% decrease in Federal scientists and engineers from 1969 to 1970. Figures for engineers were 84 100 in 1969 and 83 000 in 1970. dod engineers declined 3%—from 53 800 to 52 300. Largest decline among other agencies was at NASA and Dept, of Interior. DOD scientists declined from 22 200 in 1969 to 21200 in 1970. NASA scientists declined from 5100 to 4800 (nsf Highlights, 2/22/12, 1)
Shuttle Program Office, managed by Roy E. Godfrey, was formed at Marshall Space Flight Center. Office would be staffed by Shuttle Task Team until July 1, when team would be abolished and some members assigned permanently to office. (Marshall Star, 5/17/72, 1; msfc pao)
House passed H.R. 16645, bill for construction of District of Columbia civic center that contained amendment to change name of Jet Propulsion Laboratory to H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory [see Sept. 19]. House then substituted Senate-passed bill, S. 3943, after amending it to contain language of House bill as passed. (CR, 10/3/72, H9027-51)
NASA announced personnel actions: l/g Marvin L. McNickle (usaf, Ret.) was named Special Assistant to Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight at nasa Hq. effective Dec. 3. l/g Carroll H. Dunn (usa) was elected Chairman of Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel to succeed Dr. Charles 0. Harrington, who was retiring, (nasa Release 72-237; NASA Ann)
Instruments to be used globally to monitor air pollution in upper atmospheric airways were being flight-tested on Convair 990 at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Lewis Research Center announced. Instruments—candidates for nasa Global Air Sampling Program (gasp) under direction of LeRC—would be installed on 10 to 15 foreign and domestic commercial aircraft to monitor gaseous and particulate pollutants. Particulates would also be collected by sampling device and later would be analyzed by electron microscopy and other methods. (LeRC Release 72-106)
First Lady Patricia Nixon visited Ames Research Center. She was received by ARC Director, Dr. Hans Mark; witnessed demonstration takeoff and landing by arc augraentor-wing jet, short takeoff and landing (stol), research aircraft; and was taken for “ride” in flight simulator for advanced aircraft, (arc Astrogram, 9/28/72, 1)
Establishment of Institute for Computer Applications in Science and Engineering (icase) at Langley Research Center was announced by NASA. Institute would be operated by Universities Space Research Assn., consortium of 51 U.S. universities, as cooperative research effort. Purpose was to solve aeronautical and space-related problems, develop efficient use of newest-generation computers, and help universities use LaRC advanced computer facilities for research, (nasa Release 72—202)
Federal support to universities and colleges had reached $3.5 billion in FY 1971, increase of $253 million (8%), National Science Foundation reported. Total academic science activities were up $148 million, or 7%, to $2336 million. Federal funding of academic research and development increased by 7%, to $1544 million. Support of life sciences projects constituted 48% of total Federal obligations for academic R&D and 53% of all Federal support for fellowships, traineeships, and training grants. Total Federal obligations (exclusive of loans) to institutions of higher education increased 2% in constant dollars for first time since 1967. (nsf Highlights, 9/22/72)
Dept, of Justice charged 20 major U.S. aircraft companies and Manufacturers Aircraft Assn., Inc., with violating Sherman Antitrust Act by agreeing to suppress competition in research and development of aircraft and patentable components. Alleged agreement “hindering and delaying” development of new inventions dated back to 1928, Justice Dept, charged. Civil suit filed in U.S. District Court in Manhattan, N.Y., asked dissolution of manufacturers’ association and injunction against aircraft companies entering into future agreements to restrict research or reduce competition in R&D by patent policies. Suit said U.S. manufactured nearly $8 billion worth of aircraft in 1967, more than half of which was military, and that four largest companies accounted for 60% of work, and eight largest for 88%. Manufacturers Aircraft Assn., Inc., and Boeing Co. later said charges were “completely unfounded in fact and law.” (Shanahan, NYT, 3/30/72, 1)
Lewis Research Center engineers were running first pure jet engine designed and assembled at LeRC to power single- and twin-engine light aircraft, Cleveland Press reported. Prototype of engine—expected to usher in generation of safe, easy-to-fly aircraft that could cruise at 644 km per hr (400 mph) and costing less to produce than current piston-engined aircraft—was about 31 cm (12 in) in diameter and 122 cm (48 in) long. (Cl Press, 3/1/72)
Marshall Space Flight Center began crafts apprentice program in which 20 persons would work at msfc and study at Calhoun Technical College in Decatur, Ala., during alternate periods, msfc would pay for books and tuition during college period and would pay wages for work done at Center. Participants in program would be predominantly veterans, with many from minority groups. They would be trained to become machinists, sheet metal workers, or electrical technicians. (Marshall Star, 3/29/72, 1; msfc pao)
U.S. planned to build world’s largest and most sensitive radiotelescope, Washington Post reported. President Nixon’s FY 1973 budget request for National Science Foundation contained $3 million toward construction of $62.5-million array of 27 antennas, 35 km (22 mi) deep, that could pick up signals from outer space. Array had been designed by National Radio Astronomy Observatory, at Green Bank, W. Va., and was expected to take 6 to 10 yrs to build. (Cohn, W Post, 1/14/72, A3)
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing, completed two flights from Flight Research Center. Objective was to check repeatability with two different pilots—Thomas C. McMurtry and Gary Krier. Wake surveys and pressure distributions were run at constant dynamic pressure of 9600 newtons per sq m (200 psf) and mach 0.90, 0.95, 0.97, and 0.99. (nasa proj off)
Measurement of speed of light “more accurately than ever before” with infrared laser was announced by National Bureau of Standards, nbs scientists using laser that generated extremely pure light heam, uncluttered by jumbled frequencies and wavelengths, had arrived at new light speed figure of 299 792.472 km per sec (186282.396 mps). New value was 100 times more accurate than value that had been November 21; A telescape-mounted laser instrument teas beamed at exhaust stacks of an industrial plant in tests proving the laser’s ability to detect suck air pollutants as sulfur dioxide. Remote detection from as far as one kilometer (3300 feet) was possible by the laser, developed at Langley Research Center. Tests were being conducted at the Carolina Power and Light Co. plant in Asheville, N.C., which had offered to cooperate in the LaRC and Environmental Protection Agency program, accepted for past 15 yrs and had opened up “new possibilities for an increase of 1,000 times in the number of frequency bands” used in communications, (nbs Release)
Symposium “A Progress Report on Flight Investigations of Supercritical Wing Technology” was held at Flight Research Center for engineers and scientists from Government, industry, and airlines. Meeting included interim report of NASA supercritical wing flight-test program and report on evolution of F-8 supercritical wing configuration. Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, head of 8-Foot Tunnels Branch at Langley Research Center and developer of supercritical wing concept, commented on correlation of wind-tunnel and flight-test results. Flight tests of nasa supercritical wing on TF-8A aircraft had demonstrated that new airfoil shape increased flight efficiency at speeds near mach 1. Since its first flight March 9, 1971, TF-8A had carried supercritical wing on 27 flights and had reached mach 1.2 (1274 km per hr; 792 mph) and 15 500-km (51 000-ft) altitude, nasa test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry said flight-test program had indicated that piloting procedures and tasks at near-sonic cruise speeds should be as routine as present jet transport operations and that introduction of supercritical wing was not expected to cause any serious problems. Future plans for supercritical wing included addition of side fairings for increased area ruling, determination by simulation of effects of wing roughness from manufacturing imperfections, and development of plans for follow-on flight programs to further the readiness of new technology for industry applications, (frc Release 2—72; frc X—Press, 2/18/72, 2)
Huntsville, Ala., police department was using “elapsed time speed computer,” developed by Chief Peter H. Broussard, Jr., of Marshall Space Flight Center Astrionics Laboratory’s Sensors Branch, to identify traffic speed violators. System consisted of low-cost electronic computer and two roadside markers. Timing switch was turned on when vehicle passed first marker and off when vehicle reached second marker. Elapsed time was measured by internal computer clock and compared with distance between markers. System would perform basic functions of radar units more economically. (NASA Release 72—223)
Marshall Space Flight Center engineers were conducting research on laser-doppler clear-air turbulence-detection system. System, ground-tested and installed in NASA’s Convair 990 at Ames Research Center for flight tests, could detect small-scale atmospheric motions. Laser system, which might lead to first commercially available instrument for air turbulence measurements, was designed and built by Raytheon Co. for NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology and U.S. Air Force’s Cambridge Research Laboratories. (NASA Release 72-182)
Development of automated visual sensitivity tester was announced by Ames Research Center. Simple, accurate, and easy-to-use device to map individual vision patterns was originally developed for use during long-term confinement, such as during space flight. It mapped position and extent of normal blind spot of each eye and plotted abnormal blind spots. Device was expected to be valuable in diagnosis and treatment of many disorders, including brain damage caused by tumors or injuries, optic track degeneration, glaucoma, and detached retina. It could be used in testing visual acuity, color blindness, dynamic ocular tracking, form discrimination, Optokinetic Nystagmus Reflex, and color sensitivity, (nasa Release 72-21)
Intense solar storm in solar region 331 was observed by sensors on NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory. Warnings were issued July 28. [See Aug. 2, 7, 13; and During October.] (nasa Release 72—164)
Most intense solar storm in two years, first observed by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory July 26, produced three major explosions. Storm was being observed by Oso 7 and 5; Explorer 41, 43, and 45; Pioneer 6 and 10; and ground-based observations. [See Aug. 7.] (nasa Release 72-164)
Intense solar storm observed by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory
Langley Research Center team working with Environmental Protection Agency had developed telescope-mounted laser to detect air-polluting gases from industrial smokestacks, NASA announced. Laser was beamed at smoke emitted and detected reflected light from pollutants through optical filters, epa was interested in laser for remote sensing of industrial plants. Tests were being conducted at Asheville, N.C., plant of Carolina Power and Light Co., which had offered to cooperate with Government agencies in experiments, (nasa Release 72-222)
Filter cassette—filter-paper holder developed by Lewis Research Center and Cleveland (Ohio) Air Pollution Control Div. and used in high-volume air samplers—was being used to simplify and improve collection of air samples over Cleveland area. Cassette had been developed to avoid contamination of filter papers used to collect trace materials. They were being used in 16 Cleveland air samplers as parallel network to city monitoring stations and in 7 LeRC samplers in Cleveland suburbs. (nasa Release 72-82)
Cost reduction suggestion by Marshall Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Thomas A. Parnell had saved NASA $57 000 in development of gamma ray telescope for scheduled balloon probe to investigate gamma ray sources, MSFC announced. Dr. Parnell had suggested substitution of scrap crystal (sodium iodide) for large, expensive crystal used to shield gamma-ray detectors from radiation sources other than desired target during probes. Scrap crystal material in tank containing oil-based liquid served as effective shield. Balloon probe was to be launched in March or April from National Center for Atmospheric Research. (msfc Release 72-2)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory had issued report calling for analysis of potential hazards of 64-m (210-ft) dish antenna at Goldstone Tracking Station near Barstow, Calif., Los Angeles Times reported. Beam could pose electromagnetic threat to electronics components in aircraft and to passengers on board who had cardiac pacemakers. Preliminary estimates indicated high potential hazard within tubular, 400 000-w invisible beam out to 16.9-km (10.5-mi) altitude, where its power diminished to safe levels. (Miles, LA Times, 3/21/72)
Soviet scientists at Krym Astrophysical Observatory had discovered unidentified astronomical objects, Tass announced. Using radiotelescope with 200-mm (8-in) mirror, scientists had located radio emitters emitting 3!/^-cm signals that “do not belong to the category of pulsating stars (pulsars), which emit short impulses only in a meter-long (three-feet-long) wavelength. For their properties the new astronomical objects are closer to the class of quasi-stellar radioemitters—quasars which are 1,500 million light-years from the earth.” (fbis-SoV, 4/3/72, L4)
NASA launched first in series of five Nike-Javelin III sounding rockets carrying Naval Research Laboratory cesium cloud experiments from Wallops Station at 5:15 am est. Payloads in series would be released at 97-km (60-mi) altitude, producing yellowish clouds visible for several hundred kilometers along East Coast. NRL scientists would make radio propagation, photographic, and geomagnetic observations to determine role of wind motions, magnetohydrodynamic effects, and chemical-thermal processes governing atmosphere. Second launch would be conducted March 27. (WS pao; WS Release 72-4)
Details of Mariner 10 mission to Venus and Mercury, first dual-planet flight, to be launched from Eastern Test Range in October or November 1973, were released by NASA. Jet Propulsion Laboratory would manage Mariner Venus mission project for NASA Office of Space Science. Project would include first use of one planet’s gravitational field (that of Venus) to propel spacecraft to another and first Mercury exploration. Spacecraft’s 500-kg (1100-lb) weight would include 78 kg (170 lbs) of scientific equipment—two TV cameras to take at least 8000 photos of planets and six experiments to return planetary and interplanetary data, with emphasis on Mercury. Objectives of experiments would be to provide celestial mechanics information during flight and physical characteristics of planets and their atmosphere; study structure of solar wind and its interaction with Venus and Mercury; search for magnetic field at both planets and measure interplanetary magnetic fields between orbits of earth, Venus, and Mercury; search for Mercury atmosphere and obtain data on Venusian atmosphere; measure temperature emissions from both planets and their atmospheres and correlate data with visible features; and measure charged particles over wide energy range to study solar charged-particle bombardment of Mercury and its possible atmosphere. Spacecraft would fly by Venus in February 1974 and by Mercury in March 1974, with closest approach to Venus 5300 km (3300 mi) and to Mercury only 1020 km (635 mi). (NASA Special Release, 9/5/72)
Largest NASA-owned aircraft—Lockheed C-141 StarLifter weighing 147 000 kg (325 000 lbs) with 49-m (160-ft) wing span and 43-m (140-ft) length—was delivered to Ames Research Center. Aircraft, modified to accept infrared telescope 91 cm (36 in) in diameter and two computers, would be used by NASA as international facility for infrared astronomy. Aircraft observatory would be unique when telescope was installed later in year, (arc Astrogram, 3/16/72, 1)
Publication of A Current Index of Technical Briefs (Cl-1) by NASA and Small Business Administration was announced. Brochure contained abstracts from NASA’s technical briefs filed during 1971 and 1972. nasa had published nearly 5000 technical briefs since 1963. First edition of new publication had been mailed to more than 50 000 small manufacturing and research and development companies. Brochure eventually would be published monthly. (NASA Release 72-188; NASA pao)
First anniversary of dedication of Visitor Center at Langley Research Center. Since June 8, 1971, opening, Center had attracted more than 175 000 visitors from all 50 states and more than 20 foreign countries. (Langley Researcher, 6/23/72, 1)
NASA announced it would continue Life Scientist Program for 1972 with award of up to five three-year institutional grants for research relevant to NASA needs. Principal investigators and their designated graduate students, selected from proposals due Nov. 20, would devote one third of their time to research at Manned Spacecraft Center, Ames Research Center, or Langley Research Center. Study areas would include physiological and psychological processes and medical aspects of manned space flight, changes in man’s health and safety, design of advanced life support systems, man-machine integration, human augmentation devices, bioinstrumentation, habitability considerations, and use of flight environment to understand living systems better. Other areas announced by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director for Life Sciences, were possible existence of life elsewhere in universe, scientific explanation of life’s origin, and detection and characterization from space of ecological phenomena on earth or other planets. Step-funded grants would not exceed $50 000 annually and would support maximum of 50% of scientist’s salary, (nasa Release 72-175)
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed one of two flights scheduled from Flight Research Center. Pressure distributions were measured from mach 0.90 to 0.99 at altitudes from 12 800 to 13 960 m (42 000 to 45 800 ft) with flaps closed and at 5° and 10°. Second flight, an excess-energy maneuver, was canceled because DC generator light came on at end of first flight. Problem was later corrected and second flight was rescheduled, (nasa proj off)
Dr. Keith A. Kvenvolden, organic geochemist at Ames Research Center, displayed a HA-hillion-yearold sedimentary rock thought to contain evidence of the beginning of photosynthesis on earth—the historical point of the origin of life.
National Science Foundation released Federal Funds for Academic Science, Fiscal Year 1970 (nsf 72—301). In FY 1970 total Federal support to universities and colleges declined 7% from FY 1969 funding level. Major portion of decrease was in academic science activities, which experienced 8% drop in 1970, contrasting with 3% in support for nonscience activities. Research and development and manpower development support accounted for bulk of total academic science funding. Obligations for these activities totaled $1,396 billion and $429 million. (Text)
Protocol on- agreement between National Academy of Sciences and Soviet Academy of Sciences for further development of scientific cooperation was signed in New York by nas President, Dr. Philip Handler, and Soviet Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh. Protocol agreed on planning 50% increase in interacademy exchange program and increasing interacademy cooperative research program. Parties had agreed to expand joint research after noting “that their efForts had already encouraged the development of the US-Soviet cooperation toward compatible docking mechanisms for space vehicles and other cooperation in space activities, organization of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, as well as cooperation in very long base interferometry in radio, astronomy, oceanography, and other fields.” (Text)
Major thrust of Dept, of Defense FY 1973 expenditures was to improve strategic weapon capability, Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial said. Budget [see Jan. 24] was “the best news the aerospace industry has had in several years ... a clear signal for action and forward thrust. It also imposes an awesome responsibility on the aerospace industry. Once again it is being called upon to produce new and demonstrably superior hardware on which it is possible to base a military power sufficient to deter major war and sufficient to win quickly any minor wars. It must produce swiftly and efficiently. Neither the aerospace industry nor the country can afford any more of the expensive development fiascos of the McNamara era.” (Av Wk, 1/31/72, 9) During January:	Space Science Board of National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council released Outer Planets Exploration, 1972—1985. Analysis of new cost and engineering data for unmanned spacecraft for missions to outer planets had been made for NASA by panel chaired by Dr. Francis S. Johnson of Univ. of Texas at Dallas. Extensive study of outer solar system was “one of the major objectives of space science in this decade.” Panel recommended thermoelectric outer planets spacecraft (tops) be developed and used in Grand Tour missions of late 1970s; Pioneer-level program be maintained for exploration of Jupiter and Saturn and their satellites every two years; Pioneer-F and -G evaluate radiation environment of Jupiter and Pioneer-H be readied for Jupiter magnetosphere mission to further evaluate planet’s radiation if necessary; NASA ground-based research on planetary exploration be continued; even-segment Titan booster or its equivalent be developed for outer planet exploration; support be provided for scientific advisory committees, development of instrumentation, and studies of alternative mission strategies for Jupiter and Saturn exploration; and NASA development of methods of solar and nuclear electric propulsion be continued. Report recommended programs for three funding levels: four tops Grand Tour missions in 1976-1980 period at $400-million annual budget level, compromise between Grand Tour missions and outer solar systems programs like modified Pioneer missions at $250-million-a-year level, and varied program of outer solar system exploration using modified Pioneer spacecraft at lowest funding level, approximately $400 million over one decade, (nas-nrc—nae News Rpt, 1/72, 8-9)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced appointment of Lynwood C. Dunseith as Deputy Director of Flight Operations. Dunseith had joined nasa in 1959 as member of Space Task Group at Langley Research Center and had been Assistant Director for Computation and Flight Support at msc since 1970. (msc Release 72-137)
President Nixon signed S. 3943, Senate version of H.R. 16645. Bill, for construction of civic center as memorial to President Dwight D. Eisenhower, carried rider that changed name of Jet Propulsion Laboratory to H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory, effective Jan. 4, 1973. Bill became Public Law 92-520. {PD, 10/30/72, 1548-9; PL 92-520)
White House announced plans for new series of awards, Presidential Prizes for Innovation. Prizes, to be distributed Sept. 15, would consist of medal and $50 000. Money would come from National Science Foundation budget for Research Applied to National Needs (rann). Recipients would be chosen by Prizes Staff of White House Office of Science and Technology, headed by National Bureau of Standards physicist Carl M. Muelhause. Prizes would honor technological advances dealing with “significant problem” in domestic area. (Sci & Gov Rpt, 6/15/72, 2) May 22:	President Nixon and party flew from Salzburg, Austria, to Moscow for first official visit of U.S. President to U.S.S.R. He met for two hours with Communist Party leader Leonid I. Brezhnev and later attended Kremlin dinner given by Presidium of U.S.S.R. During toast, Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny said: “. . . great importance is attached in the Soviet Union to Soviet-American talks which should cover a wide range of questions. We approach these talks from realistic positions and will make every effort in accordance with the principles of our policy to achieve positive results and try to justify the hopes placed in our countries and beyond them.” President Nixon responded: “Because we are both prepared to proceed on the basis of equality and mutual respect, we meet at a moment when we can make peaceful cooperation a reality.” Summarizing objectives of summit talks, President Nixon said: “First, we want to complete work on matters that years of patient negotiations have brought to the decision point: Bilateral matters will serve as our point of departure: Our two nations can work together in the exploration of space, the conquest of disease, the improvement of our environment.” {PD, 6/5/72, 915-7)
Flight Research Center announced selection of rca Service Co. for final negotiation of contract to support nasa Aerodynamic Test Range— radar/communication sites 550 km (340 mi) apart that provided high-speed flight corridor 1850 km (1150 mi) long from mid-Washington state to Edwards, Calif. Negotiations were for four-year, $359 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract with four one-year options, (frc Release 13-72)
National Research Council announced formation, at Dept, of Transportation request, of nrc Committee on the Department of Transportation Climatic Assessment Program. Committee, chaired by Dr. Henry G. Booker of Univ. of California at San Diego, would examine need for studies of effects of aircraft nitrogen-oxide emissions on earth’s ozone layer; atmospheric dynamics, physics, and chemistry; nature of prospective emissions into stratosphere; and biological effects on earth of stratospheric activities, (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 10/72, 2)
President Nixon accepted resignation of James H. Wakelin, Jr., as Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology, effective Aug. 1.	(PD, 8/7/72,1204)
Col. Robert R. Wessels (usa) had been assigned to Marshall Space Flight Center as Director of Shuttle Construction Office, Marshall Star reported. Col. Wessels previously had been Deputy District Engineer for NASA Support, responsible for monitoring and coordinating district’s design, engineering, and construction program at MSC and Mississippi Test Facility. (Marshall Star, 8/30/72, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced appointment of Dr. Charles R. O’Dell as project scientist for Large Space Telescope (lst). Dr. O’Dell was Chairman of Univ. of Chicago Dept, of Astronomy and Astrophysics and Director of university’s Yerkes Observatory, (msfc Release 72-118)
National Science Foundation published Company Funds Push Total Industrial R&D Spending to $18 Billion in 1971 (nsf 72-318). In 1971 total industrial research and development performance had amounted to $18.4 billion—equal to 1969 level. When measured in constant dollars, 1971 level was 3% below 1970 and 9% below 1969, Federal r&d funds in industry decreased by 1% between 1970 and 1971, to $7.7-billion level. Federal r&d funds to industry had decreased each year since 1968, when they had reached peak $8.6 billion. Company R&D funds totaled $10.7 billion in 1971, 3% above 1970 level of $10.4 billion, smallest year-to-year dollar gain in company R&D spending since NSF series began in 1953. But 1971 company R&D
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Ball Brothers Research Corp. for negotiation of contract to develop heavy nuclei experiment for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao—a), scheduled for launch in 1975. Experiment would measure charge-to-mass ratio, abundance, and energy of cosmic ray particles, (msfc Release 72-53)
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry and equipped with supercritical wing, completed 33rd and 34th flights from Flight Research Center. Unaugmented stability and control data were obtained from mach 0.8 to 0.99 at dynamic pressure of 19 152 newtons per sq m (400 lbs per sq ft). Wing loads were measured from mach 0.5 to 0.99 at 9576 newtons per sq m (200 lbs per sq ft). Targets placed along 35% chord line and at wing tip were photographed to determine wing deflections. (NASA proj off)
Selection of Lockheed-Georgia Co. Div. of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for negotiations leading to contract for design and option for fabrication of quiet, fan-jet, propulsive-lift research aircraft (questol) was announced by NASA. Agency also authorized $600 000, four-month, cost-reimbursable design-refinement phase. If construction was authorized, Lockheed was to deliver research vehicle in two years. Project was managed by Ames Research Center with technical support from Langley, Lewis, and Flight Research Centers, (nasa Release 72-224)
Cosmos 542 was launched from Plesetsk by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 640-km (397.7-mi) apogee, 527-km (327.5-mi) perigee, 81.2° inclination, 96.3-min period, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/72; SBD, 1/3/73, 2)	_ December 29:	Lunar scientists at Manned Spacecraft Center told press they had not yet been able to determine from study of Apollo 17 lunar samples whether orange soil found on lunar surface proved existence of lunar volcanic activity. Dr. Wallace C. Phinney, Chief of msc Geologic Branch, said soil had no “distinct evidence of alteration” as from steam or sulfur gas in volcanic action. “As to what caused the orange coloration, we must wait until we have more chemistry. The most interesting thing is it has very fine grain soil samples, greater than 90 percent in glass.” Dr. Paul Gast, Chief of Planetary and Earth Sciences, said glass could indicate volcanic or other crust-related activities. Soil was not particularly rich in water or sulfur, properties associated with volcanic action, (upi, W Star & News, 12/30/72, A3)
Reorganization of Marshall Space Flight Center, announced June 30, was implemented, (msfc Release 72-98)
Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded $11165 375 contract extension to Boeing Co. for design changes on final five Saturn V 1st stages (S-IC-11 through S—IC-15), Marshall Star reported. Work would be completed by Boeing Aerospace Group at Michoud Assembly Facility by Feb. 28, 1973. (Marshall Star, 6/14/72, 4)
Army Aviation Systems Command awarded research and development, cost-plus-incentive-fee contracts to Boeing Co. Vertol Div. and United Aircraft Corp. Sikorsky Aircraft Div. for engineering development phase of prototype helicopters for Utility Tactical Transport Aircraft System (dttas). Boeing Vertol would receive $91 million and Sikorsky Aircraft $61 million, (dot note to correspondents)
NASA announced Marshall Space Flight Center award of contracts and fund transfers totaling more than $49 million for scientific experiments for first High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao), scheduled for launch in 1975. Receiving awards were Columbia Univ., $8 929 059; Massachusetts Institute of Technology, two awards of $7 821 720 and $5 357 245; Univ. of California at San Diego, $5150 000; California Institute of Technology, Washington Univ. of St. Louis, and Univ. of Minnesota, $6 198 683 for joint experiment; Naval Research Laboratory, $7 919 000; and Goddard Space Flight Center, $8 250 000. (nasa Release 72-145)
nasa TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed 31st flight from Flight Research Center. Primary objective was to evaluate aircraft’s longitudinal stability with augmentation off at altitudes from 11300 to 13 700 m (37 000 to 45 000 ft) and mach 0.8 to 1.0. Survey equipment was removed. Angles of attack up to 17° and normal accelerations as high as 3.7 g were covered, (nasa proj off)
Airborne laser system developed by NASA’s Wallops Station and Langley Research Center was being used to measure presence of drifting plankton in offshore areas of Chesapeake Bay, Md., and Chincoteague Bay, Va. System, mounted on helicopter, used orange light flash from laser to induce fluorescence in plankton. Fluorescence then was measured and recorded through telescope on helicopter. Test results had confirmed feasibility of using laser system on low-flying aircraft or surface vessel for observation of chlorophyll-bearing marine microorganisms. (Wallops Release 72-6)
Ultrasonic wrench developed by NASA to connect tubing in Saturn boosters was available to private industry for possible commercial use, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Wrench induced flexuous vibrations in nut being tightened and guaranteed calibrated tension. It could be used by industry on conventional nuts and bolts, which could replace expensive lock nuts and bolts that changed color as tension increased. Ultrasonic tightening also could remove normal friction forces and ensure proper tension by preselected torque dial, (msfc Release 72-10)
The House passed H.R. 9430, a bill naming a Federal building and carrying an amendment that repealed the 1972 naming of Jet Propulsion Laboratory after former Rep. H. Allen Smith (R—Calif.). (CR, \2/1>/13, H10468)
The April 12 loss of NASA’s instrumented Convair 990 aircraft Galileo would have “very serious effects” on NASA’s research programs, Dr. Hans Mark, Ames Research Center Director, told the press in Mountain-view, Calif. The $5-million aircraft had been carrying more than $l-million worth of equipment when it and a Navy aircraft collided and crashed in flames. The Galileo had participated in the Feb. 17-March 8 U.S.—U.S.S.R. survey of the Bering Sea and was scheduled to chart the patterns of whales and other sea mammals. “It was one of the major programs at Ames.” Dr. Mark said. “We do not have another aircraft to carry on its work.” It would be “impossible” to go ahead with the project. A joint NASA-Navy investigation would try to determine the cause of the collision, r/a Herbert S. Ainsworth (usn) told the press that human error was responsible. (W Post, 4/14/73, A3)
Infrared photos were made from a leased aircraft by Marshall Space Flight Center’s Environmental Applications Office during an Alabama flood emergency. Photos—for analysis of flooded areas, water sources, flow patterns, and runoff routes—had been requested by the U.S., Geological Survey. They would be used also by civil defense organizations, the Tennessee Valley Authority, Redstone Arsenal engineers, and the North Alabama Regional Council of Governments, (msfc Release 73-35)
A Soviet delegation of aviation and aerospace industry officials, headed by First Deputy Minister of the Ministry of Aviation Industry Stephan I. Kadishev, had completed a three-week tour of major U.S. air transport and engine manufacturers, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The visit had been “smooth” despite strained relations between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. occasioned by the Middle East war. (Av Wk, 10/29/73, 24)
Pascagoula, Miss., Sheriff Fred Diamond told the press that two local shipyard workers had reported being taken aboard a glowing blue spacecraft by buzzing creatures with silvery, wrinkled skin. Workers Charles Hickson and Calvin Parker had said they had seen the spacecraft approaching as they fished off a pier Oct. 11. (upi, W Star-News, 10/13/73, A3) October 13:	The work of Abe Karen, nasa physicist and consultant to New York City’s Budget Dept., was described in a New York Times article. Karen worked under a “one-man program called the NASA/New York City Applications Project,” administered by nasa’s Office of Technology Utilization. Karen, paid by NASA, had introduced Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Silent Communication Alarm Network (scan) security system to protect life and property in two crime-ridden New York high schools and an Ames Research Center device to detect heroin in urine samples. He was eying other NASA-funded innovations for road-patching, bridge structural testing, fire warning, and removing graffiti from public buildings. (Darnton, NYT, 10/13/73, 37; nasa Off TU)
California Lt. Gov. Edwin Reinecke and Dr. Hans M. Mark, Ames Research Center Director, had concluded an agreement under which arc would assist the California Office of Emergency Services in developing a system for rapid evaluation of emergency situations, NASA announced. The agreement was part of an arc pilot program to develop disaster-assessment systems for regional or Federal agencies, arc would provide high-altitude multispectral photography, thermal infrared imagery, and radiometric surveys using earth resources research techniques to survey fire, flood, earthquake, landslide, oil spill, air pollution, or other disasters. (nasa Release 73-157)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory staff changes were announced by the Deputy Director, Gen. Charles H. Terhune, Jr. Geoffrey Robillard, Manager of the Applied Mechanics Div., had been appointed Deputy Assistant Laboratory Director for Technical Divisions. His successor was Glenn E. Vescelus, who had joined jpl in 1969. (jpl Release 654)
The National Academy of Sciences released Plans for U.S. Clear-Air Turbulence Research in the Global Atmospheric Research Program. The report of a panel of the U.S. Committee for the Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) recommended that increased Federal logistic support be provided for clear-air turbulence studies in planning, because of importance to aviation safety and to understanding effects of small-scale motions on large-scale dynamics of atmosphere. The Dept, of Defense should make available additional C-130 and RB57 aircraft for vertical-motion measurements in Project Wamflex (wave-induced momentum flux experiment) of the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s continuous-wave radar should be modified to detect clear-air turbulence in the tropopause. And NASA should provide additional instrument support including scaning lidar. (Text)
The National Science Foundation published NSF Forecasts Rise in Company-Funded, Research and Development and R&D Employment (nsf 73-301). Company-funded R&D expenditures were projected to increase by 22% between 1972 and 1975, to a record level of $14 billion annually by 1975. A moderate upswing in employment of scientists and engineers on company r&d programs was anticipated. Industrial firms had spent estimated $11.4 billion on R&D during 1972, 7% more than in 1971. Between 1970 and 1971 company-financed r&d rose 4%. Between 1970 and 1972 the number of scientists and engineers employed on company r&d programs rose slightly, to 240 000; an increase to 260 000 was anticipated by 1975. Aerospace firms foresaw future r&d growth below the rest of the industry. The downward trend of employment on company-supported basic research had stabilized; it was expected to rise 10% between 1972 and 1975. (nsf Highlights, 2/28/73) During February:	Instrument technicians from Flight Research Center removed transducers from the XB-70 experimental aircraft on static display at the Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, for installation in the YF-12 triple-sonic aircraft shortly to participate in a flight research program. Use of XB-70 transducers in the high-temperature environment to be encountered by new YF—12 aircraft would save Government more than $950 000 in instrument development and production costs, (frc Release 3-73)
NASA announced selection of United Aircraft Corp. Sikorsky Aircraft Div. for negotiation of a $25-million cost-reimbursement contract to design, fabricate, flight-test, and deliver two rotor systems research aircraft (rsra) . The aircraft, helicopters with wings and auxiliary engines, would be used as flying laboratories to develop advanced rotor system technology and flight-testing of new rotorblade concepts in a jointly funded NASA and Army research program, (nasa Release 73—165)
Unidentified astronomers were quoted as saying Comet Kohoutek was not likely to become visible to the naked eye for at least another week. After it rounded the sun Dec. 28, it would appear in the evening sky after sunset. It might be fragmented by solar gravity and solar radiation with the comet and its tail becoming more brilliant. A Naval Observatory astronomer predicted the comet would be no brighter than Comet Ikeya-Seki in 1965 or Comet Bennett in 1970. Smithsonian Astrophysi-cal Observatory astronomers did not expect Kohoutek to be visible without binoculars during the current week. (AP, NYT, 12/13/73)
Dr. Margaret Burbidge, Director of the Royal Greenwich Observatory in England, would resign in November to return to the U.S. as a Univ. of California astronomy professor, the Chicago Tribune Press Service reported. Dr. Burbidge would be succeeded by Dr. A. Hunter, Royal Greenwich Observatory Deputy Director. Announcing Dr. Burbidge’s resignation, the British Science Research Council had said she preferred to return to her own research rather than devote a major share of her time to administrative matters. Dr. Burbidge had criticized the Royal Observatory telescope at Herstmonceux, England, because cloudiness made it almost useless. (C Trib, 10/23/73)
The Navy F—14B swing-wing supersonic fighter aircraft flew its first test flight from the Grumman Aircraft Corp. facility at Calverton, N.Y. The F-14B reached mach 0.8 during a 67-min flight. (Av Wk, 9/17/73, 23)
Skylab backup hardware was being stored in plastic tents with controlled environments at Marshall Space Flight Center for later "use or disposal. (msfc Release 73-193)
Pioneer 10—launched March 2, 1972, toward Jupiter—had traveled farther into space than any man-made object, NASA announced. The spacecraft, when it swung hy Jupiter on Dec. 3 to give man his first closeup look at that planet, would set a speed record of 132 000 km (82 000 mi) per hr, breaking its own earlier mark of 51683 km (32 116 mi) per hr set at launch. After the Jupiter encounter, Pioneer 10 would be hurled by the planet’s gravity beyond the solar system toward the red star Aldebaran in the constellation Taurus. It was expected to cross the orbit of Pluto in 1987 still transmitting scientific data to the earth. The onboard experiments had been designed to yield useful data as far as 30 to 40 astronomical units, 4.5 billion—6.0 billion km (2.8 billion—3.7 billion mi), away. The spacecraft had been tracked and controlled so precisely that it would arrive at Jupiter within less than a minute of the time predicted at launch. NASA had submitted three applications to the National Aeronautic Association and the Federation Aeronautique Internationale for Pioneer .70’s unmanned interplanetary space flight records: maximum distance traveled from the sun, maximum distance of communications from the earth, and duration of the mission during which the spacecraft had been functioning, (nasa Release 73-183)
Cochairman of the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation—the National Science Foundation Director, Dr. H.	Guyford Stever, and Soviet Academician V. A. Trapeznikov—met with President Nixon at the White House. Dr. Stever told the president: “The signing of the agreement on science and technology, plus the other initiatives that you have taken, have triggered a great amount of cooperation in science and research, exchange of technical data with firms. And I think the progress is excellent.” (PD, 3/26/73, 288)
Langley Research Center and the Virginia Institute of Marine Science (vims) were using aerial photography to identify Tidewater Virginia vegetation in a project to aid Virginia in using its marshlands. High-resolution photos from helicopters would provide accurate knowledge of vegetation species to enable VIMS to classify plant life in specific marshes. VIMS also was working with Wallops Station to use multispectral aerial photography to identify features of specific vegetation by low-resolution photos, (nasa Release 73-146)
An earthlike atmosphere, 70% oxygen and 30% nitrogen, would be used for the first time in a U.S. manned spacecraft on the Skylab mission, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Pure oxygen had been an acceptable atmosphere for relatively short U.S. flights, but long-term breathing of pure oxygen might cause the red blood cells to become fragile. Three tons of breathing oxygen and three fourths^ ton of nitrogen would be launched aboard Skylab and combined into) atmospheric distribution, circulation, and control systems at a nominal pressure of 3.45 newtons per sq cm (5 psia). (msfc Release 73—5,7)
Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., issued its semiannual analysis of aerospace employment. Continued restraints in Government spending and an increase in foreign competition for existing markets were cited as causes of an expected continued decline in aerospace industry employment through June 1974. Employment had dropped by 33% since 1968. Nearly 950 000 persons had been employed in June 1973, but by June 1974 payrolls were expected to have been cut by about 32 000. The most significant decline would be among scientists and engineers— a reduction of 6000, 3.6% below December 1972. Employment of production workers was expected to decline by 13 000 jobs, leaving 460 000 employed by the end of FY 1974. Missiles and space employment was expected to decline by 28 000 workers between December 1972 and June 1974. Aircraft group employment faced a similar period of decline, from 556 000 to 533 000. Employment in the helicopter and general-aviation field was expected to increase 500 from June 1973, resulting in a work force of 22 500 by June 1974. Employment in the general-aviation aircraft field alone was expected to rise more than 20% during FY 1974. (Text)
President Nixon issued Executive Order 11712 establishing a Special Committee on Energy and a National Energy Office in the Executive Office of the President. In a message to Congress on U.S. energy policy, he said: “If we are to be certain that the forward thrust of our economy will not be hampered by insufficient energy supplies or by energy supplies that are prohibitively expensive, then we must not continue to be dependent on conventional forms of energy. We must instead make every useful effort through research and development to provide both alternative sources of energy and new technologies for producing and utilizing this energy. For the short-term future, our . . . strategy will provide technologies to extract and utilize our existing fossil fuels in a manner most compatible with a healthy environment. . . . from 1985 to the beginning of the next century, we will have more sophisticated development of our fossil fuel resources and . . . full development of the Liquid Metal Fast Breeder Reactor. Our efforts for the distant future center on the development of technologies—such as rfuclear fusion and solar power—that can provide us with a virtually limitless supply of clean energy.” (PD, 4/23/73, 389-406; 412-3)
The U.S.S.R. had fired nine intercontinental ballistic missiles within two weeks over its Asian territory north of the People’s Republic of China, the New York Times reported. Nixon Administration officials had said this suggested a step-up in Soviet training of crews for missiles with potential targets in China. (Beecher, NYT, 2/\l/12>, 4) February 19:	NASA was measuring aerodynamic noise made by aircraft in unpowered flight, to solve noise problem in communities surrounding airports. Lockheed-California Co. studies made for NASA and the Navy had indicated that aerodynamic (nonengine) noise might be a significant portion of total aircraft noise. Knowledge of sources could aid in designing quieter aircraft. Tests had been made with twin-engine, propeller-driven aircraft at Flight Research Center. Flights with twin-engine jet aircraft were planned for late January; flights with four-engine jet aircraft were being considered, (nasa Release 73-22)
Dr. Charles A. Lundquist, Assistant Director of the Smithsonian Institution’s Astrophysical Observatory, had been named Director of Marshall Space Flight Center’s Space Sciences Laboratory, Msfc announced. Before joining the Smithsonian, Dr. Lundquist had been Chief of the Physics and Astrophysics Branch in msfc’s former Research Projects Div. He had been transferred to msfc in 1960 from the Army Ballistic Missile Agency, (msfc Release 93-99)
President Nixon announced he would add $115 million to the FY 1974 budget for energy research and development. The increase would raise total energy r&d funding for FY 1974 to about $1 billion, a 37% increase over FY 1973. He said, “Our hopes for advancing research and development also rest upon my proposed legislation to create a Department of Energy and Natural Resources and an independent Energy Research and Development Administration.” (PD, 10/15/73, 1239-40)
General Dynamics Corp. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer David S. Lewis told the press in St. Louis, Mo., that he had signed an agreement with Dzherman M. Givishiany, Vice-chairman of the Soviet Committee for Science and Technology, for scientific and technical cooperation. The agreement covered commercial shipping, telecommunications equipment, asbestos mining, aircraft, computer-operated microfilm equipment, and navigation and weather buoys. (AP, Today, 9/28/73)
Ames Research Center earth resources survey aircraft were monitoring tussock moth damage to Douglas fir trees in Washington and Oregon at the request of the Washington State Dept, of Natural Resources. Two flights over the Blue Mountain area, covering parts of each state, would help determine damage done by the moths, which also attacked Ponderosa trees, (nasa Release 73-149)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Marshall Space Flight Center Director, announced personnel actions to reduce the Center’s total Civil Service personnel to 5214 by June 30. Separation notices had been given to 108 employees—87 at Huntsville, Ala., and 21 at msfc installations elsewhere. A total of 67 MSFC employees would receive notices of change to lower grade, with 15 losing some salary. Reassignment of 57 would be made concurrently with the reduction in force, (msfc Release 73-45)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.) introduced S. 2819 to establish an Office of Solar Energy Research within the Atomic Energy Commission to conduct research and development to ensure the use of solar energy for national energy needs. (CR, 12/17/73, S23017-24)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the selection of the Avco Electronics Operation of Avco Precision Products Div., Avco Corp., for negotiation of a $3 252 845, 23-mo contract for modifications to the MSFC Structures and Mechanics Laboratory. The work would provide a data-acquisition system for space-shuttle-hardware structural and fatigue tests, (msfc Release 73—141) October 4:	President Nixon issued a statement about NASA’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1] : “At mid-twentieth century, the United States found itself drawn by international necessity, and driven by national pride and pioneering instinct to view the heavens no longer as the stuff of romance, but as a practical environment for the extension of man’s dominion over the earth. Since then, four administrations have committed our industrial resources, our technological and scientific capacities and the national will to the proposition that America can and must play a role in outer space equal to its responsibilities as a great nation.” People of all nations stood in awe of NASA’s accomplishments. “The men of NASA have undertaken one of the greatest human adventures with such consummate skill, cool exactness in the face of untold dangers, and professional disdain for the sensational that we have come already to take for granted the legitimacy of man’s place in an environment entirely alien to him. But neither the courage, skill and devotion of the men of NASA, nor the benefits of their efforts, should be taken for granted. In every phase of our national life, new products, new techniques and new understanding have resulted from our efforts in space. And in relations between nations, the prospects for a lasting peace have been enhanced by the now absolute awareness that the primary interests of mankind are identical and shared in common. On the fifteenth anniversary of NASA, we look ahead to the same ordered progress into our space future which has characterized our first tentative steps into space.” (Text)
A team of Ames Research Center scientists, headed by Dr. James B. Pollack, had discovered that the upper levels of Venus’s brilliant clouds consisted of droplets of sulfuric acid more concentrated than the acid in an automobile battery, arc announced. The team had measured the infrared “color” of Venus from a Lear jet aircraft and compared results with a computer simulation of the color properties of various substances. (arc Release 73-128)
Findings that solar power held vast potential to supplement energy needs were presented at Marshall Space Flight Center by university faculty fellows in an msfc Systems Engineering Design Program. The joint MSFC-Auburn Univ. program was to provide information and experience for developing multidisciplinary systems engineering design courses and programs. The fellows had made a systems approach study of the application of solar technology and research to meet the energy crisis. (msfc Release 73-109; msfc pao)
Soviet cosmonaut Mrs. Valentina Nikolayeva-Tereshkova—on tour in Cacolla, India—told the press she was preparing for another space flight. “I am working for it and am keen on it because it is my work, but no date has yet been fixed for it.” Mrs. Nikolayeva-Tereshkova, wife of Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev, had made her first space flight June 16-19, 1963, on Vostok 6. (AP, W Star & News, 1/29/73, A3)
The National Science Foundation released Research and Development in Industry 1971: Funds, 1971; Scientists & Engineers, January 1972 (nsf 73—305). Industry spent $18.3 billion on r&d activities in 1971— a gain of 1% over the 1970 level. Company r&d funds increased by 4% 1970-1971, with the companies financing 58% of total U.S. R&D effort; r&d decreased only in the aircraft and missiles industry. Aircraft firms spent 6% less on r&d in 1971 than in 1970. The ratio of R&D spending to net sales had declined steadily from its 1964 peak. In 1971 the ratio was 3.5%—the lowest since 1957. The number of r&d scientists and engineers in industry also continued to decline. Between January 1969 and January 1972 the number decreased by 9%, to 325 200. During this period r&d professionals in the aircraft industry dropped by 27%. (Text)
Thomas J. Lee had been named Manager of the Marshall Space Flight Center Sortie Lab Task Force by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director, the Marshall Star announced. Lee succeeded Jack Trott, who had retired April 30. (Marshall Star, 2/5/73, 1)
The “spreading Watergate scandal”—arising from investigations of alleged White House implication in the burglarizing and electronic surveillance of Democratic National Committee Headquarters by members of the Committee to Reelect the President—had slowed down Administration research and development decision making, a Science & Government Report editorial said. The subsequent disintegration of presidential staff had created “a decision-making paralysis that is subtly but steadily spreading to agencies far remote from current headline events.” The editorial quoted an Office of Science and Technology staff member as saying that “just about every thing that the President set out in his Science and Technology message 14 months ago requires some sort of approval at the White House level now and then, and there’s no one to talk to there.” The newly created White House National Energy Office had “already received some shock waves from the scandal through the resignation of presidential assistant John D. Ehrlichman,” who had been appointed by President Nixon to a three-man Special Committee on Energy to “give political weight” to neo decisions. Difficulties flowing from Watergate were aggravated by the impending transition in management of the Science-Government relationship. Many OST responsibilities would shift to the National Science Foundation Director, Dr. H. Guyford Stever, when the OST was abolished June 30. “Whether for good or ill, the change is a change, and necessarily involves the dissolution of longstanding relationships, some of them dating back to early post-Sputnik days.” {Sci & Gov Rpt, 5/15/73, 7)
Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey A. Gromyko signed new U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreements on cooperation in transportation and ocean studies and a General Agreement on Contacts, Exchanges, and Cooperation in the Fields of Science, Technology, Education, and Culture, during State Dept, ceremonies attended by President Nixon and visiting Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev. The General Agreement reaffirmed commitments for cooperation in environmental protection, medicine and public health, space exploration and the use of outer space for peaceful purposes, and science and technology signed during the May 22-29, 1972, U.S.—U.S.S.R. summit meetings in Moscow. (PD, 6/25/73, 791-800)
Soviet helicopter designer Nikolay I. Kamov died at age 71, He had received the title of Hero of Socialist Labor for his services in the development of Soviet helicopter design and construction. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 10/28/73, Ul) November 25:	Compelling evidence of the existence of a previously predicted black hole in space had been discovered by a Univ. College team in London, using nasa’s Oao 3 Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (launched Aug. 21, 1972), NASA announced. The scientists, headed by Dr. R. L. F. Boyd with Dr. Peter Sanford, had tied the binary supergiant star system HDE 226868 to the x-ray source Cygnus X-l and had detected evidence of the structure of the star system’s gas clouds swirling around and into the x-ray source, or black hole. Using Oao 3, they had also observed extended x-ray sources identified with clusters of galaxies like those in the Perseus, Coma, Virgo, and Centaurus constellations. They believed enormous upheavals in the nucleus of the Seyfert galaxy were affecting the entire Perseus cluster of several thousand galaxies. They also believed the x-ray emission detected in the Seyfert galaxy might be associated with the inverse Compton effect, in which high-velocity electrons traveling near the speed of light collided with radio and optical photons. Their conclusions suggested that x-rays originated in the most active galaxies of the cluster, (nasa Release 73251)
Discovery of huge, shallow craters at the near-equatorial zone of Venus was announced by Jet Propulsion Laboratory radar astronomers headed by Dr. Richard A. Goldstein. The team had produced a map showing a 1500-km (930-mi) section of Venus, about the size of Alaska, that showed 12 craters up to 160 km (100 mi) across. The discovery had been made with high-intensity radar beams from Goldstone Tracking Station in the Mohave desert. The resolution, about 10 km (6 mi), was five times better than previously obtained, (jPL Release 665; NASA Release 73-145)
The U.S.S.R. intended to purchase 10 Apollo extravehicular spacesuits of the kind used on the Apollo 15, 16, and 17 missions to use in a comparative study with its own suits, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported, icx—International Computer Exchange, Inc., had been negotiating the terms of the purchase between ilc Industries, Inc., which manufactured the spacesuits, and the U.S.S.R. State Committee for Science and Technology and the Institute for Medical Biological Problems of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. A contract could be signed within 30 to 60 days and the suits delivered during the last quarter of 1973 if icx could obtain an export license from the U.S. Department of State. (Av Wk, 3/26/73, 17-18)
President Nixon announced the appointment of the National Science Foundation Director, Dr. H. Guyford Stever, as Acting Chairman of the Federal Council for Science and Technology. (PD, 5/21/73, 681)
President Nixon announced the designation of Dr. H. Guyford Stever, National Science Foundation Director, as Chairman of the Federal Council for Science and Technology. Dr. Stever, who had been Acting Chairman since May 14, would also serve as Presidential Science Adviser, pursuant to the President’s Jan. 26 Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1973, which abolished the Executive Office of Science and Technology effective July 1.	A former President of Carnegie-Mellon Univ., Dr. Stever had been nsf Director since 1972. The Federal Council for Science and Technology had been established by Executive Order 10807 of March 13, 1959, to recommend measures for effective implementation of Federal policies on the administration and conduct of Federal programs and science and technology. (Off of White House Press Secy Press Notice)
Ames Research Center light aircraft and various ground stations were being used to document air pollution in the San Francisco Bay area under a two-year National Science Foundation project, arc, the Bay Area Pollution Control District, and the Atomic Energy Commission’s Lawrence Livermore Laboratory were collaborating in the project, arc would make atmospheric measurements and computer studies in photo-chemisty to determine how sunlight affected pollution. The Livermore Laboratory, operated by the Univ. of California, would use weather and pollution data to verify a model under development. Radiosonde balloons launched by students at San Jose State Univ. also would gather data under an arc grant. Another grant, with the Statewide Air Pollution Research Center at the Univ. of California at Riverside, would analyze hydrocarbons, (arc Release 73-90)
The U.S.S.R. Tu-144 supersonic transport had reached a speed of 2100 km per hr (1300 mph) during a test flight, Tass reported. It had carried Soviet journalists to an altitude of 17 km (11 mi) on a 90-min flight between Moscow and Saralov. The designer, Gen. Aleksey A. Tupolev, had said new design changes included extendable wings on the front that improved aerodynamic performance. The engine and landing gear had also been improved. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 6/1/73, L4)
Award by Lewis Research Center of a $2 833 780 contract to General Electric Co.’s Gas Turbine Products Div. for two gas turbine assemblies was reported by Lewis News. The turbines were for a new test facility to bench-test advanced turbines and combustors for future aircraft. (Lewis News, 5/4/73, 4)
A Science editorial criticized the Nixon Administration’s abolition of the post of Presidential Science Adviser and the Office of Science and Technology: The deed had been done in a way “not worthy of a great nation.” The office had first been abolished, “then someone woke up to the fact that it served important functions. After scrambling around, someone had the inspiration to transfer the functions of the office to the National Science Foundation (nsf) and appoint [Dr. H.] Guyford Stever (head of the nsf) as science adviser. The solution has merit. However, if it is to represent more than a gesture, Stever and the NSF will be overloaded with conflicting responsibilities.” (Abelson, Science, 2/16/73, 641) February 17:	The nasa-U.S.S.R. joint mission to measure ice, surface, and atmospheric conditions in the Bering Sea began, following arrival at the experiment site of the U.S. Coast Guard ship Staten Island, NASA instrumented Convair 990 Galileo aircraft, and Soviet weather ship Priboy and 11—18 aircraft. (fbis-Sov, 3/6/73, LI)
A Chicago Sun-Times editorial praised the “mapmaking” of the Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28 to man the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop launched May 14) : “We were particularly impressed to read about their assigned job of photographing a swamp in southern Sudan as they zipped over North Africa.” Such tasks “point up the way in which a space shuttle can be used to facilitate jobs on Earth and, no less important, encourage co-operation between nations.” (C Sun-Times, 9/4/73) September 5:	President Nixon submitted to Congress Science Indicators, 1972, the fifth annual report of the National Science Board of the National Science Foundation. The proportion of the gross national product spent for research and development 1963—1971 declined in the U.S., France, and the United Kingdom, but increased in the U.S.S.R., Japan, and West Germany. By 1971, U.S. r&d expenditures were 2.6% of GNP, Soviet 3.0%, U.K. and West Germany 2.0%, and Japan and France 1.8% each. The number of scientists and engineers engaged in r&d per 10 000 persons declined in the U.S. after 1969, but continued to increase in the U.S.S.R., Japan, West Germany, and France. All countries reduced the national defense proportion of their R&D expenditures significantly between 1961 and 1969. U.S. defense expenditures dropped from 65% to 49% of total Government R&D spending. Increases in the U.S. and most other countries occurred in space, community services, and economic development. The U.S. had a favorable but declining “patent balance” between 1966 and 1970, with a reduced number of patents of U.S. origin in France, West Germany, and the U.K. and increased U.S. patents of Japanese origin. The U.S. had an increasingly favorable position in the sale of “technical know-how”—including patents, techniques, formulas, franchises, and manufacturing rights—during 1960-1971; Japan was the major purchaser, surpassing all of Western Europe after 1967. The favorable U.S. balance of trade in technology-intensive products grew 1960-1971, but was increasingly negative in nontechnology-intensive areas. Within technology-intensive areas, products with the fastest rising trade surplus were aircraft, computers, and plastics. (PD, 9/10/73, 1069; Text)
The 1973 Nobel Prizes in physics and in chemistry were awarded in Stockholm. The $122 000 physics award went to two Americans and one Briton for step-by-step proof of how electrons tunneled through conductors to form superconductors of electricity. The winners were Japanese-born Leo Esaki, International Business Machines Co. scientist; Norwegian-born Ivar Giaever, General Electric Co. scientist; and Brian Josephson of Cambridge Univ. in England. The $120 000 chemistry award went to Ernst 0. Fischer, Munich Technical Univ. scientist, and Geoffrey Wilkinson of London’s Imperial College of Science and Technology for “pioneering work, performed independently, on the chemistry of the so-called sandwich compounds” which attached rings of carbon compounds to transitional metals like titanium and vanadium. (O’Taole, W Post, 10/24/73, A19; FonF, 10/21-27/73, 882)
The Rev. Walter J. Miller, Fordham Univ. astronomer and former assistant papal astronomer at the Vatican Astronomical Observatory, died in New York following a heart attack, at age 69. He had specialized in the study of faint variables, pulsating stars that varied their apparent magnitude periodically. He was known particularly for his observations of Cygnus in the Milky Way galaxy. (NYT, 12/2/73, 85)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory astronomers—using the 610-mm (24-in) telescope and coude spectrograph at Table Mountain Observatory, Calif.— had found that a 20% fluctuation in carbon dioxide absorption was a recurring four-day phenomenon in the thick Venus cloud bank, NASA announced. The top of the cloud deck might move up and down more than one kilometer (two thirds mile) in a constant wave motion. The astronomers had said the observation was “a fundamental feature of atmospheric dynamics that is not explained by current theories of atmospheric circulation on Venus.” (NASA Release 73-97)
Cosmos 585 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into an orbit with a 1407-km (874.3-mi) apogee, 1375-km (854.4-mi) perigee, 113.5-min period, and 74.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/73; SBD, 9/13/73, 55) September 9:	Publication of Nondestructive Testing, a Survey (nasa SP—5113) was announced by NASA. The survey summarized NASA-developed methods and techniques to determine the integrity, quality, durability, and effectiveness of a material or product and to maintain quality control over products mass-produced by automation, (nasa Release 73-172) September 10:	President Nixon sent a message to Congress on national legislative goals. Of defense spending he said: “I continue to be adamantly opposed to attempts at balancing the overall budget by slashing the defense budget. ... In constant dollars, our defense spending in this fiscal year will be $10 billion less than was spent in 1964, before the Vietnam war began. . . . Further cuts #would be dangerously irresponsible and I will veto any bill that includes cuts which would imperil our national security. . . . The arms limitation agreement signed with the Soviet Union last year has at last halted the rapid growth in the numbers of strategic weapons. Despite this concrete achievement, much needs to be done to ensure continued stability and to support our negotiation of a permanent strategic arms agreement. A vigorous research and development program is essential to provide vital insurance that no adversary will ever gain a decisive advantage through technological breakthrough and that massive deployment expenditures will therefore not become necessary. Yet the Congress is in the process of slashing research and development funding below minimum prudent levels, including elimination of our cruise missile and air defense programs. The Trident and B—1 programs, which are critical to maintaining a reliable deterrent into the next decade, are also facing proposals to cut them to the bone.” The President reiterated his request that Congress authorize creation of Dept, of Energy and Natural Resources and “a new, independent Energy Research and Development Administration so that we can make the very best use of our research and development funds in the future.” r&d efforts could produce “the most helpful solutions to the energy problem.” He called for a separate and independent Nuclear Energy Commission. (PD, 9/17/73, 1074-9)
The U.S.S.R. was beginning a new major program to strengthen its underground missile silos against nuclear attack, according to senior U.S. officials quoted by the Washington Post. The unidentified officials thought the U.S.S.R. might be planning to use a new “popup” missile-launching technique as part of this effort. (Getler, W Post, 9/22/73) September 23:	Japanese amateur astronomer Tsuomi Seki reacquired and photographed Comet Kohoutek at his specially designed comet observatory in Tokyo. The comet—last observed by its discoverer, Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, May 5—was falling toward the sun almost exactly as predicted and was approaching the earth and the sun in a long, sweeping orbit. (Am Mus—Hayden Planetarium Release, 10/1/73)
A Science editorial commented on the altered structure of Federal science advisory apparatus arising from the demise of the Office of Science and Technology and the July 10 appointment of the National Science Foundation Director, Dr. H. Guyford Stever, as Presidential Science Adviser and Chairman of the Federal Council for Science and Technology. Dr. Stever had met with presidents or principal officers of most of the major scientific and engineering organizations and had indicated “that he would welcome policy advice and recommendations concerning personnel. As specific problems arise, the appropriate organizations will be tapped. Thus it seems that a major difference between the new and the old apparatus will be the replacement of a small, formal, elite group by more broadly based ad hoc groups. The concept is worth a try. Whether it will be viable will depend on how effectively it is implemented by both sides.” (Abelson, Science, 10/5/73, 13)
The Air Force announced the award of a $1 058 685 contract to PhilcoFord Corp. for feasibility demonstration of an aerial observation designator system for remotely piloted vehicles, (dod Release 258-73) May 22:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, established the Skylab 1 Investigation Board to determine why the micrometeoroid shield was lost following May 14 launch of the Orbital Workshop and why the solar panels failed to deploy. Dr. Fletcher named Director Bruce T. Lundin of Lewis Research Center Chairman of the Board. Lundin appointed nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science Vincent L. Johnson Vice-chairman, (nasa Notice 1154; nasa Release 73-112)
NASA and the Environmental Protection Agency signed an agreement to participate in a three-year Automotive Gas Turbine Technology Program to develop and demonstrate a car powered by a gas turbine engine that met or bettered the 1976 Federal emission standards, was economical to run, and performed well. The agreement was signed by Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, and Robert L. Sansom, epa’s Assistant Administrator for Air and Water Programs. Lewis Research Center would manage the program for nasa. (nasa Release 73-123; nasa nmi 1052.179)
The Nixon Administration’s proposed Criminal Code Reform Act of 1973 contained language that could make it a felony for aerospace industry representatives in Washington to notify their companies of potential business until the Government officially permitted them to do so, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The broadly worded bill would make it illegal “to knowingly communicate information relating to the national defense to a person not authorized to receive it.” (Av Wk, 4/16/73, 11)
Office of Management and Budget Director Ray L. Ash said in a letter to Rep. Ralph S. Regula (D—Ohio) that immediately upon the establishment of the proposed Energy Research and Development Administration, omb would urge the erda Administrator to undertake “a thorough review of all NASA personnel and facilities that might be closed because of NASA’s post-Apollo ‘scaling down.’ ” Ash said he had been “concerned for some time about the possible loss from government service of these valuable skills and resources.” (CR, 12/14/73, E8084)
Lewis Research Center received two Industrial Research Magazine IR-100 Awards for 1973 at ceremonies in Chicago’s Museum of Science and Industry. The Center also was presented a special award acknowledging that NASA had accumulated 10 or more IR—100 awards—prizes given by the magazine for what it deemed the 100 most significant new products developed during the year. LeRC had won 9 out of the 12 awards presented to NASA and had earned at least one IR—100 Award every year except one since first entering the competition in 1966. LeRC 1973 awards were for an x-ray photographic system with potential application for industry and basic research and for a shaft seal for very-highspeed turbines and compressors. (LeRC Release 73—39)
The U.S. aerospace industry had “weathered the economic storms of recent years” to emerge “a leaner and tougher competitor,” an Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial said. For the first time in years, the industry was seeing “some of the government shackles that restricted its efforts abroad loosened and even active support forthcoming in certain key areas. The sad story of the balance-of-trade deficits and the decline of the dollar have finally shaken the U.S. government out of its economic isolation, and the aerospace industry will benefit accordingly in its increasing export campaign.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 5/28/73, 9)
The Senate passed S. 1283 by unanimous vote of 82. The Energy Research and Development Policy Act would provide support for programs in r&d of fuels and energy. {CR, Y2J1/1Z, S22190)
Signing of a $17.9-million, three-year, fixed-price-incentive contract with award fees with LTV Aerospace Corp. for complete system management of the Scout launch vehicle was announced by nasa. Work would be performed by ltv Vought Systems Div. with Langley Research Center monitoring. Processing of 6-12 Scout launches of U.S. and foreign payloads was to be included in the system management. LTV, Scout contractor since 1958, had built some 80 Scout vehicles for nasa. (nasa Release 73-231)
The discovery that Saturn’s rings appeared to be made of solid chunks rather than of gas, ice crystals, or dust had been made by Jet Propulsion Laboratory astronomers, NASA announced. Dr. Richard M. Goldstein and George A. Morris, Jr., had made the first successful radar probes of Saturn, using NASA’s 64-m (210-ft) antenna at Goldstone Station, and had received much stronger bounceback signals than expected. “From our radar results,” Dr. Goldstein had said, “the rings cannot be made up of tiny ice crystals, dust, or gas. Our echoes indicate rough jagged surfaces, with solid material 1 meter (3.3 feet) in diameter or larger. Possibly much larger.” The rings could be a great hazard to any spacecraft sent into them, (nasa Release 73—37)
NASA research to improve general-aviation-aircraft flight control systems and increase the use of new flight equipment was described by Flight Research Center and Langley Research Center engineers at the Society of Automotive Engineers Business Aircraft Meeting in Wichita, Kan. frc flight tests of a new attitude-command-control system aboard an experimental aircraft had shown that a flight-path control system similar to an automobile’s steering system was a great improvement over conventional control systems. Use of the new system, plus an improved flight display tested by frc, could reduce the general-aviation workload throughout most flights. Astronautics Corp. of America was developing a low-cost flight director under NASA contract. The Univ. of Kansas would evaluate its economical, separate, surface-stability-augmentation flight control system on a modified commuter aircraft under a NASA grant. LaRC was developing structural design technology to provide the greatest chance of pilot and passenger survival in a crash. Full-scale aircraft crashes were simulated by using a 60-m (200-ft) pendulum to swing instrumented aircraft into the ground at controlled angles and speeds. Resulting data were used to design aircraft to absorb more of the crash forces without destroying the cabin areas. NASA stall and spin studies at LaRC used a vertical wind tunnel, unique in the U.S., to develop data for designing aircraft with improved spin recovery characteristics, (nasa Release 73-63; frc Release 7-73)
Samples from three materials-processing experiments performed during the Skylab 2 mission (manning the Orbital Workshop May 25 to June 22) had been turned over to the principal investigators at Marshall Space Flight Center, msfc announced. The small metallic spheres and welding specimens represented the first effort to obtain basic engineering and scientific data for materials processing in space. The samples would be analyzed and the results compared with similar data from earth-processed samples to learn how to fabricate and repair structures in space, develop unique or improved materials for use on the earth, and provide new knowledge of material properties and performance. (msfc Release 73-96)
Langley Research Center had purchased a 737-100 aircraft from Boeing Commercial Airplane Co. for research on advanced flight systems for future air terminal environments, NASA announced. The twin-jet transport, the first 737 built, would be delivered to Langley in January 1974. The $2-million contract with Boeing included modification, refurbishment, and NASA pilot and ground crew training. Special equipment would permit study of efficient air paths, aircraft performance requirements, automatic systems, displays, and pilot workloads. (NASA Release 73-57)
President Nixon announced 1973 recipients of the National Medal of Science, including Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, Jr., Head of the 8-Foot Tunnels Branch at NASA’s Langley Research Center. Dr. Whitcomb was cited for “his discoveries and inventions in aerodynamics which have provided and will continue to provide substantial improvements in the speed, range, and payload of a major portion of high performance aircraft produced throughout the country.” The other recipients were: Dr. Daniel I. Arnon, Univ. of California at Berkeley physiologist; Dr. Carl Djerassi, Stanford Univ. chemist; Dr. Harold E. Edgerton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Professor Emeritus of electrical engineering; Dr. William Maurice Ewing, Univ. of Texas at Galveston scientist; Dr. Arie Jan Haagen-Smit, Cal Tech biochemist; Dr. Vladimir Haensel, Vice President for Science and Technology, Universal Oil Products Corp.; Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of Rockefeller Univ.; Dr. Earl W. Sutherland, Jr., Univ. of Miami biochemist; Dr. John W. Tukey, Executive Director of Bell Telephone Laboratories, Inc., Research Communication Principles Div. and Princeton Univ. statistician; and Dr. Robert Rathbun Wilson, Director of the National Accelerator Laboratory at Batavia, 111. {PD, 10/8/73, 1224)
President Nixon transmitted The World Weather Program. Plan for Fiscal Year 1974 to Congress. U.S. participation in the world program, coordinated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, included the Depts. of Defense, State, and Transportation; Atomic Energy Commission; Environmental Protection Agency; National Science Foundation; and NASA. In addition to programs presented in noaa’s Federal Plan [see July 11], the Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) would conduct the garp Atlantic Tropical Experiment (gate) June 15-September 1974 to study tropical atmosphere meteorology and its effects on circulation of the earth’s atmosphere. And the first garp Global Experiment, scheduled for 1977, would include two polar-orbiting satellites, one provided by the U.S. and one by the U.S.S.R., and five earth-synchronous spacecraft—two operated by NOAA for the U.S., one over the Indian Ocean by the U.S.S.R., one over the western Pacific by Japan, and one over Africa and the eastern Atlantic by the European Space Research Organization (esro). (noaa Release 73-168; PD, 7/16/73, 900)
The Naval Research Laboratory was converting a number of Minuteman I missile 2nd stages into large-payload-capacity, high-performance sounding rockets for x-ray astronomy research, Naval Research Reviews reported. The surplus 2nd-stage motors were being adapted with specially designed nosecones and scientific payload's for forthcoming experiments. Instruments aboard the new sounding rockets, named the Aries, would be used by nrl scientists to determine ultraviolet background levels of the stars from above the earth’s atmosphere. (Naval Research Reviews, 8/73, 27-8)
The Institute for Advanced Computations at Ames Research Center held a press seminar on the illiac iv computer, illiac iv, developed and funded by the Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa) under a contract with Burroughs Corp., had been installed at ARC under a 1970 joint nasa-arpa agreement and the Institute for Advanced Computations had been established to operate the system, illiac iv was being integrated into a larger remote-access computer system being developed at arc as a process and data-storage resource on the nationwide arpa computing network, accessible to universities and Government agencies. illiac IV would make applications in global climate dynamics, distant seismic-event detection, multisensor processing, fluid dynamics, and simulation and optimization problems in logistics and economics, (arc Releases 73-88, 73-89; arc pao)
A helmet designed by Ames Research Center and Aerotherm Corp. to keep the heads of helicopter pilots cool had been tested successfully by stock car racing driver Richard Petty, NASA announced. The helmet, lined with polyurethane through which water circulated, kept the pilot’s head cool, lowering heat stress on his entire body. (NASA Release 73-120)
Sen. Peter H. Dominick (R-Colo.) introduced S. 1686 to authorize the National Science Foundation to facilitate the application of science and technology to civilian needs and to assist in establishing civilian research and development priorities. The bill would seek to place a science and technology adviser in each governor’s office and enable states and localities to participate at the Federal level in establishing r&d priorities. (CR, 5/2/73, S8159)
A Navy F—14 jet fighter aircraft shot itself down over the Pacific with a Sparrow air-to-air missile launched erratically from its mount beneath the aircraft. The two Grumman Aerospace Corp. crewmen ejected and were rescued unharmed by a Navy helicopter. The F-14 had been flight-testing the missile’s ability to drop clear of its mount before firing, the Navy explained in a statement issued June 21, but the missile failed to clear, struck the fuselage, and exploded. It was the third loss of an F—14 since the swing-wing aircraft’s December 1970 maiden test flight. (Witkin, NYT, 6/22/73, 8)
The National Science Foundation released Graduate Student Support and Manpower Resources in Graduate Science Education (nsf 73—304). Graduate science enrollment in doctorate departments applying for nsf traineeships declined 3% from 1970 to 1971 in all scientific areas except psychology and the social sciences. The number of students enrolling for the first time dropped 4% in 1970 and 8% in 1971. Graduate enrollment of foreign students declined 2% in 1971, after having increased 10% from 1967 to 1968 and another 11% by 1969. The enrollment dropoff of nearly 2% in full-time graduate science students was attributed to an acute financial squeeze, during which several leading universities began restricting enrollment, and to student disenchantment with science and technology because of rising unemployment among scientists and engineers. (Text) July 31—August 1:	A five-member Universities Scientific Research Assn, committee to advise on the production of glass in space held a meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center. The committee discussed an msfc study dealing with the basic phenomena of glass production and toured msfc facilities. (Marshall Star, 8/1/73, 2) During July:	Ames Research Center and Hersh Acoustical Engineering Co. began wind-tunnel experiments to test the effect of serrated rotor edges on the noise level of a simulated jet engine compressor. The concept had been inspired by observations of the owl. A British naval officer had theorized that the owl’s unique serrated wing might help explain the bird’s quietness in flight. ARC engineer Paul Soderman had discovered through five years’ study and testing that comb-like edges did reduce noise at low tip speeds, but the tests had been limited because they were made only statically to simulate a helicopter’s hover. (NASA Release 73-144)
The National Science Foundation released Immigrant Scientists and Engineers in the United States (nsf 73-302). A mid-1970 survey of characteristics and attitudes of foreign scientists and engineers who had immigrated to the U.S. between 1964 and 1969 showed most had come seeking a higher standard of living. Nearly 6 of every 10 held a Ph.D. or Master’s degree. One of every five had continued graduate training. More than 90% were employed in professional positions, and more than one half were in research and development. Although the majority were under 40 yrs of age, 35% had authored scientific papers in the U.S. and 8% held U.S. patents. (Text) August 7:	The earth had passed between NASA’s Pioneer 10 (launched toward Jupiter March 2, 1972) and the sun for the second time during its 1-billion-km (620-million-mi) journey, Ames Research Center announced. Pioneer 10 was 850 million km (530 million mi) from the earth and was scheduled to make history’s first visit to Jupiter in December. When the spacecraft, the earth, and the sun were aligned in inferior conjunction, Pioneer 10’s sun sensor would look almost directly at the sun, interfering with the sensor’s count of the spacecraft rotation rate. To avoid the problem, arc flight directors were keeping the pointing direction of the spacecraft’s radio beam and sun sensor 1.5° from the sun and 1° from the earth. Pioneer 11 (launched toward Jupiter April 5, 1973) was 150 million km (93 million mi) from the earth. Both spacecraft were functioning well, (arc Release 73-84)
Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.), with 27 cosponsors, introduced S. 1283, to establish an interagency “Earth Management Project” for research, development, and demonstration in fuels and energy for the coordination of and financial supplementation of Federal energy research and development. The bill would include an assistant administrator from nasa. (CR, 3/19/73, S5021-37)
President Nixon signed H.R. 7528 into Public Law 93—74, NASA’s $3.065billion FY 1974 authorization. Approved by the House-Senate Conference Committee June 28, by the House May 23, and by the Senate June 19, the bill provided $2,246 billion for research and development, $112 million for construction of facilities, and $707 million for research and program management. (PD, 7/30/72, 936; P.L. 93—74)
Lewis Research Center Director Bruce T. Lundin announced appointment of Harold Ferguson as Equal Employment Opportunity Officer. Ferguson was a physicist with 17 yrs experience in fluid mechanics and electric propulsion at LeRC. (LeRC Release 73-6)
Ames Research Center biologists Paul H. Deal and Kenneth A. Souza had discovered an earth organism that could survive and grow in an environment resembling that of the outer planets of the solar system, NASA announced. The rod-shaped bacteria were swimming, growing, and reproducing in a highly alkaline solution of sodium hydroxide. The atmospheres of Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus were believed by some scientists to be highly alkaline. The discovery renewed questions of possible life on Jupiter, since the planet’s extreme alkalinity had been cited as a major deterrent to life. (NASA Release 73-238)
Lewis Research Center scientist Stanley G. Young had applied cavitation— erosion of metal by tiny cavities formed by uneven pressure gradients in liquids—to restoring serial numbers obliterated by filing or grinding, NASA reported. In the process, of use to police in identifying stolen property, an ultrasonic vibrator generated very-high-frequency vibrations in water, creating millions of microscopic bubbles. The bubbles struck the metal surface on which serial numbers had been erased, weakening particles that filled the serial number grooves. Conventional methods of restoring serial numbers used chemicals or mechanical processes that might obliterate remaining traces of the numbers. (NASA Release 73-216)
A Federal court in New York began hearing $2-million libel suit brought by Dr. W. Ross Adey, Univ. of California at Los Angeles brain research specialist, against the New York-based animal welfare organization United Action for Animals. Dr. Adey accused the organization of publishing “false, scandalous, defamatory statements” in an article in its bulletin on a NASA- and Air Force-funded Biosatellite 3 experiment (launched June 28, 1969). The organization had criticized Dr. Adey’s treatment of Bonny—an instrumented monkey that had been orbited to measure functions of central nervous, cardiovascular, and metabolic systems under weightlessness. Bonny had died shortly after its return to the earth. (Burks, NYT, 1/20/73, 27; 1/25/73, 45) January 23:	At a Marshall Space Flight Center Space Science Seminar, Dr. Maurice M. Shapiro, Naval Research Center chief scientist for cosmic ray physics, said studies had shown cosmic rays were fast atomic nuclei trapped in the Milky Way’s magnetic fields. After acceleration, the rays diffused into the interstellar medium, where many underwent violent collisions and transformations. Surviving particles leaked out of the galaxy, (msfc Release 73-3; nrl pio)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced two contract awards. A $1 176 872 extension was made in a $5 188 357 contract with Bendix Corp. to provide management, sustaining engineering, and logistics support for the ST—124M stabilized platform for the July 1975 mission of the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. The contract extension, bringing the total contract value to $6 365 229, was from May 1, 1974, through July 31, 1975. A $160 000 contract was awarded Norman Engineering Co. for architect-engineering services to modify a test stand for space shuttle testing, (msfc Releases 73-190, 73-191) December 6:	Concorde 201—Air France’s first Concorde supersonic airliner, the first production Concorde and the fifth Concorde to fly—made its maiden flight, from Toulouse, France, including 45 min supersonic flight. The aircraft reached mach 1.57, more than 1600 km (100 mi) per hr, at 1280 m (42 000 ft) during its 2-hr 50-min flight. Command pilot was Aerospatiale’s Andre Turcat. (Concorde Bull 12, 1/1/74)
Langley Research Center scientists had redesigned a Cessna Cardinal aircraft with a smaller, experimental wing in a research program to apply advanced aerodynamic technology to small general-aviation aircraft, NASA announced. Renamed the Redhawk, the experimental aircraft had been flown across the U.S. and operated by aviation writers and pilots from general-aviation companies. LaRC research pilots had praised the aircraft’s low response to air turbulence and the control made possible by spoilers and flap systems on the wings. In the program’s second phase, a Piper twin-engine Seneca aircraft was being converted to study a new airfoil section developed by Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, Jr., Head of the 8-Foot Tunnels Branch at LaRC. (nasa Release 73-197)
The House passed H.J.R. 5 to designate the week of April 23 as Nicolaus Copernicus Week, marking the quinquicentennial of the pioneer astronomer’s birth. (CR, 3/22/73, D286) March 23:	NASA and the Army Air Mobility Research and Development Laboratory had requested contract bids for design, construction, flight-test, and delivery by mid-1976 of two rotor system research aircraft (rsra) , NASA announced. The rsra would be used in the joint nasa-Army advanced rotor concepts program to develop technology for increased performance, safety, reliability, and strength and for reduced noise, maintenance, and vibration of rotary wing aircraft. The rsra would be based at Langley Research Center as flying laboratories to test new rotary wing concepts for civil aviation, (nasa Release 73—49)
Federal support to universities and colleges rose $643 million, or 18%, to $4.1 billion from FY 1971 to FY 1972, the National Science Foundation reported. Federal academic science funding increased by $256 million, or 11%, to $2.6 billion. Federal support of academic research and development activities rose by $302 million, or 19%, to $1.9 billion. The life sciences received $896 million in 1972—21%, more than in 1971; environmental sciences received $187 million, up 38%; and engineering received $193 million, up 22%. (nsf Highlights, 8/1/73) August 1-10:	Two Soviet research ships and one U.S. and one Mexican vessel participated in the GARP International Sea Trial (gist) project, part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program to improve weather forecasting. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s research vessel Researcher met Soviet ships Academician Korolev and Ernst Krenkel in the Atlantic Ocean east of the Virgin Islands to make a series of simultaneous instrumented observations of the atmosphere and the ocean. The 10-day project would be followed in June 1974 by a 100-day effort in which research ships from 11 countries, 11 aircraft, and 5000 scientists would participate, (nsf Release 73-174; NSF pio) August 2:	A Today editorial commented on energy conservation efforts at Kennedy Space Center, while the Skylab 3 astronauts, in orbit since July 28, coped with a reaction-control-system oxidizer leak in the command module. Newspaper readers—noting that lights at Launch Complex 39 had remained on throughout July 28, Skylab 3 launch day—had questioned NASA’s compliance with the Nixon Administration’s energy conservation edict. One caller had queried all-night lights at the Manned Spacecraft Operations Building parking lot. “A call to Kennedy Space Center confirmed our suspicion: they are human and at times forgetful.” But KSC had reduced July energy consumption by 7%, “and it was done very simply: air conditioning equipment was turned off at the end of the working day and one half of the electric light bulbs in halls, corridors and lobbies were removed.” ICSC had said they would check launch pads and parking lots “to determine if a few hundredths of a percentage point can be added to the seven already realized.” (Today, 8/2/73)
The “much vaunted European challenge” to U.S. aerospace industry would “remain a myth,” an Interavia editorial said. Recent agreements for U.S. companies to provide European manufacturers access to their high technology might seem against U.S. interests, but “such agreements are in fact usually followed by orders for U.S.-designed aircraft.” It was “not simply that the currency crisis has made the US product much cheaper than the competitive European design, but also that the Americans are in a position to contract out production work on a proven sales success.” European commercial aircraft industry products would “never achieve the success expected of them.” Europe’s total share of the Western market for commercial aircraft—just over 9%—was “steadily dropping as the early model bac Ills and Caravelles are withdrawn from service and there are no advanced versions to replace them.” However tempting technologically the advanced commercial aircraft offered by European industry might be, “they are not what many airlines want in the present economic climate.” There “seems little or no inclination in Europe to accept inter-dependence in high technology areas. There is apparently more of a readiness to cooperate across the Atlantic than across the European frontiers. If the European aerospace industry wishes to remain a viable, independent force on the world scene, then the time has surely come when something more than lip service must be paid to the European ideal.” (Interavia, 9/73, 939)
A full-scale mockup of the Skylab Orbital Workshop— shipped from McDonnell Douglas, Huntington Beach, Calif.—arrived at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center. It would be combined with other Skylab hardware and used for system engineering and integration support to Skylab earth orbital missions scheduled to begin in May. (msfc Release 73-14)
Aerospace industry sales increased to an estimated $24.9 billion, more than 10% above 1972’s $23.5 billion. Commercial aerospace sales increased 43.1%, to $5.8 billion, reflecting deliveries of wide-bodied transports, helicopters, and general-aviation aircraft. Major aerospace sales included $13.8 billion to the Dept, of Defense, up from $13.2 billion; missile sales at $5.6 billion, up from $5.2 billion; and aircraft sales at $13.4 billion, up from $11.6 billion. Sales in the space area alone declined to $2.9 billion, from $3.0 billion in 1972. Executive and utility aircraft sales increased from $558 million in 1972 to $826 million—up 48%. Units delivered increased 39.1%. Civilian helicopter sales increased from $90 million in 1972 to $121 million in 1973, a gain of 48%. Aerospace export dollar value rose 27.6% because of two U.S. dollar devaluations, to a total of $4.9 billion; aerospace imports increased 37.5% to $777 million. Aerospace industry profits were expected to increase by 2.7% of sales after taxes. The 1973 profit rate for all manufacturing industries was expected to be 4.6%. (Aerospace, 2/74, 3)
President Nixon submitted nominations to the Senate: Howard A. Callaway to be Secretary of the Army succeeding Robert F. Froehlke, whose resignation he had accepted May 1; Amrom H. Katz to be Assistant Director for Science and Technology of the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency; and Robert M. Behr to be usacda’s Assistant Director for Weapons Evaluation and Control. (PD, 5/7/73, 441, 444, 454)
NASA-developed spacecraft sterilization technology was being used by the Bird Co. to produce a breathing machine that could be sterilized entirely by dry heat to prevent transfer of infectious organisms, Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced. A jpl team had worked with industry to produce a sterilizable ventilator to aid surgical patients and sufferers from respiratory diseases. Ventilator prototypes would be field-tested in at least one Los Angeles area hospital, (jpl Release 654)
A model for the interaction of the solar wind with very thin hydrogen gas in deep space, developed by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration geophysicist Dr. Thomas E. Holzer, would aid future space flight planning and provide data on the origins and fate of universe, NOAA announced. The presence of thin hydrogen gas in interplanetary space had been observed by Ogo 5 (launched by NASA March 4, 1968). Interaction of the solar wind and interstellar hydrogen could become important at astronomical units from the sun. Neutral hydrogen could become charged and associated with the solar wind. Some solar wind energy would be converted to random motion or heat. At the same time, the velocity of the solar wind would be diminished. Neutral hydrogen could act as gentle, penetrable barrier to the solar wind, (noaa Release 73-7)
Flight Research Center Director Lee R. Scherer had been named senior NASA representative on the Navy-NASA accident board investigating the April 12 mid-air collision of nasa’s instrumented Convair 990 aircraft and a Navy P-3 Orion aircraft, frc’s X—Press reported, frc’s 990 cockpit simulator had been set up to assist the board in determining the specific visibility available, (frc X-Press, 4/27 /73, 2)
NASA announced the appointment of J. Lloyd Jones as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics Technology in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. Jones had been Director of the Aerodynamics and Vehicle Systems Div. in OAST since 1972, when he had come to NASA Hq. from Ames Research Center. He had been at arc since 1954. In an OAST reorganization providing for two deputies instead of one, Deputy Associate Administrator for Technology Robert E. Smylie became Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Technology, (nasa Release 74—187)
In an effort toward accurate earthquake prediction, antennas at Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Goldstone Tracking Station—200 km apart and on either side of the San Andreas Fault—were receiving radio signals from quasars outside the galaxy. As part of jpl’s Astronomical Radio Interferometric Earth Surveying (aries) project, techniques developed for spacecraft navigation could measure the precise distance between the antennas by monitoring the arrival times of identical radio signals, accurate to one tenth of a billionth of a second. Changes in the times could indicate three-dimensional shifts in the earth’s crust up to an initial accuracy of 10 cm, with an eventual accuracy goal of 2 cm. Scientists hoped that ARIES techniques would help prove the theory that earthquakes were preceded by a swelling of the earth’s surface up to one meter over hundreds of square kilometers and provide a maj or new tool in earthquake research and prediction, (jpl Release 710; jpl proj off, interview, 3 Dec 75)
Aircraft stalls and spins, greatest cause of fatal general-aviation accidents, had been intensively studied for the past 18 mos, NASA said in a report on its general-aviation technology program. More than 1000 spin tests had been made in Langley Research Center’s spin tunnel; designs for test aircraft were nearly complete. Airport traffic flow and pilot ap-proach-and-landing performance also were under study, and a program offering more precise flight path control and reduced pilot workload had significantly improved pilot landing ability. A five-year program was developing better training methodology to reduce pilot errors. (nasa Fact Sheet) May 1974
First evidence of water molecules in a comet had been identified in the tail of Comet Kohoutek by Canadian scientists Dr. Gerhard Herz-berg and Dr. Hin Lew, both of Canada’s National Research Council, NASA announced. Dr. Herzberg and Dr. Lew identified the molecules by analyzing emissions of light at five wavelengths in the red region of the comet’s spectrum, where the positively charged molecules, ionized by solar radiation, were pushed by the solar wind. Data had been collected by telescopes at Asiago Astrophysical Observatory in Italy and Univ. of California’s Lick Observatory in October and November 1973. The discovery of hydrogen in the comet supported the “dirty snowball” theory that comets might be composed of an icy nucleus, various other frozen gases, and tiny dust particles as proposed by Dr. Fred L. Whipple, retired Director of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and principal consultant to NASA on comets, (nasa Release 73 [74]—13)
Preliminary results of the 18—26 Dec. 1973 Soyuz 13 mission were published in Izvestiya. The two crew members of the “orbiting astrophysical observatory” had made 10 000 spectrograms with the Orion 2 telescope, recording emissions of stars in ultraviolet. Remote luminaries up to 12th stellar magnitude had been recorded. The biomass of the microbe culture in the Oasis 2 experimental closed-cycle biological system had increased more than 35 times during the mission. [Izvestiya, fbis—Sov, 5 March 74, U1)
A 6.4-cm underwater borehole TV camera to provide geologists views of the earth’s interior layers had been developed from Skylab technology, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The camera, designed for msfc by Sperry Support Services of Alabama, would permit geologists to study geological formations from the interior of a 7.6-cm-dia survey borehole drilled to a depth of 490 m. Images received by the remotely controlled camera would be transmitted along an armored cable to a standard vidicon receiving tube on the surface, (msfc Release 74—138)
Wallops Station, Wallops Island, Va., was renamed Wallops Flight Center to describe its mission and operations more accurately. The Center had responsibility for development and launch of scientific payloads, using boosters ranging from the small Areas to the four-stage, solid-propellant Scout. The installation had been established in 1945 as the Pilotless Aircraft Research Station of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics and had served as a base for launching small rockets. After NASA had been established in 1958, it became known as Wallops Station and assumed an expanded mission in support of space flight programs. (nasa Ann, 25 April 74)
Total employment in the aerospace industry was expected to drop back to 948 000 positions in June 1974 after a temporary increase during the last quarter of 1973, according to the semiannual forecast released by the Aerospace Industries Association. September 1973 payrolls had been up 4000 positions over the June 1973 level of 949 000; December employment had added another 9000 positions; end of the year employment totaled 962 000 workers, the highest level since 1970. (aiaa Release, 29 April 74)
Marshall Space Flight Center had requested proposals for two space tug studies, msfc announced. The first study was to develop schedules, controls, and planning data for the space tug program from initial flight readiness to long-term mission operations. The second study was to recommend a space tug avionics system, with emphasis on rendezvous and docking avionics and data-management-subsystem requirements and configuration. (msfc Release 74-79)
Reduction-in-force notices were delivered to 397 employees at Marshall Space Flight Center. Another 250 employees received notices that they would be reduced in grade. Earlier, msfc officials had projectd a personnel reduction of about 500 employees, but retirements and attrition since then had reduced the number required, (msfc Release 74-68)
A vertical-axis windmill was under study at Langley Research Center as a potential source of nonpolluting energy. The windmill, based on a 1927 principle, had two four-meter curved blades attached at the top and bottom to a five-meter vertical shaft, set on a simple gear system, and a generator that converted wind power to electricity. The airfoilshaped blades rotated in almost any wind and were expected to achieve enough revolutions per minute to provide the energy requirements of a single-family house at an estimated construction and installation cost of $500 to $1000. A much larger windmill project at Lewis Research Center, for the National Science Foundation, was studying large concentrations of windmills for industrial use [see 11 Jan.]. (NASA Release 74r-33)
President Nixon, in his message transmitting the U.S, budget for FY 1975 to Congress, said the budget emphasized fiscal balance and continued “moderate restraint” on the economy to curb inflation, a strong defense force, a comprehensive energy program to “reestablish our ability to be self-sufficient in energy,” the “New Federalism philosophy of strengthening the role of State and local governments,” and a “more intensive focus on the tangible results that programs achieve.” The $304.4-billion budget proposed an increase for defense from $79.5 billion in FY 1974 to $85.8 billion, “so that we can increase our defense preparedness and preserve present force levels in the face of rising costs.” Despite dollar increases caused by rising costs and by pay raises accompanying transition to an all-volunteer armed force, the President said, the proportion of defense costs to the total budget had fallen from 44% in 1969 to an estimated 29% in 1975, after the end of U.S. combat in Vietnam. Project Independence, to reestablish U.S. self-sufficiency in energy, would require about $10 billion for accelerated energy research and development over the next five years and would encourage an even larger private R&D investment. Higher prices would be necessary to stimulate development of fuel supplies, but the emergency windfall profits tax had been proposed to curb excessive profits. The national energy policy included reorganization of Federal administrative machinery, stringent energy conservation measures, mandatory allocation of petroleum products, mandatory reporting on oil production and inventories, modernization of railroad regulations, accelerated development of domestic oil and gas reserves, increased use of coal reserves, development of a fast-breeder nuclear reactor, faster approval of energy facility sites, faster construction of nuclear power plants, and increased research into advanced energy sources, including fusion power and geothermal and solar energy. . Shortages of clean fuels would mean “some temporary variances from air quality plans” would be necessary to meet high-priority energy needs. “The progress we have made in pollution control in recent years, however, along with reductions in energy consumption, should insure that overall air quality will continue to improve.” (CR, 4 Feb 74, H407-14; PD, 11 Feb 74,161-70)
Aerospace industry employment would reach 968 000 by December—the highest level since May 1971—but then drop by 8000 by June 1975, the Aerospace Industries Assn, of America predicted in its semiannual survey. The increase over previous estimates was attributed to an unexpected rise in production and delivery of aircraft, while the missile and space sectors of the industry remained essentially constant. Commercial transport deliveries were expected to slow down in the first half of 1975. (aia Release 74-16)
Deferral of $72 million in nasa FY 1975 r&d funding was proposed by President Ford in a message to Congress. Aeronautical research and space support activities would be deferred by $36 million, affecting advanced systems for space exploration and aeronautics, analysis of data in the space science program, and maintenance and upgrading of equipment for the tracking and data-acquisition program. In manned space flight, $20 million in astp funds would be deferred. And in space science and applications, deferral of $16 million in no-year (not designated for a specific year) funds would delay the rate of buildup of Pioneer-Venus, seasat-a, Nimbus-G, Tiros-N, and the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission. These deferrals were parts of a $4.6-billion budget outlay reduction asked by the President. (PD, 2 Dec 74, 1500-1; CR, 26 Nov 74, S20096-7; Federal Register, 5 Dec 74,42519-667)
The European Space Research Organization ^ejected a plan to install a launch pad for the McDonnell Douglas Thor-Delta launch vehicle at the Kourou Space Center in French Guiana. The ESRO decision, which followed a four-month feasibility study, cited the high cost of installing the pad—set at approximately $50 million—as the reason for the rejection. The press speculated that, although proponents of the proposal contended the Thor-Delta launch capability would complement the European Ariane launcher under development, the plan might have run into opposition from Ariane supporters who feared competition. NASA, when queried by ESRO officials, had voiced no objections to. the plan even though the equatorial launch site would have increased the vehicle’s orbital weight capacity by about 20% over launches from the U.S., making the site an economical alternative for commercial customers. (Av Wk, 4 Nov 74, 21; gsfc Delta Proj Off, interview, 5 Dec 75)
The refanned JT8D jet engine successfully completed its first test at full power, at Lewis Research Center. The engine, part of NASA’s program to reduce jet engine noise, was run through its complete operating speed range and achieved a thrust value above takeoff thrust. Built by United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., the JT8D was used in a major portion of the U.S. narrow-body commercial air fleet. Modified by replacing the two-stage fan with a larger, single-stage fan, the engine could reduce the noise footprint areas of these aircraft by 75%. (nasa Release 74-57; LeRC pio, interview, Oct 75)
Science and technology might be stepping into a more important role in the conduct of foreign policy, a Science article said. During an April speech before the United Nations Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State, had urged that we “now apply science to the problems which science has helped to create.” He proposed international action in four areas: agricultural technology, birth control, energy, and weather. The Science article noted that access to U.S. technology had been a major inducement toward detente for the U.S.S.R. and the People’s Republic of China. Although the speech had made no specific commitments, the proposals, announced by the Secretary of State, became U.S. Government policy. By calling on science to help solve the world’s problems, “Kissinger clearly has the monster in his sights . . . but whether a coherent science policy will emerge is not yet evident.” (Wade, Science, 17 May 74, 780781)
NASA was negotiating two 11-mo study contracts for assessing methods of producing electric power from coal. Funded by the National Science Foundation, Dept, of Interior, and NASA, the program would compare costs and impact on the environment of such energy systems as a potassium Rankine topping cycle, advanced steam plants, open and closed cycle gas turbine systems, supercritical carbon dioxide systems, magnetohydro dynamic systems, and fuel cells. Westinghouse Corp. and General Electric Co. had been selected to make the studies, to provide data for a Lewis Research Center energy systems model for evaluating variables, (nasa Release 74-273)
A modified Piper Seneca aircraft completed the first test flight of a new general-aviation wing, the GAW-1 developed at Langley Research Center. A derivative of the supercritical airfoil, also developed at LaRC, the new wing showed potential for lift increases up to 30%. The lift-to-drag ratio was increased about 50%. In addition to the low-speed airfoil, the new wing design had a 25% reduction in area, tapered planform, full-span Fowler flaps, and spoilers for roll control instead of conventional ailerons. (Mgr, NASA Gen Aviation Tech Off, interview, 25 July 74; NASA Release 74-227)
Trace materials in Cleveland’s airborne particulate matter were not present in dangerous levels, but lead might approach these levels, scientists from Lewis Research Center reported at the Earth Environment and Resources Conference in Philadelphia. With the City of Cleveland’s Air Pollution Control Division, LeRC had conducted a two-year study using neutron activation and gas chromatography to determine levels of 60 trace materials. Processed by computer, levels of trace materials were related to wind direction in the form of maps. Sources of pollution could then be established by knowing which industry produced which elements and compounds and in what ratios. (LeRC Release 74-54)
Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, former Langley Research Center Director, had been selected to receive the Society of Automotive Engineers’ 1974 Daniel Guggenheim Medal, the Langley Researcher reported. He would receive the award for his “farsighted development of men and facilities, and for decisive leadership of research that provided technological foundations for manned flight beyond the speed of sound, safe reentry of spacecraft, and successful exploration of space.” (Langley Researcher, 19 July 74,1; A&A, Dec 74,72)
Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director of the National Science Foundation and Chairman of the President’s Advisory Committee on Energy Research and Development, predicted that solar heating and cooling systems would be commercially available in five years. Following a speech at the Edison Electric Institute’s annual convention in New York, Dr. Stever said the technology would be ready before “society is ready to solve the economic issues surrounding it.” A choice would have to be made between “building a lower priced house with added cost for a solar heating-cooling system, or spending more on higher fuel prices in a conventional house.” (Smith, WSJ, 5 June 74, 65)
A solar energy recorder to evaluate the solar energy available in any area of the world with an ambient temperature range of 233 K (—40° F) to 325 K (125° F) was being developed by International Business Machines Corp. Federal Systems Div. under contract to Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC announced. The recorder would measure and store sunfall data while simultaneously measuring direct and total (direct plus diffuse) solar radiation. MSFC engineers said the measurements were vital to efficient development of solar energy converters before any large-scale construction, (msfc Release 74-98)
The Senate Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Reorganization, Research, and International Organizations favorably reported S. 2744 to the full Committee. The bill would split the Atomic Energy Commission into two agencies, the Energy Research and Development Administration (erda) and the Nuclear Energy Commission (nec) . (House, Bill Status Off, interview, 24 Jan 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center requested bids on constructing an x-ray telescope test facility for NASA’s High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) program. Bid opening was scheduled for 27 Nov. and contract award by 9 Dec. The facility was to be used for x-ray verification testing and calibration of x-ray mirrors, telescope systems, and instruments. (msfc Release 74-211)
Facilities at Marshall Space Flight Center were being modified to consolidate Concept Verification Test (ctv) simulation in a central location. The CTV project would determine by testing in simulators whether concepts generated during definition studies for space activities, especially Spacelab experiments, were valid, before* commitments to proceed with final design and hardware fabrication, (msfc Release 74-178)
Preliminary reports for Skylab principal investigators indicated that large-scale zero-g production facilities in space could manufacture alloys, composites, and crystals of a homogeneity and perfection far greater than that obtainable on the earth, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. A sample from a Skylab brazing experiment demonstrated an almost perfect brazed joint, suggesting that it would be possible to assemble large facilities in space using welding and braizing techniques. Two ends of 2.5-cm tubes of nickel or steel joined with a sleeve by brazing with a silver-copper alloy showed a metallic structure that could not form under gravity conditions. Crystals of germanium selenide, typically 2 to 3 mm on the earth, were grown in zero g to a length of 25 mm with straight edges and no surface structure defects. A mixture of metals that would not form alloys under gravity conditions showed at least some alloying under zero g. A strengthening fiber of silicon carbide whiskers introduced into composite materials was uniformly distributed, suggesting a potential for space production of materials of greater strength and lighter weight, (msfc Release 74-33)
New synthetic materials developed from advanced aircraft research at Ames Research Center could be applied to civil aircraft tires and automobile brakes to improve wear and performance, NASA announced. A new polymer, resistant to heat buildup and the Consequent frictional deterioration, promised up to 10 times the normal wear for braking systems. And another new polymer, with unique molecular properties, might provide aircraft tires that could make as many as 200 landings, instead of the customary 100, before retreading was necessary. The new materials would be tested in fleets of hard-use Government trucks and in commercial airline service using Boeing 727 aircraft. (NASA Release 74-117; arc Chem Research Proj Off, interview, 12 March 74)
The Senate passed, by a unanimous vote of 60, H.R. 15572, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans FY 1975 appropriations bill. The bill was passed as reported out by the Senate Committee on Appropriations 15 Aug. plus an amendment to permit NASA to transfer up to 0.5% of its funds between research and development and research and program management programs. The bill appropriated $3,207 billion to NASA, $36 million below the f’Y 1975 budget request and $60.2 million below the FY 1975 authorization signed 22 June. An additional $4,435 million was appropriated in a Special Energy Bill. NASA r&d funds totaled $2,327 billion, construction of facilities $140.2 million, and r&pm $740 million. The Senate approved all budgeted R&D items, including $6.2 million for the Large Space Telescope and $8.0 million for seasat, both of which had been cut from the House appropriation 26 June. A reduction of $15 million from r&d funds was not directed to any specific program because the Committee suggested that NASA was better able to apply this reduction with a minimum disruption in its priorities. Agreeing with the House, the Committee had urged NASA to reprogram funds to begin work on erts-c and said that further reprogramming of funds for Viking would be considered only with the greatest reluctance. Funds for construction of facilities were up $4.5 million from the House appropriation and down $4.3 million from the authorization. The $740 million for r&pm equaled the House appropriation and was down $9.6 million from the authorization. H.R. 15572 had been reported out of the Senate Committee on Appropriations for a first time 1 Aug. with a total NASA appropriation of $3,243 billion. It was returned to the Committee 5 Aug. by the full Senate for additional cuts. The Senate requested a conference with the House to resolve differences in the passed versions. (Sen Com Rpts 93—1056, 93—1091; CR, 5 Aug 74, S14313-40; 16 Aug. 74, S15161-5)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences reported out H.R. 11864, Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974. The Committee amended the bill, which had been passed by the House 13 Feb., to delineate agency responsibility more specifically. NASA would have responsibility for the necessary system research, development, hardware procurement, and delivery. The Dept, of Housing and Urban Development would develop dwelling and system performance criteria, construct the dwellings, and install the solar heating and cooling systems. Transfer of responsibility to the Energy Research and Development Administration, should it be established, was authorized but not mandatory. (S Rpt 93-734)
The backup Skylab Orbital Workshop was loaded for shipment by sea to Marshall Space Flight Center for long-term storage, (msfc Release 74-56)
Flight Research Center’s highly instrumented F—111 aircraft, to he used to test the integrated propulsion control system (ipcs) , made its first baseline flight to gather data on the engine’s inlets and exhaust controls. Data would be used by NASA in support of the program and by Boeing Co., which would build the system, (frc X—Press, 27 Sept 74, 2; frc Pio, interview, 17 June 75)
Ames Research Center controllers of Pioneer 11—launched 5 April 1973 and now 85 000 000 km from Jupiter—increased the spacecraft’s spin rate to improve measurements of Jupiter’s radiation belts during the flyby, scheduled for December, (arc Release 74-41)
President Nixon signed nasa’s authorization bill, H.R. 13998, into Public Law 93-316. The $3.267-billion act authorized $2.37 billion for research and development, $144 million for construction of facilities, and $750 million for research and program management. (PD, 1 July 74, 726)
A helical rotary-screw expander that could he used to tap geothermal energy of hot aquifers under deserts for low-cost energy was described at a National Science Foundation conference at California Institute of Technology. The invention of Pasadena engineer Roger S. Sprankle was the first electrical power-generating system to use the entire amount of energy available in geothermally heated water and might reduce production costs 50%. Tested by Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Hydrothermal Power Co., the Sprankle system’s rotary screws filtered impurities to make maximum use of the steady flow of pumped water. Once the geothermally heated water flowed through the screw expanders, the liquid dropped in pressure and temperature as water vaporized. The increasing mass flow of vapor turned rotors with an output shaft linked to an electric generator. (Caltech-JPL Release, 25 Sept 74)
Pioneer 11, launched 5 April 1973 toward a December 1974 encounter with Jupiter, was retargeted to pass within 42 000 km of Jupiter and then, with a gravity assist from the planet, fly on to Saturn in 1979. Ground controllers at Ames Research Center commanded the spacecraft’s onboard thrusters to fire for 42 min 36 sec, increasing velocity 230 km per hr. On its new course, Pioneer 11 would pass Jupiter nearer the south polar region, intersecting the planet’s equatorial plane at 55°, and come three times closer than Pioneer 10 had during its 3 Dec. 1973 encounter, (nasa mor, 5 Nov 74; NASA Release 74-94; arc Release 74-10)
A House-Senate Conference Committee favorably reported a compromise version of H.R. 15572, the FY 1975 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans appropriations bill that included a $3.207-billion NASA appropriation. NASA funds were $40,394 million below the budget request and $60,194 million less than the FY 1975 authorization. An additional $4,435 million for energy research and development was appropriated separately. The compromise appropriation was close to the one passed by the Senate 16 Aug. and $3,685 million above the $3,203 billion approved by the House 26 June. (NASA Off Budget Ops, Chron History; CR, 21 Aug 74, H8787-90; H Rpt 93-1310)
An omnidirectional wheel that could change a vehicle’s direction of movement without changing the direction it was facing had been developed by Marshall Space Flight Center engineer Josef F. Blumrich, MSEC announced. The rim of the wheel consisted of several barrel-shaped segments that rotated independently when in contact with the ground. The wheel, which would be strong enough to negotiate rough terrain, could be used on a planetary explorer vehicle or on wheelchairs, (msfc Release 74-53) _
The NASA Aircraft Office was established under the Associate Administrator for Center Operations to provide a focal point for aircraft operations and management activities. The Flight Activities Office, Flight Research Center, was abolished, and the Administrative Standardization Office at Langley Research Center would report directly to the NASA Aircraft Office. Robert W. Sommer, former Director of the Flight Activities Office, was appointed Acting Director of the new office, (nasa Ann, 29 Aug 74)
The prototype Mini-Sniffer, a small 55-kg radio-controlled aircraft equipped to test pollution in the upper atmosphere, made the first of a series of eight flights from Flight Research Center. The vehicle, powered by a 9-kw gasoline engine, maintained an altitude of 15-30 m and performed well at 55-87 km per hr. The purpose of the flight was to test airworthiness at lower altitudes and speeds. Another series of flights would check out the auto-pilot system at low altitude and then the aircraft would be taken to 6100 m, using radar and a long-range radiocontrol system. The Mini-Sniffer would eventually be fitted with an 11kw engine which would carry it up to 21 000 m. (frc X-Press, 2 Aug 74, 30 Aug 74; frc proj off, interview, 24 July 75)
NASA’s Plum Brook Station had tested an experimental hypersonic ramjet engine in a hypersonic wind tunnel with simulated flight conditions of mach 5, 6, and 7, Lewis Research Center announced. The water-cooled ramjet engine, a cooperative effort of LeRC and Garrett Corp., was designed to operate efficiently from mach 4 to mach 8 by using hydrogen fuel, a translating spike inlet, and both subsonic and supersonic combustion modes. The tests had yielded valuable basic information for possible future aircraft development. (LeRC Release 74-14)
A portable, remote, patient-monitoring device called the Vitasign Attendant Monitor had ben developed by a NASA Biomedical Application Team at Southwest Research Institute, San Antonio, Tex., using monitoring techniques developed for manned space flight, nasa announced. The monitor, commercially available at a moderate cost, operated by three electrodes placed on the patient’s chest. A sudden change in the electrocardiogram signal or the respiration rate automatically alerted medical attendants. (nasa Release 74—64)
Experiments had been approved for the first High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) mission, to make an x-ray survey of the sky from low earth orbit in 1977, NASA announced. Contracts totaling $23 349 266 had been let for a large-area x-ray survey experiment to map the celestial sphere for x-ray sources; a cosmic x-ray experiment to measure emissions and absorptions of diffuse x-rays and correlate results with radio and visible-light-ray emission; a scanning modulation collimator experiment to determine precisely the celestial position, size, and structure of selected cosmic x-ray sources; and a hard x-ray and low-energy gamma ray experiment to determine the intensity and other properties of certain x-rays and gamma rays, (nasa Release 7479)
Scientists using the 305-m dish antenna at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico had discovered a pulsar—a pulsating radio source—orbiting a companion celestial object in the constellation Aquila, the New York Times reported. Both pulsar and the object weighed as much as the sun but were only a few kilometers in diameter. It was the first pulsar discovered circling another object, a phenomenon which made it possible for scientists to estimate its mass. Its orbit had been calculated from the slight variations in its pulse rate. While it was possible that the companion was a black hole, scientists thought it more likely that both were neutron stars and a search was continuing to find out if the companion was a very weak pulsar. (Sullivan, NYT, 5 Oct 74, 50)
Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, Head of Langley Research Center’s Transonic Aerodynamics Branch, had been selected to receive the 1974 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for development of the area-rule concept of aircraft design and invention of the supercritical wing, the National Aeronautic Assn, announced. Dr. Whitcomb would receive the award 13 Dec. (naa Release, 19 Sept 74)
A United Air Lines, Inc., 747 airliner carrying instruments to monitor pollution in the upper atmosphere for NASA’s Global Air Sampling Program completed flight testing and was certified as airworthy. Managed by Lewis Research Center, gasp would eventually use four 747 jets measuring dust particles and gases at altitudes of 6000 to 12 000 m to study the effects of emissions from jet aircraft and other pollution sources on the earth’s atmosphere and weather. (LeRC Release 74-80; Lewis News, 27 Dec 74)
Lewis Research Center awarded an $800 000 cost-sharing contract, of which the Government would supply $500 000, to Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft Corp. in NASA’s experimental clean combustor program. Pratt & Whitney was to maintain the already low smoke emissions of its JT8D (Class T4) aircraft engine, while reduc
NASA and the National Science Foundation announced an agreement to design, construct, and test an experimental 100-kw wind turbine generator at Lewis Research Center. The large windmill would be tested to determine performance and characteristics of systems for future commercial production of electric power [see 11 Jan]. (NASA Release 74-63)
A galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe had been discovered by an international team of astronomers using The Netherlands’ Westerbork radio telescope, the Washington Post reported. Named 3C 268, the galaxy was 18 million light years in length and 1.8 billion light years from the earth. It was composed of an optical galaxy—a group of stars emitting visible light—at the center, with enormous gaseous radio components spreading like giant propeller blades on either side. (AP, W Post, 31 Aug 74, A13) During August: Flight Research Center began wake vortex studies with a Boeing 747 to test different configurations and mechanical devices for suppressing the formation or reducing the strength of vortices. Wind-tunnel and water-channel tests had indicated that engine-induced turbulence and span-load tailoring by flap modification would permit reduction of standard separation distances between aircraft. Removing the outboard flap on a model of a Boeing 747 and adding a trailing spline reduced the wing-tip vortex so that the separation between a Boeing 747 and a following Lear jet or DC-9 could be reduced from 8 to less than 3 km. During inflight tests, lowering the inboard flap 30° dissipated the normal wing-tip vortex as a second vortex flowing in a counter direction formed. Flight testing would continue into September, (frc X-Press, 13,27 Sept 74; NASA Release 74-230)
The House of Representatives passed the special energy research and development appropriations bill, H.R. 14434, by a vote of 392 to 4. The bill appropriated funds to various agencies, including $8.9 million to NASA, for energy r&d in FY 1975. Of the NASA total, $4.5 million would be to implement the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act if enacted. An amendment to appropriate an additional $1 million to NASA was defeated by voice vote. (CR, 30 April 74, H3350-84)
Ames Research Center’s C-141 airo (Airborne Infrared Observatory) aircraft was officially transferred to operational status for research development. A total of 26 research programs had been approved for C—141 participation, using its 91-cm ir telescope—18 from universities, 5 from NASA or other Government agencies, and 3 from foreign countries. airo also was to participate in studies of Comet Kohoutek. (arc Astro-gram, 18 Jan 74,1,4) ^
Ames Research Center scientists had found more evidence that life on primitive earth might have been triggered by chemical evolution of nonliving matter, NASA announced. Seventeen varieties of fatty acids, similar to those used by plants and animals to produce more complex biological molecules, had been discovered in two meteorites. The family of simple carbon-hydrogen acid molecules found in the meteorites had counterparts in biologically formed earth materials, but had not been found in nonorganic sources before, (nasa Release 74-16)
DeElroy E. Beeler, Flight Research Center Director for Center Development, left NASA to join private industry after 28 yrs of service. Beeler had joined the National' Advisory Committee for Aeronautics in 1941, specializing in high-speed aeronautics. He was appointed project engineer for the X—1, the world’s first aircraft to reach supersonic speeds, and transferred in 1946 to what was to become FRC. There he was instrumental in research planning, design, and flight investigations of advanced research aircraft projects through X-15 and XB-70. In 1954 Beeler was named frc’s first Director of Research and in 1958 he became Deputy Director, a position he held until 1973. (frc X—Press, 27 Sept 74, 2; nasa biog, 25 July 63)
Edwin C. Kilgore, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Center Operations, had been named Director for Management Operations, Langley Research Center, effective 1 March 1975, NASA announced. Kilgore would assume the functions of LaRC Director for Administration Raymond G. Romatowski and most of the functions of Director for Center Development and External Affairs T. Melvin Butler. While at NASA Hq., Kilgore had served as Acting Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology and also as Deputy Associate Administrator (Management) in the same office. In 1973 Kilgore had been awarded NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal for developing an improved system for managing advanced technology programs. Romatowski had accepted the position at NASA Hq. of Assistant Administrator for Personnel Programs. Butler would retire in December. (nasa Release 74-324A)
A New York Times editorial commented on the Atomic Energy Commission report The Nation’s Energy Future, submitted December 1973 to President Nixon: The report, which was the basis for Administration policy, would allocate more than half the proposed energy research and development budget to nuclear projects. More than 25% of nuclear funds would be spent on the fast-breeder reactor. Three critical questions were in need of answers: risk of accident, security against theft, and the relative merit of alternative forms of energy. An AEC environmental impact statement issued in response to a court order in a 1971 suit by a group of scientists failed, the Times said, to weigh objectively the possible alternatives that might be environmentally less damaging, particularly solar energy. “But in making the choice between nuclear fission and solar energy, Congress and the public have to weigh the alternatives carefully. The a.e.c. can contribute to that decision by offering the nation a more careful and disinterested impact statement.” (NYT, 23 May 74, 38) r
NASA’s report on emergency preparedness and defense mobilization activities for FY 1973 was issued £y the Senate in the 23rd annual report of activities of the Joint Committee on Defense Production. NASA had revised emergency plans at field installations for increased readiness for a broader range of emergencies. The agency’s contract policies had contributed to maintenance of a broad industrial base of small businesses to meet conditions of a national emergency. Research and development programs contributing to energy solutions included studies of new aeronautical technology, solar and wind energy, clean fuel production, improved use of coal, and more efficient fuels. Technology utilization teams were applying aerospace technology to public problems in medicine, urban construction, law enforcement, mine safety, air and water pollution, and transportation. (Sen Rpt 93-683)
Effects of the shapes of trucks on air drag and fuel consumption were being studied by NASA and the Department of Transportation, NASA announced. Trucks traveling 80 km per hr used more than half their engine horsepower to overcome drag. Preliminary tests had shown that a rectangular vehicle with rounded corners had 30% less air drag at 90 to 95 km per hr and used 15% less fuel. Other configurations would be tested at Flight Research Center and dot’s Transportation Systems Center using technology and instrumentation developed in FRCs aeronautics flight-test program, (nasa Release 74-152)
Industrial research and development spending had totaled $19.4 billion in 1972, an increase of 6% over 1971, National Science Foundation report Research and Development in Industry 1972 (nsf 74-312) revealed. Company r&d funds had increased 7% and Federal R&D support registered a 6% gain after three years of decreases. The full-time-equivalent number of R&D scientists in industry had increased to nearly 360 000 between January 1971 and January 1972, the first increase since January 1969, when the total was 386 000. Dept, of Defense and NASA had provided 87% of the Federal r&d funds to industry in 1972 and supported 88% of the industrial R&D scientists and engineers working on Federal programs. (Text) August 1974
The first phase of the Pioneer direct-mode command system, which would permit Ames Research Center to control its spacecraft directly, became operational. The Pioneer command (pcom) system would permit direct control without depending on Jet Propulsion Laboratory computer systems. Committed operational use of pcom would begin on Pioneer 10 (launched 2 March 1972) on 1 Sept., followed by Pioneer 11 (launched 5 April 1973) on 15 Jan. 1975. (arc Astrogram, 6 June 74,1)
A robot with an artificial intelligence for making independent decisions in environments hostile to man was being developed at Jet Propulsion Laboratory and California Institute of Technology to prove the feasibility of using robots for planetary exploration. The planned rover would be equipped with metal arms and hands, a visual system of two TV cameras and a laser, wheels for legs, and thousands of instructions programmed into its computer brain. It would be able to analyze a scene, extract information from it, make some choices, and move around obstacles, (nasa Release 74-260)
NASA and the National Science Foundation announced the award of two contracts of about $500 000 each to General Electric Co. Space Div. and Kaman Aerospace Corp. for preliminary design of very large wind systerns for generating electricity. Windmills from 100 to 3000 kw would be examined by each company in a project managed by Lewis Research Center for nsf as part of the program for Research Applied to National Needs (rann). A 100-kw system with vanes more than 37 m in dia, already under design and construction, would be erected at LeRc’s Plum Brook test area. (LeRC Release 74-73) During November: Marshall Space Flight Center awarded McDonnell Douglas Corp. a $299 454 contract for the Spacelab Payload Utilization and Planning Study for the space transportation system, (msfc Release 74-243) December 1974
NASA had applied for a patent on a special absorptive coating developed by a Marshall Space Flight Center engineer. It would be applied to aluminum panels used in the construction of the solar heating and cooling system being demonstrated at msfc. The coating absorbed 93% of the total solar heat, which was transferred to water circulated through flow passages to a storage tank for use in heating or cooling; it reradiated only 6% of the infrared heat, (nasa Release 74-96)
President Ford signed H.R. 11864, the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974, into P.L. 93-4-09 and signed H.R. 14920, the Geothermal Energy Research, Development, and Demonstration Act of 1974, into P.L. 93—410. P.L. 93-409 provided for demonstration within three years of the practical uses of solar heating technology and for development and demonstration within five years of the practical use of combined heating and cooling technology. It amended the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to direct NASA to carry out solar heating and cooling research but provided that, within 60 days of a law creating the Energy Research and Development Administration or other energy r&d agency, functions given to NASA and the National Science Foundation could be transferred to the new agency. P.L. 93^110 authorized guaranteed loans to finance commercial ventures in geothermal energy and provided for coordination of Federal activities in the development of geothermal energy. {PD, 9 Sept 74, 1099; texts)
Boeing Co. and the U.S.S.R. State Committee on Science and Technology signed an agreement on aviation cooperation, including exchange of information and technology and eventual commercial exchange, (fbis-Sov, 11 June 74, B8)
A high-temperature metal alloy and a self-lubricating' bearing material, both developed at Lewis Research Center, had been chosen by Industrial Research magazine as 2 of the 100 most significant products of the year, NASA announced. Composed principally of tungsten, nickel, and aluminum, the alloy was three times stronger at 1480 K (2200°F) than any existing commercial cast-nickel-base alloy. The bearing material—a product of glass, metal, and calcium fluoride—functioned at temperatures up to 1170 K (1650°F). Both products would be used for more efficient and cleaner turbine engines, electric-power generating systems, and other high-temperature devices. (LeRC Release 74-51; Industrial Research, Oct 74) The spacecraft did not pass through either sun or earth occultation, and communications with the Deep Space Network stations were uninterrupted. The second flyby was adjudged successful 3 Oct. A third flyby was planned for March 1975. Preliminary results, presented at a 23 Sept, press briefing at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, indicated that scarps and evidence of volcanism observed on the first flyby were pervasive and not localized. The scabby hills detected on the first encounter in an area opposite the Caloris Basin did not reappear, suggesting that such terrain was peculiar to that site. (nasa mor, 3 Oct 74; NASA Release 74-248; NASA proj off, interview, 30 June 75; Sullivan, NYT, 24 Sept 74)
NASA’s newest space communications facility was dedicated in a ceremony at the station site at Robledo de Chavela, Spain. The facility, equipped with a 64-m antenna—one of the world’s largest and most sensitive—joined two other Deep Space Network facilities of the Madrid Space Communications Complex. Construction of the installation had begun in 1969 and became operational in the fall of 1973. The Madrid stations were operated for NASA and Jet Propulsion Laboratory by the Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aerospacial under continuing agreements between Spain and the U.S. (nasa Release 74-119; NASA otda, interview, 17 March 75) pheric pressure, temperature, humidity, and wind speed and direction. (msfc Release 74-76; msfc proj mgr, interview, March 75)
NASA had designated Marshall Space Flight Center as lead Center for NASA activities under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act signed into law 3 Sept., msfc announced. The Center would work under the direction of the NASA Hq. Office of Energy Programs, (msfc Release 74-175)
The Global Atmospheric Research Program Atlantic Tropical Experiment (gate) ended its operations off the coast of Senegal [see 15 June-23 Sept.]. (noaa Release 74-154)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had awarded a $169 000 contract for the study of hydrogen as a possible energy source, to the Institute of Gas Technology, Chicago, 111. The 10-mo study was to evaluate methods of producing large quantities of hydrogen and select a few of the most promising for follow-on studies. It was also to identify industrial and residential uses and estimate costs of developing technology. (msfc Release 74-207)
The Senate by voice vote passed H.R. 11864, the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974, as amended by the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs and the Committee on Labor and Public Welfare 14 May. The Senate bill would authorize $5 million to nasa and $5 million to the Department of Housing and Urban Development in FY 1975 for development of new or existing solar technology and $40 million to hud over the next four years to carry out the demonstration. The development and demonstration were to be carried out within five years. NASA functions and funds could be transferred to the Energy Research and Development Administration if erda was established. (CR, 21 May 74, S8761-77)
Interstellar space flight appeared possible, British Interplanetary Society engineers and scientists concluded after the first 15 mos of a study to establish the feasibility of flight outside the solar system. Costs would be high, but so far none of the engineering difficulties seemed insoluble. The chief limitation that might delay such a project was the low natural abundance of helium 3 for the nuclear microbombs proposed for propulsion. The Project Daedalus study had taken the star Barnard, six light years away, as a theoretical target. The journey was to be limited to 3040 yrs, a working lifetime. To achieve the necessary 51 000-km-per-sec velocity, bis scientists proposed a starship driven by a series of controlled nuclear explosions—each equivalent to 90 tons of TNT—occurring at the rate of 250 per sec. Microbombs, small pellets of nuclear fuel, would be compressed and heated to detonation point by electron beams. The rocket-powered boost phase would last 5 yrs, followed by a 35-yr coast. During flyby of Barnard, 10-20 probes would be released to search for inner planets and moons, sending back information to the mother ship for transmission to the earth. NASA had studied the nuclear-pulse propulsion concept for interplanetary exploration through a General Dynamics Corp. contract in 1963, but had suspended the study because of costs and the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. (Gatland, SF, Sept 74, 356-358; A&A 1963,1964,1965) October 1974
Widespread material and component shortages—increased by the oil embargo imposed by oil producing countries during the October 1972 Middle East war—were causing severe problems for the aerospace industry, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Suppliers found it easier and more profitable to supply material such as aluminum to nonaerospace industry, which placed quantity orders without specific deadlines and rigid specifications. Government price controls had encouraged some suppliers to halt production or divert supplies to export markets, where profits could be two to three times above the domestic. A Hughes Aircraft Co. survey showed that reasons for shortages included a diminished supply of petrochemicals, which were the basis of most plastics and synthetic rubbers, and the curtailed production of materials requiring large amounts of energy for fabrication. (Av Wk,
A National Academy of Sciences panel report to President Nixon recommended that the White House create a Council for Science and Technology. The Council would recommend how science and technology could be most effectively incorporated into the policy-making process. Three full-time members—drawn from the sciences, engineering, and related fields—would be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate. A Chairman, who would also serve as a member of the Domestic Council, would report to the President, and a staff of 25—30 experts would attack special problems, nas also recommended that the Council actively participate in the work of the National Security Council and play a role in areas of foreign policy affected by science and technology. (Dr. H. Guyford Stever, National Science Foundation Director, had been assigned the role of Science Adviser to the President following the abolishment of the Office of Science and Technology by President Nixon in mid-1973.) (Sullivan, NYT, 27 June 74)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $5 986 930 contract modification to Chrysler Corp.’s Space Div. for stage and system engineering for the 1st stage of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Saturn IB launch vehicle. The modification, effective 1 May 1974 through 31 July 1975, brought the existing cost-plus-award-fee contract total to $64 455 696. (msfc Release 74-104)
Operation of a demonstration solar heating and cooling unit was begun at Marshall Space Flight Center, using three house trailers to simulate a residence. Continuing studies would combine NASA and industry capabilities to improve efficiency and minimize cost. Efforts included development of a computer-simulation procedure for technical and economic evaluation of the systems, studies to explore mass-production effects on solar-collector costs, definition of a commercially practical absorption-cycle air conditioner that could be operated with water at 353 K (176°F) to 357 K (183°F), verification of the absorptive coating stability and application of coatings to lower-cost materials, and evaluation of other thermal storage techniques, such as melting and freezing waxes, as used in spacecraft, (msfc Release 74-77)
Large numbers of scientists and engineers trained in a variety of traditional and interdisciplinary fields would be required over the next several years by increased energy research and development efforts, a Science editorial said. Numbers of graduating scientists and engineers were dropping each year and some signs of a shortage were appearing already. Top-level representatives from r&d agencies—including NASA, the Federal Energy Office, Office of Management and Budget, National Science Foundation, and the Atomic Energy Commission—should examine manpower needs and set up or fund a program for continuing assessment over the coming decade. “Dollar budgets can be changed quickly. Manpower budgets require longer planning time if both dollars and manpower are to be used wisely.” (Vetter, Science, 5 April 74, 11)
Post-storage checkout was proceeding at Marshall Space Flight Center on the first propulsive stage and instrument unit of the Saturn IB launch vehicle (SA-210) for the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Fin-mounting brackets on the stage, taken out of storage 27 Nov., had been rod-peened (pounded with a small bundle of rods to place compressive stresses in the surface of the material) to avoid the stress-corrosion problems that had delayed the Skylab 4 launch in November 1973. Bolt holes for the fins had been rounded to eliminate stress points. The complete Saturn vehicle was to be stacked in January 1975. (msfc Release 74—241; Spaceport News, 12 Dec 74)
The French aerospace industry was reported as recording $1.07 billion worth of exports delivered in 1973. About 15%—$170 million—was in cooperative European aircraft programs. Missiles and space deliveries amounted to $79 million. New missile and space orders totaled $169 million. . British aerospace exports were later reported at almost $1.3 billion for 1973, a 25% increase over 1972 and nearly twice 1970 exports. The leading British market was the U.S., with $360 million worth of deliveries. (Av Wk, 8 April 74, 23; Interavia, April 74, 275)
NASA announced the appointment of Dr. David L. Winter as Director of Life Sciences succeeding Dr. Charles A. Berry, who had announced his retirement 21 Dec. 1973 but remained with NASA until April. Dr. Winter would manage programs in biomedical and bioscience research, medical aspects of manned space flight operations, man-machine integration, life science applications, aeronautical life sciences, extraterrestrial life research, and occupational medicine. He had been Deputy Director of Life Sciences at Ames Research Center, (nasa Release 74—118)
A New York Times editorial noted that, within a matter of hours, instrument readings from Mariner 10’s 29 March close flyby of Mercury had “made all previous scientific writing and theorizing about Mercury obsolete. Where nearly complete ignorance had existed earlier, there is now a large, diverse and important body of hard information. . . . Even if the crippled spacecraft is unable to continue to transmit data it will have earned an indelible place in the history of space exploration.” (NYT, 1 April 74,30)
Evidence that aerosols from spray cans had damaged earth’s ozone layer had been under study by an independent scientific panel that would make its report early in 1976, the Wall Street Journal said, but Federal action against fluorocarbons was not considered likely before that time, and foreign governments were considered unlikely to act before the U.S. did. Fluorocarbon manufacturers and users had insisted that the ozone-depletion theory had not been proved, and warned of damage to an industry that had made products worth $400 million to $450 million a year, with manufacturing facilities worth $300 million. U.S. producers had accounted for about half the world’s production of fluorocarbons, which was approaching about 0.9 billion kg a year. Two Univ. of Chicago chemists—Mario J. Molina and F. Sherwood Roland—had advanced a theory 18 mo ago that fluorocarbons used in spray containers and in refrigerators and air conditioners were getting into the upper atmosphere, encountering ultraviolet fight (more intense at high altitudes) that split the fluorocarbon molecules to release highly active chlorine. The chlorine had depleted the atmospheric ozone by converting it to ordinary oxygen. The theory had been partly confirmed in the laboratory by National Bureau of Standards chemists who showed that ultraviolet lamps would split fluorocarbons to produce either one or two chlorine atoms, depending on the ultraviolet wavelength used. However, no one had discovered a way to measure the ozone to tell whether it had been affected by chlorines from fluorocarbon dissociation. Another clue had been to search for chlorine products such as hydrochloric acid in the stratosphere; tests conducted by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory using U-2 flights and balloons had Confirmed the presence in the stratosphere of hydrochloric acid that had not originated from the earth. Granting the effect of aerosols, opinions had been divided upon the significance of ozone depletion: possible consequences of additional ultraviolet radiation impinging upon earth included increased incidence of skin cancer, harmful effects on animal and plant life, and alteration of temperature patterns in the stratosphere with resulting alteration of weather patterns on earth. Even without proof of damage, public apprehension of risk had increased pressure for a ban on the suspect chemicals, especially in aerosols. (Tannenbaum in WSJ, 3 Dec 75, 1)
Langley Research Center was flight-testing a new-generation light twin-engine Piper PA—34 Seneca aircraft—called ATLIT (Advanced Technology Light Twin)—fitted with several improvements using NASA advanced aerodynamic technology. One important new component, the GAW—1 (General-Aviation-Whitcomb) airfoil, was 27% smaller than the original wing but was expected to be safer and more efficient, and to reduce fuel consumption by as much as 10%. (NASA Release 75 —84)
The Soviet Union had landed Arctic explorers on an ice floe 600 km from Chukotka to set up Severny Polyus—23, a drifting observatory to study weather and ice conditions in the Arctic Sea, Tass announced. Air search last spring had discovered a flat berg 7 km long and 3 km wide about 500 km from Wrangel Island north of the eastern tip of Siberia. N. Blinov, head of the Soviet high-latitude expedition Sever-27, called this a rare find because the ice appeared to be 20 m thick. Research stations on such floating islands made it possible to trace circulation of Arctic ice over many years; the Severny Polyus—22 station operating in the Arctic for 3 yr had moved in a clockwise anticyclone circular drift and “repeatedly found itself in both the eastern and western hemispheres.” The new station, larger than its predecessor, was expected to last longer. (Tass, in FBIS No. 240,4 Dec 75) ,
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it would distribute the first NASA Standard Parts List (NSPL) to all NASA centers and contractors in Jan. The NSPL was to include electronic parts selected from experience in flights, tests, failure analyses, and recent plant surveys, to ensure reliability. The standardization had been undertaken to solve problems of small-quantity buying, high cost, long delivery schedules, market fluctuations, 'part failures, and extensive rework. The cost of correcting problems resulting from failure of parts had been estimated as 100 times the cost of preventing the use of poor-quality parts to begin with. The NASA Standard Parts Lead Office, located at MSFC because of its experience in parts management developed during the Saturn program, would establish requirements for parts, coordinate the effort with all NASA Centers, and issue and maintain the list. (NASA Release 75— 303; MSFC Release 75—259)
The National Research Council, in its program of conducting technical studies on behalf of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering, had mailed out announcements to more than 5000 individuals and organizations inviting statements on the role of nuclear power in the context of alternative energy systems. Hearings in five major cities had been scheduled for January and early February 1976 to obtain the broadest possible perspective for a comprehensive study. The Energy Research and Development Administration had asked the academies to conduct a 2-yr study, and the announcement represented the first time in the 112-yr history of the National Academy of Sciences that such an extensive effort had been made to solicit the views of the informed public on a projected study. The committee conducting the study would attempt to set forth the current and probable states of energy technology through the year 2010, various policy options, and consequences of each. (NRC Release 24 Dec 75)
A Senate and House of Representatives conference committee reported out H.R. 8070, appropriating FY 1976 funds for the Department of Housing and Urban Development and sundry independent executive agencies, after resolving the disagreements of the two congressional bodies. Total NASA FY 1976 appropriation recommended by the committee was $3 551 822 000, changed only with respect to funds allotted for research and development. The FY 1976 NASA Budget Appropriation Congressional Adjustments to Budget Request Program Budget Request House Changes Senate Changes Conference Changes Total Conference Recommendation Research & Development 267B.4 -49.4 + 7.0 -1.0 2677.4 Construction of Facilities 84.6 - 2.5 -2.5 -2.5 82.1 Research & Prog Management 776.0 +0.5 -0.5 -0.5 775.5 Totals 3539.0 -52.4 +4.0 -4.0 3535.0 (H.R. Comm Rpt 94—502; CR, 23 Sept 75, H9035 —38) committee appropriated to NASA $2 677 380 000 for R&D, $48.4 million more than the $2 628 980 000 proposed by the House [see 19 and 24 June] and $8.0 million less than the $2 685 380 000 proposed by the Senate [see 24 and 26 July]. The conference committee agreed that NASA could reprogram $7 000 000 from the R&D total for an upper atmospheric research, technology, and monitoring program. The committee also agreed that $1 000 000 of the total funding of $48 400 000 proposed for a Pioneer-Venus mission might be reprogrammed for further planning of the Large Space Telescope, though not beyond evaluation of phase B studies. Appropriations for construction of facilities and for research and program management had been previously agreed on and remained unchanged.
A digital Stoland navigation, guidance, control, and display system in an augmentor wing aircraft (a modified C —8A Buffalo) guided the aircraft to an automatic landing at the short-takeoff-and-landing (STOL) test facility at Crows Landing, near Patterson, Calif. The automatic landing, first for a STOL aircraft, was a milestone in the flight acceptance of the Stoland system being developed by Sperry Flight Systems under contract to Ames Research Center. The system would be tested on other STOL aircraft. (ARC Astrogram, 17 July 75, 2)
The Soviet Academy of Sciences chose Anatoly Alexandrov, a 72-yr-old nuclear physicist, as its new president, the Tass news agency reported. Peter Osnos commented in the Washington Post that the main speaker at the Academy meeting—Mikhail Suslov, the Communist Party’s chief ideologist, who is not even a member of the Academy— made the only speech on Alexandrov’s behalf. This, said Osnos, showed the extent to which the choice was determined by Kremlin leadership and the Party’s growing influence over the once-autonomous scientific establishment. Academy members traditionally had voted in secret ballots and had maintained their own organizational structure in running the country’s important research facilities; Alexandrov was chosen on a secret ballot, but apparently there were no other candidates. Alexandrov, head of the atomic research institute in Moscow, was one of the few Academy members also a member of the Party central committee. (W Post, 26 Nov 75, A8)
Langley Research Center announced the appointment of Robert E. Smyhe as Director for Space, replacing Eugene S. Love, who was retiring. Smylie had been in NASA Hq as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space, Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. In his new position he would direct Langley’s work in space systems, space applications and technology, environmental quality programs, and the Scout launch vehicle. (LaRC Release 75 — 11)
Lewis Research Center was testing a version of an ipn-thruster engine with reduced propellant requirements that would permit payload increases of up to 20% on future spacecraft, NASA announced. The ion-thruster propulsion system used solar cells to convert solar energy into electrical power, tailored to the current and voltage necessary for the ion thruster. The propellant—mercury, cesium, or relatively stable gas—was ionized in the engine and electrically exhausted to produce thrust. During the tests the NASA version of the engine had become the first electric propulsion system to exceed 10 000 hr of operation. LeRC was continuing the testing toward an endurance goal of 15 000 hr. The engine was the second of its kind to be tested by NASA. The first had experienced internal sputtering and erosion which had degraded performance. Testing had been stopped at 9715 hr for modifications. (NASA Release 75—150)
President Ford told a group of eight congressmen at a White House meeting that he would work to reestablish the Office of Science and Technology as a permanent part of the White House organization, the New York Times reported. Tbe office had been abolished by President Nixon 1 July 1973. The Times quoted Director of the Domestic Council James Cannon as saying that President Ford would propose legislation creating the post of science advisor with a staff of 10 to 15 persons and an annual budget of $1 million to $1.5 million. (NYT, 23 May 75, 14)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued requests for proposals for development of solar-energy cooling and heating systems for both residential and commercial applications. The RFPs had been issued in five areas of procurement: firms already producing and marketing solar heating and cooling subsystems; firms developing marketable subsystems and needing government assistance; firms with complete systems under development; firms designing innovative complete systems; and firms to compete for test and evaluation of the subsystems procured under the first two RFPs. The Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974, which requires demonstration of the practical use of solar heating in the U.S. within 3 yr and of combined solar heating and cooling within 5 yr, made the Energy Research and Development Administration responsible for managing and coordinating the national program. ERDA assigned MSFC the responsibility for developing solar heating and cooling systems in an all-out effort to create a viable industrial and commercial capability of producing and distributing such systems. (NASA Release 75— 284)
Flight Research Center’s F—111 Integrated Propulsion Control System (IPCS) aircraft had made its first flight with the new system operating, FRC’sX-Press reported. The IPCS used digital electronics instead of conventional hydromechanical controls for actuating the aircraft’s supersonic jet engine and engine inlet. The new system was expected to allow aircraft to fly at full high-speed performance limits without adverse interaction among the engine, the inlet, and the aerodynamic flow over the fuselage. During the 1-hr flight, the modified inlet and engine were operated entirely under computer control, with routine test transfers between digital and hydromechanical control at all flight conditions. (FRC X-Press, 12 Sept 75, 2)
Total does not include a supplemental authorization for increased pay costs introduced and considered as H.R. 13172. For the transition period 1 July to 30 Sept. 1976, the committee recommended decreasing NASA’s total budget request of $958 900 000 to $929 900 000. The requested $730 600 000 for research and development was reduced to $704 600 000, leaving NASA management to apportion the $26 million reduction. The committee reduced funds requested for construction of facilities from $14 500 000 to $11 500 000 in a series of minor economies. (Sen Com on Aero & Space Sci Rpt 94-103)
Energy Research and Development Administration announced the award of a $2 612 000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Hughes Research Laboratories to develop a new mercury valve for use in high-voltage direct-current transmission. The liquid-metal plasma valve was a spinoff from a spacecraft ion engine developed by Hughes for NASA. The valve, a single-anode device that fired a vacuum arc on signal, would be used to convert between alternating current and direct current at the terminals of high-voltage direct-current transmission lines. (ERDA Release 75—25)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio) introduced H.R. 7830, the President’s bill [see 9 June] “to strengthen staff capabilities for providing advice and assistance to the President with respect to scientific and technological considerations affecting national policies and programs.” The bill was referred to the Committee on Science and Technology. H.R. 7830 called for establishing an Office of Science and Technology with a director who would be the Presidential science adviser, a deputy director, and a 15-member staff. The office would have a budget of $1.5 million. H.R. 7830 was the second bill concerning Presidential science advice introduced by Reps. Teague and Mosher; H.R. 4461 had been introduced 6 March to establish a national science and technology policy. It also included provisions for a council of science advisers and a cabinet-level Dept, of Research and Technology. (CR, 11 June 75, H5346; 6 March 75, H1464)
The launch of Viking A had been postponed for the second time [see 11 Aug.] when Jet Propulsion Laboratory technicians discovered that the batteries had dropped from their normal charge of 37 volts to 9 volts. The batteries had been drained because a motorized rotary switch that should have remained off until 7 min before launch had accidentally turned on. The dangerously low voltage decided officials to remove the entire spacecraft from the launch vehicle and return it to the spacecraft assembly and encapsulation facility for troubleshooting. At the same time, the Viking-B spacecraft, in a planned holding mode before mating with its launch vehicle, would be moved to the launch complex to replace its ailing sistercraft and become the Viking-A mission. The launch had been rescheduled for 20 Aug., with the launch window opening at 5:22 pm. (Viking Status Bulletin No 10, 20 Aug 75; NASA Audio News, 14 Aug 75; O’Toole, WPost, 14 Aug 75, A23; McElheny, NYT, 14 Aug 75)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory had proposed some economically sound and technically feasible alternatives to the automobile industry’s inefficient and polluting internal combustion engine [see 3 Sept.], a Los Angeles Times editorial said. Development of a new economical and pollution-free engine on a mass-production basis would take time and money but “the auto industry can well afford the $150 million a year that would be needed.” The JPL report voiced skepticism that industry could do the job alone. “Additional funding from the federal government is required, as well as a commitment that introduction of an alternative engine by 1985 is a national goal. JPL makes a persuasive case that all this is feasible and in the national interest. Given the potential in fuel savings and reduced air pollution, the money. . .would be a solid investment.” (LA Times, 5 Sept 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center was requesting proposals—due 22 Sept.—from the aerospace industry for a study leading to design and development of an Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) as a payload aboard Spacelab, MSFC announced. ACPL experiments would give scientists a knowledge of weather processes important for long-range weather prediction and weather modification. After evaluating the proposals, MSFC would award two parallel 12-mo firm-fixed price contracts. (MSFC Release 75—192)
Marshall Space Flight Center had opened for competition a research and development program to develop and demonstrate cryogenic components for the Space Tug vehicle. Work would include design of a reusable cryogenic storage system, and fabrication and evaluation of a testing system. Proposals were to be submitted by 31 October. (SBD, 1 Oct 75, 159)
A vertical motion simulator to reproduce the critical maneuvers of aircraft during takeoff and landing was being built at Ames Research Center. Costing $3.5 million, the VMS would use an existing cab and computer system, but would have new hardware to provide large-scale vertical motions. It would move as much as 18 m vertically and 12 m horizontally and would accurately simulate flare and touchdown of such aircraft as the short takeoff and landing (STOL) and vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL). (FRC X-Press, 26 Sept 75, 4)
Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded contracts worth $500 000 each to Martin Marietta’s Denver Division and to TRW Systems Group, to define the Spacelab payload called AMPS (atmospheric, magnetospheric, and plasmas in space). The definition studies would emphasize flexibility, low cost, and an evolutionary approach to environmental research. One of the first payloads considered for Spacelab, AMPS had been conceived as a manned orbiting scientific laboratory to study the nearspace environment of earth and the effects on it of changes in incident solar energy and of emissions from earth. Instrumentation would include a laser beam to define the composition of the various constituents of earth’s atmosphere. Missions would last from 7 to 30 days, with extensive involvement of the scientist crews in conducting the experiments. (MSFC Release 75— 239; SBD, 20 Nov 75, 108)
Flight Research Center was investigating the use of TV to provide visual information to pilots of future aircraft and spacecraft, NASA announced. TV might enhance target visibility for pilots of high-performance aircraft that might have to approach and land at high angles of attack with reduced window area, and for unmanned remotely piloted research vehicles that would augment flight instrumentation with visual. For testing, FRC had installed a TV camera on top of a Piper PA—30 aircraft with a 12.5- by 17.5-m TV screen installed on the instrument panel. A curtain would restrict the test pilot’s view through cockpit windows with a safety pilot riding in the right seat of the aircraft. Besides demonstrating use of TV for approach and landings, the first phase of the program would evaluate the pilot’s ability to judge altitude using TV. The second phase would aim at optimizing the TV system for landing maneuvers. (NASA Release 75-11) •
NASA announced approval of Rockwell International Corp. to begin final design and construction of two subscale models of highly maneuverable aircraft. The construction would be completed under an $11.3-milfion contract awarded earlier. The Rockwell design called for a 6.3-m-long 1260-kg model with a “coke bottle” fuselage and two large canards mounted on each end of the 2.5-m wing. The model would be powered by a General Electric Co. supersonic J85 supersonic jet engine. The two unmanned models would be flown from NASA’s Flight Research Center in a joint NASA—Air Force program to develop advanced technology in high-maneuverability aircraft. The models would be air-launched from large carrier aircraft and maneuvered by a pilot in a ground cockpit, using test techniques developed during NASA’s Remotely Piloted Research Vehicle program. (NASA Release 75- 279)
The Vertical Motion Simulator (VMS), an aeronautical facility designed to reproduce up-and-down and sideways motions of aircraft during takeoff and landing, was being built at Ames Research Center, NASA announced. Costing about $3.5 million, the VMS would move as much as 18 m in height and 12 m sideways, accurately simulating flare and touchdown. Practice in the simulator would enable pilots to cope better with the complexities of flying sophisticated aircraft such as short takeoff and landing (STOL) and vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) types. (NASA Release 75—224)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a request for proposals for a 10-mo study of a space-based power-conversion and power-relay system, MSFC announced. The proposed study would examine alternate means for generating electrical power in space, with emphasis on identification and delineation of problem areas and new technology required for these power systems. (MSFC Release 75—90)
Flight Research Center pilot Einar Enevoldson, in a ground-based instrumented cockpit, guided the remotely piloted research vehicle (RPRV) to its first unpowered landing, at FRC. Following air-launch from a B—52 aircraft flying at 14.6 km, the 7.3-r.i three-eighths-scale vehicle performed maneuvers to measure control effectiveness during spinning flight. The spin was continued until 4.6-km altitude when Enevoldson deployed the landing gear and performed a series of stability and control maneuvers. He initiated final approach at 1524-m altitude. The RPRV landed on the dry lakebed using small steel skids individually mounted on the ends of three conventional automobile shock absorbers installed inside the aircraft’s fuselage. The RPRV had been developed by FRC to provide a more economical and far less hazardous means of flight-testing new vehicles. Earlier versions of the RPRV had been recovered in midair using a parachute and helicopter. (FRC Release 26—75; FRC Proj Off, Rezek, interview, 12 Sept 75)
Dr. Wernher von Braun—German-born rocketry pioneer and former Marshall Space Flight Center Director and NASA Deputy Associate Administrator—had undergone successful surgery at Johns Hopkins University Hospital in Baltimore for removal of a malignant tumor, the Washington Post reported. (AP, W Post, 13 Aug 75)
A terrestrial solar-energy recording system now installed at Marshall Space Flight Center would provide accurate data on sunfall for use in developing solar-energy measuring systems, MSFC announced. Designed and built by International Business Machines Corp. as part of the center’s earth-based solar-power activities, the monitor would use a sun tracker and stationary sensors to measure and record solar energy. The 203-cm by 178-cm instrument included a pyrheliometer to measure energy coming directly from the solar disc and 2 pyranom-eters to measure direct and scattered energy from any direction in its hemispheric field of view. The system could also evaluate the ability of developmental devices to convert or reflect solar energy. Collected data were recorded on tape for computer analysis. (MSFC Release 75-168)
A NASA-developed low-cost highly efficient solar thermal-energy collector and a ball bearing design with a life expectancy 20 times greater than that of present ball bearings had been selected to receive Industrial Research magazine’s award for two of the 100 most significant new products developed during the year, NASA announced. Developed at Lewis Research Center in cooperation with Honeywell, Inc., the solar collector absorbed 20% more solar-radiated energy and produced a greater flow of high-temperature fluids. The flat-plate collector combined an efficient flow scheme, insulation, dual antireflective glass covers, and black chrome absorption coating to provide heating and cooling, with low cost and low pollution, for both commercial buildings and homes. LeRC developed the bearing with General Electric Co. and Industrial Tectonics, Inc., using computer analysis for maximum performance and reliability. Advanced techniques for producing and melting steel provided a cleaner, longer lived material for the bearing, and advanced fabrication and machining methods contributed greater accuracies and surface finishes to the bearing rings. The bearing was lubricated through holes in the bearing’s split inner ring rather than by a conventional lubricant jet pointed at the bearing rings. This advanced bearing design was expected to replace mainshaft-thrust ball bearings presently used in large turbine engines, pumping systems, electric utilities, and petroleum pipeline operations. (NASA Release 75—258)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a request for proposals for a study of alternative means for generating electrical power in space and relaying the power to earth, with emphasis on problem areas and new technology, the Marshall Star reported. Previous studies had defined concepts for the use of large solar-cell panels to generate power in geosynchronous orbit and transmit it to earth via microwaves; also studied had been the transmission via an orbital microwave system of power generated at a remote location on earth and transmitted long distances to the user location. (Marshall Star, 21 May 75, 1)
The Ancient Mariner—a power package built as a backup for the unit flown past Venus on Mariner 5 in 1967—was still going strong after more than 5 yr of operating in a space environment, the Boeing Space Center at Kent, Wash., said. Function of the package had been to transform raw power collected by solar panels into electric current acceptable to the spacecraft. NASA had asked Boeing to find out if electronic units like this could stand the rigors of long-distance space flights such as a 12-yr Grand Tour of the outer planets. Boeing put the Mariner instrument in a test chamber—part of an extensive vacuum and space simulation facility—in which temperature had been fixed at 1.6°C and other conditions had been made to conform with those in space. The duplicate had performed perfectly, outlasting much of its ground-support equipment and all but one of the technicians originally assigned to the experiment. The test had proved that flight hardware could stand temperatures as much as 3(^0 cooler than those encountered on missions already completed, and that similar electronic packages had a life expectancy of more than 5 yr, far longer than the period for which they had been designed. (Newport News Times-Herald, 16 Oct 75, 15)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of three contracts, part of a program to design, fabricate, test, and demonstrate a low-cost aesthetically appealing solar collector for residential heating and cooling. Chamberlain Manufacturing Corp. was awarded $72 621 and Honeywell, Inc., was awarded $104 255 to deliver a low-cost collector based on existing technology and the requirements of the solar heating and cooling demonstration. A third contract was awarded to PPG Industries which would furnish collector panels from off-the-shelf hardware at essentially no cost. (MSFC Release 75—22)
Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. was studying the economic and technical feasibility of using a rotating flywheel for electrical storage in commercial, utility, and transportation applications. The 9-mo study for the Energy Research and Development Administration was based on technology developed for a prototype spacecraft energy-momentum flywheel that Rockwell had built for NASA’s Langley Research Center. The small prototype spinning at speeds up to 35 000 rpm could provide 2500 w of electrical power as well as spacecraft attitude control. In the flywheel concept, electric motor generators would spin up specially constructed flywheels which kinetically stored energy by their rotation. When electrical power was needed, the rapidly spinning flywheels would drive generators. A significant application of the flywheel would be to store energy for electric utility companies; the flywheels, spun up during off-peak hours, would drive power-producing generators during peak-demand periods. (Rockwell Int’l Release SP—18)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio) introduced H.R. 9058, a revised bill to establish national science policy and organization, incorporating the most promising features of H.R. 4461 [see 6 March] and the Administration bill H.R. 7830 [see 9 and 11 June]. The proposed bill included a statement of national policy similar to that in H.R. 4461, but with language recommended during an earlier 3 wk of hearings. The proposal to establish an Office of Science and Technology Policy was based on the Administration bill with three major changes: First, H.R. 9058 would give the President the power to appoint up to four assistant directors, giving him the potential of a three- to five-man council as he chose; this would give later Presidents more flexibility of organization. Second, the President-appointed Director and assistants would be subject to confirmation by the Senate. Third, H.R. 9058 described the duties and functions of the new office more precisely than had the Administration biU. H.R. 9058 would establish, within the Executive Office of the President, a Federal Science and Technology Survey Committee to survey the Federal science effort, including missions, goals, personnel, funding, organization, facilities, and general activities. The 5 to 12 committee members would report findings and recommendations to the director of the new advisory office, with particular attention to organizational reform, science information systems, technology innovation and transfer, Federal-state and Federal-industry liaison and cooperation, and improved science budgeting process. Upon completion of the report, the committee would cease to exist. (CR, 30 July 75, E4265)
States from New England to California had joined the competition to be selected as the site of a proposed Federal Solar Energy Research Institute that might be spending up to $50 million annually within 3 yr after its establishment. Competition had begun even before issuance of formal criteria describing the center’s mission and needs, expected later in November. A report on the center by a special committee of the National Research Council—an agency of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering—had forecast a staff of about 800 professionals and 800 support people. The committee had recommended a single institute administered by a nonprofit corporation, like those that govern many other large national laboratories; geographical location had not been considered as important as “intellectual atmosphere, technical suppliers and availability of services for a substantial laboratory.” Issuance of criteria by the Energy Research and Development Administration would call for proposals early next year, with site to be chosen in April or May 1976 by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Administrator of ERDA. Among those already in competition were the state of N. Mex., which had put a proposal for the solar center in Feb. 1975 when ERDA . was a month old; a consortium of universities and industries on Long Island, N.Y.; the governors of six New England states, sitting as the New England Regional Commission, who voted to “work as a regional force” to get the center for New England; and the state of N.Y., which had designated a coordinator to work on getting the center, including “assembling the necessary real estate” from various areas of the state. (NYT, 9 Nov 75, 33)
Bills were introduced in the Senate (S. 573) by Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), and in the House of Representatives (H.R. 2931) by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), “to authorize appropriations to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration for research and development, construction of facilities, and research and program management, and for other purposes.” Bill S. 573 was referred to the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Bill H.R. 2931 was referred to the Committee on Science and Technology. {CR, 5 Feb 75, H659, S1430)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio) introduced H.R. 4461 “to establish a science and technology policy for the U.S. to provide for scientific and technological advice and assistance to the President, to provide adequate administrative organization to assure effective Federal support and utilization of research and development, to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, to amend the National Science Foundation Act of 1950, and for other purposes.” The bill was sent jointly to the Committees of Science and Technology and on Government Operations. The legislation proposed the establishment of a new cabinet-level Dept, of Research and Technology Operations to bring together Federal research-related activities through a unified and efficient governmental structure; a five-member Council of Advisors on Science and Technology to help form and implement policy at the highest levels of government; and a Science and Technology Information and Utilization Corp. to assure the widest possible dissemination of scientific and technological information. The proposed legislation would administratively relocate NASA, Energy Research and Development Administration, National Bureau of Standards, National Science Foundation, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration within the new department, but would not alter the basic mission and purpose of each agency. (CR, 6 March 75, H1464; House Com of Sci & Tech Print 48— 694)
The Energy Research and Development Administration had awarded a 45-mo $i7 736 000 contract to General Electric Co. Space Div. to provide nuclear generators for NASA’s two Mariner—Jupiter—Saturn missions scheduled for launch in late 1977. GE would build seven radioisotopic thermoelectric generators for use during the mission; three of the nuclear generators—each providing 150 watts—would be used for each spacecraft, and the seventh would serve as a spare. (ERDA Release 75— 79)
The Skylab program was closed out at Marshall Space Flight Center and personnel assigned to the program had been reassigned, the Marshall Star announced. Responsibility for the deactivated offices, including storage of hardware and phaseout of remaining contractual and documentary activities, was assigned to the Administration and Program Support Directorate’s Logistics Office. (Marshall Star, 2 July 75, 4)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a request for proposals for an x-ray source system for the x-ray telescope facility being constructed at MSFC for use in the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) project, MSFC announced. The proposed contract would include design, fabrication, assembly, preliminary in-plant checkout, installation, and verification. The contractor would also have the option of building a cover for the system. Under the terms of the contract, the x-ray source system would be installed on a 40.6-cm-by-39.3-cm steel flange by 20 Feb. (MSFC Release 75—93)
NASA announced award of a $1.5 million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Rockwell International Corp. for development of a solid-state bubble-memory data recorder to meet spacecraft data-storage requirements. The recorder, which would have no moving parts, would offer a capacity of 100 million bits, serial or parallel data input/output operation, user-selected data rates, and direct access to the memory. Rockwell would complete the work in two phases: A prototype would be completed by early 1977, and a flight-qualifiable model would be produced by early 1978. Langley Research Center would manage the contract for NASA. (NASA Release 75—272)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists had released “Automobile Power Systems Evaluation Study,” urging adoption of a billion-dollar program to mass-produce, by 1985, a fuel-saving pollution-free replacement for the standard internal combustion engine, Richard Witkin reported in the New York Times. Funded by a $500 000 grant from the Ford Motor Co. with the understanding that the study would be independent and unbiased, JPL’s report recommended accelerated, parallel development of the Brayton gas turbine and Stirling external combustion engine until a clear choice could be made between them. The study found that either engine not only was virtually pollution-free and cut fuel consumption by 30 to 45% but also could be mass-produced at a cost differential small enough to be easily recovered through fuel savings by the first owner. The JPL engineers defined the fuel economy, emissions, and costs of vehicles powered by nine other engines as well as by improved versions of the conventional internal combustion engine. Six sizes of cars were analyzed, covering the range of consumer preferences. Electric and hybrid power systems were also evaluated. Aside from development of the Brayton and Stirling engines, the report recommended other programs to reduce fuel consumption 15 to 35% by improved vehicle packaging, weight reductions, and transmission improvements. The report also recommended that the U.S. work in the interim to improve the fuel economy and emissions level of conventional car engines. (JPL Laboratory, 1975/5, 21; Witkin, NYT, 4 Sept 75, 18)
Pioneer 11 had been scheduled to take its first look at Saturn, according to controllers at Ames Research Center. Upon its encounter with Jupiter on 2 Dec. 1974, Pioneer’s trajectory was altered by the gravitational effects of Jupiter to one that would take Pioneer to Saturn on or about 1 Sept. 1979. The spacecraft had returned the only pictures ever taken of Jupiter’s polar regions and probed the planet’s intense inner radiation belts for the first time, attaining the highest speed ever attained by a manmade object (171 000 km per hr). Pioneer was still more than 1287 million km from Saturn, but in a position to observe the ringed planet at a phase angle 4 times larger than the largest angle at which Saturn could be seen from earth. The total amount of light and the polarization of sunlight reflected from a planet’s atmosphere at different angles could reveal the composition of the atmosphere; scientists would watch Saturn throughout Pioneer’s approach to note changes in intensity and polarization of light reflected from the planet with changes in phase angle. The viewing angle would also permit study of the light-reflecting characteristics of Saturn’s rings in large areas of shadow from the planet, an effect not visible from earth. Pioneer was headed upward out of the plane containing the sun’s planets, and in 1977 would attain a distance above this plane of about 161 million km, allowing it to measure phenomena coming from higher latitudes on the sun than previously observable. (ARC Release 75—53; MOR S—811—73—07, 19 Nov 75)
Flight Research Center announced the award of a $146 000 costplusfixed-fee contract to LTV Aerospace Corp.’s Vought Systems Div. to study the possibility of flight-testing the oblique wing on an F—8 jet aircraft. LTV would investigate technical and mechanical problems in modifying the test aircraft and would estimate the cost of modifications. , The oblique wing, developed by Dr. Robert T. Jones of Ames Research Center, was a conventional straight wing mounted on top of an aircraft so that it could be swiveled around a central pivot point. The wing could be fixed at zero degrees—perpendicular to the fuselage— for takeoff and landing, and moved to various sweep positions at different speeds for the best performance. Wind-tunnel tests had indicated the new design could operate with maximum efficiency over a wide range of flight conditions, offering either increased speed or significant fuel savings. (FRC Release 17—25)
Marshall Space Flight Center issued a request for quotations from industry for development of a flat conductor-cable wiring system suitable for use in residences and commercial establishments. Surface mounting, a feature of the flat cable System originated by NASA to reduce the size and weight of wiring harness in space capsules, would eliminate the need for routing wires in walls, ceilings, and floors because it could be covered by paneling, tile, or even wallpaper. Use of the flat wiring would reduce costs of wiring new construction and permit savings in renovating, remodeling, and rewiring of existing buildings. The successful proposer would develop a surface-mounted baseboard system using a cable 63.5 mm wide; total thickness of the baseboard—channel, airspace, and cover— would be about 11 mm, thickness of the thinnest lumber baseboard strips in use. (MSFC Release 75—257)
NASA’s Oso 5 Orbiting Solar Observatory began its 7th yr in earth orbit. Launched 22 Jan. 1969 to study the sun and its influence on earth’s atmosphere, Oso 5 had completed more than 34 000 orbits. It was the fifth of eight spacecraft launched in the OSO program to observe the sun during most of its 11-yr solar cycle. Oso 5 had been shut down 3 yr after launch but was reactivated in July 1974 after decay of the orbit of Oso 7 (launched 29 Sept. 1971). Oso 5, which had a planned lifetime of 6 mo, was obtaining data on the frequency and extent of eruptions on the sun’s surface. (NASA Release 75— 46)
Pioneer 10 (launched 2 March 1972), on its way out of the solar system 1.2 billion km from earth and halfway between the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, was making unexplained orientation changes, Ames Research Center announced. The spacecraft’s axis of rotation was changing by 1° every 2 wk. Project officials had said that the changes could be caused by a slight malfunction or by some interplanetary phenomenon, but evidence was contradictory. Further tests were planned to find the cause of the change. (ARC Release 75—30)
NASA, in cooperation with the Dept, of Transportation, was investigating aircraft wake vortices—turbulent air trailing from an aircraft’s wing-tips and swirling at velocities up to half the flight speed of the aircraft. Safety required an aircraft to travel far enough behind a preceding airplane to permit the vortices to dissipate, adding to congestion at already busy airports. NASA’s objective was to develop methods to reduce the intensity of the vortices and render them harmless 3 km behind the aircraft. This would decrease the amount of fuel wasted and the pollution produced when aircraft were subjected to holding patterns and waits to taxi to a runway, and would permit aircraft to land and take off at a faster rate. Engineers and scientists at Ames and Flight Research Centers were investigating the vortices by flying an instrumented Leaijet and a T—37 jet trainer through wakes created by larger aircraft. Data collected during these flights, checked against wind-tunnel data, suggested several possible ways of alleviating the wake-vortex problem, including tailoring the lift across the aircraft wings, modifying engine placement, and adding wing spoilers and drag devices. (NASA Release 75—136)
Radio transmissions from Mariner 10 ceased after attitude-control gas was depleted and flight controllers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory sent the command for the spacecraft to stop operations at 8:20 am EDT. Before shutdown, spacecraft engineering tests were conducted to try to open the stuck door on the plasma science experiment, rotate the solar panels to various positions, stow the scan platform at 18(f, operate the stuck tape recorder, and provide data for future spacecraft design. During its more than 16 mo in heliocentric orbit, Mariner 10 (launched 3 Nov. 1973) had traveled more than 1.6 billion km and made four planetary encounters, one of Venus and three of Mercury. It had passed within 5800 km of Venus 5 Feb. 1974, and transmitted to earth the first closeup photographs ever taken of the cloud-shrouded planet. Mariner 10 had confirmed the high-speed circulation of Venus’ upper atmosphere and revealed circulation patterns that swirled from the equator toward the poles. It had also revealed a long tail of charged particles trailing behind the planet and away from the sun; verified the presence of a bow shock wave created by the solar wind acting upon the dense atmosphere; detected hydrogen, helium, and argon in the Venusian atmosphere; and discovered temperature-inversion zones suggestive of deeper stratiform cloud layers. First spacecraft to use the technique, Mariner 10 used the gravity of Venus to speed it on toward Mercury. The probe flew by that planet three times, on 29 March and 21 Sept. 1974 and 16 March 1975. At Mercury, Mariner 10 photographed a highly cratered lunar-like surface with large scarps hundreds of kilometers long and over 1.6 kilometers high. Mariner 10 data also revealed the existence of a chemically differentiated light crust, lunar-like near the surface and earth-like at its interior, and an unexpected magnetic field 100 times smaller than earth’s. A slight but measurable atmosphere was found, in addition to streams of high-energy electrons and protons on the planet’s dark side. On its last encounter with Mercury [see 16 March] Mariner 10 came within 327 km of Mercury to take the closest photographs ever made of another primary planet. (NASAMOR, 7 April 75; VASA Activities, April 75, 12—13; NASA Release 75—59; A&A 1974)
Water vapor was detected for the first time deep in the atmosphere of Jupiter in October 1974 by a group of Univ. of Arizona scientists aboard NASA’s C—141 Airborne Infrared Observatory, Ames Research Center announced. The data, combined with data gathered by the Pioneer 10 and 11 flybys of the planet in 1973 and 1974, added to the speculation that organic compounds being formed in Jupiter’s atmosphere might account for the red, brown, and orange coloring of the planet’s clouds. The discovery was made with a 91.5-cm infrared telescope, newly installed aboard the C—141, which was flying above virtually all the water vapor in the earth’s atmosphere. Scientists would use the new data to predict Jupiter’s temperature and pressure, develop a structural model of the planet’s atmosphere, and determine Jupiter’s character at the time of its formation. (ARC Release 75—3; ARC Airborne Astronomy Prog Mgr, interview, 26 July 76; Larson et al., Astrophysical Journal, 1 May 75, L137— 40)
Dr. Philip Handler, 18th president of the National Academy of Sciences, had been elected for a second 6-yr term, NAS announced. Dr. Handler had served as NAS president since 1 July 1969. Before that he had been chairman of the Department of Biochemistry at Duke Univ. Medical Center. NAS, established in 1863 by an act of Congress, was a private organization of over 1000 scientists and engineers frequently called upon to advise the Federal government on policy questions related to science and technology. (NAS Release, 21 Feb 75)
Does not include a supplemental request for pay increases, introduced as H.R. 13172 and signed into P.L. 94— 303 on 1 June 1976. The committee also recommended denial of $1 000 000 of the $5 000 000 request for continued studies of the LST, and reduction to $2 000 000 of the $3 000 000 requested for the transition period. The remaining amounts were judged sufficient to complete LST studies. Within the Construction of Facilities category, the committee denied funds requested for construction of the Lunar Curatorial F acil-ity. No funds were to be used for modifying the 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel at Ames Research Center until the committee had reviewed a formal budget request. Reduction in the Research and Program Management request reflected a 10% reduction in the payment of General Services Administration space-rental charges. The committee also recommended language in the bill to permit the replacement of five older aircraft with more modern aircraft for greater efficiency and safety. This would reduce operating costs by $1 300 000 annually. The committee recommended a total appropriation of $925 028 000 for the transition period 1 July through 30 Sept. 1976. This total was $33 872 000 under the total budget request and $122 111 less than the authorization. NASA Transition Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and House-Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) H.R. Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 730.6 700.6 (-30.0) 700.6 (-30.0) Construction of Facilities 14.5 10.8 (-3.8) 10.8 (-3.8) Research & Program Management 213.8 213.8 (0) 213.7 (-0.1) Total 958.9 925.2 (-33.8) 925.0 (-33.9) (H.R. Com Rpt No. 94—313; Budget Chron Hist FY 1976, NASA Ofc of Budget Operations, 16 June 75)
For coating solar collectors that heat and cool homes and buildings, black chrome had been demonstrated by a Lewis Research Center scientist to be some 20% more efficient than current coatings. Being “solar selective,” black chrome allowed absorption of sunlight but prevented the ensuing heat from radiating out of the collector. Because of this, black chrome would raise the temperature of water in the system as much as 5°C (40PF) over the 95°C (200fDF) provided by current coatings. A system with hotter water would require fewer collectors to heat or cool an area. (NASA Release 75 — 55)
NASA announced the appointment of Dr. JohnE. Naugle, Deputy Associate Administrator, to be Acting Associate Administrator until a replacement was named for Dr. Rocco A. Petrone. (NASA anno, 30 April 75) During April: Soviet spending for research and development had risen 50% between 1968 and 1973, representing an increase of from 2.5% to 3.8% of the Soviet gross national product, the Air Forces Journal International quoted a Dept, of Commerce report as saying. During the same period, outlays for U.S. R&D had fallen from 3% to 2.4% of the GNP. The number of Soviet scientists and engineers working in R&D functions nearly doubled in the period, from 594 000 to 1 069 000; by contrast, the U.S. technological pool had risen from 454 000 to 531 000. The growth stemmed from a Soviet decision, announced in 1968, to increase Soviet expenditures for science and technology by more than 60%. The report estimated that 90% of the Soviet technical workforce was in the military and space fields. (AF Joum Int, April 75, 20)
NASA announced completion of a program conducted by Jet Propulsion Laboratory to measure the constituent gases of the stratosphere to help determine the effects on the earth’s ozone layer of gases released from aerosol spray cans. Using a Fourier interferometer onboard a U—2 aircraft, JPL scientists had measured the distribution of hydrogen chloride molecules at altitudes between 10 and 21 km during 6 separate flights in May. Hydrogen chloride—produced by the breakdown of aerosol gas molecules in the upper atmosphere and released naturally, in small amounts, from the ocean surface and volcanic eruptions—was one of several trace gases thought to play a major role in controlling the equilibrium of the protective ozone layer. JPL had found traces of the chloride beginning at 15 km, and reaching a maximum of almost 1 part per billion at 20 km. Although the results did not represent a direct effect of aerosol gas, or Freons, on stratospheric ozone, JPL scientists recommended continuing measurements to detect any future buildup. The ozone measurements, part of NASA’s Stratospheric Research Program, had begun when a JPL-designed instrument was flown on the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport in 1973. Data collected on these flights included the first detection of nitric oxide, along with new information on the geographic and vertical distribution of water, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and methane, and furnished a base for the 1975 study. (NASA Release 75—223; Miles, LA Times, 21 Aug 75)
High-speed computer techniques were producing profiles of giant red stars, in a NASA-sponsored research project conducted by California Institute of Technology scientist Dr. Juliana Christy-Sackmann at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Analyzing high-resolution infrared data on successive star flashes representing from a fraction of a year to a million years in the evolution of a red giant, Dr. Christy-Sackmann found that the violent combustion of helium in the heart of the stars, releasing heat up to 260 million°C, produced a predominance of carbon. She stressed the convective role of helium and hydrogen in fueling the stellar fires: A convective tongue of helium was driven through layers of burning shells toward the outer envelope of hydrogen. Hydrogen might also drop down to overlap, giving extra energy to an old star. The release of energy from the interior of the stars varied, apparently because of convective zones that seemed to come and go. Although each flash produced extreme interior disruption, surface changes in most cases were minor. The length of time required for computation had prevented previous investigators from following and analyzing more than a few of the hundreds of successive flashes occurring in a star; using the new computer technique, Dr. Christy-Sackmann planned to analyze hundreds. (JPL Release, 2 Feb 75)
A telescope aboard NASA’s Oao 3 Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (named Copernicus and launched 21 Aug. 1972) was observing three nearby stars—epsilon Eridani, tau Ceti, and epsilon Indi—-for signs of other civilizations that might be trying to contact earth with laser beams. The telescope had scanned the first star in November 1974 for 14 orbits while the spectrometer scanned the ultraviolet spectrum for potential laser signals to earth. The data were being analyzed and scientists were planning to scan tau Ceti and epsilon Indi again during the summer and fall of 1975. (NASA Release 75—130)
The recent detection of water vapor, and therefore oxygen, on Jupiter by Univ. of Arizona scientists aboard NASA’s C—141 Airborne Infrared Observatory [see 12 Feb.] could stimulate additional support for a probe mission to obtain more detailed information, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Scientists had already known that the proportions of helium and hydrogen on Jupiter were approximately the same as on the sun. The additional information that oxygen existed on Jupiter would strengthen the belief that the planet’s composition was similar to that of the sun, and that the sun and the planet had been formed from the same raw material. The conclusion was important to many scientists who believed that earth’s atmospheric composition had evolved from one similar to Jupiter’s. If this were true and if Jupiter’s atmosphere had changed little from its primitive state, then the Jovian atmosphere could serve as a laboratory for studying the evolution of life on earth. This new information could influence NASA scientists charged with making recommendations for new starts. (Av Wk, 24 Feb 75, 58)
Reduction-in-force and reduction-in-grade notices were sent to 213 Civil Service employees at Marshall Space Flight Center as a result of the reduction in the end-of-FY 1975 personnel ceiling. In addition to the 93 persons separated and the 120 persons reduced in grade, 191 MSFC employees received reassignments as part of a reclassification survey conducted during the summer of 1974. (MSFC Release 75—24)
A new antireflection-coated metal oxide semiconductor (AMOS) solar cell developed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists might have potential use in the nation’s solar energy program, JPL scientist Richard J. Stem reported at a Photovoltaic Specialists Conference in Phoenix. The solar cells, made from oxidized gallium arsenide with an extremely thin nearly transparent film of gold on the surface, had demonstrated an efficiency of about 15% in terrestrial sunlight, better than the average silicon solar cell now in standard use. The new cell also had superior resistance to radiation, promising a longer lifetime in space. Dr. Stern said that the technology was potentially adaptable to very low-cost polycrystalline thin films, with only a modest reduction in efficiency. (NASA Release 75—133)
A new computer-controlled tracking device for telescopes, called VIP (video inertial pointing), had been developed at Ames Research Center to improve the aim of balloon-borne, airborne, and space telescopes. The two main functions of VIP were to help the astronomer steer the telescope, and to continuously update the automatic stabilization system that holds the telescope steady during viewing. Automatically stabilized telescopes heretofore had used gyroscopes to keep the telescope aimed at a point in space and counteract the rotation of the earth and other disturbances; gyroscopes had been found subject to drift, causing the telescope to wander off target. VIP, using a single video sensor, could generate the signals required for all three control axes—roll, pitch, and yaw—and could use the visual information to point at nonvisible (infrared) sources. Previous systems using star trackers had needed from two to six conventional sensors to do the same job. Development of VIP had made use of several state-of-the-art devices: the microprocessor, a complete digital computer on a single printed circuit card, was the computer inside the VIP electronics. Two types of video sensors used by VIP were the solid-state imaging device called a CCD (charge-coupled device) that incorporated a matrix of light-sensitive elements on the surface of a silicon chip measuring 0.01 mm on a side, and an advanced vidicon tube for night vision called an ISIT (intensified-silicon intensified-target) camera. By reducing the amount of hardware required for good performance, use of these new instruments had lowered the cost of the system. Ames would use VIP to provide accurate automatic pointing of the Space-lab Infrared Telescope Facility for the Shuttle that was under development at Ames and on contract. (Ames Astrogram, 9 Oct 75, 1)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists reported that a joint JPL—Univ. of Texas astronomy team had detected carbon monoxide in the atmosphere
Prof. Hyron Spinrad, Univ. of Calif, astronomer, had photographed a galaxy 5 to 10 times larger than the Milky Way. Prof. Spinrad photographed the galaxy, designated 3C123, using the 120-in telescope at Lick Observatory and a new device that filtered out backlighting. The huge galaxy was moving away from earth at a speed of about 4.3 trillion km per year. (AP, B Sun, 2 July 75, A3)
Space expenditures resulted in tangible economic benefits, according to a report, “The Economic Impact of NASA R&D Spending,” being prepared for NASA by Chase Econometric Associates, Inc., the Philadelphia Inquirer reported. Using methods developed for regular national economic forecasts, Chase predicted that, if NASA’s research and development budget were increased by $1 billion for the 1975—84 period, the U.S. gross national product (GNP) would swell by $23 billion or 2% over the normal rate of growth. Labor productivity in the nonfarm areas of the economy would rise more than 2% over the normal growth rate, and more than one million jobs would be created, reducing the unemployment rate by nearly 0.4% by 1984. According to Chase, the key to NASA’s domestic economic importance was in the agency’s widespread technological advances that benefited a wide range of industries. Although the technological benefits were readily visible, NASA’s influence on the nation’s economy was more subtle, taking about 5 yr to work its way through the system. (Text, NASA Final Rpt, CR 144351, April 76; Holland, PInq, 3 Aug 75)
Two Ames Research Center research aircraft would be stationed in Hawaii for scientific research missions. A U—2 earth-resources survey aircraft would probe the stratosphere up to 20 km to measure the distribution and extent of ozone, nitric oxide, and aerosol particles in the area between the equator and 4(F N latitude. Conducted by ARC to aid a national study, the sampling program was part of a semi-globed study of the effect of ozone and nitric oxide on the world’s climate over a long period of time. Similar missions had been flown over higher latitudes and polar regions. Another objective of the U—2 flights was to collect remotely sensed data on the Hawaiian Islands in support of several investigations, including one of the decline and die-back of Ohia and Manami trees in the forested areas of Hawaii. NASA’s Kuiper Airborne Observatory, a C—141 jet aircraft equipped with a 91.5-cm infrared telescope, would make 16 flights to collect previously unobtainable data from the region of the galactic center, a highly complex intense source of infrared emission. (ARC Astrogram, 17 July 75, 1)
NASA announced the beginning of a cooperative NASAuniversityindustry program to flight-test a low-cost flight-control system that would improve ride quality, reduce pilot workload, and improve flight safety. The control system—developed and ground-tested by the Univ. of Kansas—was being installed on a Beechcraft 99 commuter airliner for a flight-test program under the direction of NASA’s Flight Research Center. Nearly a third of the aircraft’s control surfaces were controlled by the new automated avionics system, with two-thirds remaining under direct control of the pilot. Any failures in the automated control system could be easily overridden by the pilot, eliminating the need for redundancy in the attitude-control system and permitting mechanization at a much lower cost. With automated controls off, the separate surfaces responded to the pilot’s commands and the control system was essentially that of the Beechcraft airplane. The flight-test program would include functioned tests, envelope expansion, system optimization, and quantitative and qualitative evaluation by the three test pilots. (NASA Release 75—207; FRC Release 22—75)
President Ford sent a $349.4 billion FY1976 budget request to Congress, an increase of $45.0 billion over the FY 1975 request. The recommended deficit of $51.9 billion was a peacetime record high designed to help revive the Nation’s sagging economy. In his budget message to Congress, the President said that his recommendations provided for fiscal policy actions to increase purchasing power and stimulate economic revival; a major new energy program to hold down energy use, accelerate development of domestic energy resources, and promote energy research and development; an increase in outlays for defense to maintain preparedness and preserve force levels in the face of rising costs; a 1-yr moratorium on new Federal spending programs other than energy; and a temporary 5% ceiling on increases in pay for Federal employees and on individual benefits tied to changes in consumer prices. Proposals included a one-time $16-billion tax cut— $12 billion for individual taxpayers and $4 billion for business—to stimulate economic recovery. Energy: The President specifically requested that no new Federal spending programs be initiated in FY 1976 except in the field of energy, which had a total recommended budget authority set at $2,491 billion. Federal energy functions were divided into three broad categories: general operating programs (analysis and development of energy policy), regulatory programs, and research and development programs. General operating programs, with a recommended budget authority of $548 million, would be administered by the Federal Energy Administration (FEA), Dept, of the Interior, and the new Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA). Federal energy regulation, with a recommended budget authority of $178 million, was managed by FEA, Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), and Federal Power Commission. Although the new budget called for support from NASA and the National Science Foundation (NSF) for energy R&D, ERDA would have the major responsibility. The proposed energy program called for an increased fee on imported oil and an excise tax on domestically produced petroleum and natural gas. The proposal also called for decontrol of oil prices—coupled with a windfall profits tax—and deregulation of prices on hew natural gas. (in millions of dollars) 1974 1975 1976 Recommended budget Program or agency actual estimate estimate authority for 1976 General operating programs 223. 152. 498. 548. Regulation 90. 171. 164. 178. Research and development 739. 1131. 1577. 1764. Total energy 606. 1454. 2240. 2491. The Federal government had further expanded its research and development program to provide new and improved technologies necessary to increase domestic energy resources. Outlays for energy R&D would be $1.7 billion in FY 1976, an increase of 36% over FY 1975 and 102% over 1974. Budget recommendations continued a vigorous nuclear R&D program and accelerated non-nuclear energy R&D, particularly in coal and solar energy. General Science, Space, and Technology (in millions of dollars) 1974 1975 1976 Recommended budget Program or agency actual estimate estimate authority for 1976* Space research and technology: Manned space flight Space science, applications, and technology Supporting space activities Subtotal General science and basic research: National Science Foundation Energy Research and Development Administration Earth Sciences: Geological Survey Deductions for offsetting receipts
Aerodynamically designed wind-flow aids could reduce wind resistance to tractor-trailer trucks by up to 24%, NASA announced. In a series of tests conducted in 1974 at Flight Research Center, NASA and the Department of Transportation evaluated performance gains of a 15-m trailer outfitted with five different commercially available drag-reduction devices and two different trailer-cab spacings. The tests had been conducted without and then with the devices, at speeds from 45 to 30 km per hour, to evaluate changes in fuel economy resulting from reductions in air drag. (NASA Release 75—39) During February: NASA biochemist B. C. Walverton began planting large quantities of water hyacinths as part of a study to determine the plant’s ability to absorb and concentrate toxic metals and to metabolize various other chemical pollutants. Scientists at NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories had been experimenting since 1971 with vascular aquatic plants, which are equipped with a system of vessels to carry nourishment from the roots to the leaves. Results of the experiments were so promising that NASA, in cooperation with Mississippi state officials and the city of Bay St. Louis, had installed a special system using water hyacinths as a final filtration to remove nitrates, phosphates, and other chemical pollutants from the 245-sq-kmBay St. Louis, Miss, sewage lagoon. The water hyacinths would be harvested and analyzed to determine the amounts and kinds of impurities assimilated; saturated plants would then be recycled , using one of two methods being developed by NASA, into a mixed hydrocarbon fuel similar to natural gas. (NASA Release 74—332) March 1975
A giant 283 200-cu-m balloon carrying a Marshall Space Flight Center gamma ray detector was launched from Palestine, Tex., by the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The balloon reached an altitude of 40 km and traveled 800 km before touching down near Ft. Stockton, Tex., 23 hrs later. The purpose of the flight was to detect the sources and determine the nature of sudden bursts of gamma rays coming from various directions in space. (MSFC Release 75100)
A metering truss made of graphite—one of the few materials that expands with cold and contracts with heat—and epoxy, which expands with heat and contracts with cold in the usual way, had been designed to hold stable the mirrors of NASA’s Large Space Telescope without being distorted by temperature changes. Built by Boeing Aerospace Co. under a $185 000 contract with Marshall Space Flight Center, the structure had been subjected to a 2-day vacuum-chamber test at Boeing’s Space Center in Seattle under temperatures ranging from —84°C to +21°C without suffering lens-limiting thermal distortion. (Huntsville Times, 25 Nov 75; Boeing Release A—0459)
Efforts to charge batteries on the Viking 2 lander faded for unknown reasons, but controllers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory were confident that time would allow them to solve the problem. Both Viking 1 and 2 were launched with their lander batteries essentially uncharged to prolong their lives; the batteries aboard the Viking 1 lander were charged without difficulty 2 wk ago, and the same procedure had been scheduled for Viking 2. The spacecraft carried a backup as well as a prime battery charger, but NASA had not attempted to use it in case the problem had originated outside the charger system. Use of the backup before the problem had been identified might have damaged it as well as the prime charger. Viking 2, originally scheduled to be launched first, had been pulled back for repair after its orbiter batteries had been accidentally drained; officials said there was no connection between prelaunch orbiter problems and the lander situation. (NASA Release 75—288; Aero Daily, 4 Dec 75, 10; SBD, 4 Nov 75, 16)
A new medical diagnostic system known as time-delay spectrometry, using high-frequency sound waves, had been developed by scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The new technique passed continuous, varying high-frequency sound waves through the body; the waves were received and displayed as pictures on a cathode-ray-tube screen. Existing ultrasound systems had operated less effectively, sending into the body a pulse of sound waves and timing the echo after the waves were reflected from the body’s various internal organs. A picture from the JPL system looked like an x-ray and took shape in 2 to 4 min. Bones, muscles, organs, and differences in soft tissue could be clearly seen. The varying pitch of the sound waves and the differences in frequency response and absorption properties of various body tissues would aid the diagnostician in discriminating between, for example, a cyst and a tumor. JPL researchers were planning to evaluate the system’s usefulness in hospital applications, first by demonstrating its ability to detect and identify tumors in the female breast. (NASA Release 75—162)
Formation of a Federal interagency group—the Federal Interagency Task Force on Inadvertent Modification of the Stratosphere (IMOS)—to investigate the relationship of freons (fluorochlorohydro-carbons) to ozone reduction in the stratosphere was announced by the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality, Dr. Russell W. Peterson, and the Chairman of the Federal Council for Science and Technology, Dr. H. Guyford Stever. The group included representatives from NASA; the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Justice, and Transportation; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; Energy Research and Development Administration; Environmental Protection Agency; National Science Foundation; and Interdepartmental Committee for Atmospheric Sciences. IMOS would prepare a report summarizing atmospheric, medical, and ecological information on the freon/ozone relationship. The report would also evaluate possible economic impacts and alternatives to industry, consider what Federal action could be taken, and propose a Federal program to resolve the issues. (Fed Council for Sci and Tech Release 1)
Defense, space, and energy accounted for most of a record increase in Federal research and development funding in FY 1976, the National Science Foundation’s report An Analysis of Federal R & D Funding by Function, Fiscal Years 1969— 76 stated. The largest dollar increase, $1860 million, was for national defense; the second and third largest increases, $343 million each, were for space and energy. Relative increases in FY 1976 were largest for education, 102%; energy, 37%; national defense, 20%; and space, 13%. Total Federal obligation for R&D in the 1976 budget of $21.7 billion was a record high. The $2.7-billion increase over FY 1975 was also a record increase for any one year, enough to indicate a real rise in R&D activity, allowing for a reasonable inflation factor. The upward change contrasted with an average annual decline of 2.7% in constant dollars over the period 1969— 75. (NSF Highlights, 25 Aug 75, 1)
The first 10 automatic landings of a powered-lift shorttakeoffandlanding (STOL) aircraft equipped with a STOLAND automatic flight-control system had been completed by Ames Research Center personnel at the Naval Auxiliary Landing Field in Calif. The STOLAND system, a versatile onboard digital computer, provided the pilot with navigation, guidance, and control information. Automatic controls, including control of the aircraft’s lift with automatic flaps and augmenter nozzles, permitted steeper climbouts, approaches, and landings, offering potential relief for airport traffic congestion. Half the aircraft’s lift was provided by engine thrust, permitting flight dt much lower speeds than conventional aircraft. The STOLAND system was developed by Sperry Flight Systems for use in the joint NASA—Dept, of Transportation operating experiments program and the augmentor-wing handling qualities and flight-control programs. (NASA Release 75— 226)
S. Neil Hosenball, NASA’s Deputy General Counsel, had been appointed General Counsel, effective immediately, replacing R. Tenney Johnson, who had been named General Counsel of the Energy Research and Development Administration in February. Hosenball, who had been Deputy General Counsel since 1967, had been Assistant General Counsel for Procurement from 1966 to 1967 and previously had served for 4 yr as Chief Counsel at Lewis Research Center. (NASA Release 75—173)
The Senate Committee on Appropriations reported out H.R. 8070, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development—Independent Agencies Appropriations Bill for FY 1976. NASA FY 1976 Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and Senate Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) Senate Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 2678.4 2687.2 (+8.8) 2685.4 (+7.0) Construction of Facilities 84.6 99.1 (+14.5) 82.1 (-2.5) Research & Program Management* 776.0 776.0 (0) 775.5 (-0.5) Totals* 3539.0 3562.3 (+23.3) 3543.0 (+4.0)
Marshall Space Flight Center plans for the FY 1975 reductioninforce had been revised, MSFC announced. The target date for issuance of RIF notices to MSFC employees had been delayed from mid-January to 29 Jan. with an effective date of 14 Mar. The 2-wk delay resulted from the need for an additional decrease in the end-of-FY 1975 personnel ceiling, from 4145 to 4113. This further reduction was MSFC’s share of the government-wide reduction of 40 000 employees called for by President Ford in 1974. (MSFC Release 75—6)
NASA announced that General Counsel R. Tenney Johnson would leave NASA to become general counsel of the Energy Research and Development Administration, effective 16 Feb. Johnson had been With NASA since May 1973. NASA Deputy General Counsel S. Neil Hosenball had been named acting General Counsel. (NASA Release 75—32)
Flight Research Center announced the award of a 30-mo costplusfixed-fee contract, valued at $13 million, to Rockwell International Corp. to design and build two subscale model aircraft for NASA’s Highly Maneuverable Aircraft Technology Program. The two-phase contract called for an initial 60-day effort for detailed program planning; upon satisfactory completion of phase 1, NASA would approve the final design and fabrication. The two vehicles were scheduled for delivery to FRC late in 1977 for flight-testing, using the Remotely Piloted Research Vehicle test technique [see 3 March] developed by FRC. Air-launched from a carrier aircraft, the vehicles would be flown through maneuvers by a ground-based pilot using TV, telemetry, and radar. (FRC Release 7-75)
An interagency agreement between NASA and Department of Interior to use NASA technology for mineral extraction was announced by Secretary of the Interior Rogers C. B. Morton. Funded and directed by Ddl and combining efforts of NASA and contractor scientists, the project Would apply NASA experience in developing of systems for manned and automated operations in hostile environments to demonstrate new coal-mining technology. NASA has designated Marshall Space Flight Center as the lead NASA Center. (NASA Release 75-H) _ _
The Energy Research and Development Administration announced plans to launch a giant manned and instrumented balloon, Da Vinci II, between 24 May and mid-June to determine physical and chemical changes in air pollutants over distances of several hundred km from their source. The helium-filled ballopn more than 70 m high—equaling, with its gondola, the height of a 15-story building, and carrying the same crew of 4 that flew on Da Vinci I in November 1974—would fly for up to 36 hr at altitudes from 3 to 9 km from St. Louis, Mo., to a point in 111., Ky., or 0. Da Vinci I flew from Las Cruces to Wagon Mound, N.M., in 12 hr to prove the feasibility of using a manned instrumented balloon for lower atmosphere research. Crew members were Dr. Rudolf J. Engel-mann of NOAA; Otis Imboden, photographer from the National Geographic Society; Jimmie Craig, pilot from the U.S. Naval Weapons Center; and Mrs. Vera Simons, project consultant and experienced balloonist, who originated the idea for the project. The crew would use a variety of instruments to conduct more than 20 experiments to show what happens to a plume of polluted air as it moves across several states. (ERDA Release 76- 128)
The Natl. Science Foundation announced that employment of academic scientists and engineers had increased 3% in 1976; the increase had cut across all major fields of study, from 1% in life sciences and engineering to nearly 7% in social and environmental sciences. The number of full-time scientists and engineers at academic institutions went from 224 800 to 230 500, or 3%, and the number of those employed part time went from 55 900 to 58 700 (5%). Over the period 1965 to 1976, there was a significant shift to teaching. Scientists and engineers employed primarily as teachers increased 223 200 from 1975 to 1976 (3%); those working primarily in research and development increased 51 000 (2%). The number of women employed full time as scientists and engineers increased 5% from 1975 to 1976, a rate more than double that for men. (NSF Highlights, 2 Dec. 76, 1)
Images from 2 Landsats circling the earth 912 km up had helped the state of Md. monitor strip-mining damage and inventory its surface coal-mining activities, NASA announced. The state did not know the location or extent of orphan mines—those abandoned before 1967—and began a mapping program to determine the extent of the disturbed land and the procedures and expense that would be required to reclaim it. A 1967 law required private companies to operate under state-approved reclamation plans; acreage disturbed before 1967 would be reclaimed by the state. The Landsat images showed from 25 to 30% more acreage affected by the mines than anyone had realized. Arthur T. Anderson of Goddard Space Flight Center’s information transfer laboratory compared Landsat images taken over a 3-yr period ending in 1974 to identify and measure effects of strip mining in Western Md. with an accuracy better than that obtainable from aerial photography or field-inspection techniques. Other states using Landsat imagery for reclamation projects were Ohio, Tenn., W. Va., Ky., Pa., S.C., Fla., and the Great Plains states. (NASA Release 76-134)
NASA announced issuance of a patent to Richard T. Whitcomb, an aerospace technologist at Langley Research Center, for an aircraft wing to be used at subsonic speeds. The new wing, called a supercritical or “upside down” wing, was described as increasing speed without need for additional power and as suitable for any aircraft flying near the speed of sound. Whitcomb last year received $25 000 for the invention from NASA’s Inventions and Contributions Board. (ATT, 1 May 76, 31)
A new research aircraft combining the precision hover and low downwash of a helicopter with the long range and high speed of a fixed-wing aircraft made its debut at rollout ceremonies in Arlington, Tex., marking “a major milestone in the joint NASA-Army tilt rotor program,” according to a NASA announcement. The Bell Helicopter Textron’s XV-15 would undergo a 2-yr flight-testing program scheduled by Ames Research Center and the Army’s Air Mobility Research and Development Laboratory. The XV-15 was a 12.8-m-long 9.7-m wing-span aircraft with win grip-mounted engines, transmissions, and 7.6-m propeller rotors that could tilt from the helicopter position for vertical takeoffs and landings and for hovering, to a horizontal position for forward flight at speeds up to more than 482 kph. The tilt rotor would operate with less noise than conventional helicopters or turboprop aircraft of comparable size. The first XV-15 would undergo ground and hover tests, then go to ARC for testing in that center's wind tunnel; the second XV-15 would undergo initial envelope-expansion flight tests at Bell’s Arlington, Tex., facility beginning late in 1977. (NASA Release 76-169; W^Siar^ 24 Oct 76, A-2)
The price of solar cells had come down, the Energy Research and Development Administration announced. Cells that would have cost about $210 ($21 a watt) 6 mo ago today cost $155 ($15.50 a watt). “This 26% price drop in just 6 mo shows that our research and development program is making significant progress,” said Dr. Henry H. Marvin, director of ERDA’s division of solar energy. “However, we have a long way to go to meet our 1986 goal of 50<t a peak watt.” At the goal price, Dr. Marvin said, solar cells could compete with electric power from conventional sources; even at the present high cost, solar cells were competitive for special uses, such as recharging batteries at remote microwave stations operated by railroads and highway departments in southwestern states. Manufacture and sale of solar cells for such uses doubled in the past 18 mo, and the price during that period had dropped almost 50%. NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory would manage solar-cell purchase contracts for ERDA, the announcement said, to establish technical feasibility of uses ranging from remote power sources to integration with existing power systems. (ERDA Release 76-290)
One of the first in a group of 32 commercial solar heating and cooling systems in ERDA’s nationwide solar-energy demonstration program went into operation in Lynchburg, Va., NASA announced. Local and state government officials attended an open house at the office of Terrell E. Mosely, Inc., where the system is installed, to view the equipment together with businessmen, engineers, architects, and federal representatives. The 32 pilot projects, selected from 308 proposals submitted to ERDA, include ten office buildings, four schools, three hotels or motels, two fire stations, two factories, one hospital, one laboratory, one library, and some miscellaneous buildings. NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center provided technical management for the installations in support of the ERDA program. (NASA Release 76-163; MSFC Release 76-177)
NASA was preparing to issue requests for proposals in Jan. 1977 for the Large Space Telescope, resulting in contractor selection during the next year if Congress approved the fiscal 1978 funding requested, said Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine. NASA also hoped to issue an announcement of scientific opportunity to the scientific community in Feb., asking for scientific instruments to be carried on the first mission of the 2.4-meter telescope. (Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 9)
Louis Mogavero was appointed Director of NASA’s Technology Utilization Office in the Hq Office of Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, the agency announced. Mogavero, who joined NASA in 1966, had held management and planning positions in the former Office of Manned Space Flight, and in 1972 had worked with a White House study group evaluating new opportunities in technology. Before joining NASA he was operations manager for new product development with the Boeing Co., and received a master’s degree in engineering administration in 1970 from George Washington University. (NASA Hq announcement, 12 Apr 76)
The European aerospace industry was frustrated in attempting to increase its share of commercial and military aircraft sales, said Robert B. Hotz, editor-in-chief, in an editorial in Aviation Week magazine. Although maintenance of a viable European aerospace industry would be in the best interest of the Western world, Hotz said, attempts to organize it on a truly international competitive scale had emphasized inherent weaknesses and failed to achieve fiscal success. Recent developments— nationalization of the British aircraft industry, and French moves toward a transatlantic rather than a cross-channel cooperation—had intensified the problems, characterized by higher wage scales and lower productivity. Suggestions for improvement included organizations based on commercial and technical considerations, rather than on political boundaries and restrictions; marketing goals based on the broadest markets possible, rather than on narrow domestic requirements; and controlling labor costs that had priced European products out of the export market and had held production to a rate below that needed to fill international market requirements. (Av Wk, 3 May 76, 5)
NASA was beginning to make headway in efforts to solve basic problems of U.S. aircraft manufacturers caused by a long-term dearth of low-speed aeronautical research, reported Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine. Industry engineers reporting on discussions at a recent Wichita meeting of the Society of Automotive Engineers said use of the workshop technique had been effective in uncovering primary problem areas by crosstalk with such specialized segments as aerodynamicists and propulsion engineers. NASA research being further refined in industry product development included general-aviation aircraft airfoils, aircraft drag reduction, propeller efficiency, and reduction of airflow separation on wing trailing edges. Lewis Research Center had begun exploration of alternatives to conventional reciprocating engines, such as diesel and rotary concepts. NASA had also begun studying the application of advanced technology to agricultural aircraft, said to be responsible for increasing farm production by about $10 billion annually, to solve problems such as corrosion of aircraft structures by agricultural chemicals and control of chemical drift. (Av Wk, 26 Apr 76, 56)
INTELSAT announced plans to conduct a 1977 program of research and development costing more than $5.4 million, to advance technology for its global comsat system. The R&D yearly budget, approved by the recent meeting of the board of governors, would consist of $1.3 million for research to identify technology that appeared promising for the future INTELSAT projects; $2.2 million for contract authority for projects with near-term applications; and $1.9 million for in-house support of such projects. Areas of exploratory research would include spacecraft and microwave technology, communications processing, analysis of propagation and transmission, and studies of materials and devices. Near-term projects would include development of antennas, transponders, and other components; investigation of cross polarization; development of NiH batteries, voice-channel decoders, high-power transistors, and improvement of techniques. (INTELSAT Release 76-33-M)
Establishment of an Office of Science, Engineering, and Technology Policy in the White House, a goal of U.S. scientists since 1973, would become effective within 6 wk or so, the New York Times reported. Since President Nixon had abolished a similar office, the scientific community had been concerned over the lack of provision at the top level of government for sophisticated advice on science and technology affecting U.S. policies on world food supplies, environmental pollution, energy, transportation, disarmament, and similar problems. The Ford Administration had encouraged Congress to establish such an office by law rather than set one up by executive order, and the House of Representatives had passed an Administration-backed bill in Nov. 1975. A Senate bill, “roughly comparable” according to the NYT, had been agreed upon by several committees and was on its way to passage; this measure would establish a White House office with a director and as many as 4 associates, who would work closely with the Office of Management and Budget on science and technology budgets and would prepare an annual report for the President to send to Congress on science, engineering, and technology, with options on federal investment and priorities in the three related fields. The Senate bill would also call for authorization of funds to establish science and technology offices in each state; the House bill did not have similar provisions. (NYT, 25 Jan 76, 26)
Third Century America, the bicentennial exposition on science and technology that opened in May at KSC, closed its gates with a ceremony that included music, fireworks, and cannon salutes. More than 600 000 visitors had seen displays prepared by government agencies, educational institutions, and industry firms, many of which had representatives on the outdoor stage during the closing exercises. A time capsule dedicated during the ceremony would remain on display at the visitor center with duplicates of the items contained in the capsule: 1976 coins, stamps, and medals; items representative of 1976 technology and lifestyle, including space-related materials; newspapers, letters, and a mailorder catalog. The stainless steel cylinder, enclosed in a stainless steel cube with a lexan plastic top, would be opened in 99 yr (on 4 July 2075) in preparation for the U.S. Tricentennial. (Spaceport News, 3 Sept 76, 8; 17 Sept 76, 4)
Dryden Flight Research Center announced it would begin a series of YF-17 test flights in mid-May to aid designers of future highly maneuverable aircraft. The YF-17, built by Northrop Corp. for the Air Force’s lightweight fighter program, is a twin-engine aircraft incorporating many innovations to give it high performance and maneuverability. Objectives of the NASA research program would be to collect in-flight data on pressure around the engine nozzles and afterbody, for comparison with wind-tunnel data to improve prediction techniques for future fighter-aircraft design; and to continue NASA studies on improved maneuvering for fighter aircraft in the areas of buffet, stability and control, acceleration, and handling. Under a $255 000 contract funded jointly by NASA and the U.S. Navy, the YF-17 would be flown for about 8 wk by Gary Krier, DFRC’s YF-17 project pilot. (DFRC Release 7-76)
The Energy Research and Development Administration announced plans to build a “power tower” in 1978 and put it in operation by 1981. Plans called for a large number of sun-tracking mirrors, called heliostats, to reflect sunlight on to a boiler located at the top of a tower; water in the boiler, superheated by concentrated sunlight, would produce high-pressure steam to drive a turbine. ERDA was seeking a utility company to construct and operate the pilot plant: the utility would provide the site, install a conventional turbine and generator, and distribute the power to its customers over existing lines. ERDA would provide the solar portions (tower, boiler, heliostats, and storage) and charge the utility for the electricity. Sites proposed for the pilot plant were in Ariz., Calif., Fla., Miss., P.R., R.I., and Tex. Three teams—headed by Honeywell Inc., McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., and Martin Marietta Corp.—were working on designs for the pilot plant, and Boeing Engineering and Construction Corp. was developing a design for the heliostat only. ERDA would choose the best design and test it at a facility under construction at the Sandia Laboratories of ERDA in N.M. (ERDA Release NF-76-12)
The Marshall Star reported that a former student research assistant at MSFC, now a member of the faculty at Alabama A&M Univ., would be principal investigator in a study to develop remote-sensing applications for resources study and management, under a $35 000 grant from NASA and MSFC. The research effort would catalog the transportation network of Ala., including highways, railroads, water systems, and airports, and would devise a system for storing information in quickly retrievable form that could readily be updated. Dr. Oscar Montgomery, who had worked on the study at the outset, had graduated from A&M and had received a Ph. D. from Purdue Univ., returning to A&M in the department of natural resources and environmental studies. He and other researchers at A&M would identify and assist users of remotely sensed data in Ala., develop university facilities and skills to handle, process, and interpret such data, and support “ground truth” and related activities of the Earth Resources Office at MSFC. The grant, part of the Minority Institutions Research Program, would provide remotely sensed data obtained by aircraft or spacecraft to the Ala. Development Office and other state agencies. (Marshall Star, 10 Nov 76, 4)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that 3 different solar collectors procured from industry in an ERDA-sponsored program on technical management and support of solar-energy development were undergoing tests of efficiency versus cost. The collectors, after exposure to weathering, were put into an active situation in which the heat-transfer medium (usually water) passed through them, and measurements were made to determine their efficiency. At the same time, 4 low-cost collectors developed by MSFC were being tested to evaluate the thermal performance of black-nickel and black-chrome absorber coatings that could reduce the amount of collector area required, and thereby lower the cost of a specific application. (MSFC Release 76-121)
Federal agencies allocated $4.5 billion to institutions of higher learning in FY 1975, the Natl. Science Foundation reported, a level of support about the same as the previous year’s but representing an 8% decline when converted to constant (1972) dollars. HEW allocated the largest amount, $3.2 billion, or 70% of the total; the NSF supplied the second largest, $491 million or 11%. Other sponsoring agencies were the Dept, of Agriculture, DOD, ERDA, and NASA. Of the $2.2 billion earmarked for research and development (about half of all allocations to academic institutions), researchers in life sciences received $1.2 billion, more than half of all federal R&D funds; research in physical sciences received $307 million, about 14%, and engineering and environmental sciences each received about 9%. All other fields together received only about 13%. (NSF Release PR76-91) .
Oso 8, an orbiting solar observatory launched 21 June 1975, had performed without failure of any subsystem except a redundant solar sensor, and was judged successful, according to a postlaunch mission operations report. Primary mission objectives were high-resolution spatial and spectral observations of the solar chromosphere and transition regions, obtained by the pointed experiments aboard the observatory; secondary mission objectives were met with “substantial numbers” of observations of solar x-rays, earth airglow, and cosmic x-ray background radiation. At launch, Oso 8 carried the most comprehensive package of cosmic x-ray experiments ever included in a single payload, including the first satellite instrument containing large-area thin plastic window detectors to measure ultrasoft x-rays; the first high-sensitivity crystal spectrometer flown to measure cosmic x-ray sources with extremely high spectral resolution; and the first satellite experiment flown to measure x-ray polarization of cosmic sources with high sensitivity. (MOR S82175- 09 [postlaunch], 10 May 76)
A nickel-zinc battery improved by space technology, installed in a utility van and tested against a regulation lead-acid battery, ran the delivery vehicle nearly twice as far at a constant speed of about 32 kph, Lewis Research Center announced. The improved battery would be able to meet the needs of 95% of the nation’s drivers for a full-service urban vehicle and could help to reduce dependence on petroleum. The improvement consisted of an inorganic separator adapted from space battery technology. L<RC planned further studies of the battery’s life, performance, and competitive cost, using sample batteries in mail pickup and delivery vans with the cooperation of the U.S. Postal Service. (NASA Release 76-155)
The jumbo jet—“a revolutionary class of elephantine airliner” carrying twice as many passengers as the biggest narrowbodied aircraft—was a jumbo bust, said the Wall Street Journal reporting on declining business in the aircraft industry, especially on a 3-way battle among U.S. manufacturers for British Airways orders. The government-owned British airline would buy 6 widebody jet liners valued at about $165 million with possible options on 3 more, to replace an aging fleet of Boeing 707s and Vickers VClOs on its long-distance routes, and there was no British-made aircraft of the size British Airways needed. McDonnell Douglas had been advertising in London papers “the difference to Britain” of $537 million and 13,000 jobs if the DC-10 were chosen, because it would use the Rolls Royce engine now used in Lockheed’s slightly smaller TriStars. Lockheed, also competing for the order, said the engines on its L—1011 TriStars had already provided more than $750 million of business for Britain, and buying a long-range version of the TriStar for overseas routes would be simply an extension of a proven relationship. The Boeing Company had also been competing for the order, although its 747 was said to be too big for the British Airways’ long-distance routes: it would carry about 400 passengers, compared to 260 for the DC-10 and 240 for the L—1011. Boeing, however, had been talking with Aerospatiale of France on a smaller version of the latter’s widebody twin-engine jet, to be marketed in the U.S. with a revised Boeing-built wing in return for French participation in a bigger version of Boeing’s 737; the French were reported wary of Boeing and leaning toward an agreement with McDonnell Douglas on a modification of the French 150-seat Mercure. The WSJ reported 10 Aug. that U.S. manufacturers’ sales of widebody aircraft had fallen “billions of dollars behind original projections.” McDonnell was producing DC-10s at only 20% of capacity; Boeing had cut output of 747s from 84 a yr to 18; and Lockheed’s production of L-101 Is was “even lower.” U.S. airlines, for which the widebodies were originally designed, had not placed a single new order for passenger jumbos since 1973, and planned to buy “only a handful” before 1980. The jumbo was industry’s answer to the problem of carrying the passenger load predicted for 2 decades without clogging runways, skyways, and airports; the traffic growth had been curtailed by economic recession and the oil embargo that increased fuel prices unexpectedly. Also, the rise in nonstop service between medium-size cities whose traffic formerly was funnelled through major airports had cut into the traffic of the jumbo jets. Makers of the widebodies were far from breaking even on their design and development costs, which had run over $4 billion; about 1200 planes would have to be sold to cover that investment, the WSJ said, and so far the 3 makers reported only about 700 firm orders and deliveries, with another 80 options that might or might not materialize. (WSJ, 6 Aug 76, 12; 10 Aug 76, 1)
Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the first hitch in operations of the Viking 2 lander—trouble with its digging arm—had been solved: the problem turned out to be in a microswitch. Ground control at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Calif, had commanded the lander’s computer to ignore signals from the malfunctioning switch in future digs. If the corrective commands freed the arm for duty, the experiments needing soil samples would begin receiving them and results would become available within a week or 10 days. Viking 2's lander cameras had returned excellent pictures of the Utopia terrain around the landing site; the meteorological experiment was collecting and returning weather data regularly; and the seismometer (whose parallel on Viking 1 was never uncaged) was ready to monitor marsquakes, the magazine said. (Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 25, 58-61)
A team of engineers and scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had devised a way to transfer blood without contamination and lengthen its safe storage time, NASA announced. Using a concept developed in spacecraft sterilization, the team—under contract to the National Heart and Lung Institute of the National Institutes of Health—worked out an aseptic fluid-transfer system on which patents had been applied for by the Calif. Institute of Technology, which operates JPL for NASA. Two dualwalled tubes, fused and penetrated by heat, would permit clean transfer of blood from one container or bag to another; the unique connector would be manufactured as part of the container. Outer portions of the tubing would be polyvinyl chloride, and the inner parts of heat-resistant kapton; application of heat at 200° C through a metal clamp to the flat end links of each tube would effectively fuse the tube and sterilize the adjoining areas. Heat could be applied by a portable device no larger than an ordinary hair dryer. The method was reported to kill 99.999% of all bacteria and spores, even when surfaces had been purposely contaminated. (NASA Release 76-20)
Reviewing the Energy Research and Development Administration’s first year of operation, ERDA Administrator Robert C. Seamans Jr. said the U.S. had taken major steps to assure adequate energy supplies in the future. Establishment of ERDA on 19 Jan. 1976, bringing together energy research functions formerly located in other agencies, was itself a milestone. Specific steps cited by Seamans included a major solar-heating demonstration and completion of two heating-and-cooling projects; development of a national energy R&D plan emphasizing conservation of energy and development of new sources; demonstration and testing of more efficient recovery and use of coal, oil, and shale; biohazard screening of 150 compounds in fossil fuels to determine which might cause cancer or genetic mutations; and identifying problems in the nuclear-fuel cycle, including reprocessing of fuel and disposal of wastes. Describing fossil and nuclear energy as the near-term and midterm resources of the nation, Seamans said that conservation should enable them to carry the U.S. into the next century, when essentially inexhaustible energy sources should be available: solar electricity, breeder reactors, and fusion power. (ERDA Release 7 6—5)
NASA announced award of a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to evaluate a fuel-saving concept applicable to commercial subsonic transport aircraft. The three companies selected were Boeing Co., McDonnell Douglas Corp., and Lockheed Aircraft Corp.; each company estimated its portion of the contract to be about $1.6 million. The 24-mo contract, to be managed by Langley Research Center, would be for a study of laminar flow control by use of an air-suction system built into aircraft skin surfaces to remove boundary-layer air before it could cause drag and air turbulence that would reduce aircraft speed. (NASA Release 76-161)
MSFC announced selection of two NASA payload specialists and a backup for ASSESS II, a Spacelab simulation project to be flown in May 1977 in a four-engine jet aircraft. ASSESS II, a joint mission of NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), would use the two U.S. payload specialists and two selected by ESA [see 27 Aug.]. The two selected, both of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, were Dr. Robert T. Menzies and David S. Biliu; Leon B. Weaver of MSFC was chosen as the backup. Dr. Menzies would be principal investigator (Pi) for the laser absorption spectrometer experiment; Biliu was a member of JPL’s synthetic-aperture radar research team; Weaver, a veteran of the ASSESS Lear 4 mission of Oct. 1974 and presently assistant mission manager, would represent MSFC’s Spacelab Payload Projects Office, and was selected from a group already involved in ASSESS II whose experience would permit training at minimal cost. The ASSESS II payload would include both NASA and ESA experiments in earth resources, monitoring of atmospheric pollution, and infrared astronomy. (MSFC Release 76-170; Marshall Star, 22 Sept 76, 4)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that about 80 scientists from universities, medical facilities, and industry, serving as the Universities Space Research Association, would meet at Huntsville 26-30 July to evaluate experiments proposed for the first Spacelab mission. NASA’s Space Science Steering Committtee would use the evaluations in selecting experiments to be carried on Spacelab 1, scheduled for launch in the 3rd quarter of 1980. The 10 categories in which experiments were proposed were: astrophysics, upper atmosphere, space plasma, biomedicine, atmospheric observations, biology, technology/behavior, communications/navigation, drop dynamics/atmospheric cloud physics, and technology experiments. MSFC was assigned management responsibility for defining, integrating, and operating the payloads for the first 3 Spacelab missions. (MSFC Release 76-130)
NASA announced that the U.S. Government Printing Office had published the 3-volume English edition of the joint U.S.-USSR Foundations of Space Biology and Medicine, summarizing biological and medical results of the first 15 yr of space flight. The work was produced by a joint editorial board on space biology and medicine formed in Oct. 1965 by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences; the USSR had published a Russian-language edition in Moscow. The text consisted of 45 chapters, 19 authored by U.S. scientists, 20 by USSR scientists, and 6 by teams of authors from both nations. Volume I was called “Space as a Habitat”; Volume II, “Ecological and Physiological Foundations of Space Biology and Medicine,” responses of man, plants, and animals to space flight; Volume III, “Space Medicine and Biotechnology,” technology and procedures needed to sustain life and permit living creatures to function in space. (NASA Release 76-135) 4-member crew of Da Vinci III included 3 who manned both the Da Vinci 1 flight in Nov. 1974 and the Da Vinci 11 flight in June 1976: Dr. Rudolf J. Engelmann of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; pilot and project originator Ms. Vera Simons; and pilot Jimmie Craig of the U.S. Naval Weapons Center. The new member of the crew was Preston B. Herrington of Sandia Laboratories, Energy Research and Development Administration, which would collect and analyze the flight data as well as conduct all flight operations. Da Vinci was a joint project of ERDA, NOAA, and the Environmental Protection Agency. (ERDA Releases 76-211, 76-245)
NASA announced plans to roll out the first of 2 rotor systems research aircraft (RSRA) 7 June at the Sikorsky Aircraft Division in Conn. The RSRA, capable of conventional cruise flight as well as typical helicopter performance, was the product of a joint NASA-Army research program to reduce rotor noise and vibration—with attendant high maintenance costs—and improve performance and cruise speed of future civil and military helicopters. The RSRA was the first helicopter designed with research capability in mind; devices in the main rotor-support structure would permit accurate measurement of rotor forces in flight, and force-measurement systems were also incorporated in the wing, tail rotor, and auxiliary engine to permit measurement and control of the lift and drag of the rotor system. The Army, world’s leading user of helicopters, would make the RSRA available to the U.S. helicopter industry for rotor-systems tests; most of the technology would also be applicable to civil vehicles. NASA’s goal would be to meet predictions of increased usage in the civil helicopter industry to enable the U.S. to compete favorably in the growing world market. (NASA Release 76-105)
A NASA earth-survey aircraft—one of two U-2 high-altitude research planes flown by the agency—had been studying the stratosphere over Central America, South America, Canada, the Caribbean, and the Pacific Ocean to measure ozone, nitric oxide, and manmade pollutants as part of a long-term global effort to understand the effects of pollutants on global climate over a long period of time. The data flights used 4 scientific instruments: a stratospheric air sampler, to measure ozone and nitrogen ozide; an aerosol particle sampler, to measure minute aerosols; a stratospheric cryogenic sampler to measure halocarbons (freons) and methane levels; and a foil sampler, to measure aerosols and trace gases for the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The other 3 studies were under the direction of NASA’s Ames Research Center. Data from the flights would be available to the other governments involved in the studies. (NASA Release 76-60)
Scientists attempting to find a source of unlimited energy like that which powers the sun had taken two potentially significant directions, Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times, Soviet researchers had shifted from emphasis on laser beams for crushing nuclear fuel to superdensity, to use of electron beams for that purpose. Although 90% of U.S. effort had been on converging pulses of laser light, a new system of using ion beams had shown advantages over the electron-beam method from which it evolved: the apparatus would deliver a vast amount of energy to a fuel pellet, causing the shell to explode both inward and outward. The inward blast, crushing the pellet core to 1000 times its original density, would produce a fusion reaction resulting in helium, and a small amount of mass would be converted into a large amount of energy. The U.S. electron-beam study was based at Sandia Laboratories, in N.M., one of three research centers operated by the Energy Research and Development Administration. Although the U.S. use of ions was the chief novelty in the fusion-energy field, laser fusion was still the front runner, Sullivan noted. (NYT, 15 Jan 76, 22)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced development of a solar-simulator test facility, believed to be the largest of its kind in existence, to compare the efficiency of solar-energy collectors in MSFC’s program of assisting the Energy Research and Development Administration in its solar energy program. Designed to provide variable levels of energy similar to ground-level solar radiation, the simulator contained a lamp array with 405 tungsten halogen 300-watt lamps paired with the same number of Fresnel lenses to provide an illuminated area for solar collectors up to 1.2 by 2.4 meters. After a 6-wk checkout of the lamp array, power equipment, and solar-collector fluid-flow systems, the simulator would serve to test solar-energy collectors that used either air or liquid as the heat-transfer medium. (MSFC Release 76-111) ,
Dr. James B. Pollack, research scientist at Ames Research Center, had been named to receive the H. Julian Allen award for 1975, for major findings about the atmosphere of Venus. Dr. Pollack and coworkers used airborne infrared telescope observations in 1974 to show that the top 20 km of Venus’s heavy cloud cover consisted of a water solution of concentrated sulfuric acid. The heat absorption peculiar to sulfuric acid might account for conditions of extreme heat near the surface of Venus. Dr. Pollack would share honors with 8 other Ames employees; the award, given for outstanding papers written by members of the Ames staff, would be accompanied by an honorarium of $1000. (ARC Release 76-11)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that the Space Div. of Rockwell Inti. Corp. at Palmdale, Calif., had received delivery of three dummy main engines for the Space Shuttle—known officially as flight mass simulators—for mounting on Shuttle Orbiter 101, which would be used for approach and landing tests at Dryden Flight Research Center and for ground vibration tests at MSFC. The simulator engines, resembling the real main engines in size and weight, could be adjusted in weight and center-of-gravity and gimballed to provide various positions for testing. Orbiter 101, after vibration testing, would be returned to Palmdale for replacement of the simulators with flight engines and placed in flight status. (MSFC Release 76-162)
Eighty percent of the 114 federal research laboratories had not adopted cost-cutting activities recommended 6 yr ago by the General Accounting Office. A new GAO survey found that agencies had not made periodic inspections of equipment to find unused items that could be sold; had not established equipment pools to eliminate duplication and underuse of costly scientific tools; and had not started using “time meters” as a check on how often the equipment was used. Agencies following the three recommendations could save millions of dollars, said Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.) in releasing the GAO report, citing an atomic research facility that saved $24.2 million by disposing of unneeded equipment. Aspin also referred to purchases of expensive sophisticated equipment for a single experiment that was never used again, when it could have been sold or passed along to another agency. (W Star, 13 Jan 76, C8)
ERDA conducted a demonstration at Ft. Belvoir, Va., for military decisionmakers on the use of solar cells by the armed forces. Arranged in cooperation with the U.S. Army’s Mobility Equipment Research and Development Command, the exhibit would show the advantages of solar cells over conventional sources of electricity in applications such as communications and surveillance. Increased purchase by the military could improve availability of solar cells to the general population, ERDA said, by stimulating mass production and thereby lowering costs. (ERDA release 1 Nov 76)
The Energy Research and Development Administration announced selection of 2 firms, one in Mass, and the other in Calif., to study potential wind-power use by utilities to generate electricity in their own localities. The JBF Scientific Corp., a small research company in Wilmington, Mass., would study potential wind-power use by the Cambridge Light Co. and the New Bedford Gas and Edison Light Co. in New England; the utilities would provide information about their power needs and other data. The Aerospace Corp. of El Segundo, Calif., would assess potential wind-power use by the Hawaiian Electric Co., which serves most of that state; the Univ. of Hawaii would also participate in the study. Besides examining the utilities and their power needs, the contractors would study other ways of generating electricity (such as coal and nuclear plants), comparing them with wind energy to see if conversion would be practical and economical. The regional studies would last 1 yr each and would cost about $500 000 overall. The resulting data would supply a model for utilities throughout the country to assess the use of wind energy in their own regions. (ERDA Release 76-180)
Pluto—outermost of the 9 planets circling the sun—might have a surface of frozen methane, putting its temperature in its near-vacuum environment at close to absolute zero (total absence of heat) and indicating that never since the ice formed had the sun’s heat been able to boil off the covering, according to a team at the Kitt Peak National Observatory in Ariz. Dr. David Morrison of the University of Hawaii said that Pluto might look and behave just the way it did when it was formed during the creation of the solar system; nowhere but on Pluto had methane been found as a solid, and nowhere else was it present in such abundance. The frozen surface also meant that astronomers might have been fooled since Pluto’s discovery in 1930 into thinking it larger than it really was; instead of being the size of the earth, Dr. Morrison said, “it might he only half our size or even smaller.” Pluto, 4.8 billion km distant, was the last planet to have scientists define its surface composition. (NYT, 2 Apr 76, 37; W Post, 2 Apr 76, A—1; Science, 23 Apr 76, 362)
A program conducted jointly by NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center and Langley Research Center had been trying literally to work the bugs out of aircraft, by studying materials and methods to keep insects from sticking to the leading edge of aircraft wings. The study was part of NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program, aimed at developing an advanced long-range aircraft with possible savings of 20 to 40% in fuel consumption. The laminar flow-control technology on which the advanced craft would depend for savings required smooth airflow over the wings; impacted insects sticking to the leading edge of the wing could interrupt the airflow and cause turbulence. The test planes used at LaRC and DFRC had variously coated panels installed on the leading edges, with instrumented probes above them to register airflow changes resulting from adherence of insects and monitor differences attributable to the panel coatings. After a low flight over areas where insects would impact the wing surfaces, the aircraft would land for preliminary measurements and then fly at high altitudes and speeds to measure the effects on airflow. (DFRC Release 20-76; LaRC Release 76-41; NASA Release 76-190)
One of the environmental disasters of the century” was the appearance of water hyacinth in the Sudan’s Nile river basin, reported an international conference of scientists representing the U.S., the Democratic Republic of the Sudan, Egypt, Ethiopia, the Federal Republic of Germany, Indonesia, and Mozambique, after a meeting sponsored by the Natl. Academy of Science’s Board on Science and Technology for International Development, and by the Sudan Agricultural Research Council. Besides choking watercourses and interfering with fishing and navigation, water hyacinth flourishing in warm river waters around the world had proved to harbor carriers of bilharzia and malaria. Measures suggested for control included herbicides, biological intervention, exchange of information and trade restrictions, and stimulation of economic incentive to harvest the plants. The report cited a NASA discovery that water hyacinth was a possible source of biogas production, and recommended harvesting to exploit this resource as well as using the plant for water-buffalo fodder. (NAS News Report, Dec 76, 2)
Successful completion of the Da Vinci 11 scientific balloon flight by 4 crew members was announced by the Energy Research and Development Administration. Launched west of St. Louis on 8 June, the balloon had flown over the city during the day and moved eastward across the Mississippi River toward evening; it had flown across 111. and landed near Griffin, Ind., a distance of more than 240 km in 24 hr. Purpose of the flight—a joint project of ERDA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the Environmental Protection Agency—was to follow industrial and urban air pollution across the surrounding countryside and to record its changing concentration and chemistry. The crew reported excellent scientific data, especially on concentrations of sulfur dioxide. The crew, its 3m-square gondola, and more than 900 kg of scientific equipment landed safely and in good condition. (ERDA Release 76-170)
NASA announced appointment of Jerry Hlass, Director of Space Flight Facilities at NASA Hq, as Manager of the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Mo., effective 1 Sept. Hlass came to Hq from GSFC, where he was head of the Data Acquisition Facility Section between 1961 and 1963. He received a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering in 1949 from N.C. State Univ., and a master’s in engineering administration from Geo. Washington Univ. in 1971. As manager of NSTL, Hlass would report to the Hq Associate Administrator for Center Operations. (NASA anno. 18 Aug 76; NASA Release 76-147)
The Energy Research and Development Administration requested proposals for what the Wall Street Journal called a “scaled-down” Institute for Solar Research, a modest facility with a budget of $4 to $6 million in its first year. The National Academy of Sciences months ago recommended an institute with a wide research role, a staff of about 1500, and an annual budget of $50 million; unsolicited proposals had been arriving from nearly every state, with many politicians interested in having the institute locate in their constituency. ERDA would operate the facility through contracts with any organization, including nonprofit groups, corporations, universities, or state or local governments, and operations should begin by early 1980, according to Robert Hirsch, an acting assistant administrator of ERDA, at the press conference. The institute was a requirement of a 1974 law calling for various solar-energy demonstrations to be financed by the federal government; ERDA wanted initial proposals for a 5-yr operation, with future functioning dependent on performance and availability of funds. As ERDA currently contracted out most of its solar research to private facilities, a reporter asked why its work called for a special institute instead of expanding the current research program; Hirsch responded, “because the law requires it.” {WSJ, 16 Mar 76, 3)
NASA’s Wallops Flight Center received a National Safety Council award for its performance in on-the-job safety. The Council selected Wallops for a third-place award in its annual contest honoring the lowest disabling-injury frequency achieved by NSC member organizations. Wallops qualified for its award with a recorded rate of zero lost-time injuries per million man-hours worked, as compared to a rate of 1.4 injuries for all competing units in the Aerospace Section, Research and Development Division. (WFC Release 76-4)
First flight tests of a unique oblique-wing aircraft model designed for future supersonic use would begin early in Aug. at the Dry den Flight Research Center, NASA announced. The remotely piloted research vehicle (RPRV) to be tested had a wingspan of 6.7 m, weighed 400 kg, and was powered by a 4-cylinder 90-hp engine; its wing angle relative to the fuselage could be varied during flight, and angles up to 45° would be tested. The RPRV would be flown by radio control from a ground cockpit, with a TV camera in the aircraft nose giving the ground controller a pilot’s-eye view. Use of the oblique wing was a proposal of Dr. Robert T. Jones, senior scientist at Ames Research Center, to alleviate sonic boom and increase energy effectiveness of supersonic aircraft; positioned at right angles to the fuselage in slower flight, the wing would allow landing and takeoff with minimum power and less noise, but rotated with respect to the fuselage it would provide the high speed possible with the swept-wing design. Studies indicated possible fuel savings even at speeds up to 1600 kph. (l)FRC Release 13-76)
New federal policies deriving from the Occupational Health and Safety Act and. the National Environmental Policy Act would affect about 30% of the USAF’s Aerospace Medical Division investment in biotechnology research and development, said an article in Aviation Week magazine. “USAF has yet to appreciate...how important these two laws are going to be. The day is rapidly coming when even major weapons systems will never get through [a Defense System Acquisition Review council] without having to come to grips with...the occupational safety of the people that have to work around the system and the impact of...noise, electromagnetic radiation effects and toxic effluents,” said Col. George C. Mohr, director of AMD research and development. Among items of special interest were the rocket fuels—unsymmet-rical dimethylhydrazine and monomethylhydrazine—and the hydrochloric-acid fallout expected from Shuttle motor exhaust during launches at Vandenberg AFB; effects of laser exposure on eyes and skin; effects of multiple stress, including that caused by locating or operating equipment; and development of hardware, such as a lightweight 1-kg helmet to replace the standard 2-kg helmet that caused “high moment” effects on the wearer during sustained high-gravity maneuvers in the new generation of fighter aircraft. Another environmental-safety hardware item was a new 9-layer 25-mm windshield for planes to overcome the bird-strike problem, in place of the standard 2-layer 8.5-mm-thick windshield. A major problem, Col. Mohr said, has been that biotechnology standards and criteria often were not considered until after the system concept had been finalized; another problem is the DOD policy of tri-service planning, an attempt to ensure that the services do not duplicate research. Use of mathematical modeling in biotechnology had tended to “drive aerospace medicine research toward an engineering discipline,” the article said; the data output is usable by design engineers, while new legislation prevents use of humans in hazardous testing, and cost of laboratory animals has soared. (Av Wk, 19 July 76, 219)
Ames Research Center announced that a NOAA scientist, Dr. Peter M. Kuhn, had discovered a way to give airplane pilots up to 12 min. warning of air turbulence ahead, during his investigation of infrared radiation emitted from atmospheric water vapor using ARC’s Convair aircraft. While measuring background infrared radiation in the atmosphere to define sources of astronomical infrared, Dr. Kuhn had seen sudden drastic changes in water-vapor content followed closely by turbulence. A radiometer in the aircraft wheel well of the Galileo II flying laboratory could detect atmospheric infrared from water vapor, and predict accompanying turbulence with an 81% reliability. Experiments with varying infrared wavelengths had permitted detection of turbulence more than 100 km ahead of the plane. The water-vapor anomalies resulted from wave motions in the atmosphere caused by lee waves over high terrain or by sudden shifts in wind speed or direction with resulting friction between adjacent streams of air. Although water-vapor content would usually be fairly constant, the wave motions would thin the vapor in one place and concentrate it in another, making the turbulence detectable. (ARC Release 76-80; Av Wk, 15 Nov 76, 25; NOAA Release 76-251)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $209 368 contract to a small business firm, Northern Research and Engineering Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., for designing, assembling, and demonstrating a portable self-contained firefighting module conceived as a joint effort of NASA’s Technology Utilization Office and the U.S. Coast Guard. The module would be a lightweight unit complete with pump, hose, firefighter suits, and other equipment that could be transported by helicopter to the deck of any medium-sized boat in the area of a shipboard or dock fire; it would be able to pump about 5700 liters of sea water per min for an uninterrupted 3 hr. (MSFC Release 76-116)
NASA announced selection of a team consisting of General Electric Co. and Hamilton Standard Division of United Technology Corp. for negotiating with NASA and ERDA a $7-million contract to design, build, and test by 1978 a 1.5-Mw wind-turbine electricity-generating system, biggest in history. The experimental system, a windmill with 2 horizontally rotating fiberglass rotor blades about 61m long mounted on a 45-m tower, could produce annually enough energy to supply more than 500 homes at a site with average winds of 29 kph. Located at a utility-company site, the NASA-ERDA system would supply electricity to the local utility for public use, to determine the economics and operating characteristics of large wind turbines coupled to conventional power plants. Utility companies had proposed 17 sites across the U.S.; ERDA would measure their wind characteristics over the coming year and would choose the site late in 1976. Lewis Research Center would manage the project for ERDA. The new system would be bigger than the 1.25-Mw system, 53 m in diameter, built near Rutland, Vt., in the 1940s; that project could not compete economically with the then low cost of fossil fuels, and had been abandoned. (NASA Release 76-136)
Two engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center had developed a solarenergy collector using air rather than water for heat transfer; this might be the key to low-cost solar-energy systems. The collector consisted of 3 parts: a rigid foam structure, a metal collector plate, and a transparent cover. The device needed no tools or fasteners, but could be fitted together, and required no insulation; it measured 1 by 2 m and weighed about 17 kg. The inventors said their collector had shown itself in tests to be as efficient as other more costly and complicated collectors, and the chief patent counsel at MSFC was considering it for patenting. An average house of about 140 m“ would require about 67 m" of collector area, or a 40-collector system, to provide sufficient heating. A solar-energy system could save a household about 75% of its normal winter heating expense, and could be modified to heat water year round. (NASA Release 76-56)
Ames Research Center had contracted with Goodyear Aerospace Corp. of Akron, 0., for studies of 2 lighter-than-air vehicle concepts for civilian use, NASA announced. New requirements for transporting heavy loads in power-plant construction, transferring ship cargoes to shore points, and providing quiet energy-saving intercity transportation had revived interest in lighter-than-air vehicles, formerly the only means of nonstop rapid travel across the world’s oceans. Use of airships for military missions also had come under consideration; principal potential use was transport of ship cargoes over a beach to shore points. NASA, in conjunction with the U.S. Navy, was also studying military applications for conventional airships that would use the great endurance potential of the airship in activities such as antisubmarine warfare and sea control. One of the concepts under study, a feeder airliner 60 m long carrying 80 passengers, would be used as a short-haul transport system, landing and taking off vertically and cruising at 160 knots. The other concept, a vehicle to transport large heavy payloads over comparatively short distances, would combine features of large dirigibles and helicopter rotors to provide lifting capacity far beyond that of either type of vehicle alone; the dirigible buoyance would lift the empty weight of the vehicle, and the total lifting capacity of the rotor system would lift and support the payload. The heavy lifter would be most likely to have immediate application, NASA said, because of the need for transport of heavy powergenerating equipment or other outsize industrial equipment to a remote destination not served by any other heavy transport systems. Increased engineering knowledge and better understanding of weather phenomena, as well as substituting inert helium for the volatile hydrogen used in German airships of the 1920s, would make a modern airship safe. (NASA Release 76-93)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced development of a solar concentrator-collector that would use a large plastic Fresnel lens to focus sunlight on a tube containing heat-transport fluid, for use in constructing or converting cooling systems in large buildings or in manufacturing processes requiring heat in the 200-370°C range. A Fresnel lens, consisting of a thin transparent material grooved on one surface, would serve the function of a heavier ordinary curved lens in focusing incoming light in the desired direction. MSFC’s lens, thought to be the largest tried in a solar-energy application, was assembled from multiple lens panels and measured 1.8 by 3.6 meters; it had been undergoing tests at Wyle Laboratories in Huntsville since July 1976. It would be moved to MSFC and integrated into a solar test bed for further analysis of performance. Primary advantage of the Fresnel lens would be its adaptability to mass-production techniques, permitting low cost; besides the light weight and space saving of the acrylic plastic, MSFC cited durability and mechanical strength, as well as ease of cleaning, of lenses exposed to weather. The test article, to minimize technology requirements and to interface with existing systems, used off-the-shelf materials and hardware as fully as possible. MSFC findings would be made available to industry after further testing and evaluation. (MSFC Release 76-169)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a contract to Ivey’s Plumbing and Electrical Co. of Kosciusko, Miss., for construction of a test facility at MSFC for the solar heating and cooling development program MSFC is directing for the Energy Research and Development Administration. The $647,243 contract was awarded by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which would monitor construction activities; completion date set by the contract was 1 Nov. 1976. The facility would be located in an area formerly used as a swing-arm test facility for Saturn; data-acquisition equipment—instrument terminals and cabling from pad to blockhouse—used for Saturn would be available for the heating and cooling tests. The facility would consist of 4 test areas, 2 designed for complete system or subsystem tests; a third would be used to test liquid energy storage subsystems, and the fourth for passively testing solar collectors. A solar simulator constructed in a nearby building would be linked to the test facility for data collection. Subsystems and components to be tested would include solar collectors, thermal-energy storage equipment, and solar heating and cooling devices. Testing the hardware against predetermined performance standards would produce data for input to analytical programs; the analyses in turn would be used to evaluate total systems performance under environmental conditions other than those simulated during tests. Components of the facility—heat exchangers, cooling towers, chillers, fans, pumps, and control valves—would be arranged to permit maximum flexibility for future modifications and use of other test positions or procedures. (MSFC Release 76-59)
A new comet now approaching the sun—named Comet West, after Richard M. West of the European Southern Observatory at Geneva, Switzerland, who discovered it in Nov. 1975—would be the object of extensive space and ground-based study to identify and measure its constituents, NASA announced. Comet West would come closest to the sun on 25 Feb., but would not be readily visible until about 2 March because of solar brightness; it would provide the first opportunity for extensive comet study since the appearance in 1973 of Comet Kouhoutek (a “visual disappointment” from which more had been learned about comets than in all the time that had gone before). NASA would participate in the study along with the Naval Research Laboratory, and with the Univ. of Colo, at Boulder and the Johns Hopkins Univ. (NASA Release 76-31)
The National Science Foundation reported that U.S. spending for research and development (R&D) would reach $38.1 billion in 1976, 8% above the 1975 level. R&D expenditures would account for 2.2% of the gross national product in 1976, down from 2.3% in 1975. Of the total R&D spending, federal agencies would account for $20.1 billion; industry, about $16.6 billion; universities and colleges, about $800 million; and other nonprofit institutions, about $600 million. The figures appeared in a NSF report, National Patterns ofR&D Resources: Funds and Manpower in the United States 1953-1976, updated annually in a continuing analysis of the nation’s scientific and technological resources. (NSF Release PR76-68)
The concept of a “science court’”—an impartial quasi-judicial body of scientists to conduct inquiries into conflicting scientific claims— was advanced by Dr. Arthur Kantrowitz, director of Avco-Everett Laboratories, a high-technology industrial firm in Mass. The proposal would be a means of assuring a rational and orderly assessment of scientific facts underlying highly complex issues of public concern. Although hearings had been held by Congress and federal agencies on issues such as radiation, automotive safety, air pollution, drugs, and pesticides, these had frequently been superficial and led to no resolution of facts. A recent Harvard University book on the subject said in part: “The principal shortcoming of such hearings can be revealed simply by asking how ‘adversary’ these adversary hearings are . . . direct battle over facts, if it occurs at all, takes place as a free-for-all in the mass media.” Conflicting statements by experts had added to confusion and paralyzed decision-making processes. A test of the “science court” concept had been recommended as part of the new White House office of science and technology policy. {NYT, 29 Feb 76, 8)
A “house of the future” incorporating technology from aerospace research would be open to the public at Langley Research Center after July 1, NASA announced. The Tech House, a project of NASA’s technology utilization program, would demonstrate how an average family could cut fuel consumption by two thirds and water consumption by one half, using innovative energy and water management systems integrated with building designs and materials. Building started in late Jan.; all equipment and features in the house would be available to the public within 5 yr, or are available now. A family selected by NASA would live in the house for at least a year, beginning early in 1977; a systems engineer would monitor all use of the systems in the normal life of the family and record day-to-day savings. The contemporary one-story house would have an enclosed living space of about 500 sq m; its major feature combined solar collectors with night radiators and heat pump for one of the most cost-effective heating and cooling systems now available. Contributing to the NASA project were the National Association of Home Builders, the National Bureau of Standards, and the Department of Housing and Urban Development. (NASA Release 76-26)
NASA launched the Gravitational Probe-A (GP-A) from Wallops Flight Center at 7:41 am EDT on a Scout vehicle into a trajectory with peak altitude of 889 km and total flight time of 6960 sec. The 102.5-kg probe was designed to measure the gravitational red shift predicted by the equivalence principle laid down by Einstein in 1907 as the cornerstone of the general theory of relativity: GP-A would directly determine the effect of gravitation on time by comparing the rate of a rocket-borne clock to an identical clock on earth. During the flight, the probe clock would be in a weaker gravitational field than the identical clock on earth; as the probe clock rose through increasingly weaker gravity to its maximum altitude, it would appear to run increasingly faster, and its rate would slow as it returned to the stronger gravity at lower altitudes. The experiment required not only extremely accurate telemetry throughout the probe’s ascent and descent, but also an extremely accurate set of clocks; those used were atomic-hydrogen masers of extraordinary stability, according to Dr. R.F.C. Vessot of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, principal investigator. (“Maser” is an acronym for microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.) The clocks were expected to provide measurement accuracy within 5 thousandths of 1% (5 x 10 5) of the predicted effect. The experiment and its support systems performed normally, but Dr. Vessot said that 1 to 3 mo of data reduction would be needed to determine whether the scientific objective had been met. (NASA Release 76-106; MOR S-879-76-01 [prelaunch] 14 June 76, [postlaunch] 23 June 76; MSFC Release 76-113)
NASA would appeal a decision of the U.S. District Court ordering the agency to rehire all Marshall Space Flight Center civil service employees laid off since 1967 as the result of awarding support-services contracts to private business, Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported. The court had ruled that all such contracts awarded at MSFC since 1967 were illegal. NASA spokesmen estimated that up to 1500 contractor employees now at MSFC could be fired as a result of the ruling, and that 17 000 contractor employees throughout the agency might be affected by the decision, which ordered NASA to rehire the civil service personnel with back pay in amounts depending on the period of unemployment. Had all the employees affected been unemployed for the full 10 yr (the “worst-case situation”), necessary back pay might go as high as $ 150 million, NASA said, although the actual funds required would be less. An appeals court had already granted NASA a stay until 1 Feb. 1977 before the district court’s ruling became effective, so that the agency could ask Congress for supplemental funds to cover the back-pay requirements. (Av Wk, 1 Nov 77, 22)
Atmosphere Explorer D, second in a series of 3 maneuverable unmanned spacecraft designed to explore a specific area of earth’s outer atmosphere, had ceased functioning, spacecraft controllers at GSFC said. AE—D had stopped working 29 Jan. when a power-supply electronics malfunction disabled its solar array. Launched 6 Oct. 1975, AE—D had transmitted important data on energy transfer in the upper atmosphere and on processes critical to the atmospheric heat balance; although it did not last its design lifetime of 1 yr, it did transmit a full set of lower thermosphere data on the daylight side from North to South Pole at constant times during its 4—mo operation. AE-C, launched in 1973, was still functioning normally, returning upper-atmosphere data in the region above 128 km; AE-E, launched in Nov. 1975, had a payload similar to that of the others but also carried equipment to measure earth’s ozone layer between 20 °N and S. (NASA Release 76-24)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) had joined in research in Antarctica on stratospheric pollution with a team from the Univ. of Wyo. supported by the National Science Foundation. NOAA’s Aeronomy Laboratory would launch 2 balloons carrying probes with containers that would open at different altitudes to collect a vertical profile of fluorocarbons and nitrogen oxides in the relatively clean stratosphere over Antarctica. The measurements would be used in testing two theories of ozone destruction in the stratosphere, the first being the production of destructive chlorine through breakdown of manmade fluorocarbon aerosols migrating into the upper atmosphere. The other theory posed a natural ozone-limiting cycle, involving dissociation in the stratosphere of bacterially produced nitrous oxide that became nitric oxide harmful to the ozone layer. The Antarctic launches would help to explain variations in nitrous oxide measurements as a function of latitude, season, or some other cause. (NOAA Release 76-17)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that Barbara S. Askins, a chemist in MSFC’s Astronomy Branch, had applied for patent on an improved process, autoradiographic film intensification, that would improve photographic images after films or plates had been developed. Exposing silver or other imaging material on a developed film or plate to a radioactive environment would convert the material to a radioactive compound; placing the radioactivated material in contact with a receiver emulsion on an unexposed film or plate would reproduce the original image with increased contrast and density. The hazards and complexity of handling radioactive material had limited the use of such a process, but the new process did not require special training, expensive equipment, or extraordinary safety precautions, as it used an isotopic organo-sulfur 35 compound and could be adapted easily to an ordinary photographic laboratory. Askins said the process would be used in astronomy and other scientific research where low light levels were encountered. (MSFC Release 76-13)
The Smithsonian Institution awarded its Langley gold medal for aeronautics to James E. Webb, former head of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the late Grover Loening. Webb was cited for management skills in leading the U.S. to “pre-eminence in space flight research and development.” Loening [see 29 Feb.] was honored as “a pioneer aeronautical inventor” who developed the Loening amphibian plane and the design of the strut-braced monoplane. (W Post, 8 May 76, E—3)
Soon after Rockwell International Corp. was named prime contractor on a $5-billion Space-Shuttle program, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, had accepted an invitation for a trip to Rockwell’s resort in the Bahamas. Teague’s name was added to a list of senators and representatives who had accepted invitations from Rockwell, a prime government contractor; most went to hunt at the company’s lodge in Maryland. Three Senate staff members had accepted invitations to hunt at the Maryland lodge of another contractor, Northrop Corp. During the previous week, the Pentagon had rebuked 38 civilian and military officials, including admirals and generals, for accepting similar invitations from Northrop. House rules prevented members, officers, or employees from accepting gifts “of substantial value, directly or indirectly, from any persons, organization, or corporation having a direct interest in legislation before the Congress;” the Senate had no similar written regulation. (IF Post, 29 Jan 76, F-5)
NASA announced selection of the Roeing Commercial Airplane Co. of Seattle for award of a $20-million contract to build an experimental flight research aircraft for use in noise-reduction technology. Roeing would modify a government-furnished C-8 Ruffalo transport aircraft into a quiet short-haul research airplane (QSRA) for the Ames Research Center’s noise-reduction research program, aimed at reducing aircraft-noise impact on U.S. communities and congestion at major airports. The redesign to meet QSRA concepts would enhance aircraft performance and control at low speeds, and would demonstrate propulsive-lift technology that would permit civil transport aircraft to achieve a short takeoff and landing (STOL) capability. STOL aircraft could use runways at existing smaller airports to relieve traffic at large metropolitan airports, as well as to reduce noise impact. (NASA Release 76-33)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had used aerial thermalscanning techniques to locate high heat-loss areas as part of its energy resources management program to reduce energy consumption agencywide. The Lewis Research Center had made thermal scanning flights for all NASA centers, and MSFC had been scanned twice, once in October 1975 and again in February 1976, using a C-47 aircraft with onboard scanners that recorded on digital tape the average temperature of each area covered. Fed into a computer, the digital tape produced printouts and live mosaic maps projected on a television monitor to show areas where excessive steam-line losses occurred and to identify buildings losing excessive heat through roof structures. The MSFC facilities office validated the data through visual inspection of steam lines and roof insulation, and issued work requests for repair and replacement of insulation in 88 steam-line locations. Longer range action was planned to repair and replace deteriorated roofing and replace sections of the steam lines. (MSFC Release 76-104)
ESA’s Science Program Committee announced that it had unanimously approved two new scientific projects at its sixth meeting held 4 and 5 Oct. in Paris. The committee approved participation in the Space Telescope, planned by NASA for launch in 1983, and agreed to finance a plan called GEOSARI (launching a Geos spacecraft into a different orbit on the second flight of the Ariane launcher, scheduled for Dec. 1979). The Space Telescope project depended on a favorable outcome of negotiations with NASA and approval of the project by U.S. authorities in 1977. The committee considered an additional ESA-NASA cooperative project, the Out-of-Ecliptic (OOE) mission to fly two spacecraft around the sun at its north and south poles in a first exploration of the solar system’s third dimension; the committee agreed to continue negotiations with NASA and to join in an announcement of opportunities for the mission if necessary before the committee’s next meeting, in the spring of 1977. (ESA release 6 Oct 76)
The Energy Research and Development Administration announced that a nuclear explosion reported by the Peoples Republic of China 17 Oct. had been detected by the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission’s detection system. The explosion, which occurred underground at 1 a.m. EDT at the Lop Nor test area in western China, was in the low-yield range, ERDA said. (ERDA Release 76-320)
The Natl. Science Foundation announced that federal funding for research and development would increase in FY 1977, ahead of expected inflation. The long-term trend of the R&D portion of the budget had been downward, with a steady decline from 1967 to 1971; a slight rise in 1972 preceded another decline to a 1975 low that represented the smallest federal support for R&D for the 10-yr period. The estimated increase for FY 1977 would restore “real performance” to a level close to that of 1972, although about 20% below that of 1967. Estimated shares of the FY 1977 total would be 11% for basic research, 23% for applied research, and 66% for development. (The NSF noted that most major NASA projects had been categorized as development, as they primarily generated outer-space transport technology. Substantial parts of these programs were classified in former years as basic or applied research. The shift in NASA categories resulted in lower shares of federal R&D funding for basic and applied research, and a larger share for development.) About 60% of development funds would be accounted for by DOD, which with NASA and ERDA would account for more than 90%. NASA’s $99-million increase put its share of the total 1977 R&D budget at about 15%; DOD accounted for an estimated 48% of the federal R&D total in 1977, and ERDA would account for 14%. HEW would account for about 11%, NSF 3%, and USDA about 2%. The next 4 agencies in size of R&D support—DOT, Dept, of Interior, EPA, and Dept, of Commerce—all showed decreases in their federal R&D funding from the 1976 level. (NSF, Science Resources Studies, 10 Aug 76, 1) September 1976
Lewis Research Center announced the first of a number of solar-cell demonstrations it would conduct as part of the national photovoltaic conversion program directed by the Energy Research and Development Administration: a solar-powered refrigerator, standard-size camper’s model, fitted with 3 panels of photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy. Designed for use in remote locations, the solar cells would run the refrigerator during daylight hours and charge conventional automobile batteries located under the unit; the batteries would power the refrigerator during darkness and on overcast days. With the cooperation of the Interior Department’s National Park Service, the refrigerator was being used for perishable foods at a trail-construction camp at Isle Royale National Park in Michigan, a roadless area near northern Lake Superior accessible only by boat or floatplane and typical of places that have no regular electric power. The solar-cell arrays, although relatively expensive, cost less to use in remote locations than the fuel and transportation would cost for alternative power sources. (NASA Release 76-110)
An unusually high loss of total blood hemoglobin after the first 16 days of flight was one of the medical findings from the Salyut 4-Soyuz 18 mission reported by Cosmonauts Vitaly I. Sevastyanov and Lt. Col. Pyotr Klimuk to the 19th annual meeting of the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) of the International Council of Scientific Unions. If valid, the Soviet data would represent a “significant departure” from earlier data on body mechanisms governing red cells in zero gravity, said Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine. Klimuk told the Phila. meeting that hemoglobin had decreased 16% in his blood and 25% in Sev-astyanov’s by the 16th day of the flight; although past data showed hemoglobin loss averaging 1% daily, Sevastyanov must have had a mechanism that “destroyed more cells than normal” to achieve the 25% deficiency. U.S. Skylab missions reported that crewmen normally recovered their ability to produce red blood cells with more time in orbit; the cosmonauts did not discuss their recovery from the hemoglobin deficiency, but reported that nothing medical had ben discovered during their 63-day flight to prevent increased duration of Soviet space flight. (Av Wk, 5 July 76, 49)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch announced reorganization of the agency effective Nov. 8 “to strengthen NASA organization and improve our effectiveness ... we will reduce the number of staff offices reporting directly to the Administrator.” Headquarters operations would consist of 3 functions: the office of the Administrator, for general management; the chief scientist, chief engineer, and 5 program offices for program planning, management, and review; and 8 staff offices to give program, staff, and functional support. Each of the 5 program offices would have an associate administrator to manage aeronautics and space technology; space sciences; space and terrestrial applications (formerly applications); space transportation systems (formerly space flight); and space tracking and data systems (formerly tracking and data acquisition). (NASA Release 77-228)
Langley Research Center announced award of a 5yr $23 million contract to Wyle Laboratories for electronic instrument support to test and research facilities at the center. The contract, running from Oct. 1977 through Sept. 1979 with options to extend for another 3yr, covered inspection, calibration, maintenance, and satisfaction of measurement requirements on some 30 000 instruments and transducers valued at more than $50 million; also, design, modification, and maintenance of hardware and computer programs associated with digital data systems and special purpose computers used in the research facilities. (LaRc Release 77-15)
NASA announced that LeRC had supplied news media in the Cleveland area with readings of daily solar energy available for use during the winter. Using a pyranometer, a device to record total solar energy reaching a surface, LeRC staff measured the kilowatt hrs of solar energy received on a 150m2 surface facing south at a 37° angle. Other NASA centers had made similar measurements, all related to solar energy research being pursued by the Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA). (NASA Release 77-49)
NASA announced that the Arizona Dept, of Transportation and 2 federal agencies had demonstrated solar energy potential by using an array of solar cells to power a dust-storm warning system in central Ariz. The state had installed the system over an 80mi area on Interstate 10 between Phoenix and Tucson, and west on Interstate 8 near Casa Grande, to help motorists avoid accidents in low-visibility conditions resulting from blowing dust. In normal mode, the signs would display directional information; when dust storms struck, the message would change to give motorists the radio frequencies on which storm-alert instructions would be available. The state agency (working with LeRC, which had managed the applications project for the Energy Research and Development Administration) would replace propane-fueled 60w generators at 40 signs in the system with solar arrays, halving the cost. Each sign would use solar electricity to power the lighting, changeable-message feature, and radio communications activated by a link from Phoenix when dust storms were imminent. (NASA Release 77-106)
NASA announced it and ERDA had contracted with Boeing Engineering and Construction Co. to design and build on a utility company site chosen by ERDA the largest windmill in history, a 2500kw generator with 300ft blades, to provide data on such systems coupled with conventional power plants. Lewis Research Center would manage the project for ERDA. (NASA Release 77-141)
MSFC reported results of a gamma-ray detector launched on a balloon May 11 from the Natl. Scientific Balloon Facility at Palestine, Tex., to study sources of bursting and pulsating x-rays and gamma rays during an 18hr flight. MSFC scientists headed by Dr. Charles Meegan, principal investigator and associate of the Natl. Research Council, had sent a 420 000m3 (15 million ft3) balloon carrying an array of 12 large-area detectors with total payload weight of 590kg (13001b) to an altitude of 39km (126 000ft) to transmit data back to the launch site for recording. High winds had interrupted the successful mission and brought the balloon down with some payload damage. Investigators would use the data for the scheduled June 30 launch of NASA’s high-energy astronomy observatory (HEAO). (MSFC Release 77-93)
NASA announced it had named Dr. James J. Kramer associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology, effective Oct. 23. He had been acting in that capacity since Dec. 1976. Starting at Lewis Research Center in 1951, Dr. Kramer had come to NASA Hq in 1971 as chief of OASTs noise and pollution reduction branch. (NASA anno Oct 21/77; NASA Release 77-227)
NASA reported that MSFC had awarded a lyr $150 000 contract to the Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (IITRI) in Chicago to set up a team to find uses for aerospace technologies in manufacturing. The team would work with U.S. industries, industrial associations, and professional groups in areas related to machine tools, electronics assembly, and light fabrication and assembly. The team would be another of the groups created by NASA’s technology-utilization office to expand the use of aerospace technology on earth. (NASA Release 77-57)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award to Inti. Business Machines of a $1 344 950 contract for 134 site data-acquisition subsystems to monitor performance of ERDA’s solar heating and cooling demonstration program at sites throughout the U.S. The IBM machines would provide data on solar energy at each site, amounts used for heating, cooling, and hot water, and other areas of performance, efficiency, and fuel saving. Each site would feed data to a central computer in Huntsville, Ala., for compilation of reports to business, industry, and the general public on the most economical and practical systems tested. (MSFC Release 77-184)
MSFC reported that Corning Glass Works, Canton, N.Y., had begun work on a huge primary mirror blank for NASA’s Space Telescope, designed to give astronomers a view to the edge of the universe. Corning would work under a $1.74 million subcontract from Perkin-Elmer Corp., which would be responsible for assembling the optical telescope. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. would build the spacecraft and support system and integrate the telescope into it. Scientists expected the space telescope to detect light from objects 14 billion light-years from earth; it might, therefore, be able to provide views of the first galaxies at the time they were formed. The Hale telescope at the Mt. Palomar observatory in Calif, could penetrate only about 2 billion light-years because of the optical degradation from earth’s atmosphere. The space telescope would be carried by the Shuttle to an orbit more than 300mi above earth to avoid that interference. Corning would deliver the first of two 8ft discs to Perkin-Elmer within a yr and the spare by April 1979, for the process of grinding the blanks to an optical curvature. The blank would be 1ft thick with a 2ft-diameter center hole, and would consist of solid inch-thick top and bottom plates separated by a weight-saving structure of open cells lOin long and 4in square. It would carry a thin metal film constituting the mirror or reflective surface; glass had long served as best mirror material because its shape would change only slightly with changes in temperature, so that it maintained image quality. More than 40yr ago Corning had made the 200in blank for the Hale telescope out of borosilicate glass, having an expansion of 32.5 on a scale used by physicists; the material it would use for the space telescope blank would have an expansion of zero. Corning had chosen the new material, a titanium silicate called ULE (ultra-low expansion) first formulated in 1967, for ease of handling and ultrasonic testing. (MSFC Release 77-233)
Lewis Research Center announced it would participate in programs to demonstrate the feasibility of using an airborne infrared scanner to pinpoint residential heat loss. The cities of Cleveland, Ohio, and Springfield, 111., would reimburse the center for its services. A NASA C-47 aircraft, flown over areas designated by Cleveland’s city council as eligible for low-interest winterizing and rehabilitation loans from the U.S. Dept, of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), would record on magnetic tape the images of rooftops showing hot areas as white, warm areas as gray, and cool areas as black. Homeowners in the target areas could view the results at community centers and apply for block grant money from HUD as necessary. The city of Springfield had requested similar assistance for a HUD loan program. LeRC had used a thermal infrared technique in 1975-76 to scan NASA centers for energy loss, saving the agency about $350 000 in the first yr of the program. (NASA Release 77-13; Lewis News, March 11/77, 3)
The eighth annual session at JSC of the Lunar Science Conference had discussed the possibility of mining asteroids for the raw materials of space industrialization, the Chicago Tribune reported. Dr. David Criswell, associate scientist at the Lunar Science Institute, said that two developments would make asteroid mining feasible: an engine capable of towing an asteroid, and a method of locating asteroids rich in needed resources. Materials from asteroids would be 1000 times cheaper than materials launched from earth into orbit. (C Trib, Mar 24/77, 4-11)
LaRC announced it would open a major educational exhibit on energy Sept. 22 through 29. Assembled by the Energy Research and Development Administration, the exhibit in two 50-ft trailers would include films, animated sections, and visitor-operated consoles describing all types of energy now in use and possible future energy sources. Operating the displays for ERDA on the U.S. energy situation and what could be done about it would be Oak Ridge Associated Universities, a nonprofit educational and research organization of 45 colleges and universities in the southeast. (LaRC Release 77-41)
Dryden Flight Research Center announced it had commenced studies on turbulence caused by insects sticking to aircraft wings. It would use a small jet transport flown at low altitudes to collect insects on the wings, in turbulence tests at higher altitudes and greater speeds. The Johnson and Kennedy Space Centers would assist the studies aimed at developing high-speed fuel-efficient aircraft, by taking advantage of their differing insect populations. (DFRC Release 13-77; KSC Release 93-77)
Political interference had delayed development of science and technology in China, according to Chien Hsueh-shen, director of the mechanics institute of the PRC Academy of Sciences. The W. Post quoted his statement in the journal Red Flag that China would “catch up with and surpass the world advanced levels.” Chien, now China’s “top missile scientist” according to the Post, had been a colonel in the U.S. Army Air Corps before returning to China in 1955. Meanwhile, provincial radio reports monitored in Hong Kong said that “political infighting” at a PRC base for nuclear weapons and missiles had “crippled defense construction” for months in 1976. (WPost, July 12/77, A-15)
The new federal Dept, of Energy opened its doors with Secretary James R. Schlesinger promising “to resolve our energy problems . . . through the effective work of all the people of this department.” Proposed by President Carter March 1, the department had become a reality Aug. 4 upon signing of its organization act and Schlesinger’s confirmation as secretary the following day. The department inherited nearly 20 000 employees and had a first-yr budget of about $10.4 billion. Programs it would administer included conservation, resource development and production, research and development, data management, environment, and regulation. (DOE Release R-77-001)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had awarded a $634 250 contract to Grumman Aerospace Corp. to design, build, and test a machine that would demonstrate, on earth, the automatic fabrication of beams for space construction. Ground demonstration would be needed to develop a safe and efficient facility for use in space. Beam fabrication, part of the Space Industrialization Program, would be the first step in building large space structures. (MSFC Release 77-33)
New infrared detectors at Kitt Peak Natl. Observatory might have detected frozen methane on the surface of Pluto, AvWk reported. If verified, the observations would indicate a smaller size for Pluto and would change current theories of Pluto’s interaction with other planets. {AvWk, Mar 7/77, 11)
The new administration of President Carter would not initiate a working Landsat earth resources monitoring system until it found out how much money Landsat data users would invest in such a system, AvWk reported. The president’s science adviser Frank Press, director of the White House office of science and technology policy, would set up a committee to study the user-cost question. Press had told the Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space that it would be “premature to commit the federal government” to support of an operational system because of many uncertainties about remote sensing; he said that development of a sector to be served by Landsat data had not evolved “as rapidly as some anticipated several years ago,” and that “no comprehensive assessment” had been made “of the overall market structure for Landsat data applications. . . .” The subcommittee was considering a bill cosponsored by Sen. Wendell H. Ford (D-Ky) and former astronaut Sen. Harrison M. Schmitt (R-NM) that would establish an operational Landsat system, the space segment to be run by NASA and the ground data distribution by the Dept, of the Interior. AvWk noted, however, that the Interior testimony had been altered at the last minute to deny support of the bill. {AvWk, June 13/77, 91)
NASA reported that an F-8 aircraft using the digital fly-bywire control system would simulate the Space Shuttle’s flight-control system during a series of 3 flights at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center. The flights, simulations of orbiter maneuvers after separation from the Boeing 747 Shuttle-carrier aircraft, would determine the thresholds of sensor failure and would test the programming of the Shuttle’s flight-computer system. (NASA Release 77-53; DFRC X-News, Mar 25/77, 2)
Langley Research Center announced that 21 area high school students had completed a 4wk hands-on career exploration program at the center, applying classroom concepts to actual situations. Each student had been assigned to a sponsor in science, computers, engineering, or mathematics to supervise the unpaid 8hr workdays. (LaRC Release 77-34)
MSFC reported that the Energy Research and Development Administration had selected 80 new projects for installing solar heating and cooling, on 27 of which MSFC would monitor technical design and construction. MSFC was already monitoring 32 commercial demonstration projects selected by ERDA in April 1976 as the first of a series; ERDA would issue a third solicitation for proposals later this summer, the announcement said. Dr. Henry H. Marvin, director of ERDA’s division of solar energy, said cooperative agreements negotiated by MSFC with the 27 proposers of projects would be signed within approximately 3mo. Government funding on a cost-sharing basis would cover only the solar portions of the projects; more than 90% of the funds would go to projects with substantial small business participation, and more than half the awards would go to teams using solar energy systems supplied by small businesses. (MSFC Release 77-89)
MSFC announced that NASA had invited researchers to propose materials-processing experiments to be performed on the Space Transportation System (STS), as the Shuttle missions would be called. The experiments, basic or applied research projects in materials science, would exploit the weightless and ultra-high vacuum conditions of space to demonstrate their applications in materials science and technology. (MSFC Release 77-52)
NASA announced that biologists working for it and the Natl. Science Foundation had identified a “new” form of life that might date back to earth’s first billion yr: a methane-producing organism representing what might be the oldest form of life as well as a line of evolution totally separate from the two traditionally recognized lines of bacteria, and animals and plants. A research team headed by Dr. Carl Woese of the Univ. of Ill.-Urbana, described as a world expert on the genetic code, said the organisms were a distinct class no more related to typical bacteria than to higher forms. Biologists working with a group of methane-producing organisms had assumed they were ordinary bacteria; however, analysis of ribosomal RNA had shown the genealogy of the new form to be distinct from those of both bacteria and the animals or plants. Dr. Woese said the study might shed light on a missing stage of evolution, the chemical stage that immediately preceded identifiable life on earth. (NASA Release 77-229)
NASA announced development of ultrathin large-area silicon solar cells thinner than a sheet of newspaper for increasing the power-to-weight capability of solar arrays, considered a major breakthrough in applying solar energy to missions requiring multikilowatts, even millions of watts, of electricity. The Solarex Corp. of Rockville, Md., had made the thin cells some 40 to 50 microns thick (only one-sixth as thick as cells in present solar arrays) in sizes up to 38cm2, proving both structurally flexible and less fragile than expected. Energy conversion of the new cells virtually equaled that of conventional cells, 11% compared to 12 or 13% for the thicker cells. Lightweight cells would mean larger solar arrays for ion-propulsion systems in extended space exploration, and could supply power for platforms and remote-satellite power stations in the future. Solarex had delivered hundreds of the new cells to JPL at Pasadena, Calif., for test, evaluation, and design-application studies. (NASA Release 77-31)
WFC announced it would receive this week the first of two rotor-systems research aircraft (RSRA) for contractor flight tests. Sikorsky Aircraft, which would conduct the tests, had designed the RSRA (a joint project of NASA and the U.S. Army) to fly as a regular helicopter, as a compound helicopter (both rotors and wings), or as a conventional fixed-wing aircraft. As the RSRA’s engines or wings were changeable, NASA planned to use it as a “flying wind tunnel” for trying out various rotor systems: articulated, hingeless, or gimbaled, or with variable geometry, variable diameter, or controllable twist. (WFC Release 77-7; NASA Release 77-149)
KSC Emnounced award of a $25 970 contract to the research institute at the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta to develop an automatic manatee-tracking system for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Attempts to track the manatee, Em endEmgered aquatic mammal, had failed because of poor monitoring systems. Tracking the movements of about 100 mEmatees in the Banana and Indian Rivers and Mosquito Lagoon nesir KSC would provide scientists with data on their living habits. (KSC Release 77-77)
NASA announced it had awarded Boeing Commercial Aircraft Co. of Seattle a contract to design and ground-test composite structures for the Boeing 727 aircraft. NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program to decrease transport-aircraft fuel consumption by 50% had included contracts with several manufacturers to reduce aircraft weights by using composites (high-strength filaments in a polymer matrix, lighter than metal structures). Boeing would build five shipsets of composite elevators (five right- and five left-handed) using manufacturing techniques that might become standard procedure. Costs would be shared, $8 100 000 contributed by the government and $890 000 by the contractor. Langley Research Center would manage contractor effort over 3.5yr. (NASA Release 77-139; LaRC Release 77-27)
Science magazine carried an article by Drs. T.B.H. Kuiper of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and M. Morris of the Calif. Inst, of Technology on the search for extraterrestrial intelligence, based on extrapolations of known physical processes and known behaviors of terrestrial animals and humans. Concluding that interstellar travel would be practicable and that advanced beings might have reasons for making contact with humans, the authors reviewed the options and the interstellar-beacon frequencies proposed for use in such contact. (Science, May 6/77, 616)
NASA announced it had invited scientists to submit proposals for use and development of the unfunded Space Telescope [see Feb. 1]. Capable of holding five different instruments at the focal plane of its 2.4m mirror, the Space Telescope would expand the volume of observable space 350 times beyond that of the largest ground-based telescope, offering new information for astronomers and other scientists interested in fundamental questions of cosmology and astronomy. GSFC would manage operations of the telescope’s missions and develop its instrumentation; MSFC would be responsible for overall management of the telescope system. (NASA Release 77-58)
NASA reported that Dr. Lo I. Yin, x-ray researcher at GSFC, had invented a hand-held device producing an instant x-ray image from a small source of radioactive material. The lixiscope (low-intensity x-ray imaging scope) had resulted from research on space energy sources that converted their x-rays to visible images; Dr. Yin said the idea had not been feasible until the Army declassified an image intensifier produced at its Ft. Belvoir night vision laboratory. Cost of the unit, not yet on the market, might be less than $5000. Using no new technology, it contained off-the-shelf items such as the radioactive source and an x-ray phosphor screen besides the intensifier. Pulling a trigger unshielded the source, sending through the object being examined a low x-ray dose which the phosphor screen converted to visible light. The unit’s high intensification would allow use of a small radiation source of 10 to 20 millicuries resembling a pen-size battery; an attached camera could produce instant x-ray pictures with exposure 1000 times weaker than that of a conventional x-ray machine. Dr. Yin said a device invented for x-ray astronomy “where there is a scarcity of x-rays should [be] of obvious value in medical fluoroscopy where there are many x-rays.” Cooperating in evaluating the device would be the National Institute of Dental Research, Howard Univ.’s College of Dentistry, Howard’s cancer research center, and the Duke Univ. Medical Center at Durham, N.C. NIDR researchers had already worked up a configuration of the lixiscope for use in dentistry, and the cancer research center would compare it with existing techniques for detecting soft-tissue tumors or foreign bodies and for looking at bone fractures. Prime advantage of the unit would be for emergency and other field use requiring quick fluoroscopy (NASA Release 77-238) •
Marshall Space Flight Center reported it had coped with the threat of a serious power shortage when maintenance and emergency shutdowns dropped the Tennessee Valley Authority’s generating capacity by a third at the same time that severe cold weather moved into the area. On Friday, Dec. 9, TVA had asked NASA and the U.S. Army to reduce power use by half, as it expected the shortage to continue for some time. C. Horton Webb, director of MSFC’s facilities office, said the plant maintenance division had worked around the clock turning heat on and off to keep buildings from freezing, and had asked employees to help in minimizing use of electrical equipment. Security guards helped by closing blinds and turning off lights and equipment wherever possible. Webb said the combined effort had reduced power use by 50% on Saturday and 65% by Sunday morning. (Marshall Star, Dec 14/77, 1)
WFC announced it had completed tests using rockets, balloons, and supporting ground observations to obtain data on the natural state of earth’s ozone layer and on stratosphere pollution. As part of the joint WFC-GSFC applications sounding-rocket program (ASRP), the tests July 19-22 had measured daylong variations in the vertical distribution of ozone to establish a model for studying the effects of pollutants. (WFC Release 77-11)
Langley Research Center announced award of a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract worth about $1.8 million to Vought Corp. for design, development, and qualification of a Scout launch-vehicle guidance system. Teledyne would do the designing under subcontract and Vought would integrate the system into the Scout. Work would proceed at the Vought plant in Dallas and Teledyne’s plant in Northridge, Calif., under LaRC direction. (LaRC Release 77-3)
Scientists at the McDonald Observatory in Los Alamos, N.M., had discovered that the red-giant star Betelgeuse, familiar feature of the constellation Orion, was 3 250 000 times larger than earth’s sun. Pictures taken at the observatory, using a new process with a special one-of-a-kind television camera tube produced by RCA, had shown the star expanding and throwing off matter into space at a prodigious rate; the photographs for the first time had viewed and measured the shell of matter around a red giant. Betelgeuse and its shell had proved to be 400 times larger than the orbit of Pluto; it had measured nearly 3 trillion miles across (2800 billion miles). Earth’s sun in comparison was 864 000 miles in diameter at its equator, and earth itself was only about 8000 miles in diameter at the equator. The pictures had verified a theory that red-giant stars were a primary source of raw material for making new stars, according to astrophysicist Maxwell Sandford of McDonald laboratory. The red giants would routinely lose matter to relieve internal pressures built up by consumption of nuclear fuel, and the pictures had shown the loss to be much greater than previously thought. (Today, June 3/77, 11 A)
Pioneer 11 had covered two-thirds of its 2.3-billion-km (1.5-billion-mi) journey from Jupiter to Saturn; passing Saturn, it would head out of the solar system in the direction that the solar system takes through the galaxy, nearly opposite the path of Pioneer 10, now between the orbits of Saturn and Uranus, also on its way out of the solar system. Ames Research Center had managed the Pioneer project for NASA’s Office of Space Science; TRW Systems, Inc., had built the spacecraft. (NASA Release 77-112; ARC Release 77-33)
Ames Research Center reported that on May 10, 10 female volunteers would complete a month-long test [see March 24] to set standards for passengers on future spaceflights. The test included 9 days of total bed rest, to simulate effects of weightlessness, and centrifuge rides to simulate reentry into earth atmosphere. ARC had scheduled a press conference to announce and discuss the results of the test; Dr. Harold Sandler, principal investigator, would attend with members of his staff and the volunteers. (ARC anno May 4/77)
The Natl, Science Foundation reported that research and development spending in the U.S. would reach an estimated $40.8 billion in 1977, 9% more than the 1976 level of $37.3 billion. The federal government expected to increase its R&D outlay from $19.8 billion in 1976 to $21.8 billion in 1977, emphasizing defense, space, and energy. (NSF Release PR77-73)
NASA announced that the Jet Propulsion Laboratory had negotiated contracts with 5 firms for enough silicon (photovoltaic) solar cells to supply a combined total of 190kw of power for use by the federal government. JPL would manage the contract for the Dept, of Energy (DOE), sponsor of the program to reduce the price of the cells below 504 per peak watt by the end of 1986, while raising production capability to 500,000kw annually. The DOE program, besides reducing costs, would study the use of solar-cell materials potentially less expensive than silicon crystals and of alternatives such as optical concentrators. Firms receiving contracts were ARCO, 20kw, $321 950; Motorola, 50kw, $676 614; Sensor Technology, 40kw, $643 907; Solarex, 30kw, $559 454; and Solar Power, 50kw, $757 665. Panels of solar cells previously purchased under the program were powering an irrigation system in Nebr., a test system for residential use at MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory in Mass., a dust-storm warning system in Ariz. [see May 23], automatic weather-reporting systems in 6 states, and other remote uses. (NASA Release 77-246)
The Wall St Journal reported that the government of France had announced plans for a major overhaul of its “financially troubled aerospace industry,” that would include partial nationalization of Avions Marcel Dassault-Breguet, maker of the Mirage jet fighter. A sharp drop in orders for civilian and military aircraft had forced companies to dismiss workers and cut down operations; the government hoped to introduce new products, step up sales, and increase cooperation with other European aircraft firms. (WSJ, June 9/77, 13)
Kitt Peak astronomers had suggested designs for a telescope 5 times larger than the 4.5m telescope at Mt. Palomar, Calif., to complement the Very Large Array radiotelescopes in New Mexico and the planned Space Telescope, the NY Times reported. An instrument using multiple-mirror technology (several mirrors connected by laser, aligned by computer to within an eighth of the wavelength of the observed light) would have the light-gathering potential of a huge single mirror without the high cost of manufacture or maintenance. The resolution possible with such telescopes would permit observation of weather patterns on other planets. (NYT, Apr 9/77, 22)
The W. Post reported that the U.S. Naval Observatory had honored the memory of its astronomer Asaph Hall with a 2:30am party attended by Hall’s descendants (“a fine crop of teen-agers and young adults”) on the 100th anniversary of his discovery of the moon of Mars, which he had named Deimos (flight) and Phobos (fear) after the horses that drew the war god’s chariot. “It now turns out,” the Post added, that the little moons would crash into Mars within the next 70 million yr [see During June]. Other Naval Observatory observances honoring Hall included a reception, a group of technical meetings, a dinner, and a 100th anniversary memorial entry in the logbook of the observatory’s 26in refracting telescope. [W Post, Aug 13/77, Bl)
President Carter would propose budget changes to reduce emphasis on nuclear power and increase research on energy conservation, predicted Les Gapay in the Wall Street Journal. Sources in and out of the Carter administration said that Carter would amend the Ford budget for FY 1978 by cutting money for two major nuclear-power research projects: a multimillion-dollar program to develop a fast-breeder nuclear reactor that would produce more fuel than it consumed, and research on nuclear fusion, a new technology intended to provide commercial electrical power within several decades. Fusion was said to be more environmentally acceptable than other nuclear programs, and the U.S. had been spending several hundred million a yr on this research. Funds cut from the Energy Research and Development Administration would go toward research on energy conservation; ERDA had been studying ways to save fuel in building, transportation, and industrial processes. The Ford budget had asked for a 28% increase in energy research for FY 1978 (from $2.9 billion to $3.7 billion), most of it for ERDA and for nuclear power studies. (WSJ, Feb 17/77, 3)
NASA reported it had begun working on its plan to make Ames Research Center the lead center for helicopter research. Approved last summer, the plan resulted from NASA’s assessment of its research to see where realignment would improve effectiveness and reduce costs. As lead center, ARC would do research on small- and large-scale helicopter hardware using its aeronautical facilities such as the 40 x 80ft wind tunnel and flight-simulation equipment, and flight-test items like the tilt-rotor and rotor-systems research aircraft. A helicopter program office at NASA Hq would direct the overall helicopter program and coordinate research between ARC and the Langley and Lewis Research Centers. LaRC, working mainly on helicopter structures, would continue its studies of acoustics, airfoils, aeroelasticity, and avionics. LeRC would continue to emphasize propulsion, its first task being a proposed new program in helicopter transmission technology leading later to work on helicopter engines. NASA estimated that over the next 3yr the change would result in adding 72 positions to the ARC staff; LaRC helicopter work would phase down during that period but would continue to employ 72. The expected growth in long-haul aircraft technology at LaRC would add up to little long-term impact on that center’s manpower or the local economy. (NASA Release 77-8; ARC Release 77-19)
A native New Yorker, Dr. Frosch had earned A.B., A.M., and Ph.D degrees from Columbia Univ. From 1973 to 1975 he was asst, secretary general of the United Nations and assistant head of its environmental program. From 1966 to 1975 he was asst, secretary of the Navy for research and development, working on naval-research projects at the Hudson Laboratories of Columbia Univ. where he had been director from 1956 to 1963. Dr. Frosch had received the Arthur S. Flemming award in 1966 and the Navy’s distinguished public service award in 1969. (NASA release 77-107; NYT, May 24/77, 19)
Threats to the earth’s ozone layer remained a matter for concern, Walter Sullivan reported in the NY Times, especially fluorocarbons widely used as aerosol propellants and accumulating as chlorine byproducts in the atmosphere where they would break down ozone and expose the earth to more ultraviolet light. Health records from the United Nations had shown that people living in low latitudes where the ozone layer was thinner and sunlight more abundant had a markedly higher rate of skin cancers, especially of the often fatal melanoma. Although some scientists noted that atmospheric ozone would normally vary with latitude, season, and even with the sunspot cycle, public health officials said any total increase in ultraviolet exposure would probably increase the incidence of cancer. Other dangers to the ozone layer included supersonic planes and other high-flying aircraft, nuclear explosions, and the heavy use of nitrogen fertilizers. The Natl. Academy of Science had proposed outlawing fluorocarbon gases as propellants except in medical products. (NYT, May 15/77, 4-9)
NASA announced it had investigated a unique propulsion system for sending a spacecraft to rendezvous with Halley’s Comet in 1986. The comet had made some 30 visits since 467 B.C., and its next appearance would offer NASA an opportunity to find out more about the origin of the solar system. A device using solar electric propulsion, suggested by MSFC and tested for several yr at Lewis Research Center, would aim solar energy concentrated by reflectors at conventional solar cells to provide electric power for a system of 8 ion engines capable of taking a spacecraft to an encounter with the Halley comet around Christmas Day 1985 just outside earth’s orbit. The spacecraft would reach the comet during its most active state as it passed near the sun, and could send pictures of the comet to earth, possibly sending a probe through the comet’s tail toward its nucleus to define its properties. NASA would decide in August 1977 whether to use the solar electric system, or a solar sail being developed by JPL, in its rendezvous with Halley’s Comet. (NASA Release 77-97; MSFC Release 77-87)
NASA announced that the launch of HEAO-A (the high-energy astronomy observatory) originally scheduled for April 1977 had been set for Aug. 12. Problems with the spacecraft’s gyroscopes, required for attitude control, had caused the delay. Analysis and testing had produced design changes to improve gyroscope reliability for the expected 6mo mission lifetime. HEAO-A would be first of three astrophysical observatories orbited over the next 3yr to study radiation from stellar sources throughout the universe. (NASA Release 77-156)
Dryden Flight Research Center announced it had developed an autopilot device during flight tests of the YF-12 aircraft that would enable future high-speed planes to fly closer to the preset flight path. Experience gained from aircraft cruising at high speeds and high altitudes had shown deviations up to ± 4000ft in altitude and more than 30mph in speed from those planned. An aircraft flying across the country at Mach 3 could encounter normal changes in temperature and pressure as rapid changes that could affect the Mach number; conventional techniques to correct for those changes had caused large altitude deviations and poor-quality passenger comfort. The deviations could degrade aircraft performance or overrun the plane’s operating limitations. The new control system combining surface motion and throttle motion, Hot previously used together, with newly developed data sensors, had kept the YF-12 on a highly precise flight path even at high-speed conditions over extended periods of time. (DFRC Release 19-77) ____
The Natl. Science Foundation reported that federal funding for research and development had risen significantly between fiscal yrs 1974 and 1978, having shown only slight growth in the 1969-1974 period. Total federal R&D funding for FY 1978 was about $26.3 billion, $8.9 billion more than for FY 1974. For the 1974-1978 period, 6 functional areas accounted for nearly all the increase in federal support: defense, 44%; energy, 25%; space and health, 7% each; environment, 5%; science and technology base, 4%. (NSF Release PR77-93)
ARC announced that a team of scientists using the 91cm (36in) infrared telescope on the Kuiper Airborne Observatory and the ground-based 230cm (90in) infrared telescope at Steward Observatory, Univ. of Arizona, had made the first discovery of planet formation in process and the first identification of a flat disc-shaped luminous stellar object. The object, MWC 349 in the constellation Cygnus, exhibited a surrounding mass of intensely glowing gas with a diameter 20 times that of the central body, emitting 10 times as much light; the luminous area would disappear in about a century as disc material spun into the central body. The End had been significant because it might show how planets had been formed in earth’s solar system. Members of the team were Drs. Rodger Thompson and Peter Strittmatter of the Steward Observatory, and Drs. Edwin Erickson, Fred Witteborn, and D.W. Strecker, all of ARC. Infrared instruments could view the object through dust shrouding the disc: the Kuiper telescope had detected infrared spectra that could not penetrate earth’s atmosphere, and the Steward telescope could offer higher resolution. (ARC Release 77-33; NASA Release 77-119; NYT, June 16/77, A21; W Post, June 16/77, B-ll)
The Energy Research and Development Administration reported that its scientists had developed a new way to reclaim used automotive oils, removing solid and liquid impurities in a solvent-and-distillation treatment. After heating the used oil to drive off volatile hydrocarbons and water, the process would add a solvent to make sludge of the contaminants; the remaining oil would go through normal processes of distillation, improvement of color and odor, and reformulation with additives. Iowa State Univ. had run a vehicle-fleet test for more than lOmo using the re-refined oils with no abnormal wear or performance; the product had not generated polluting byproducts. Most commercial rerefining had used an acid-based technology producing wastes more polluting than the used oil itself. (ERDA Release 77-14)
NASA launched from Cape Canaveral the high energy astronomy observatory Heao 2 on an Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle [see Nov. 3]. This was the second in a series of three NASA high energy astronomy observatories designed to survey the entire sky for x-ray sources, make measurements of the gamma-ray flux, determine source locations and line spectra, and examine the composition and synthesis of' cosmic-ray nuclei. The 20ft 70001b Heao 2 was equipped to provide precise pointing capability of 1 arc-minute or better, and would focus on specific x-ray sources for detailed examination. Orbiting the earth at 290mi altitude, Heao 2 had a design life of lyr. Nicknamed “Einstein” by project scientists, the mission would operate under a consortium representing the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Mass. Inst, of Technology, Columbia Univ., and GSFC. The spacecraft was built by TRW, Inc., under NASA direction. (NASA MOR S-832-78-02 [prelaunch] date?; NYT, Nov 14/78, C-3)
NASA announced that MSFC had developed a teleoperator-retrieval system (TRS) vehicle for first use in late 1979, either to boost the Skylab orbiting space laboratory to a higher orbit or to deorbit it in a remote ocean area. The decision to reboost or deorbit was expected early in 1979. Concept of the system evolved from teleoperator supporting research and development under way since the mid-1960s. Anticipated long-range usefulness of the TRS for payload survey, stabilization, retrieval, and delivery missions; its recovery and reuse capability; and its adaptability for the Skylab reboost/deorbit mission had led to its further development. The TRS had a central-core propulsion system accommodating strap-on kits for additional propulsion. A 24-nozzle attitude-control system on the core provided 6 deg of freedom for control of the vehicle during rendezvous, docking, and initial orientation. Although thrusters originally used cold-gas propulsion, designers were studying use of low-cost hydrazine (hot gas). Preprogrammed instructions in the vehicle’s core and computer, or a Shuttle crew member, would control guidance and attitude maneuvers. The TRS and orbiter structure were new designs; other systems would be fabricated almost completely from either off-the-shelf components or those being developed under NASA contracts. (NASA Release 78-49)
MSFC announced NASA had extended the mission lifetime of the first earth-orbiting high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 1, originally scheduled to end Feb. 12, to at least mid-November when the second of the series was due for launch. The high quality of scientific data received from Heao 1 had prompted the decision to extend the mission. Launched Aug. 12, 1977, Heao 1 had been the first of three planned large unmanned orbital observatories managed by MSFC; the third would be launched in 1979. Heao 1 had been a scanning mission for fully mapping the celestial sphere; the second Heao mission would point very precisely at x-ray sources identified by Heao 1, which had already significantly advanced knowledge of celestial x-ray and gamma-ray sources. By extrapolating these results, the scientists expected to increase the number of x-ray objects identified by the first 6 mo of data from 200 to 1000 or more, with further increases during the extended operation. Heao 1, although basically a scanning instrument, had been versatile enough to stop its rotation and point briefly at items of particular interest; resolution and sensitivity would increase tremendously in the pointing mode. Heao 1 was performing about 5 daytime pointings lasting about 3hr during a week; extended mission lifetime would enable the mission-control crew to add night pointings. Dr. Fred Speer, mission director, explained: “Astronomers would like to have their optical viewings and optical photography of stellar objects—which of course can only be done at night with optical telescopes—coincide with our pointings with the X-ray sensors aboard Heao 7, so that data can be correlated.” (.Marshall Star, Feb 15/78, 1)
Dryden Flight Research Center reported that the KC-135, testbed aircraft to be modified with winglets in early 1979, had made its first flight at DFRC as a fully instrumental research aircraft. The data package would be ferried by air to Tinker AFB where it would undergo fatigue inspection. The transport-sized aircraft would return to DFRC in mid-Nov. for reinstallation of the data package. Baseline-data flights with the conventional wing would begin in 1979, followed by installation of the winglets for full-data flights. (DFRC X-Press, Sept 22/78, 2)
Sixty-five percent of the food carried on Shuttle missions would be cooked, packaged, and tested in a new JSC food lab, JSC reported. Or-biter menus would be standardized on a 6-day cycle. About 15% of Shuttle food—mainly flexpacks and thermostabilized food items—would be supplied by the U.S. Army’s Natick Research and Development Command in Mass. Another 20% would be off-the-shelf items, from chewing gum and snap-top puddings to peanut butter. The orbiter’s lower deck would contain a galley with an oven, serving trays, water dispensers, and other serving equipment. When the galley was installed and operational (about mission SS-7), an hr before meal time the crewperson cooking would spend about 5 min rehydrating dehydrated food items, loading meal trays, and placing them in the galley oven. After meals, trays and silverware would be cleaned and sterilized for reuse. JSC nutritionist Rita Rapp, who has seen space-food technology evolve from bland squeeze-tube pastes carried on Mercury spacecraft to the electrically-heated food trays in the Skylab wardroom, said, “We try to present foods in a normal way, more like people are accustomed to eating on earth. Operational experience permitted us to add new food items—wider selection and better packaging—as we learned weightlessness did not cause the problems everyone anticipated.” (JSC Roundup, Oct 13/78, 4)
The latest in a family of small-diameter 8-bladed propellers had completed wind tunnel testing at Lewis Research Center, the Lewis News reported. Third in a series tested and designed for new high-speed fuel-conservative aircraft, these propellers had unique extreme curve to the blades designed to improve performance and minimize cabin noise during flight. At simulated cruise conditions of 855km/hr (530mph) and 9145m altitude (30 000ft), the propellers proved less noisy and more efficient than previous models tested. NASA estimated that, at those cruise conditions, an advanced turboprop engine using the propellers could save 20 to 40% in fuel over current turbofan engines and 10 to 20% in fuel over advanced turbofan engines. LeRC work on the propellers was part of a NASA-wide effort toward 50% fuel savings in future U.S. aircraft, with testing expected to be completed in later 1980. Hamilton Standard Division of United Technologies Corp. had been contractor for design and fabrication of the advanced propellers. (Lewis News, Sept 1/78, 1)
FBIS reported that Oleg Gazenko, director of the USSR’s Manned Spaceflight Institute of Medico-Biological Problems, said in an interview that cosmonauts Vladimir Kovalenok and Alexander Ivanchenkov were physiologically “as healthy as they were before the [Soyuz 29] spaceflight” [see Nov. 2]. The record 140-day flight had caused some functional changes: . . . “the cosmonauts lost a part of the muscle mass, which they have now restored. They returned to earth with erythrocytes that were born in space. The average life span of erythocytes is 120 days, and they are fully renewed during this period.” Gazenko said that the cosmic erythrocytes tended to be smaller, though they fully retained the main function of carrying oxygen to the tissues. “As time passes, the erythrocytes that were born in weightlessness will perish. But what will those that will replace them be like? Identical to those that were born before the space flight? Apparently yes, because our organism is a wonderful instrument of self-regulation; it excellently arranges all the processes taking place in it in such a way that they would meet the demands made by those conditions in which man is staying.” Gazenko had directed research that substantiated the possibility of manned spaceflight, and had received the 1978 USSR state prize for studies of ways to counteract unfavorable effects of weightlessness on the human organism, making lengthy manned spaceflights possible. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 12/78)
Science Indicators 1976, ninth annual report of the National Science Board recently transmitted to Congress by the President, noted an increase in U.S. research and development expenditures during 1976 to an estimated $38.1 billion in current dollars; however, constant-dollar spending of $28.5 was only 2.5% above the 1974 level. Measured in current dollars, federally supported R&D expenditures in 1976 had climbed to an estimated new high of $20.1 billion; however, constant-dollar levels stood at $15 billion, 18% below the peak reached in 1967. National spending for basic research in current dollars had climbed substantially since 1960, to a new high in 1976. However, estimated constant-dollar expenditures in 1976 had advanced only about 2% above the 1975 level, remaining nearly 11 % below the peak year of 1968. The federal government was the source of most support for basic research in 1976, as it had been in past years. The federal share amounted to 68% of the total since 1971, compared with approximately 60% in 1960, whereas industry’s share had remained stable at approximately 15% throughout the 1970s, in sharp contrast to its 28% share in 1960. (NSF report, Feb 78)
LaRC announced selection of Telos Computing, Inc., Santa Monica, Calif., for negotiations leading to award of a contract to develop software for the Natl. Transonic Facility (NTF) wind tunnel at LaRC that would allow networking of four medium-sized computers to be the nucleus of NTF’s instrumentation complex. The contract would cover collection and display of all research measurements, as well as automatic control of many wind-tunnel test parameters. Telos estimated the value of the cost-plus-fixed-fee contract at $1.2 million. Work would be performed at LaRC over a 3-yr period. (LaRC Release 78-86)
The Marshall Star announced that the most extensive study ever made of Venus had begun with the arrival at the planet of Pioneer Venus 1, the orbiter half of the two-spacecraft Pioneer Venus mission. It went into orbit Dec. 4 and was scheduled to take pictures and make measurements for one Venusian yr (225 earth days) or more. On Dec. 9, the four probes and transporter bus of Pioneer Venus 2 would plunge into the Venusian clouds at widely separated points to measure the dense atmosphere in detail from top to bottom. A spokesman at Ames Research Center, manager of the project for NASA’s Office of Space Science, reported Dec. 4 that Pioneer Venus 2 was on course and on schedule. (Marshall Star, Dec 6/78, 2)
Representatives of LeRC, ARC, LaRC, other government agencies, and industry had met at Dry den Flight Research Center for what was probably the final symposium on NASA’s YF-12 aircraft program begun in the late 1960s, the Lewis News reported. The airplanes would be mothballed by March 1979. DFRC’s Dr. James Albers, symposium chairman, said the symposium was to “disseminate recent research findings and stimulate exchange of information among participants engaged in design or research related to high supersonic flight.” The YF-12 had given NASA an opportunity for research on sustained supersonic flight. Several NASA centers had investigated propulsion-system performance and the dynamics of mixed compression inlets; aero-elastic effects and thermal problems of high Mach number flight; and techniques of measuring aerodynamic data and operational parameters in extreme temperatures. Researchers had conducted a parallel series of laboratory experiments to augment the findings of the flight program. The symposium ended with an industry-government panel on “Future Perspectives in Supersonic Flight.” {Lewis News, Dec 8/78, 7)
Fifteen scientists who would manage earth-orbital investigations for the third Spacelab in mid-1981 had met at Marshall Space Flight Center to discuss preparations for the mission, the Marshall Star reported. Known as the investigators’ working group for Spacelab mission 3 (IWG-3), the group would work with NASA mission management to develop a payload offering the greatest possible scientific return and to select payload specialists who would perform experiments aboard Spacelab 3. Those at the meeting agreed on professional qualifications for payload specialists and on criteria for their selection, beginning in the second half of 1978. Sponsored by the NASA Hq Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications, Spacelab mission 3 would include materials processing in space, the atmospheric cloud-physics laboratory, the drop-dynamics module, and vestibular-function research. Experiments would obtain basic knowledge about crystal-growing processes in earth orbit, mechanisms for generating small latex spheres, dynamic behavior of free-floating drops of liquid, cloud formation in the atmosphere, red blood cell aggregation, and adaptation of life forms to space. MSFC would manage integration and operation of the scientific payloads flown on the first 3 Spacelab missions. CMarshall Star, Feb 1/78, 1)
ESA reported it had scheduled 3mo of propellant-mockup tests of the European launcher Ariane to begin at the French Guiana Space Center launch site [see June 16]. Tests would check general conditions for launcher-assembly compatibility of ground facilities (platform, tower, etc.) with the vehicle, and for technical functioning of the fueling and draining facilities and systems both on the ground and on the vehicle. Thejatter three of four qualification flights scheduled from June 1979 to Oct. 1980 would launch Amsat (telecommunications for international radio amateurs), Firewheel (science/Germany), Meteosat-2 (meteorology/ESA), APPLE (communications/India), and Marots-A (maritime communications/ESA). (ESA newsletter Aug/78, 3)
AvWk reported that the high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 1 was each day discovering about three new x-ray sources in deep space. NASA expected that by the end of the mission in early 1979 the spacecraft would have found more than 1000 new sources. Heao 1 data had also revealed a new black-hole candidate in the constellation Ara, bringing to four the number of such candidates identified. (AvWk, Oct 9/78, 13)
NASA announced that the two Pioneer spacecraft en route to Venus—the orbiter and the multiprobe—had passed major operations tests. Tests of orientation, timing, and separation systems aboard Pioneer Venus 2 for split-second release of three probes 9600km (6000mi) apart over Venus’s earth-facing hemisphere, and of systems on Pioneer Venus 1 (orbiter) controlling retrofire and injection into orbit (to take place behind the planet and out of reach of earth communications), had been satisfactory. Separate operations teams at Ames Research Center had sent 6400 commands to the orbiter since its May 20 launch and 3600 commands to the multiprobe craft since its Aug. 8 launch. Virtually all experiments and systems (including thermal, orientation, command, communications, and data-return and power systems) on each of the multiprobe’s five entry craft had been operated and were working well. The orbiter’s instruments had been checked and calibrated, including systems for insertion into Venus orbit Dec. 4. Twenty days and 13 million km (8 million mi) from Venus, the multiprobe would split into a transporter bus and four probes, the bus serving as fifth probe. The multiprobe had covered 140 million km (87 million mi), the orbiter 325 million km (202 million mi). Both spacecraft still had about 180 million km (112 million mi) to travel to Venus. (NASA Release 78-153; ARC Release 78-48; ARC Astrogram, Oct 19/78, 1)
Two experiments for HEAO-C had been delivered to the prime contractor, TRW, Redondo Beach, Calif., and the third was expected the following wk, MSFC reported. Scheduled for launch in late 1979, HEAO-C would survey gamma-ray emissions and study cosmic-ray particles from space. Like the first high-energy astronomy observatory launched in 1977, HEAO-C would be a scanning mission to perform sky surveys. The HEAO-B scheduled for launch in November 1978 would be a pointing mission, focusing on selected X-ray sources. The two delivered experiments were a high spectral-resolution gammaray spectrometer (experiment C-l) and a heavy-nuclei experiment (C-3). Arriving Oct. 23 would be C-2, the European-produced experiment on isotopic composition of primary cosmic rays. Mechanical integration of the experiments would begin as soon as KSC returned mechanical ground-support equipment it was using to prepare for HEAO-B’s launch. Meanwhile, TRW would check out individual experiments to assure the devices had arrived in good working condition. Following mechanical integration, TRW would make individual data runs through late Nov. Electrical integration would begin after KSC returned the computer equipment now supporting the HEAO-B launch. (Marshall Star, Oct 18/78, 1)
Despite tight new restraints on federal spending, President Carter had instructed his aides to give special protection to R&D programs — currently scheduled to get $28 billion—in the FY80 federal budget, the Washington Post reported. This came a day after the President had announced an anti-inflation program that included spending cuts plus reduction of the FY80 budget deficit to $30 billion or less, a goal at least $3 billion tighter than his previously announced target. In a handwritten note Carter instructed his aides: “I want to maintain our strong support for R&D as (percentage) of budget.” This meant high priority for spending consideration in a field usually considered a prime target for any budget-cutting program. One White House aide indicated Carter’s instructions meant that R&D would be virtually exempt from new federal spending constraints; another said that R&D might still face some restraints if inflation did not ease. The President had previously expressed special concern that basic research (which accounted for $3.5 billion of the total R&D budget and had been dwindling until the Ford Administration reversed the trend) be protected from any budget-cutting considerations. Frank Press, Carter’s science adviser, said Carter’s decision constituted the nation’s “first presidential expression of an overall science and technology policy.” (W Post, Nov 1/78, A-6)
Lewis Research Center announced that NASA Hq had joined with the FAA in sponsoring a 3-day aircraft-icing workshop at LeRC. Attended by more than 100 icing specialists, sensor/instrument specialists, meteorologists, and weather forecasters, the workshop had assessed fixed-wing and rotocraft operational icing, evaluated facilities requirements for R&D and certification, examined ways to improve icing forecasts, and identified gaps in knowledge of aeronautical icing. LeRC had been chosen for the conference because its research on icing in the 1940s and 1950s was still important in aircraft certification; it also had the largest icing-study facility currently actively operating in North America. As a result of needs defined at the workshop, LeRC would begin a new program of research on icing. (Lewis News, Aug 4/78, 2)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that Corning Glass Works, Canton, N.Y., had begun work on a foot-thick primary-mirror blank for the Space Telescope, for which the center would have overall management responsibility. The telescope had been scheduled for launch in 1983. Corning would deliver two 8ft,discs to Perkin-Elmer Corp. for grinding and polishing and telescope assembly; Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. would build the primary spacecraft and support system, and integrate the complete telescope. Glass had been used for the mirror blank as it would change shape only slightly with temperature changes during viewing; the titanium-silicate mirror blank would have zero expansion on a scale used by physicists. Aperture of the mirror blank was about 94in; diameter of the center hole was about 2ft. (Marshall Star, Jan 11/78, 4)
NASA announced that two radio astronomers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory had discovered major changes deep in the atmosphere of Uranus. Dr. M. J. Klein of JPL and Dr. J.A. Turegano, a visiting research associate from the Univ. of Zaragoza, Spain, found that radio emissions from Uranus had become 30% stronger over the past lOyr. Klein and Turegano, who had used NASA’s 64m (210ft) radio antenna at Goldstone, Calif., explained that radio waves emanating from dense clouds on Uranus had originated deep in the atmosphere, where pressures might be more than 10 times greater than at earth’s surface. Observations in the spring of 1978 had confirmed the two astronomers’ discovery a yr earlier; the atmosphere of Uranus could be either warming or becoming clearer to the passage of radio waves, although the investigators doubted that temperature so deep in a planet’s atmosphere could warm more than 30% in only lOyr. They thought the change was more probably caused by the planet’s unique orientation: Uranus, unlike any other planet, spun on its side as it orbited the sun, and every 84yr (the length of one Uranus yr) the sun would shine directly on the North Pole. Forty-two yr later, the northern hemisphere would be dark with the South Pole pointed sunward. Ammonia gas in the planet’s atmosphere probably blocked radio emissions from Uranus’s deep interior. The scientists suggested that ammonia might have been preferentially depleted in the planet’s polar regions, either by convection currents or chemical reactions. If so, then the radio telescopes would be registering hotter temperatures deeper in the atmosphere than those recorded lOyr previously when the planet had a different orientation to the sun. Theoretical studies to discover the relationship of the radio measurements to global changes in Uranus’s climate, weather patterns, and atmospheric chemistry would help in drawing general conclusions about planetary atmospheres applicable in turn to specific studies of earth’s atmosphere. (NASA Release 78-130)
NASA announced that the Jupiter-bound Voyager 2 was having problems with both its radio receivers that prevented Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineers from sending commands to the spacecraft. Early spacecraft data had indicated failure of one receiver, and the backup receiver might have had trouble receiving commands from earth; the spacecraft had continued sending information to earth. The Voyager had been designed to switch radio receivers if it had not received earth command for 7 days; the receiver that appeared to have failed had been the one on-line, and in 7 days the spacecraft computer should automatically switch to the backup receiver. Engineers would then attempt to reestablish communications by sending commands to the spacecraft. (NASA Release 78-56) The Voyager 2 spacecraft had accepted a command, the W Star reported, ending a week-long radio failure that had threatened its mission to Jupiter and Saturn. To protect the mission, engineers at JPL had begun reprogramming the spacecraft’s onboard computer “so it will still do its science when it passes Jupiter and send back the results whether we can talk to it or not,” said JPL spokesman Frank Bristow. Earlier in Apr., the spacecraft had automatically switched from the primary to secondary receiver because Voyager had not received an uplink from tracking stations for 7 days; the commands had not been sent because controllers had been preoccupied with scan-platform problems on Voyager 1. Controllers were reviewing their activities to pinpoint why they had overlooked an uplink, to ensure the lapse would not recur during the mission. (W Star, Apr 14/78, A-7; AvWk, Apr 17/78, 20)
Decisions not yet made by the U.S. government would determine the U.S. aerospace industry’s fate for years to come, said Aerospace Industries Association president, Karl Harr, Jr., in the AIA’s Aerospace Review and Forecast, 1977. Aerospace-industry sales in 1977 had increased appreciably, if not dramatically, in comparison with the previous year. Profit as a percentage of sales had climbed half a percentage point but remained below the average for all U.S. manufacturing. The industry had anticipated similar sales gains in 1978 and expected space activity to continue at approximately the same rate. Military sales should top those of 1977. The aerospace industry had pressed for elimination of barriers to “free and fair trade” in the General Agreement on Tariff and Trade (GATT) negotiations; foreign-government subsidy of their manufacturers had made them highly competitive. The U.S. government’s attempts to control export of “strategically critical” technology could severely impact sales abroad. Other issues of concern to the aerospace industry were capital formation and dealings with the government such as renegotiation, overregulation, expanding paperwork, and government competition with industry. Harr said that negative decisions could lead to “forfeiture of the pre-eminent position the U.S. has long held in high technology.” (Aerospace, Spring 78, 3)
LaRC announced it had awarded General Electric Company, Newport News, Va., a contract to provide rigid closed-cell foam-insulation material for use in the National Transonic Facility (NTF), a cryogenic wind tunnel under construction at LaRC. The insulation would be installed on the internal surface of the tunnel’s cylindrical pressure shell. The contract, managed by LaRC and estimated by GE at approximately $1.4 million, covered just over lyr; work would be performed at GE’s Thermal Systems Programs plant in Tacoma, Wash. (LaRC Release 78-81)
AvWk reported U.S. avionics manufacturers were sure that a NavStar receiver suitable for general aviation use, with features comparable to those of a VOR omnirange distance-measuring equipment and area-navigation computer, would be available for under $5000 by the late 1980s. AEL, Inc., which had designed a microwave landing receiver that could sell for less than $1500 through normal distribution channels, said the price of a NavStar receiver in 1978 dollars could eventually be as low as $2000. The role of NavStar (DOD’s satellite-based navigation system) in civilian aviation would depend on availability of inexpensive receivers at least as accurate as the present VOR/DME navaids. The potential market for civilian NavStar receivers had aroused considerable interest among civil-avionics manufacturers, resulting in Langley Research Center’s receiving a number of bids in a recent competition for a technology/design study of a low-cost NavStar receiver. Magnavox Government and Industrial Electronics Co. had won the contract. (Av-Wk, June 5/78, 91)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that its test engineers had successfully completed the first series of live firing tests of the Space Shuttle’s main propulsion system, with all major test objectives achieved. Rockwell Intl.’s Space Systems Group had conducted the test program for MSFC. The test version of the propulsion system had consisted of three Shuttle main engines mounted on an orbiter aft fuselage with a flight-type external propellant tank and associated systems. The first series of tests (Apr. 21, May 19, June 15, and July 7, 1978) had recorded systems operation at thrust levels from 70 to 90% of rated power for up to 100 sec; in the final test, engines were throttled down from 90% thrust to 70% and back up to 90%. The Shuttle would be the first spacecraft with throttleable engines. After removal from the test stand at the National Space Technology Laboratories, the engines had undergone modifications for more firings later in 1978. The next test series would run the engine at rated power levels (357 0001b, or 1.67 million newtons at sea level) for more than the 500sec required to lift the Shuttle into orbit. Results of the tests would verify main propulsion system operation before the first manned orbital flight, scheduled for 1979. (Marshall Star, Aug 2/78, 1)
Using the space environment for materials processing had limited application, and should be considered only on a case-by-case basis, according to a report by the Natl. Research Council’s committee on materials processing in space, which had studied NASA’s program. The committee said the early NASA program had used poorly conceived and designed experiments, often with crude apparatus, from which weak conclusions had been drawn and in some cases overpublicized. However, meaningful science and technology could result from experiments in space if the problems to be investigated in space were soundly based in terrestrial science or technology, and if the proposed experiments addressed specific problems instead of being scheduled to take advantage of flight opportunities or space-facility capabilities. The committee said it had not found economically justifiable reasons for producing materials in space, and recommended that NASA deemphasize this area of technology. (NRC News Report, Sept 78, 7)
NASA announced that an Ames Research Center scientific team led by Univ. of Chicago astronomer Dr. Richard Miller and ARC astrophysicist Dr. Bruce Smith had been pioneering in computer simulations of cosmic events that might alter traditional ideas of how galaxies formed, what shapes they assumed, and what happened when they collided. Using ARC’S ILLIAC IV, world’s most powerful computer, the researchers had recreated the birth and evolution of stars and galaxies, compressing 200 million yr into several hr of computer time and reducing the distance light traveled in 100 OOOyr to the length of a television screen, to witness galaxies colliding and gas clouds begetting embryonic1 stars. Computer simulations had shown elliptical galaxies, thought to be oblate (shaped like a frisbee), to have a 3-dimensional prolate shape (oblong); astronomers had found observational evidence confirming the computer discovery. The researchers had instructed the computer to create swirling systems of 100 000 computer points, each point representing the mass of about 1 million suns to give the simulated galaxy a realistic total mass. Each point had felt the gravitational pull of its neighbors and had absorbed energy from exploding supernova. Furnishing a computer with the power of ILLIAC IV with a detailed program on formation and dynamics of galaxies had proved computer simulation to be a useful approach to explaining basic astrophysical processes. ARC scientists had filmed several computer simulations showing results unexpected in light of traditional astrophysical theories. For example, vast congregations of computer-generated stars had repeatedly evolved into stable prolate bars that rotated end over end to form what was perhaps the true shape of elliptical galaxies. When Miller and Smith had set two simulated 50 000-star galaxies on a collision course, the colliding galaxies had exhibited much greater interaction than was forecast. First they contracted, their gravitational fields reinforcing each other, then they bounced back in violent expansion flinging hundreds of stars out of the galaxies, resulting in merged galaxies containing considerably fewer stars. The two researchers’ most recent efforts had centered on tracing simulated masses of gas as they coalesced and formed stars. (NASA Release 78-108)
The Aerospace Industries Assn, announced that industry sales, earnings, backlog, export performance, and contribution to the U.S. balance of trade had improved substantially in 1978. Sales, at $37.3 billion, were up almost $5 billion over 1977; the major gain was in commercial sales. The high inflation rate had distorted sales data, but 1978 sales had increased about 15% above 1977, well in excess of the inflation rate. Industry profits as a percentage of sales rose half a percentage point to 4.7%. Aerospace exports had reached an all-time high of $9.3 billion, $1.8 billion more than in 1977. At a time when export sales were important to the U.S. economy, the aerospace industry recorded an international trade surplus of nearly $8.4 billion, leading all U.S. manufacturing industries in contributing to the nation’s balance of trade. Industry backlog at year-end, estimated at $51.4 billion, was a sharp increase over $44.3 billion in 1977, resulting mostly from a surge of new orders for commercial transports. (.Aerospace, Winter 78, 2)
After a flawless launch from KSC on an Atlas-Centaur at 12:24a.m. EST Nov. 13, Heao 2 was functioning satisfactorily in a near-perfect earth orbit, the Marshall Star reported. The observatory was expected to become fully operational by Nov. 16. First steps in orbit were to open the solar arrays and to separate the launch vehicle, both of which happened exactly on time. Ground stations were receiving and evaluating engineering data, as one by one each instrument was turned on to low power and checked out. All leftover gas had to be purged from the spacecraft before high voltage could be turned on to avoid electrical arcing or damage to delicate onboard instruments. MSFC was in control of Heao 2 together with TRW flight-control engineers operating at GSFC. (Marshall Star, Nov 15/78, 1)
LaRC announced it had begun a research program on problems of agricultural aircraft. Beginning in 1921, airplanes for agricultural use had required conversion from some other purpose; in 1950, the first aircraft was designed specifically for agricultural use. Agricultural aircraft had improved since then, but still relied on 1940s technology. The aerial-applications industry had recognized this, and asked NASA to study drift, swath guidance, liquid and dry material-distribution systems, and aircraft-handling characteristics causing pilot fatigue. The NASA study would also attempt to make the wake vortex of an airplane work for, rather than against, aerial applications. Aerodynamic concerns involved reducing drag for better fuel efficiency and developing appropriate high-lift concepts to improve takeoff, landing, and turning performance. LaRC would conduct the study at its vortex-research facility, its full-scale wind tunnel, and in actual flight tests. The vortex-research facility would test small-scale models of the agricultural aircraft for interactions of the aircraft wake with dispersed spray and granular materials. The full-scale tunnel and flight tests would use an Ayres Thrush S2R-800, one of the largest agricultural aircraft. (LaRC Release 78-130)
Ames Research Center Director C.A. Syvertson announced appointment of A. Thomas Young, director of the planetary program in NASA’s Office of Space Science, as deputy director of ARC effective Feb. 1, 1979. Young, who had held his current position since Nov. 1976, had served as missions operations manager and missions director of Project Viking as well as of other projects at LaRC, which he had joined in 1961. Young had received LaRC’s sustained superior performance award in 1967 for contributions to the lunar orbiter project and in 1977 for his work on Viking. In 1977 he received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for contributions to Viking. (ARC Release 78-53)
Two National Academy of Sciences committees, those on space physics (of the Space Science Board) and on solar terrestrial research (of the Geophysics Research Board), would meet for the first time at MSFC, the center announced. The former was developing for NASA a strategy for a 1980s research program in solar system space physics. Committee members would include 35 top-level scientists from government, industry, and universities throughout the U.S. (Marshall Star, Oct 4/78, 2)
NASA reported that the Natl. Business Aircraft Association at its annual convention in St. Louis Sept. 13 would present to Dr. Richard Whitcomb, aeronautical scientist at Langley Research Center, its Meritorious Service to Aviation Award for 1978. Whitcomb would be honored for “significant contributions to the field of aviation.” Among those contributions were the area-rule design (a “Coke bottle” airplane shape that reduced drag and increased aircraft speed without the need for additional power, incorporated in every U.S. supersonic airplane now flying); and the “supercritical” wing developed during the 1960s to increase the speed and range of subsonic aircraft without an increase in required power or fuel consumption. Whitcomb had begun his career in 1943 with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor, and was head of LaRC’s Transonic Aerodynamics Branch. (NASA Release 78-119)
NASA announced award of a contract to Boeing Commercial Airplane Company, Seattle, Wash., for development and evaluation of selected advanced aerodynamics and active-control concepts for commercial transport aircraft. The contract, to be managed by LaRC, would be part of the second phase of energy-efficient transport (EET) work that had begun in early 1977 under two NASA contracts. The second phase would concentrate on ways to improve energy efficiency and operational economy for subsonic long-haul commercial transport aircraft, including wingtip extension or winglets, surface coatings for drag reduction, wingload alleviation systems, and active controls/guidance systems. Boeing estimated the contract value at $17 million. (LaRC Release 78-65) During October: NASA issued a press kit in observance of its 20th anniversary, having opened for business October 1, 1958. To commemorate the anniversary, NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch wrote: “By the time a man or a woman has lived for 20 years, a new individuality has been established, physical maturity has been achieved, important experiences have been undergone and digested, there have been some triumphs and some tragedies, the outlines of the individual’s role in society are beginning to come into focus, and it becomes possible to do some sensible planning and make some educated guesses about the future. Most importantly, a unique new entity with largely undetermined potential has come to exist in the world. “On its 20th anniversary, NASA—composed of some 23,000 men and women—is just such an entity. We are a unique agency, mandated by the people of our country through their elected representatives to develop and utilize space technology both for immediate practical application and to expand our knowledge of the earth, its environment, the solar system and the universe. We are charged with assisting the Department of Defense in the use of space to maintain the security of our nation, and with the promotion of international cooperation in space for peaceful purposes. An important part of our charter calls for research and development to maintain U.S. leadership in aeronautics, and to improve civil and military aeronautical vehicles while minimizing their energy consumption and environmental degradation. We are further charged with the dissemination to all potential users of new knowledge and technology acquired in the course of all these activities, and, alone among Federal agencies, we are required by law to ‘provide for the widest practicable and appropriate dissemination of information concerning (our) activities and the results thereof.’. . . “We have, after all, in just two decades, for the first time ever, put life from the planet earth on another body of our solar system, and in our explorations of the moon learned more about the nature and origins of that system than humanity was able to determine in all the centuries that went before. “In those two eventful decades we have landed extensions of our intelligence on Mars, begun an automated investigation that will eventually extend to all the planets orbiting the sun, achieved significant increase in our knowledge of sun-earth interactions and relationships, and through remote sensing satellites made order of magnitude improvements in how we view the natural and manmade phenomena of the whole earth, as a first step on the way to better management of all our resources. And we have put astronomy observatories into orbit above the obscuring atmosphere, which are beginning to supply data that may well change our conception of the universe. “Closer to home we have initiated a communications revolution. Though barely begun, the communications satellite program has tied the nations and peoples of our planet together in a way never before possible, and it promises the benefits of intercommunity contact to the most remote and isolated areas. . . “In our 20th year, we are deeply involved in solving the primary problems of our time—through remote sensing, helping to locate new sources of fossil fuels while working with the Department of Energy to develop alternate energy resources. “With passenger cars alone burning almost a third of all petroleum products used in this country each year and causing most of the air pollution that blights our metropolitan areas, we are applying our scientific and engineering expertise to improving auto efficiency, economy, and environmental acceptability and to developing advanced auto propulsion systems. “Finally, exactly as is true of a man or a woman, the future from the perspective of 20 years is full of challenge, excitement, and opportunity. Consider, for example, that the 12 months following our 20th anniversary will see, among other events: —launch of the second HEAO to follow up the major astronomical discoveries of its predecessor; —arrival of the Pioneer orbiter and probes at Venus; —exploration of Jupiter and its moons by both Voyagers; and — first orbital test flight of the Shuttle. “Beyond our 21st year, we can see the Shuttle evolving as the major factor in all our operations in space, facilitating and accelerating progress toward nearly all our goals. . . “In short, on our 20th anniversary we at NASA can take pride in what we have already accomplished, satisfaction from the knowledge that we are doing useful work on the frontiers of science and technology for the benefit of our people and our country, and exhilaration at the prospects which lie ahead for the continued expansion of human knowledge and the improvement of the condition of mankind on the planet earth. “Truly a unique new entity has come to exist in the world, an entity of which each one of us can be proud to be a part.” Also included in the press kit was a chronology of major NASA milestones, descriptions of all NASA centers, and NASA’s major launch record. (NASA Release 78-133)
MSFC announced that its Boeing 747 modified for Shuttle-orbiter transport had arrived at Redstone Army Airfield in Fla. for a dry run in preparation for its March landing with an orbiter atop. Crews from MSFC, KSC, and Dryden Flight Research Center had checked out handling gear and procedures to be used at MSFC for receiving the orbiter and offloading it from its carrier. MSFC had installed a large lifting derrick at the airfield with lateral-restraint and other devices needed to lift the Enterprise clear of the 747 and position it on a trailer-like transporter. When the 747 had departed, handling crews at the airfield would continue verification of the mate-demate device, using the orbiter ground transporter and a full-size orbiter simulator. (Marshall Star, Feb 8/78, 1)
Flight testing of the Space Shuttle’s microwave scanning-beam landing system (MSBLS) had begun at KSC, Today reported, with pilots and technicians using a specially equipped Jetstar aircraft operated by Dryden Flight Research Center to conduct the tests. The system-verification tests would be the initial checkout of the airborne MSBLS/ Jetstar system and the ground stations with their laser systems to verify compatibility, and to check out the system processing test data. KSC had scheduled 5 test flights lasting a toted of about 12hr. {Today, Apr 7/78, 12A; DFRC X-Press, Apr 7/78, 2)
NASA announced it had flown its quiet short-haul research aircraft (QSRA) to Ames Research Center to begin a flight-research program on design and operation of future quiet short-haul transport. The QSRA [see July 27] had been the first to achieve truly quiet operation of jet aircraft, through high-performance special treatment of the engines and nacelles to restrict landing and takeoff noise to relatively small areas. Operating less noisily than most small private aircraft, the 4-jet QSRA had a 90-decibel noise-impact area, smaller than 1.3km2 (0.5mi2). Scaled up to the equivalent of a 150-passenger aircraft, the 90-decibel noise-impact area would be less than 2.6km2 (lmi2), compared to the approximately 78km2 (30mi2) noise impact of comparable-size aircraft. High performance of the QSRA resulted from a design concept in which four jet engines mounted on top of the wing directed fan air from the engines across the upper surface of the wing and flaps, significantly increasing lift, particularly at lower speeds. Compressed air from the engines, fed through an ejector system, provided boundary-layer control-blowing at the wing leading edges and ailerons, further enhancing lift and control. Future QSRA-derivative aircraft the size of the Boeing 727 transport could carry the same payload at the same speeds but could operate from small airports with short runways (about 1/2 to 1km [1500 to 3000ft], compared to current requirements for lengths of 1.6km [lmi] or more) and could operate without disturbing surrounding communities. (NASA Release 78-126; DSFC X-Press, Aug 11/78, 2; AvWk, Aug 14/78, 20)
NASA announced receipt of the first 2 HiMAT (highly maneuverable aircraft technology) prototypes from the builder, Rockwell Inti., which developed the 0.44-scale version during a joint NASA-USAF multiphase competitive program. Flights of the subscale models at Dryden Flight Research Center would use the remotely piloted research vehicle (RPRV) technique developed there to test advanced aerodynamic technology for enhanced aircraft maneuverability. The RPRV offered a highly cost-effective means of flight testing advanced, high-risk technology without associated risks to test pilots. A pilot in a ground cockpit using telemetry, television, and radar air-launched unmanned craft from a carrier aircraft to fly them through maneuvers. (DFRC X-Press, Mar 10/78, 2; AvWk, Mar 20/78, 17)
Dr. Frank Press, director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, had launched a campaign to reduce paperwork required by the government from university scientists receiving federal support, Nature reported. Press said money saved in this way might mean millions of dollars for every university, and wrote to NASA and NSF asking what steps they could take to reduce paperwork and to streamline grants regulations. Press added that, although there was little support in the administration for a Dept, of Science, interest was growing in establishing a Dept, of Technology and Industrial Development. {Nature, Feb 9/78, 497)
Langley Research Center announced it would host Mar. 7-9 an advanced technology airfoil research conference offering the aviation community a comprehensive review of the latest technical developments in airfoil computational analysis and design methods, airfoil test facilities and techniques, and various applications of new airfoil technology. Presented by NASA, supporting contractors, and university grantees, the technical sessions would cover progress in mathematical codes for use in electronic digital computers for airfoil analysis and design, coupled with progress in analog computers through wind-tunnel test facilities and special techniques of investigation; general aviation aircraft; transports; rotorcraft; propellers; windmills; and agricultural aircraft. (LaRC Release 78-12)
LaRC announced award to Micro Craft, Inc., Tullahoma, Tenn., of a contract to design and build precision models for wind-tunnel tests at the center. The small-scale models of controlled shape and finish, designed specifically for research and development projects, would consist of metals, moldable or formable materials, fiberglass-reinforced resins, woods, or combinations. The contract might also require specialized model-support equipment and other unique items needed for model tests. Micro Craft estimated the value of the 3-yr, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract at $2.8 million. (LaRC Release 78-14)
The USAF reported that a wind-tunnel test at Arnold Engineering Development Center using a new type of model and new testing techniques had demonstrated selection of an optimum aircraft-wing shape. Previous efforts to determine the best wing shape for a particular aircraft had compared features of several (sometimes many) models representing educated guesses; even after selecting one shape, testers could not be certain there was not another more efficient. The latest test had used simulated flight conditions with a new computer-controlled wing model able to change shape automatically. Three-dimensional images made by a stereophotographic technique defined the actual wing shape during each flight change, making it possible to consider numerous shapes. The model, one of the most complex tested in AEDC’s 16-ft transonic wind tunnel, was a product of General Dynamic’s Convair Division, San Diego, that had been redesigned and reassembled by AEDC’s operating contractor ARO, Inc., after its arrival at AEDC. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug/78, 12)
NASA announced it had tentatively selected five scientific experiments for its gamma ray observatory, a planned 1984 mission to explore a variety of the most energetic forms of radiation known: very high-energy gamma rays from pulsars, nuclear gamma rays, and gamma-ray bursts. Observatory data should provide a much better understanding of the nature of supernovas, pulsars, quasars, radio galaxies, the character of the early universe, and the possible existence of antimatter in the universe. Scientists also hoped to learn more about incredibly dense matter composing objects such as neutron stars, matter so compressed that a teaspoonful would weigh millions of tons. Data from the GRO might also tell more about gamma-ray bursts, erratic gamma-ray pulses of unknown origin that flashed across the solar system every month or so. Although Congress had not yet approved GRO, early solicitation of scientific participants and investigations would allow for mission definition and a prompt start after approval. GSFC would manage the observatory to be carried by the Shuttle into a planned orbit of 400 to 500km (250 to 300mi). NASA had selected principal investigators and experiments: Dr. James Kurfess of NRL, broad line gamma-ray spectrometer; Dr. Laurence Peterson of the Univ. of Calif., San Diego, narrow line gamma-ray spectrometer; Dr. Carl Fichtel of GSFC, high-energy gamma-ray detector; Dr. V. Schoenfelder of the Max-Planck Inst., Garching, W. Germany, medium-energy double Compton telescope; and Dr. Gerald Fishman of Marshall Space Flight Center, transient gamma-ray monitor. (NASA Release 78-140)
NASA reported that the 200kw experimental wind turbine generator managed by Lewis Research Center had completed more than lOOOhr of operation for DOE in Clayton, N.M., and was ready for checks to verify design-life estimates. Twin rotor blades and other dynamic components that had rotated at 40rpm or more (making more than a million cycles) since the machine began operating in January had developed loose or missing rivets and three small 3-in cracks, and would undergo more detailed inspection. Although DOE had shipped the blades to LeRC for detailed inspection and analysis of their wear and life potential, the turbine had continued operation using rotor blades from the prototype wind turbine operated on an experimental basis near Sandusky, Ohio, since October 1975. The first U.S. federally sponsored wind system to produce electricity directly for a community power system, the turbine had supplied more than 100 OOOkw-hr of electrical power to the Clayton-owned utility system. (NASA Release 78-97)
Under a cooperative agreement between NASA and the U.S. Navy, a Navy experimental plane would undergo in-place tethered-flight testing at LaRC’s Impact Dynamics Research Facility, the Langley Researcher reported. The Navy’s XFV-12A plane built by Rockwell Intl.’s Columbus Aircraft Div. was the only one of its kind, a prototype V/STOL aircraft designed to demonstrate the thrust-augmented wing concept in supersonic flight. The tests at LaRC had tethered the XFV-12A to the gantry by a single cable from a powerful winch mounted 210ft above ground. Static restraint tests kept the aircraft in place at various heights by ground cables attached to the nose and main landing gear, as its engines operated at full power. Using results of the static tests, LaRC had put the XFV-12A through dynamic tests, permitting greater freedom of motion, as the aircraft was not restrained by ground cables. The upper tether cable automatically reeled in as the aircraft maneuvered within the gantry, and a shock absorber on the winch cable guarded the airplane against loads greater than 2g. (Langley Researcher, June 16/78, 6)
A Senate operational remote-sensing bill introduced by Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) and a House space industrialization bill introduced by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) had increased pending legislation to carry civilian space policy beyond that outlined by President Carter, AvWk reported. Both bills called for formation of government corporations to expand benefits of space exploration beyond the R&D stage. AU the legislation would be reintroduced in the next Congress where, as a bloc, they would constitute the largest recent push for an expanded federal space effort. Other bills included a Space Policy Act introduced by Sen. Adlai Stevenson (D-Ill.), for extensive design and application of large space structures in orbit over the next lOyr; National Space and Aeronautics Act introduced by Sen. Schmitt, for a 30-yr planning process in U.S. space and aeronautics research; Earth Data and Information Service Act introduced by Sen. Stevenson, for an operational Landsat remotesensing system as a new division of NASA; Solar-Power Satellite Research Development and Demonstration Program Act introduced by Rep. Ronnie Flippo (D-Ala.), for $25 million in near-term funding to research technologies required for a solar-power satellite; NASA Solar-Power Satellite Program Act introduced by Sen. Schmitt, for greatly expanded work on solar-power satellite technology. (Av Wk, Oct 23/78,19; CR, Oct 13/78, S 19075; D/SBD, Oct 24/78, 234; Oct 27/78, 257)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced it had agreed to participate during May in an experiment called Avefria (Spanish for lapwing) to perturb the atmosphere so that scientists could study ionospheric irregularities and their effects on radio communications. The experiment would create a high-altitude barium-ion cloud in the ionosphere (an atmospheric layer 25 to 250mi above earth in which radio signals typically travel for long distances) by rocket-borne release of barium-metal vapor. Optical-observation and radio-communications stations in Nev. would make scientific measurements of the cloud and its interaction with the ionosphere. Major observation point would be the Tonopah (Nev.) Test Range; JPL would operate a second observation station at its Table Mountain astronomy site near Wrightwood, Calif. (JPL Universe, May 12/78, 1)
The USAF reported that the E-3A airborne warning and control system (AWACS), “leader” of the USAF command and control structure, had arrived at Wright-Patterson AFB for low-level flight tests conducted by the 6750th Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory to evaluate effects of aircraft noise. Tests with the E-3A would complete the 1978 measurement phase of NOISEMAP, a computer program to assess environmental impact of aircraft noise that had included the F-15, A-10, C-141, and KC-135. The assessments would serve in making alternative aircraft assignments and flight schedules, deciding on appropriate noise suppressors, and discovering potential noise problems for aircraft under design. Civil engineers had used the program in fixing sites for new buildings, determining requirements for adding noise-reduction materials to existing structures, and in orienting trim pads to minimize aircraft-noise impact on the community. AWACS was a modified Boeing 707 used as an airborne command post to coordinate fighters, close air-support aircraft, and strategic bombers in a combat arena. Its friend-or-foe antenna could identify enemy craft in a battlefield setting, allowing the 17-member AWACS crew to relay information to friendly aircraft. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug/78, 7)
A laser-heterodyne radiometer (LHR) developed by Dr. Robert Men-zies of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory had obtained evidence of ozone destruction in the upper atmosphere, JPL reported. The unique instrument, carried on a gondola suspended from a helium-filled polyethylene balloon, had gathered extremely accurate data by “looking” at the sun through the stratosphere during sunset at an altitude of 25km (120 000ft) where ultraviolet light breaks apart carbon molecules, releasing chlorine. Atoms of chlorine normally existed in quantities so small that their presence was difficult to detect; however, scientists had determined the effect of chlorine in destroying ozone, through a chain reaction that would form chlorine monoxide molecules. Later flights would measure the effect of seasonal variations and would look for other molecules responsible for ozone destruction. The research would assist federal regulators investigating danger from fluorocarbons used in refrigeration and air-conditioning; regulators might decide to ban aerosol propellants by June of this yr. (JPL Universe, Feb 17/78, 1)
Langley Research Center announced it had awarded SDC Integrated Services, Inc., McLean, Va., a contract for support services to operate the digital-computer complex at the center. All segments of the center would use the computer complex in analytical studies, real-time simulations, and experimental data reductions. Services under the contract would include operation of the computing and data-handling equipment, operational and performance analysis, and keypunch and auxiliary equipment operation, in addition to research-data reduction such as programming, nrocessing preparation, and data management. SDC had estimated the cost of the 2-yr base period of the contract at $5.7 million and a 1-yr option at $3 million; the cost-plus-award-fee contract also had two 1-yr unpriced options. (LaRC Release 78-17)
Lewis Research Center and Dryden Flight Research Center would conduct flight tests of advanced models of propellers, some with 8 or 10 blades, intended for new high-speed fuel-conserving aircraft, DFRC announced. LeRC had already measured aerodynamic performance of the approximately 1/7 scale (2ft-diameter) models in its wind tunnel, at a simulated cruise speed of 855kph (530mph) and altitude of 10 668m (35 000ft). NASA estimated that, in those cruise conditions, an advanced turboprop engine with the new-design propeller could save 20 to 40% in fuel over current turbofan engines and 10 to 20% over advanced turbofan engines. (DFRC Release 23-78)
LaRC announced it had selected Mercury Co., Tustin, Calif., to negotiate a contract for a pressure systems certification/recertification and configuration management program, including engineering evaluation of ground-based pressure systems to ensure a safe environment and to facilitate operation of the center’s unique high-energy research facilities. The contractor would make in-service inspection and certification of these pressure systems in accordance with NASA guidelines and In a ceremony at KSC marking NASA's 20th anniversary Oct. 1, President Jimmy Carter awards the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to six astronauts: Neil Armstrong (center), first man on the moon; Charles Conrad, Jr., commander of the second lunar landing and of the first crew to occupy the Sky lab space station, and Frank Borman, commander of the first manned spacecraft to orbit the moon (seated at left); also to Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; Virgil I. Grissom (posthumously), second American in space; and John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the earth. (NASA photo 78-H-610) OyRlGINAk PAGE IS, QE 0bR QUALITY would continue the existing configuration management program. LaRC would manage the approximately $1.15 million 2yr contract, which had a lyr option for extension valued at approximately $637 000. (LaRC Release 78-56) October 4\ Two U.S. payload specialists would join three Europeans at Porz-Wahn, W. Germany, Oct. 6 to begin training for Spacelab 1, first combined manned space mission of NASA and ESA, Marshall Space Flight Center reported. They would attend sessions in W. Germany and two other European countries conducted by the scientific investigators planning European-sponsored experiments to fly on Spacelab 1, the two NASA mission specialists assigned to the flight, with MSFC’s Charles Lewis and NASA training coordinator. Porz-Wahn was the site of ESA’s Spacelab payload integration and coordination in Europe (SPICE), which had coordinated European crew training. After the European trip, the group would begin a tour of U.S. scientific installations in Jan. 1979. (.Marshall Star, Oct 4/78, 1)
NASA announced that Heao 1, first of a series of observatories designed to study celestial x-rays and gamma rays, was officially a success. Primary objective of Heao 1 was to obtain highly detailed experimental data on astrophysical phenomena by measuring sizes and locations of x-ray sources and determining their intensity and time variation; according to Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA associate administrator for space science, the objective had been accomplished. NASA had authorized an extension of Heao l’s mission to a second scan of the celestial sphere, and would broaden scientific participation through a guest-investigator program. NASA planned to launch in Nov. 1978 a second high-energy astronomy observatory designed for detailed study of interesting sources pinpointed by Heao 1; a third would be launched in 1979. (NASA Release 78-80)
MSFC announced it had awarded contracts totaling $42 751 900 for scientific investigations in support of the Space Telescope project to five educational institutions: Research Foundation of the State Univ. of New York, Albany, Dr. J. J. Caldwell, Space Telescope interdisciplinary scientist, $126 000; Beloit College, Beloit, Wis., Dr. D. J. Schroeder, telescope scientist, $69 000; Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, N.J., Dr. J. N. Bahcall, interdisciplinary scientist, $257 700; Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore, Md., Prof. W. G. Fastie, telescope scientist, $151 300; Univ. of Texas, Austin, Dr. William Jefferys, astrometry science team leader, $1 862 500; and Dr. K. L. Lambert, interdisciplinary scientist, $285 400. The Space Telescope, planned for launch into earth orbit in the early 1980s, would permit scientists to see 7 times farther into deep space than before. MSFC had been lead center for the Space Telescope; GSFC had been responsible for scientific instruments and for planning telescope operations. (Marshall Star, May 10/78, 2)
NASA announced that scientists from NASA’s Ames Research Center and NOAA’s Environmental Research Laboratory in Boulder, Colo., had begun flight tests of an instrument designed by NOAA scientist Dr. Peter Kuhn to warn pilots of impending turbulence (see A&A 1976, Nov. 11, 277). Dr. Kuhn, an experimenter on NASA’s Gerard P. Kuiper Observatory (a C-141 aircraft equipped with a large telescope for astronomy research), had noticed that variations in atmospheric water vapor as measured by an infrared (IR) water-vapor radiometer had often accompanied extreme turbulence encountered by the aircraft; he had succeeded in using IR radiometer to define atmospheric conditions in the telescope’s field of vision. Dr. Kuhn then suggested mounting an 1R radiometer aimed forward in an aircraft; this system had successfully predicted occurrences of turbulence in clear air from 2.5 to 5.5min before encounter. However, researchers needed more encounters from various directions and altitudes to test the instrument, and wanted to experiment with filters and to fine-tune the instrument for optimum results. The joint NASA-NOAA program would consist of exhaustive tests using a NASA Learjet research aircraft to develop a low-cost system that would enhance flight safety and comfort, be suitable for any aircraft, be able to operate unattended and require minimum maintenance, and produce a cockpit visual alert 4 to 5min before a turbulence encounter. (NASA Release 78-15)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory reported that NASA and DOE had selected 10 companies to begin contract negotiations for projects to improve current methods of manufacturing modules of photovoltaic cells. The $4 million effort would focus on improving production methods to reduce costs in 1979-1981, and would supplement current DOE efforts to make solar energy economically competitive with conventional power sources. Firms selected were Arco Solar, Inc., Chatsworth, Calif.; Energy Materials Corp., Ayer, Mass.; Kayex Corp., Rochester, N.Y.; Kluicke & Soffa Industries, Inc., Horsham, Pa.; MB Associates, San Ramon, Calif.; Motorola, Inc., Semiconductor Group, Phoenix, Ariz.; RCA Corp., David Sarnoff Research Center, Princeton, N.J.; Sensor Technology, Inc., Chatsworth, Calif.; Siltec Corp., Menlo Park, Calif.; and Sollos, Inc., Los Angeles, Calif. In the specified time period, the firms would develop techniques for mass-producing large modules of silicon-based photovoltaic cells for use by industries producing flat (nonconcentrating) photovoltaic modules. Techniques would include new ways to slice silicon solar-cell material and to assemble photovoltaic modules. JPL would manage the effort (designated Low-Cost Solar-Array Project) for DOE. (NASA Release 78-151)
ESA announced the successful launch of its Ariane LOl at 17 hours, 14 minutes, 38 seconds GMT from Kourou; all three stages functioned normally and the fairing was jettisoned as planned. Achieved orbit was close to planned orbit. Space center facilities and all downrange stations functioned “faultlessly” and permitted continuous tracking of launcher telemetry. (ESA Info Bltn 41)
NASA reported that LeRC engineers had worked for six years on perfecting a new power transmission system: the Nasvytis multiroller traction drive, capable of transmitting high-power loads at high-speed ratios without using toothed gears. Between 1879 and 1971 about 34 patents had been issued on various fixed-ratio traction-drive concepts; 8 of these were issued to Dr. Algirdis L. Nasvytis. NASA engineers working with Nasvytis had made key design changes in traction-drive roller geometries to produce a test rig that could operate in a 15-to-l speed ratio. LeRC had developed for an automotive gas-turbine engine a similar drive that could transmit 7 horsepower per pound compared to conventional gears with about 4 horsepower per pound. Stuart H. Loewenthal, lead LeRC engineer on the project, said the “quiet, almost vibrationless means of transmitting power [could aid in] minimizing the noise pollution that now surrounds us.” The device would be cheaper to make because it needed no gear-tooth design or cutting; it was lighter and smaller than conventional gearboxes; it had performed at 95% efficiency for 15-to-l ratios at speeds to 73,000 rpm, and was more reliable, being less susceptible to wear and breakdown. (Lewis RC Release 79-104)
NASA reported that improved components and techniques could lower the “now prohibitive” cost of using turbine rather than piston engines in small general aviation aircraft. If turbines cost only half again instead of three times as much as piston engines, small plane users could reap the advantages of one-third the weight, proven reliability and safety, multifuel capability, and less maintenance, vibration, noise, or pollution. A study by Lewis Research Center (LeRC) said that an advance turbine aircraft would be 25% cheaper to operate, would use 10% less fuel, and would cost 15% less to purchase than an equivalent aircraft powered by a typical reciprocating engine. Although only 8% of general aviation aircraft flying in the United States, were turbine powered, the study said that the market for PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED | tut-MUON WAV ***** 2i an advanced turbine engine could reach 25,000 units per year by the late 1980s. The general aviation field included 98% of U.S. civilian aircraft. (NASA Release 79-29)
NASA reported results of a 22-month government-industry study of possible damage to electrical equipment from release of carbon fibers in fires after accidents to civil aircraft. R. R. Heldenfels, LaRC director for structure, told a conference at LaRC that public risk from use of carbon fibers on civil aircraft was so small as to be insignificant. The President in July 1977 had directed the Office of Science and Technology Policy to study potential problems of using carbon-composite materials and to provide a plan for federal action if needed. NASA got the assignment to assess risks of such use in civil aviation, with support from the National Bureau of Standards, some DOD laboratories, and private firms. Other federal agencies studying the problem were DOC, DOT, DOE, and EPA. The perceived risk was that breakdown of composite materials in burning would put into the atmosphere short lengths of carbon fiber thought to be hazardous to electrical equipment because of their high heat resistance and electrical conductivity; their extreme light weight would allow them to float for miles before touching electrical equipment, causing short circuits or malfunctions. (NASA Release 79-171; LaRC Release 79-85)
NASA adjudged the mission of Heao 2 successful. Launched November 13, 1978, the observatory had made more than 5,000 discrete observations and had worked well for more than 11 months, though design lifetime was only 9 months. On the basis of significant new findings (X-ray detection of more than 60 known quasars and discovery of more than a dozen previously unknown; the absence of hot neutron stars at the center of historic supernovas, calling for new theories to explain the remnant cores; X-ray emissions far more intense than predicted from main-sequence stars) and of “an active and enthusiastic guest observer program,” Dr. Thomas Mutch, associate administrator for space science, recommended extension of the mission. (NASA MOR [postlaunch] S-832-78-02)
NASA announced it would join Soviet scientists for the first time in a study of physiological changes due to simulated weightlessness. Tests in each country on 10 subjects aged between 35 and 40 would comprise two weeks of control observations, one week of bed rest, and two weeks of postrest measurements, including stress tests and blood and urine samples. Half of each group would be horizontal during the total bed rest, the others would rest with heads lowered 6° for horizontal. U.S. tests had kept subjects horizontal only, and the identical studies would indicate the best procedure. The program would begin in mid-May at the Moscow Institute of Medico-Biological Problems and continue at Ames Research Center (ARC) in July. Both NASA and USSR scientists would take part in each experiment. (NASA Release 79-46; ARC Release 79-17)
NASA announced preparations for Voyager 7’s encounter with the planet Jupiter about March 5. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) would provide television coverage of the event; employees at Langley Research Center (LaRC) would have a special 7 a.m. colloquium in the center’s cafeteria, complete with breakfast service and television monitors throughout the area. After 18 months of space travel, the encounter would take place at 7:42 a.m. EST at a distance of 278,000 kilometers (172,750 miles) from the planet’s cloud tops. Real-time images and live programming through Comsat 1 would continue for about two hours. (NASA Release 79-26; LaRC anno, undated)
NASA reported that its first high-energy astronomy observatory, Heao 1, had exhausted its attitude-control gas supply, ending a 17-month mapping of celestial X-ray sources. Launched August 12, 1977, and designed for a 6-month lifetime, Heao 1 had returned data of such quality that NASA had extended its mission. Its systems and experiments had functioned well throughout, though the primary mission ended in February 1978. Results included raising the number of X-ray sources from the 350 previously known to nearly 1,500; locating a new black-hole possibility near the constellation Scorpius, bringing the total to four; and discovering a universal hot plasma constituting a major part of the mass of the universe, as well as a dust and gas cloud with a mass probably sufficient to “close” the universe (prevent its perpetual expansion). The results had already engendered more than 160 technical papers and scientific presentations, and analysis of the Heao 1 data would require years of work by high-energy astrophysicists; the findings might change fundamental concepts of the universe, the NASA report said. Heao 1 would probably reenter Earth’s atmosphere in late March. (NASA Release 79-4; MSFC Release 79-3).
ARC said that it would test for the first time the ability of males aged 55 to 65 to withstand the physiological stress of weightlessness. Previous studies had tested males and females aged 35 to 45 and 45 to 55. Women aged 55 to 65 would be tested later in 1980 to complete the baseline data for use in establishing medical criteria for space flight. For the first briefing early in February, 46 volunteers reported and 20 were chosen for orientation March 24. The preliminary orientation and testing PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED would give researchers a chance to see how the subjects performed and allowed the subjects to decide whether they wanted to participate in the entire test. Two sets of four subjects would be selected: four would begin 9 days of controlled observation April 10 at ARC’s human research facility, followed by 10 days of bed rest and 5 days of recovery and tests of the cardiovascular system. Another group of four would begin the same series April 13. Dr. Harold Sandler, ARC project scientist, would supervise the tests. (ARC Release 80-7; NASA Release 80-43)
LaRC reported award of a 3-year $4.6 million contract to Sperry Support Services for development, operation, and maintenance of flight simulators, including real-time digital programs for solving research problems and for aerodynamics and space flight. Sperry would design and operate flight simulators and would develop, integrate, and test electronic subsystems to use with existing data systems. (LaRC Release 80-9)
Langley Research Center (LaRC) announced that it had awarded Computer Science Corporation a 3-year contract valued at $3 million for computational analysis and programming support services to basic and applied research at LaRC, including computer documentation, technical reports, program designs, training courses, and plans for follow-on work. (LaRC Release
LaRC announced an award to Dynamic Engineering Inc., Newport News, Va., of a three-year cost-plus-fixed-fee contract valued at $4.3 million for design and fabrication of dynamic models for NASA research and development programs. It would include personnel, equipment, materials, and facilities for feasibility studies, engineering design, and assembly and calibration of models.	. Used primarily in wind-tunnel tests, the models would be of three kinds: general-performance, holding a fixed geometry through a range of angle-of-attack and dynamic pressure; free-flight and spin models, simulating mass properties of aircraft; and aeroelastic models simulating configuration changes .with load, for performance and flutter investigations. The models would consist of fiberglass-reinforced resin, wood, metal, moldable or for-mable materials, or combinations of these. (LaRC Release 80-73)
NASA said that it would launch seven sounding rockets February 15 and 16 from the San Marco platform off the coast of Kenya to study a total solar eclipse visible in that area but not in North America, recording changes in the electrical structure of Earth’s middle atmosphere and temperature distribution in the solar corona during an eclipse. Two Astrobee D and three Super Areas rockets would carry payloads from Pennsylvania State University, and two Black Brant rockets would carry payloads from the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory in New Mexico. Piggyback on one of the Black Brants would be a Johns Hopkins University experiment to measure ultraviolet zodiacal light from the solar corona. Instrument packages carried to 330 kilometer (205-mile) altitude would make measurements during parachute descent. GSFC would manage the eclipse study with support from Wallops Flight Center (WFC) in rocketry, instrumentation, and range support. The mobile launch platform in the Indian Ocean was operated by the University of Rome’s center for aerospace research. (NASA Release 80-24; WFC Release 80-1)
The U.S. Coast Guard signed an agreement with NASA April 29 for work leading to an operational lighter-than-air machine that might constitute a fleet of blimps by the early 1990s, according to the New York Times. Coordinating the two agencies’ research would reduce costs: NASA scientists had been studying use of lighter-than-air craft to lift heavy equipment and would now work on developing stronger synthetics and better adhesives for the blimp bag, more sophisticated electronics, and more automated procedures for ground handling to do away with the need for large ground crews. Lt. Cdr. Kenneth Williams, chief of the Coast Guard technology branch, said that they sought a vehicle for use in “search and rescue, law enforcement, and other patrol functions.’’ The Navy had abandoned its airship program in the early 1960s because fuel was cheap; it “costs a heck of a lot more today,” Williams said, and a Coast Guard-Navy study had found fuel-efficient airships operationally and technically feasible for maritime patrol work in combination with cutters and conventional aircraft. (NY Times, May 4/80, 56)
Astronomer Robert Victor, a professor at Michigan State University, said that the Christmas season would be marked by a triple conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn “worth gazing at” that would not occur again until A.D. 2238 or 2239, The event had occurred in 7 B.C. and resembled a similar conjunction of Jupiter and Venus in 2 B.C., either of which could have appeared as the guiding light of the Magi or star of Bethlehem. (fV Star, Dec 1/80, A-2)
NASA announced that it would extend the mission of Heao 2, nicknamed Einstein, beyond its projected lifetime of 11 monllis. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, NASA associate administrator for space science, said Einstein, second of the three high-energy astronomy observatories, had not only produced significant results [see December ll, 1979] but had also lent itself to a guest-investigator program that had garnered about 400 proposals from 80 groups in the United States and other nations, including Great Britain, France, West Germany, Italy, the Soviet Union, India, and Japan. Heao 1, launched in 1977, had mapped about 1,500 X-ray sources and measured for the first time the uniform high-energy X-ray background of space. Heao 3, launched in September 1979, was making an all-sky survey of cosmic and gamma rays at higher energies and from a higher orbital inclination than the first observatory. (NASA Release 80-6)
LaRC said that NASA had awarded three major U.S. manufacturers contracts for 14.5-month studies of advanced supersonic transport aircraft. Boeing Company, Lockheed California, and McDonnell Douglas, each received a $1.15 million contract to work in the same discipline, but each on its own concept. Boeing’s was a 270-passenger delta-wing, cruise speed Mach 2.4; Douglas’s was an arrow-wing carrying 225-500 passengers, cruise speed Mach 2.2; Lockheed’s was an arrow-wing carrying 290 passengers, cruise speed Mach 2.5. Each firm would broaden its research in aerodynamics, lightweight titanium and composite-material structures, and variable-cycle engines for subsonic and supersonic operation. Past studies by these contractors on reducing fuel consumption and noise and on economic considerations needed updating. LaRC would manage the work at the contractors’ facilities. (LaRC Release 80-29; NASA Release 80-51)
NASA announced that it had signed a memorandum of understanding with TVA on NASA support of TVA programs in energy research, development, and demonstration. The two agencies were currently negotiating an agreement for TVA reimbursement of NASA for MSFC support of TVA’s coal-gasification project. NASA for some time had supported DOE and other agencies’ programs on energy research and development (R&D) because its facilities were adaptable to such research. TVA had requested NASA assistance because of the NASA staffs experience in engineering and scientific disciplines applicable to energy research and technology, as well as in managing such programs. (NASA Release 80-172; MSFC Release 80-145)
NASA announced that a joint government-industry team would design, fabricate, and test a solar-power 20-kilowatt generator for use by small communities, industries, farms, military bases, and similar users. Sponsored by the Department of Energy (DOE), the project would foster inexpensive ways to use solar energy to produce electric power and industrial heat. Under a $1.3 million Lewis Research Center (LeRC) contract, AiResearch Manufacturing Company would build the engine, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) would develop the solar power system including the solar mirror and receiver. (NASA Release 80-17)
DFRC announced plans for a ceremony at which ARC officials representing NASA and the Army’s Tilt Rotor Research Aircraft project would accept the first of two aircraft built under a joint program. One of the two planes built by Bell Helicopter Textron arrived at ARC in March 1978 for tests in its full-scale wind tunnel; the other arrived at DFRC August 13 for followup of tests by Bell. So far, two contractor pilots, two NASA pilots, one Army pilot, and one Marine pilot had tested and evaluated the aircraft. (DFRC Release 80-28)
NASA launched at 10:57 a.m. February 14 the SMM observatory from Cape Canaveral on a Delta vehicle into a circular orbit 360 miles above the equator. The 5,200-pound spacecraft carried instruments to study solar flares [see February 8] over a period of 2 years; the 11-year cycle of solar activity was entering its most turbulent phase, with flares erupting on the Sun once or twice a day and superflares causing atmospheric disturbances on Earth once a month. The SMM launch cost the United States $99 million, including $20 million for the Delta. (W Post, Feb 15/80, A-7; NASA Release
The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) reported that NASA’s Heao 1 had detected “surprisingly intense” X-ray emission from a pair of common Sunlike stars in the constellation Cepheus. The pair formed a tight binary revolving around each other with a period of only six hours, in a rotary motion like “the twin blades of an eggbeater.” The gas in the intervening space would be stirred violently and the magnetic-field lines twisted, stretched, and tom in a furious turbulence, the resulting X-ray emission being “millions of times that expected from either star alone.” The Heao 1 discovery was recently confirmed by the large telescope aboard Heao 2 (Einstein), and other stars of that sort would be checked for X-ray emissions; two other binaries had been detected as X-ray sources. (NRL Release 3-1-80F)
The European Space Agency (ESA) reported that detailed evaluation of records from the Ariane’s first test flight December 24, 1979, confirmed that it was a complete success. Each of the three powered stages had performed better than predicted, and the results would allow integration of the second launcher to proceed without change except for a pogo-correction device not used on the first flight. The second flight was set for late May or early June 1980.	(ESA Info Bltn 1)
ARC would close the free world’s largest wind tunnel for an $85 million modification. The 40 x 80 foot (12 x 24 meter) tunnel, in continuous use since completed in 1944, would have a 600-foot (183-meter) addition to house a new test section 80 x 120 feet (24 x 37 meters) with an air intake 362 feet (110 meters) wide and 132 feet (40 meters) high. The six 6,000-hp electric motors used since 1944 would be replaced with 22,500-hp units, raising drive from 36,000	hp to 135,000 hp. (NASA Release 80-125)
MSFC said that NASA’s third high-energy astronomy observatory, Heao 3, used the last of its attitude-control thruster gas and was powered down, completing a mission begun in September 1979 to study pulsars, quasars, exploding galaxies, and black holes in space, whose high energy output could not be studied with Earth-based telescopes due to atmospheric interference. With 20 mqnths of operation in orbit, Heao 3 was the third of its type to perform for more than twice its design lifetime. It would reenter and burn up later this year. (MSFC Release 81-69; NASA Release 81-77)
The House of Representatives passed NASA’s authorization bill by a vote of 404-13. The amount, the same that appeared in the amended budget request, was $6,122 billion for research and development, construction of facilities, and research and program management. One amendment was adopted, reducing the authorization for aeronautical research and technology by $11.2 million. (CR, June 23/81, D773; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 24/81)
MSFC reported the arrival from Europe of a jumbo jet carrying equipment to prepare Spacelab, the ESA reusable scientific research facility, for flight on the shuttle beginning in 1983. The gear for electrical ground support and mechanical servicing arrived at KSC after formal acceptance in early July by representatives of MSFC, which was responsible for monitoring Spacelab design and development and would manage the first three Spacelab missions. (MSFC Release 81-92)
NASA announced that Perkin-Elmer Corporation’s Danbury, Connecticut, facility had finished shaping and polishing the 94-inch (2.4-meter) diameter primary mirror for the space telescope, main optical component of the telescope assembly. Launched on the Shuttle early in 1985, the 12-ton unmanned telescope would orbit at 600 kilometers (370 miles) above the interfering haze of Earth’s atmosphere. It would be able to see objects 50 times fainter than observable from Earth telescopes, observing about 350 times more volume of space and 7 times further into space than now possible, up to 14 billion light-years. To make full use of this undistorted view of space, telescope parts had to be much more accurate than those in Earth telescopes. The mirror exhibited a deviation at any point on its surface of less than one millionth of an inch from an ideally perfect surface. Manufacture of the mirror blank began in October 1977 at Corning Glass Works, which delivered it to Perkin-Elmer in December 1978. The blank was made of a Corning product called ultra-low-expansion glass, which has extremely low thermal expansion properties. Optical fabrication began with rough grinding of front and back surfaces of the blank, followed in August 1980 by fine polishing of the front surface, using a computer-controlled polisher. The next stage of fabrication would be the application to the polished surface of two uniform extremely thin coatings, one a reflective layer of pure aluminum, the other a protective layer of magnesium fluoride to prevent oxidation of the aluminum. Coating would take place at Perkin-Elmer in the world’s largest vacuum chamber, which operates at a vacuum very near that of space. After coating, the mirror would be installed in the optical telescope and aligned to the secondary mirror, focal plane, scientific instruments, and guidance sensors. The completed optical telescope would then be integrated into a support-systems module, a major element of the space telescope, under construction by Lockheed. The space telescope project was managed by MSFC. (NASA Release 81-82)
MSFC reported a milestone in the development of the Space Telescope. Perkin-Elmer Corporation, contractor for design and production of the optical asembly, finished putting an aluminum coating 3 millionths of an inch thick on the 94-inch primary mirror, an 1,800-pound polished glass blank. Engineers from the firm and from MSFC verified that the coating adhered to the mirror and exhibited the proper reflectivity. The telescope would use two mirrors to focus light from stellar objects onto a group of instruments at the rear of the telescope assembly. Launched from the Shuttle into Earth orbit in the mid-1980s, the Space Telescope should allow astronomers to see seven times deeper into space than is now possible with ground-based telescopes. (MSFC Releae 81-148)
Ames Research Center (ARC) announced the completion of a flight program to evaluate the quiet short-haul research aircraft (QSRA). Twenty-two visiting pilots representing 16 organizations made 2 flights each in the modified deHavilland Buffalo (C-8A) with a new wing design and 4 Lycoming YF-102 engines mounted on the wing to provide propulsive lift. NASA offered the evaluation program to introduce QSRA technology to potential users, obtain feedback on the future of the program, and get an independent critique. Participating pilots and engineers represented ARC, Dryden Flight Research Center (DRFC), and Langley Research Center (LaRC), as well as the U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and companies including Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, Lockheed, deHavilland, Grumman, United Airlines, U.S. Air, Ran-some Airlines, and the Airline Pilots Association (APA). (ARC Release 81-01)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) reported testing the thermal performance of a helium cooling system to be used on the large infrared telescope experiment planned for flight on Spacelab 2 in 1984. For the MSFC-managed experiment to work, the cooling system must keep the infrared detectors at a supercold temperature. The liquid-helium coolant stored during the mission in a 250-liter container would vaporize as withdrawn to circulate through telescope channels and keep the instrument near absolute zero, coldest possible temperature, at which all molecular action stops. One objective of the tests was to see how long the system could store the cold liquid; the container would be filled one or two weeks before launch, then undergo a seven-day mission. Tests would continue until March. (MSFC Release 82-2)
Ames Research Center (ARC) released new findings about Venus from 30 experiments of the Pioneer Venus missions and reported that the orbiter was still returning daily information. The data were available only now because of the complexity of the missions and the large amounts of data returned, combined with the value of comparisons with Soviet data on Venus. The new data included evidence for two major currently active volcanic areas on Venus; findings that Venus had a thicker crust than Earth and was a “one-plate” planet with little plate-tectonic movement; and models of the Venus cloud system and greenhouse effect that were complete and consistent. The research also found strong new evidence of former Venus oceans on the scale of Earth’s. Data indicated that the Earth would become “a virtual Venus if you stopped its rotation, removed the moon, and moved [it] slightly closer to the sun.” Although Venus’s atmosphere and environment might have been Earthlike during the solar system’s early history, evidence of the lost oceans remained only in the ratio of deuterium to hydrogen (100 times as much deuterium relative to hydrogen on Venus as on Earth). Earlier, abundant water could have sustained life; the greenhouse effect “wiped out most existing phenomena” on Venus, replacing them with the current furnace-like environment. (ARC Release 82-1; NASA Release 82-9)
The Space and Earth Science Advisory Committee, z. group of more than 80 scientists, met for the first time in Washington to discuss its role in advising NASA on science activities. Associate Administrator Dr. Burt Edelson told the committee of two recent changes in NASA: a reorganization that moved science and applications into the same department and the appointment of Dr. Frank McDonald as chief scientist, a position that had been vacant for a long time. (A/D, Nov 19/82, 107)
NASA reported that its Kuiper airborne observatory (a Lockheed C-141 Starlifter aircraft carrying a 36-inch infrared reflector telescope) had captured an image of Columbia’s reentry heating pattern at the end of its third spaceflight. The procedure, known as IRIS (infrared imagery of Shuttle), was part of an orbiter experiment program using the Shuttle to collect data of value in advancing aerospace technology. The Kuiper plane, operated by ARC, had taken off for observation without knowing whether the Shuttle would land at White Sands or KSC; an update 15 minutes before landing ensured success. A similar attempt on the first flight had failed. (NASA Release 82-56; ARC Release 82-14)
NASA technicians at Cape Canaveral removed two of Challenger’s main engines for repairs; a third engine, on its way from Mississippi, would undergo similar maintenance. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, associate administrator for space transportation systems, told a House subcommittee on science and technology that discovery of the flaws while the Shuttle was still on the ground showed the agency’s conservative approach to safety. He blamed tight budgets in the past for a lack of spare parts. Delay from the original January 20 launch date had already cost NASA about $1.5 million; costs would increase later when crews would have to work overtime to meet program commitments. Challenger’s ffl engine was removed February 4 when a crack in a coolant line allowed inflammable gas to leak into the aft compartment. Then, the replacement engine was found to have an oxygen leak in its heat exchanger, a system to pressurize the external fuel tank. An inspection of the #3 engine revealed the same flaw. As Challenger’s engines were intended to handle heavier payloads than Columbia’s, a design change had added a metal sleeve over the fuel-supply tubes to absorb greater vibrations. Soldering apparently overheated and embrittled the underlying metal tubing. Welding new tubing would make the configuration like the old Columbia engines, and Challenger would not be able to run at full thrust. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Mar 2/83; NY Times, Mar 2/83, A-l; W Post, Mar 2/83, A-5)
NASA announced the establishment of a Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science at ARC, to begin operations in June. Funded by NASA through the Universities Space Research Associations (USRA), the institute would be a place for the academic community to work in computer science, applied math, and computer applications to solution of scientific and engineering problems. Director of the institute would be Dr. Peter J. Denning, head of the computer sciences department at Purdue University. (NASA Release 83-38)
Lewis Research Center’s (LeRC) basic organization was revised following a recent strategic planning session. The four research and technology (R&T) directorate (aeronautics, energy, science and technology, and space) were changed to aeronautics, spaceflight systems, space technology, and materials and structures. An office of comptroller was established to manage resources and budget. Other directorates affected were administration, engineering services, and technical services, (NASA anno Jan 14/83; LeRC Release 83-3)
A NASA board said that slippage of a mechanical adjustment caused a December 1982 accident at ARC during tests of the world’s largest and newest wind tunnel. The collapse of a structure smoothing airflow through the tunnel pulled debris through the power section and damaged the fan blades beyond repair. The damage cost more than $10 million and would delay completion by a year or more. No persons were injured. (NASA Release 83-96)
NASA announced that its scientists studying motion sickness were focusing on a chemical substance in the fluid core of the brain that might cause vomiting. The fact that there might be a chemical link in motion sickness was discovered through NASA’s research into the causes of space motion sickness. The research was being conducted at ARC in the Biomedical Research Division and at the new Biomedical Institute at JSC. Studies by Ames scientist Dr. Nancy Daunton and two colleagues at Wright State University in Dayton, Ohio, showed that blocking the flow of cerebrospinal fluid in the brain stopped motion-induced vomiting and that an incomplete block did not suppress vomiting. The scientists were attempting to isolate the responsible chemical from cerebrospinal fluid. When a person received sensory cues for motion, the brain responds with its normal, programmed responses to control eye, head, and body movements. But when the responses do not yield the expected results—especially when the visual image does not stabilize and posture control is not easily maintained— humans and animals often experience motion sickness. (NASA Release
NASA announced that it awarded to the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colo., a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract of $7,076,741 for operation and maintenance of the National Scientific Balloon Facility (NSBF) in Palestine, Tex. The contractor would provide the personnel, materials, supplies, and services to manage, operate, and maintain the NSBF, including flight program operation, engineering activities, and research and developmnet. The NSBF would annually conduct 60 to 70 scientific balloon flights. GSFC’s Wallops Island, Va., facility would administer the contract. (GSFC Release 84-4) On this flight, Sharma would conduct medical experiments in which he would practice yoga as a possible means of coping with space sickness. Experiments would also include detailed space surveys of the Indian subcontinent. The Soviet Union and India televised the launch, and Tass quoted Prime Minister Indira Gandhi as saying that the joint mission gave a “new dimension” to friendship between India and the Soviet Union. The three returned to Earth April 11 in a perfect parachute landing of their Soyuz T-10 space capsule near the town of Arkalyk, 1,500 miles southeast of Moscow. Tass reported that the cosmonauts were “feeling fine.” The report continued, “New information on peculiarities of the human organism’s adaptation to space flight conditions was obtained.” Beyond stressing Soviet-Indian cooperation and friendship, the flight also demonstrated the peaceful uses of outer space, Soviet officials commented. (FBIS, USSR, Apr 4/84, Ul-4; FBIS, USSR, Apr 11/84, Ul-3; NY Times, Apr 4/86, A-16; W Post, Apr 12/84, A-33)
NASA announced that Dr. Richard J. Terrile of JPL and Dr. Bradford A. Smith of the University of Arizona, using a special electronic camera system at the Carnegie Institution’s Las Campanas Observatory in Chile, clearly photographed the rings of Uranus, showing them to be made of particles that were possibly the darkest found in the solar system. The camera used a charge-coupled device to record the image. Photographing the rings was difficult because they were darker than charcoal and very close to the much brighter Uranus. Special computer processing was performed on the images in order to make the rings visible. This processing created the false three-dimensional look of the images. Analysis of the photographs showed that the rings reflected back only about 2% of the sunlight falling on them, making them possibly the darkest material found in the solar system. This raised the question as to what the rings were made of, and two possibilities were suggested. Evidence from meteorites and astronomical observations of asteroids suggested that dark organic materials were prevalent in the outer solar system and could comprise the rings. Another possibility was that the rings were made of frozen methane, another common material in the outer solar system. Studies of the rings were important because they would contribute to preparations for the Voyager 2 encounter with Uranus in January 1986, the first opportunity to view the rings close up. (NASA Release 84-145)
NASA announced Lewis Research Center awarded a $58,291,440 contract to General Dynamics Corp. to modify three Centaur G vehicles, the nation's most powerful upper stage vehicles, to fit into the Space Shuttle's payload bay to launch various large spacecraft including the Galileo and Ulysses missions, both scheduled for spring 1986. The sole-source, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for fabrication, assembly, test, checkout, and delivery of the vehicles would begin April 1985 and continue through October 1987. (NASA Release 85-61)
NASA announced it honored at a KSC reception 200 NASA and NASA industrial Quality Circle employees for their volunteer efforts in improving quality, safety, and productivity. Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for space flight, read a message from George Burns, president of the International Association of Quality Circles, congratulating the employees on their outstanding performance. NASA selected the honorees under an office of space flight program that recognized first-level supervisory and support personnel for their productivity efforts. The Manned Flight Awareness Panel, made up of NASA and industry personnel, managed the program. NASA had over 120 employee teams with over 1,000 employees voluntarily participating in Quality Circles. Through the program, NASA hoped to foster increased effectiveness through improved efficiency in the space and aeronautics research and development programs. (NASA Release 85-55)
NASA announced that pilots flew the NASA/Army XV-15 tilt-rotor research aircraft with its stability control augmentation system (SCAS) both operative and inoperative. The SCAS reduced pilot workload, allowing the pilot to devote attention to other tasks; however, if the SCAS failed, the pilot had to provide stability and control commands. A primary question answered by the NASA research was whether a pilot could fly a tilt-rotor aircraft with a sidestick controller when the SCAS failed. The objective of the XV-15 tilt-rotor research aircraft program was to develop and evaluate tilt-rotor technology for civil and military applications. A tilt-rotor aircraft could lift off vertically like a helicopter and then, by rotating its rotor thrust from vertical to horizontal, fly like a conventional airplane at speeds up to 345 miles per hour. The sidestick control system evaluation provided data for the V-22 Osprey, a tilt-rotor aircraft NASA was developing for the Department of Defense (DOD). DOD would consider the flight test when deciding whether to use a sidestick controller in the V-22. Results of the flight evaluation indicated the sidestick controller provided a reasonable means of controlling the aircraft with or without the SCAS. However, when the third axis (yaw) was added to the sidestick controller, pilots noted a significant increase in workload, indicating that additional studies were necessary in this area. The sidestick controller system used onboard digital computers and electronics, which replaced mechanical linkages that normally transmitted pilot signals to the aircraft's control surfaces. Ames Research Center developed the system and would refine and reevaluate it during future control system studies. (NASA Release 85-124)
NASA announced a demonstration at Lewis Research Center (LeRC) of a convertible gas turbine engine, which could operate in turboshaft or turbofan modes or both simultaneously, that would enable future rotorcraft to operate either as rotary or fixed-wing aircraft capable of speeds equivalent to commercial transports. The demonstration was part of a joint NASA/Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) program using a TF-34 engine modified under a General Electric Co. contract. Such an engine would provide future X-wing (4-bladed) rotorcraft with the necessary shaft power to take off vertically. After reaching the conversion speed, near 200 knots, the pilot would disengage the transmission of the rotorcraft and lock the rotor blades in an "X" configuration for operation as a fixed-wing aircraft. The engine would convert from shaft to fan mode in 15 to 20 seconds to power the craft at speeds near .8 Mach. Landing would require reversing the conversion process. During the past year, designers had evaluated performance characteristics of the engine and in Dec 1984 accomplished successfully the first transient operation simulating the conversion to and from rotary-wing to fixed-wing flight. The conversion had required 18 seconds, with the engine responding as predicted throughout. These tests had represented the first successful operation of a 5,000 hp-class convertible engine in both fan and shaft modes and the first dual mode operation for an engine. The new engine would make possible a class of civil and military highspeed rotorcraft that could operate efficiently from hover to transonic speeds. (NASA Release 85-30)
NASA announced that its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) would begin a series of simulated airline flights to test two experimental laminar air flow control devices. Previous research had shown that laminar air flow could reduce aerodynamic drag from 25 to 40% and thus provide significant fuel savings under laboratory conditions. However, in actual flight insects, ice, and other obstructions adhering to the leading edges of an aircraft's wings could disrupt laminar flow. Ames-DFRC had installed on its business-sized JetStar aircraft the two experimental laminar control flow devices and would simulate airline service flights in widely separated areas of the U.S. to experience a wide variety of contaminant conditions. NASA would conduct the simulated airline service flights just as an airline would under normal air traffic rules and regulations. During the test, researchers planned up to four flights each day over a two-week period to gather as much information as possible on the test articles' performance. The test article installed on the left wing used suction through 27 0.003-in. spanwise slots on the upper and lower surface to maintain laminar flow. A propylene glycol methyl ether (PGME)/water mixture discharged through several slots at the wing leading edge and flowing back over the wing provided ice and insect impact protection. Lockheed-Georgia manufactured the article for NASA. The test article on the right wing used suction through approximately 1 million 0.0025-in. diameter holes in the titanium skin to maintain laminar flow on the upper surface of the article. For insect protection, a shield, which retracted at 6,000 feet altitude, extended much like a wing leading edge flap on commercial transports. Spray nozzles behind the shield could spray the PGME/water mixture on the test article for additional insect protection. For additional ice prevention, glycol was forced through the wing's porous metal section of the shield leading edge. McDonnell-Douglas manufactured the article for NASA. The JetStar would carry a Knollenberg probe, mounted atop the aircraft, to measure the number and size of ice and water particles encountered in flight. A charge patch, located on the pylon that held the probe, would measure the static electric charge caused by particles in the air rubbing across the patch surface, thus giving a qualitative measure of ice and water particles. Correlation of the probe and patch data could calibrate the charge measurement in a simple cockpit display. (NASA Release 85-101)
NASA announced the first flight at Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, scheduled for late September, of the advanced fighter technology integration (AFTI) F—111 with a mission adaptive wing (MAW). The AFTI F—111 research aircraft was modified with a wing that could change its camber (fore and aft wing curvature) and its wing sweep to adjust to varied flight conditions. NASA expected that MAW's variable camber capability would allow optimum efficiency at supersonic, transonic, and subsonic speeds by adopting the best wing shape for each speed. The MAW program was intended to demonstrate that smooth variable camber technology showed improvements over current aircraft wing lifting-altering devices in such areas as aircraft payload and range capability, maneuverability, fuel efficiency, and aircraft handling qualities. The first flights would test the airworthiness and flight envelope expansion phase of the program, followed by the research phase. The plans for the initial phase called for about 15 flights that gradually increased the MAW aircraft to speeds of approximately Mach 1.05 and altitudes of about 35,000 feet. NASA expected that phase to be complete by January 1986; and the research phase, about 30 flights, by June 1986. The MAW system had smooth-surfaced, variable-camber wing leading- and trailing-edge flaps, an actuation mechanism, hydraulics, and redundant computers to control flap positions. Six independent trailing-edge flaps (three per wing) and two leading-edge flaps provided a smooth continuously variable wing camber using flexible fiberglass skins on the upper surface and sliding panels on the lower surface. Fully developed, the MAW system would result in an aircraft equipped with an automatic flight control system with several control modes. Cruise camber control mode would optimize the trailing-edge flap position for maximum cruise speed. Maneuver camber control mode would continuously position leading and trailing edge for optimum Iift-to-drag ratio depending on the lift coefficient and speed of the aircraft. Maneuver enhancement/gust alleviation mode would enhance the aircraft reponse to pilot control inputs, while reducing the aircraft's sensitivity to wind gusts. Designed for research rather than as a production prototype, the AFTI F-111 was a joint program of Ames-Dryden Flight Research Center and the U.S. Air Force's Flight Dynamics Laboratory. The Boeing Military Airplane Co. manufactured the MAW. (NASA Release 85-129)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced completion of a study done by McDonnell Douglas under a 1983 contract that showed undeniable need for both humans and machines in space. MSFC was continuing to refine and validate the data. In the human role in space (THURIS) study, engineers identified 37 generic tasks requiring human involvement ranging from removing and replacing protective coverings around spacecraft to surgically acquiring tissue samples. The study then established three criteria for allocation of tasks (performance time, relative cost, and technological risk), which became the basis for an objective method to allocate tasks and determine how much of each of the generic tasks would benefit from human involvement. For each task, researchers rated man's participation from essential to not significant. For example, in a task entitled "compute data," man's role rated not significant. However, for the task "surgical manipulations", man's participation rated essential. A second THURIS product was an analytical method to define how man should participate in space systems. The method objectively compared humans, machines, and systems requiring both humans and machines and consisted of a short, logical sequence of questions and a set of highly condensed supporting data covering performance times, relative costs for each man/machine combination, and technology availability data for the 37 generic activities. "The study provided a set of fundamental data for planners that can be used as a guide for many future activities," MSFC's Stephen Hall said. "To me . . . machines and automation allow man to proceed to greater challenges and achievements. . . The THURIS study found that there are tasks for which man is best, and tasks for which machines are best. For most activities, a mixture of both is the best guarantee of success." (MSFC Release 85-1)
Galileo project team members would soon complete the two-month-long environmental test, phase 2, of the spacecraft, during which they put Galileo in a 25-ft. space simulator, an evacuated chamber cooled to -250 to 270° F, in order to observe how Galileo functioned in a space-like environment, the JPL Universe reported. Engineers also exposed the spacecraft to an array of high-intensity quartz lamps, which simulated the solar effects Galileo would experience in space. Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) personnel would move Galileo in about two weeks to the spacecraft assembly facility for the system test, phase 3. Following spacecraft disassembly, researchers would simulate different operational phases of the mission for spacecraft testing. Galileo was composed of a planetary orbiter and an atmospheric entry probe for investigations of the planet Jupiter's magnetosphere's chemical composition and its physical state of structure and physical dynamics. (JPL Universe, Mar 8/85, 1)
NASA announced selection of 64 research proposals from high-technology small business firms for negotiation of Phase II contracts in its Small Business Innovation Research program established under Public Law 97-219. The contract awards would total approximately $30 million. NASA selected the Phase II programs, follow-ons to previous Phase I contracts, from 113 proposals submitted by Phase I contractors in the 1984 program. Phase I included 127 awards selected from 919 proposals. Objectives of the Small Business Innovation Research program were to stimulate technological innovation, strengthen the role of small business in meeting federal agencies' research and development needs, and foster increased private sector commercialization of innovations from federal research and development. The program also encouraged minority and disadvantaged business participation. In Phase I, NASA awarded six-month fixed-price contracts to explore the feasibility of the proposed innovation and the value of conducting further research and development. Continuation of the activity into Phase II, which could extend up to two years, depended on the merit of the work and agency program plans and needs. Selection might also depend on availability of funds from the private sector and/or government for development or commercialization beyond the scope of the Small Business Innovation Research program. (NASA Release 85-157) Public Affairs
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced selection of Teledyne Brown Engineering for negotiation leading to the award of a five-year contract to provide operation and maintenance of the propellants and pressurants facilities for the center. Total price for the first three contract years was approximately $8.8 million. Teledyne Brown would furnish the necessary management, personnel, equipment, and materials required to operate and maintain the gaseous pressurants equipment and distribution systems, liquid propellants storage and transfer systems, fluid transporter services, valve and component refurbishment, and retention of certification status of high-pressure systems, including test stands, wind tunnels, and Department of Transportation certification of fluid transporters. (MSFC Release 85-72) Wallops Flight Facility
The U.S. House Science and Technology transportation aviation and materials subcommittee completed its markup of NASA's FY 86 authorization, approving a series of changes that resulted in reallocations for several aeronautics programs and elimination of proposed funding for oblique-wing technology, Aerospace Daily reported. NASA requested $522 million for aeronautics and space technology in its FY 86 budget, of which $354 million was for aeronautical research and technology and $168 million for space research and technology. Under the proposed changes, NASA rotorcraft systems technology funding would increase by $4 million over the agency's request for $20.4 million. Hot section engine technology, for which NASA had requested $5.2 million, would increase by $2 million; and the subcommittee restored high-speed aeronautics funding. The panel approved a $1.4 million decrease for the fluid and thermal physics research and technology program and deletion of the oblique-wing technology, for which NASA had requested $4.7 million, and of funding for altitude wind-tunnel planning. The panel based its decision to delete oblique-wing technology funding on an advisory committee finding that the planned flight portion of the NASA/ Navy oblique-wing program was one whose design solutions would have low payoff to industry. Since the Navy was the only identifiable user, Chairman Dan Glickman (D-Kans.) said, if it was a program worth their while, the service should provide the funding. (A/D, Mar 27/85, 1)
NASA announced that its Lewis Research Center (LeRC) awarded a $79,194,665 contract to General Dynamics Corp.'s Convair Division to support the Space Shuttle/Centaur program from August 30, 1985 through June 1987. Under the cost-plus-award-fee contract, General Dynamics would supply labor, materials, and resources necessary for management and engineering services and launch operations services to implement the program. Included in the multi-contract concept were services such as overall program management; administration and engineering support; technical management; operations, planning, and integration; and launch complex modifications. NASA planned that the Space Shuttle/Centaur combination in May 1986 would launch Ulysses, the first and only planned mission to observe the polar regions of the sun, and a week later Galileo to explore Jupiter's atmosphere. In spring 1988 the combination would launch the Venus radar mapper mission to investigate the surface and interior of Venus. (NASA Release
An international team of planetary scientists gathered at the USSR's Space Research Institute to catch the first return of data from the Vega-2 spacecraft plunging into the atmosphere of Venus, the NY Times reported. At 6:06 a.m. Vega-2 began its descent. Among the roughly 100 participants were representatives from eight European nations and the French Ambassador. Two days before, exploding bolts had freed an eight-foot sphere that carried one-and-a-half tons of payload bound for Venus's night side. The main craft would miss Venus entirely and use energy provided by the planet's gravity to propel it toward an encounter with Halley's Comet. Inside the rapidly decelerating sphere a timing device programmed months before switched on the scientific packages around it, then set loose a 15-lb. stack of miniaturized weather instruments built by French, Soviet, and U.S. scientists. An 11-foot-diameter teflon balloon filled with helium kept the instruments from reaching Venus's surface. An hour after the balloon inflated, the Vega-2 lander had reached the surface safely. The lander, in an atmospheric pressure 80 times the earth's at sea level and in a nighttime temperature of 855° F, was relaying information on surface conditions and excavating a small sample of the surrounding soil for crude analysis of its composition. Vega-1's balloon had reached the planet June 11 and had covered nearly 6,000	miles through the Venusian clouds in 46 hours, passing into the planet's sunlit hemisphere before exhausting its battery. The new Vega results suggested the planet had five discrete cloud layers whereas earlier missions detected only three. (NY Times, June 18/85, C8, June 16/85, 24; W Post, June 14/85, A10)
NASA announced the first flight of the NASA/Air Force/F-111 mission adaptive wing (MAW) [see Aerospace R & D/Aeronautics, Sept. 17] at the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility. The flight accomplished functional verification of the variable camber MAW at flight conditions up to MACH 0.6 and altitude of 15,000 feet. The Boeing Military Airplane Co. manufactured the MAW. (NASA Daily Activities Report, Oct 21/85)
President Reagan, at a White House ceremony, presented Distinguished Executive Awards worth $20,000 each to 32 career civil servants for their professional accomplishments, including in many cases, their plans and programs that saved millions of dollars, USA Today reported. Among the recipients were Samuel Keller, NASA's deputy associate administrator for space science and applications; and Andrew Stofan, director of NASA's Lewis Research Center. (USA Today, Dec 13/85, 9; LeRC Release 8584)
McDonnell Douglas Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Sanford McDonnell in a letter to Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger explained a company policy that instituted "expanded, no-questions-asked" refund policies on the sale of spare parts and support equipment to the U.S., foreign countries, and commercial customers worldwide, Defense Daily reported. McDonnell said the government could return "any covered spare part or piece of support equipment if there is any dissatisfaction with its cost—no questions asked." McDonnell described the refund policy as the most comprehensive in the aerospace industry and said that if the military felt it must retain an item in stock for operational readiness, "their complaint will be addressed without concern for a time limit." Under the new policy, the military could, if dissatisfied with the price, return within six months of delivery new and unused parts or equipment built by McDonnell Douglas and purchased under prime contracts. The company said the policy applied to prices to the government up to $100,000; at that level the company furnished cost data in advance of establishing price. Earlier Weinberger directed establishment of a standard industry-wide refund policy based on voluntary refund policies of Boeing Co. and the General Electric Co. The Boeing/General Electric refund programs accepted for credit the return of any spare parts or support equipment that the Pentagon considered to be unreasonably priced. (D/D, Aug 2/85, 1)
NASA announced that its deep space network (DSN), as part of a French-led international tracking network, would track the first of two international balloon experiments carried aboard the Soviet VEGA spacecraft to study beginning June 10 Venus's atmosphere. The VEGA 1 and 2 spacecraft each would drop an instrumented lander and an instrument-laden balloon into the Venusian atmosphere as they approached the planet on their way to a March 1986 rendezvous with Halley's Comet. After reaching the equatorial regions of Vfenus's atmosphere, the balloons would float free in the middle, most active, layer of Venus's three-tiered clouds. The flight plan called for the entry packages, consisting of the atmospheric balloon and a lander, to plunge from a 125-km (78 miles) to a 65-km (40 miles) altitude, where a parachute would deploy. The lander would separate from the balloon at 63 km (39 miles) and head for the surface. The balloon would then inflate and carry its instrument package through the atmosphere at an altitude of 55 km (34 miles) for more than two days. NASA's deep space network and other stations around the world would use a technique called very long baseline interferometry to measure the balloon's velocity, and therefore the wind velocity, with a precision of about 3 km (2 miles) per hour at Venus's about 108 million-km (67 million miles) distance from earth. A Soviet internal network would also track the balloons. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory was cooperating with the French National Space Agency (CNES), Paris, in the tracking activity. Scientists believed data from the balloons would further their understanding of Venus's complex weather system. (NASA Release 85-87) Management and Personnel
The National Science Foundation (NSF) in its Science Resources Studies Highlights reported that since 1980, annual increases in federal support of industry-performed research and development, primarily as a result of Department of Defense funding, had outpaced growth in company-financed R&D expenditures. In 1983 federal funding of industrial R&D performance amounted to $20.4 billion, 11% more than the 1982 level (7% in constant 1972 dollars), whereas industry's own R&D spending increased 8%. Federal and company funds together in 1983 were up 9% to a total of $62.9 billion. An NSF projection for 1984 placed total industrial R&D expenditures at $70.5 billion, 12% over the 1983 level. Companies in aircraft/missiles and electrical equipment industries received more than three-fourths of all R&D funds provided by the government. Industrial firms spent $42.5 billion of their own funds on R&D in 1983; between 1975 and 1980 the average annual constant-dollar rate of growth in company R&D financing was 6.6%, which slowed to 4.9% over the following 3-year period. The number of full-time-equivalent (FTE) R&D scientists and engineers in industry rose 3% during 1983 to 538,000. The electrical equipment industry, which employed over one-fifth of industrial R&D scientists and engineers, showed the highest gain—6%. (Science Resources Studies Highlights, June 21/85, 1)
NASA announced that S. Neil Hosenball, NASA general counsel since 1975, would retire on August 2 to become director of the University of Colorado's new Center For Space Law and Policy. Before appointment to his current position, Hosenball served as deputy general counsel since October 1967. Earlier he had been assistant general counsel for procurement and had served for four years at Lewis Research Center. From 1970 to 1979, Hosenball was a member of the U.S. delegation to the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and headed the U.S. delegation at legal subcommittee and committee sessions. Hosenball, who received a B.S. degree from the University of Michigan and his LL.B. degree from Harvard Law School, was awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1967, the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1973, the National Civil Service League Career Service Medal in 1980, and the Presidential Rank of Distinguished Executive in 1983. The Center for Space and Law Policy, established in November 1984, was one of a very few such institutions in the world and was intended to guide the university in its space research efforts. (NASA Release 85-104)
A flight today of an F—14 marked the completion of the latest phase in the plane's aileron-rudder interconnect (ARI) program, which was intended to coordinate turns, prevent wing rock, and resist spins at high angle-of-attach flight conditions, the DFRC X-Press reported. Dryden Space Flight Center (DFRC) modified the F—14 X's basic analog flight control system for ARI. Although earlier configurations were successful in flight tests, pilots noted a deficiency in loss of roll power in high angle-of-attack flight regions. NASA then developed a "cross control" feature in the ARI system to correct the problem. The cross control feature allowed the pilot to roll the aircraft opposite to lateral stick input but in the direction of the rudder pedal input. This gave the F—14 pilot roll power needed for tactical maneuvering while the aircraft was in a high angle-of-attack mode. Flight tests of the cross control feature began in June 1985. Two NASA Ames-DRFC F—15 project pilots, three Navy pilots, and one Grumman pilot flew these initial evaluation flights. As part of the evaluation program, four other Ames-DRFC pilots not involved in the F—14 program flew the aircraft. NASA Ames-DFRC pilot Ed Schneider said after his flight that "The new modification permits improved rolling performance at angles of attack above 30°, yet the system retains spin resistance and wing rock suppression, both ARI features." Navy personnel taking part in the evaluation would make presentations on program results to NAVAIR. Navy pilot Lt. Commander Chuck Baucom would also present results at the Society of Experimental Test Pilots' September symposium. (DFRC X-Press, Aug 16/85, 2)
measure the effect convection had on heat flow in a liquid (General Electric/Penn State University);
The first month of the flight of cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Viktor Savinhkh aboard Salyut 7 was drawing to a close during which time the crew had accomplished all planned activities to bring the Soviet space station into a manned flight mode, checked the condition of onboard systems, and carried out a variety of scientific research projects and experiments, FBIS Moscow TASS in English reported. The cosmonauts had unloaded the Progress-24 transport spacecraft, positioned the delivered equipment, and replaced three sets of storage batteries as well as individual instrument units. They had used oxygen delivered in containers aboard the transport to pressurize the Salyufs living compartments. The cosmonauts had started preparation of the station's united propulsion unit for refuelling by checking for leaks in the fuelling lines. They would then pump compressed nitrogen out of the fuel tanks. The schedule for July 5 called for the cosmonauts to perform maintenance on a system for the regeneration of water from atmospheric moisture, take medical checks including measurements of body mass and evaluations of the condition of muscles, and exercise on a bicycle ergometer and running track. The cosmonauts would continue geophysical experiments in a research program on earth's natural resources and environment. They also would make visual observations and take photos of individual areas of the Atlantic Ocean. (FBIS Moscow Tass in English, July 5/85)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) researchers believed their engine research, focusing on development of supersonic combustion ramjet (scramjet) technology, would lead to air-breathing engines capable of operating at speeds through Mach 12, Aviation Week reported. Testing had already produced net thrust-to-drag ratios of better than one at high Mach numbers. Research included solution of engine aerodynamics, diagnostics and measurement problems, and effects of change to full-scale, flight-weight engine prototypes. Although the Reagan Administration budget request for NASA FY 86 hypersonic research continued the existing level of effort, NASA believed propulsion technology development would be the pacing factor for hypersonic-flight capability and looked to congressional interest, evidenced by a request for a NASA report on hypersonic research, for increased funding. Initial scramjet technology applications might lie in missile development. As the potential for higher speeds and longer ranges became attainable, NASA concentrated on basic research for later generations of military cruise missiles rather than applications to aircraft. (AvWk, Feb 25/85, 52) During March: After a detailed review of the history of Concorde development, J.C.D. Baine in his article, "The Concorde Supersonic Airliner—The Struggle for Survival," concluded that the survival of Concordes or their being superseded by second generation supersonic airlines appeared doubtful under the persisting circumstances of international economic, political, and social relationships. He noted that the confrontation between aviation technology and the environment had brought into focus problems, whether real or emotional, that only advanced aeronautical science and technology would solve. That was especially true with respect to airport noise, sonic booms, and stratospheric pollution caused by emissions from multi-engines that consumed large quantities of petroleum-based fuels. Until those acceptable solutions were found, he concluded, opposition to civilian supersonic aircraft would continue and might further restrict or ban the aircraft's use on national and international routes. However, he noted that the efforts of Great Britain and France to develop the Concorde should not be dismissed as a waste of human effort and resources. They had contributed to advancements in aeronautical science and technology that, though not financially rev/arding, represented a store of scientific knowledge that would be available for future development. (Aerospace Historian, Mar/85, 10)
NASA researchers were continuing detailed analysis of all data, and Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would produce additional documents when results were finalized for the Spacelab system, payload integration, and the Spacelab-2 experiments managed by MSFC. Principal investigators would produce separate documentation for their experiments. (NASA MOR M-977-51F-03 [postlaunch] Sept 30/85)
NASA announced that on December 26 its Venus orbiting Pioneer spacecraft began six weeks of observations of Halley's Comet during the comet's most active period closest to the sun (perihelion). Near the time of perihelion, the comet, Venus, and Pioneer were located on the opposite side of the sun from earth, making observations difficult from earth (160 million miles away). Pioneer was the only spacecraft close to Halley's Comet during perihelion, and NASA expected that Pioneer's ultraviolet observations would provide valuable insights into the state of the comet in advance of flybys of Halley's by European, Soviet, and Japanese spacecraft beginning March 6, 1986. Pioneer's first phase of observations would end January 4 when both Venus and Pioneer passed behind the sun for almost a month, cutting off effective communications between the spacecraft and ground controllers at Ames Research Center. Observations would resume about February 3, six days before perihelion, and would continue until March 6. NASA scheduled Pioneer to produce two images of the comet in ultraviolet light. One would show the hydrogen cloud surrounding the comet, an image expected to be 20 times larger than a photo of the comet in visible light. The image would come from 20,000 scans of the comet as it drifted for three days through Pioneer's ultraviolet spectrometer's field of view. A second image would show both Venus and Halley's Comet in a single view. (NASA Release Planetary Exploration
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) hosted January 10-11 150 cometary scientists from around the world at a meeting of the Internatl. Halley Watch (IHW), for which JPL was the western hemisphere lead center and University of Erlangen-Nurnberg, W. Germany, the eastern hemisphere lead center, the JPL Universe reported. Lead center representatives at the meeting had joined IHW discipline specialists in such fields as astronomy, photometry and polarimetry, radio science, and spectroscopy; representatives of European, Japanese, and Soviet spacecraft missions to Halley; and IHW steering group members. The IHW organized a group of ground-based professional and amateur Halley watchers worldwide to coordinate their observations with those of airborne, earth-orbital, and spacecraft-flyby observations. Nine hundred professional astronomers from 50 countries and some 300 amateur astronomers had signed on as members of the IHW. JPL expected the IHW meeting would be the last before perihelion, Halley's closest approach to the sun on February 9 at 53.1 million miles. Since its 1948 inbound leg of its 74-year orbit around the sun, Halley would make its closest approaches to earth on November 27 at 57.6 million miles and the following April 11 at 39 million miles. Astronomers had already observed that Halley's coma (the bright halo of dust and gas surrounding the nucleus) had begun developing and questioned why the comet exhibited this feature at such a great distance from the sun. Early observations had also unexpectedly revealed the comet's brightness was fluctuating. Amateur observers with small telescopes would be able to see Halley by fall 1985; naked-eye viewing would be possible by March or April 1986. Halley would appear again in 2061. (JPL Universe, Jan 25/85, 1)
Los Angeles's Cedars-Sinai Medical Center announced development of a new surgical tool, using JPL's excimer (excited "dimer") laser technology, for one of medicine's most difficult and long-awaited procedures—a means to clean out clogged vascular passages without surgical intervention, the JPL Universe reported. The lasers would be a significant alternative to existing treatments—that of angioplasty, in which a balloon catheter squeezed blockage out of the way, or by-pass surgery. A JPL research team with Cedars-Sinai colleagues had developed the new laser technology, which used glass-magnetic switches in which a xenon chloride-excimer laser produced a uniform beam of energy controlled and pulsed to extremely short periods, to overcome the problems of lack of precision and control and high heat of current medical lasers. The JPL/Ce-dars/Sinai procedure would allow a fiber-optic catheter, placed nonsurgically in the brachial and femoral arteries and threaded to the site of the obstruction, to transmit the laser's energy to the clogged vessel. The fiber-optic imaging system would enable doctors to view the artery on a TV screen as the laser cleared the material forming the blockage. The speed of the laser's delivery—10 to 200 billionths of a second bursts of ultraviolet light—allowed the laser to cut through arterial plaque with precision and little damage to surrounding tissue. Although researchers were cautious in predictions of the laser's medical potential, they believed results of experimentation, though not yet done on living human patients, signaled additional future medical applications, ranging from removal of kidney stones to changing the eye shape of patients with myopia. (JPL Universe, Feb 8/85, 1)
Officials at Japan's Institute of Space and Astronomical Research announced that today Japan launched from the Kagoshima Space Center in Kyushu its second spacecraft to observe Halley's Comet the following March, the NY Times reported. The spacecraft, Planet A, was on a trajectory that would take it within about 60,000 miles of the comet. The USSR had two craft bound for Halley and the European Space Agency had one. Planet A had a solar-wind analyzer to measure the distribution and direction of high-energy particles from the sun as they encountered the vicinity of Halley's Comet and an ultraviolet telescopic camera to examine the cloud of atomic hydrogen, glowing in the ultraviolet, that extended tens of thousands of miles out from the comet. (NYT, Aug 20/85, C3)
NASA announced it had selected Grumman Data System Corp. for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for a high-speed (Class VI) computer system for Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). The fixed-price contract would require Grumman to provide hardware, software, documentation, and services for installation and maintenance of a scientific- and engineering-computations system in support of MSFC's programs in thermal, electrical, load, and structural-design characteristics that influence flight-vehicle and payload performance. The five-year contract, to begin no later than August 1985, would cost about $42 million and provide for a total lease period, with renewal in periods of one to 12 months, not to exceed 60 months. (NASA Release 8515)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) researchers were working on improvements in the National Airspace System (NAS) air-traffic control system to provide more efficient air transportation in the U.S. and to maintain the U.S. position of leadership in civil aviation, the Lewis News reported. A major NAS requirement was accurate upper-air wind information, necessary for efficient movement and control of aircraft. Dating back to 1982, LeRC recognized this need and proposed and developed, in cooperation with the Environmental Research Laboratories of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), an interactive data management and enhancement system (MERIT) to improve significantly the accuracy of upper-wind forecasts in the U.S. To evaluate the potential of MERIT, the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) formed an aviation weather task force of a dozen experts from NOAA, NASA, and universities that was led by Dr. John McCarthy of the National Center for Atmospheric Research. Over 18 months at a cost of half a million dollars, the task force would examine all aviation weather forecast products concurrently with MERIT. If the MERIT system could provide improved upper-level wind information (initial tests at NOAA showed a 20 to 30% reduction in wind error compared to the existing system), it was possible that MERIT could become an important contribution to the NAS of the 1990s. (LeRC News, May 2/85, 2)
NASA announced that U.S., French, West German, and United Kingdom scientists completed preliminary findings from the September 11 [see Astronomy, Sept. 11] encounter of NASA's International Cometary Explorer (ICE) spacecraft with comet Giacobini-Zinner, which took place 44 million miles from earth and was the first comet intercept in history. In the precedent-setting encounter, ICE, traveling at 46,000 miles an hour, entered at approximately 6:50 a.m. EDT, September 11, the 14,000-mile-wide tail of the comet 4,900 miles behind the cometary nucleus and emerged from the tail about 20 minutes later. Midpoint of the tail encounter came at 7:02 a.m., when the spacecraft passed through a narrow region called the neutral sheet. ICE was then on its way to its fourth space exploration assignment to record on October 31 and March 28, 1986 solar wind measurements upstream of Halley's Comet. (NASA Release 85-138)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that experiment teams for the Spacelab 3 mission had begun analysis of the 250 billion bits of data obtained during the mission, and preliminary results were excellent. In the area of materials science, two of the three experiment teams had begun to examine crystals grown during Spacelab 3. In one experiment, a mercury iodide crystal the size of a sugar cube grew from a seed crystal in the vapor crystal growth system; via the vapor transport technique, the crystal grew at a carefully controlled rate over a 104-hour period. Researchers would remove the crystal from the glass ampoule within the next few weeks for analysis to determine its quality and properties as an X-ray and gamma-ray detector for applications in scientific research, medicine, and industry. Two fluid mechanics experiments ended successfully; the geophysical fluid flow cell experiment completed more than 102 hours of experiments designed to provide information for the first time on convention in spherical rotating shells with a radial gravity field. Co-investigator Dr. Fred Leslie said of the experiment, "The films of one of the Jovian (Jupiter) scenarios indicated the formation of a 'Red Spofi similar to that present on Jupiter. This data should be useful to meteorologists and astrophysicists in modelling the large-scale circulations of fluids under the influence of rotation, gravity, and convection." Three atmospheric and astronomical observations were completed during the Spacelab 3 flight. The atmospheric trace molecules spectroscopy experiment operated for 50 hours providing 19 sequences of more than 150 independent atmospheric spectrally resolved measurements. Researchers would use these to analyze the earth's atmospheric composition chemically and physically for the stratosphere and mesosphere between 10 and 150 km. The information also would provide extremely detailed measurements of the minor and trace components of the atmosphere, which was crucial to understanding the evolution of earth's climate, and would aid in the analysis of pollution causes and effects. The experiment also provided the first high-resolution infrared spectrum of the sun, which indicated some surprising evidence about its molecular constituents. Four of the six life sciences experiments completed successfully were part of the Ames Research Center's life sciences payload. The research animal holding facilities proved a suitable animal habitat in which the two squirrel monkeys and 24 rats adjusted to spaceflight and demonstrated their suitability for research in orbit. One primate apparently developed symptoms of space adaptation syndrome but recovered in a manner analogous to human experience. "In addition to the successful results from each of these experiments," said Dr. George Fichtl, Spacelab 3 mission scientist at Marshall Space Flight Center, "the overall success of the mission has proven the importance of the Spacelab concept. During this mission, we have proven that a microgravity environment is an important environment for the growth of crystals, the study of fluid mechanics, and measurement of the effect man is having on this environment. We have also proven the need for man's presence in performing these tasks." (MSFC Release 85-28)
In its aerospace forecast and inventory issue, Aviation Week reported that aerospace sales would continue to expand in 1985 as a result of business that was already on the books, with reviving commercial transport orders expanding on earlier rebounds in the military and space segments of the industry. However, as strong as the expansion was, sales were not as robust in some markets as had been predicted the previous year. Among the factors affecting the sales picture was Congressional trimming of military funding in the FY 85 budget. But Aviation Week predicted that to trim outlays the Pentagon would go after operating funds rather than hardware money that was spent over periods longer than a year. Thus the aerospace industry experienced moderately slower but still firm growth. Also international and domestic competition was intensifying, particularly because the Pentagon sought to use competition as a primary tool to hold down weapons costs. The magazine forecasted that total aerospace sales in 1985 would reach $99 billion and over $100 billion in 1986. Military aircraft would produce $32 billion in sales, compared with $27.5 billion in 1984; missile sales would rise to $15.7 billion from $13.8 billion in 1984; space technology, rebounding from weak sales in the 1970s, would reach $14.8 billion compared with $12.5 billion in 1984; commercial transport orders would revive from the $6-billion level in 1984 to $9.2 billion in 1985; and business flying sales would remain flat at about $1.8 billion. Both transport and corporate aircraft had a common problem: the high cost of relatively small increments of new technology and the drop in fuel prices that had placed a premium on modest improvement in fuel efficiency. However, all-composite turboprop aircraft for the business market were flying and might begin to change that situation in 1986 and 87. Also, new ultra-high-bypass engines (in some situations a euphemism for propellers) were under test and might hit the commercial transport market in the early 1990s, as would increased use of composites, lighter and simpler subsystems, and more flexible cabins in terms of seating, galley, and lavatory layouts. Military sales levels depended on what happened to President Reagan's defense budget in Congress. Although orders on the books would carry industry sales for 1985 to forecasted levels, a stalemate in Congress would affect the longer term outlook. (AvWk, Mar 18/85, 10)
NASA and the Pentagon announced the award of $5000*million in contracts to seven different defense contractors for research into the development of the aerospace plane, seen by many as a successor to the Shuttle. The craft was envisioned as one that could take off and land like an airplane, but have the added capability of achieving orbit where it could then travel at 25 times the speed of sound. (WSJ, Apr 8/86; USA Today, Apr 8/86; W Post, Apr 8/86)
Parallel contracts for the Advanced Stirling Conversion System were awarded by NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, to Mechanical Technical, Inc. and Stirling Technology Company, for $253,385 and $246,576, respectively. Research was to be funded by the Department of Energy, as ground application took precedence over any potential space uses. The system would include a freepiston Stirling engine, a liquidmetal heat pipe receiver, and a means to provide power to a utility grid. The external combustion engine has only two moving parts and works by heating air, or another gas, in a cylinder, with a power source at one end, such as focused solar energy, which expands the gas and moves the piston. Electric power to the utility grid would be transferred from the engine directly, via a linear alternator, or indirectly with hydraulic output to a groundbased fluid pump coupled to a generator. (NASA Release 86156)
Thomas Paine, Laurel Wilkening, George Field, Jack Kerrebrock, Kathryn Sullivan, and Carl Sagan testified before Congress concerning Paine's report, "Pioneering the Space Frontier." (Hearing before the Committee on Science and Technology, July 22/86)
Pratt & Whitney was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to a contract award for the design, development, test, flight certification, and production verification of alternate'30*highpressure fuel and oxidizer turbopumps. With a proposed cost of about $182 million and a period of performance of five to six years, the turbopumps were intended to be interchangeable with the Space Shuttle's main engine turbopumps, provide extended life capability, and enhance safety margins. (NASA Release 86112)
NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, awarded a $6.6 million, fouryear contract to General Electric for definition, modification, and test of propulsion systems for supersonic short takeoff and vertical landing technology development. In support of next century military aircraft, design and modification of a GE F110 engine would focus on a fan air collection and valving system by taking compressed air from the engine and redirecting it to vertical lift producing devices. (NASA Release 86136)
NASA's Ames Research Center dedicated the $2.3 million, 21,336 square foot Fluid Mechanics Laboratory, a new research facility designed to stimulate basic knowledge of aerodynamic flows. The Laboratory could support multiple, simultaneous smallscale wind tunnel research while having full access to supercomputer resources. The laboratory would concentrate on vortex flows, a major factor in maneuverability and reduced drag by aerodynamic means, for applications ranging from developing fuelefficient aircraft to lowspeed research on the National AeroSpace Plane. (NASA Release 86158)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), in Pasadena, California, studied a program that would send a nuclearpowered spacecraft hurling into deep space traveling 225,000 miles per hour. The mission, said JPL Director Lew Allen, could be launched by 2005. The craft was expected to travel 1,000 astronomical units, 1,000 times the distance between the Earth and Sun, sending back data for more than 50 years. The Voyagers 1 and 2 spacecraft were expected to eventually reach deep space, but their slow rates of speed, about 36,000 miles per hour, would put any data gathering activity too far in the future. (LA Times, Sep 16/86)
NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California, modified an F15 jet engine to increase its thrust by 10 percent and fuel savings by 5 to 7 percent. The modification grew out of NASA's Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control program (HIDEC), which lessened unneeded engine stall margins (the amount that engine operating pressure must be reduced to avoid stall). The typical 25 percent stall margin allows for a contingency of any of the worst flight conditions and robs 15 percent of an engine's usable power. The HIDEC created engine and flight control systems that communicate with each other; thus the engine adjusts itself according to actual flight, not assumed constants. (NASA Release 86176)
In conjunction with its 1986 Small Business Innovation Research Program, NASA announced the selection of 172 research proposals from 144 small firms for Phase I Award'@0*Negotiations. Selected from 1628 proposals, about onehalf of the sixmonth, fixedprice contract efforts would be eligible for Phase II followon contracts of up to two years. This program was designed to stimulate technological innovation in the private sector and strengthen small business participation. (NASA Release
Two nearEarth asteroids, composed of nickel and iron and could provide future space mining, were discovered shortly before this date by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. About one mile in diameter, each, one asteroid is inside and one is outside of'%0*Earth's orbit. (NASA Release 8673)
A study by NASA scientist Linwood B. Callis concluded that the recently discovered thinning ozone layer might have been a result of increased sunspot activity. Other scientists, however, were hesitant to accept the theory and remained steadfast in their belief that manmade chemicals were responsible for the depletion. (LA Times, Oct 30/86; C Trib, Oct
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded an $8.9 million fiveyear contract to Calspan Corporation for operation of the Marshall Problem Assessment Center and the Safety Issue Assessment Center. Under the contract, Calspan would receive problem reports and safety issues from the contractors of Marshall's numerous projects, check the accuracy and completeness of the reports, track the closeout of proposed corrective actions, perform trend analysis and special study into causes of problems and safety issues, and appraise Marshall management on a daily basis. (NASA Release 86163)
NASA named a board to investigate the July 13, 1987, Atlas Centaur 68 accident which resulted in extensive damage to the vehicle. James B. Odom, Director of the Science and Engineering irectorate, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was appointed Chairman of the Board. The Board was expected to report the results of its investigation to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly,h)0*0*0*Associate Administrator for Space Flight, by August 14, 1987. (NASA Release 87112; LA Times, July 14/87; NY Times, July 16/87)
The XWing, a NASA experimental aircraft, made its first brief venture into the air, lifting 25 feet off the runway for about 16 seconds. The XWing concept uses a fourbladed rotor system for vertical takeoff and landing. The first major test flight was expected to follow in about two weeks. (NASA Release 87172; Antelope Valley Press, Nov 19/87)
The Boeing Commercial Airplane Company was selected by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, for major aeronautical flight experiments. NASA tasked Boeing with providing data on the aerodynamic and operational effectiveness of a hybrid system to achieve laminar air flow control at flight conditions, particularly at high subsonic speeds. The tests were to be conducted on both commercial and military transport airplanes. H&(NASA Release 87140; Def News, Oct 12/87)
Officials from NASA and the LockheedGeorgia Company, Marietta, Georgia, announced that flight testing had begun on a new, highly fuelefficient, "propfan" engine. Aircraft equipped with the propfan propulsion system, which was developed as a result of a $56million NASA sponsored research program, was expected to be 1530 percent more fuel efficient than the most advanced turbofanpowered aircraft flying in the 1990's. (NASA Release 8773)
NASA announced plans for three balloon flights to study ray radiation produced by Supernova 1987a. The Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility at Wallops Island, Virginia, which manages NASA's balloon program, would provide launch services and helium. The first launch, from Alice Springs, Australia, was to take place no earlier than May 7, 1987, and the third balloon was to be launched within a month's time. (NASA Release 8760)
NASA reported that two techniques were being used to monitor the Supernova SN 1987a. In the first case, the Supernova was observed by NASA's Deep Space Network (DSN) located at Tidbinbilla, Australia, and connected by microwave with Australia's CSIRO Parkes Radio Telescope 200 miles away. Dr. Robert Preston of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which operates the DSN for NASA, said that the second technique, called Very Long Baseline Interferometry, consisted of an even wider network of four antennas: Tidbinbilla, Parkes, a Landsat ground station in central Australia; and a 26meter dish at Hobart on Tasmania, an island southeast of Australia. The supernova, an exploding star whose emissions were just arriving on Earth at the time of this report, was detected in the neighboring Large Magellanic Cloud galaxy. It was about 163,000 light years from the Earth. Supernova 1987a was the first such detectable star explosion close to our own galaxy since 1604. (NASA Release 8764)
NASA announced that it would begin, in late March, a new aircraft flight research program at AmesDryden Flight Research Facility, in Edwards, California. The aim of the program was the study of super maneuverability and prevention of dangerous spins and related crashes. (NASA Release 8737)
A spokesman at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that NASA's Deep Space Network station near Canberra, Australia, configured with Australia's Parkes Radio Observatory, was observing radio wave emissions from Supernova 1987a, first detected by astronomers in the large Magellanic cloud on February 24, 1987. (NASA Release 8731)
The United States and the Soviet Union signed an accord on cooperation in space exploration. The accord culminated a three day visit to Moscow by Secretary of State George P. Shultz. The accord formalized the ongoing exchange of information between NASAh)0*0*0*and the Soviet Academy of Sciences. It provided for no dramatic joint venture in space. Rather it called for coordination of projects in solarsystem exploration, space astronomy and astrophysics, earth sciences, solarterrestrial physics and space biology, and medicine. (NY Times, Apr 16/87; P Inq, Apr 16/87)
Flight controllers at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, reported that the untended spacecraft Voyager 2 was on course for a rendezvous in two years with the planet Neptune. Launched on August 20, 1977, Voyager 2, travelling at a speed of 41,600 miles an hour, was 642 million miles away from its target. It was expected to come within 3,000 miles of Neptune on August 24, 1989. (NY Times, Aug 18/87)
NASA's Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology selected five proposals for the development of space flight technology experiments as part of its Industry/University InSpace Technology program. (NASA Release 87164)
Science magazine published findings from a recent Earthbased radar mapping of the planet Venus, conducted by Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) scientists. Newly processed radar pictures of the surface of Venus showed what may be geologically recent volcanic activity and impact cratering, including possible volcanic mountains and broad lava flows and fields like those which make up the Hawaiian Islands. The JPL radar images, with a resolution of less than a mile, were the latest in a series of Earthbased radar scans of Venus conducted at the Goldstone, California, complex of NASA's Deep Space Network. The Magellan spacecraft was expected to make more detailed radar observations of Venus in 1990. (NASA Release 8865; C Trib, May 21/88; )
NASA's Lewis Research Center and the NASA/Industry Advanced Turboprop Team were awarded the prestigious Collier Trophy at the annual Robert J. Collier Trophy Dinner hosted by the National Aviation Club. Lewis and the NASA/Industry Advanced Turboprop Team were honored for developing technology and testing advanced turboprop propulsion systems that offered dramatic reductions in fuel usage and operating costs for subsonic transport aircraft. (NASA Release 8859)
Controllers at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, directed the Voyager 2 spacecraft to fire its hydrazine thrusters for 3 minutes and 29 seconds in order to steer the craft toward a flyby of Neptune on August 28, 1989. The Voyager 2 trajectory would bring it to within 3,000 miles of Neptune's cloudtops. (Voyager 2 Neptune Encounter Press Kit; LA Times, Nov 14/88)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, and the Department of Energy's Argon National Laboratory, Chicago, Illinois, signed an agreement to begin joint research in the development of hightemperature superconductivity (HTS) materials and technology. The objective of this major research effort would be to exploit recent rapid advances in HTS technology for significant space and aeronautical applications. Research and technology development would be undertaken in those areas where HTS could be an enabling technology or substantially improve existing Initially, research would concentrate on advanced studies and critical exploratory experiments to identify the most promising applications for further development. Among the first candidate applications would be superconducting magnetic energy storage, space electromagnetic propulsion, microwave power transmission, aeropropulsion, and electromagnetic launch systems. (NASA Release
Challenging earlier reports that a mysterious object at the heart of the remnants of Supernova 1987A is a rapidly spinning pulsar, scientists at Columbia University announced that the observed object was more likely to be a vibrating neutron star. The debate over the nature of the object began in February when astronomers at the University of California at Berkeley theorized0*that they were observing an extremely dense pulsar rotating at 2,000 rotations per second. The Berkeley announcement prompted astronomers at Columbia University to argue that the observed bursts of radiation were more likely to emanate from a less dense neutron star that is vibrating at the observed frequency. The Columbia astronomers argued that the vibration theory not only explained the recent observations but also was consistent with previous hypotheses on how neutron stars develop. (W Post, Mar
A NASA ER2 high altitude aircraft flew the first of a dozen scientific missions over the arctic circle to document the depletion of the Earth's atmospheric ozone layer around the North Pole. The project, a joint U.S.European effort, involved over 150 scientists engaged in research on ozone depletion caused by chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and other manmade chemicals. (AP, Jan 3/89; USA Today, Jan 4/89)
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that the Voyager 2 space probe had discovered a giant weather system on Neptune approximately 6,200 miles wide and comparable to Jupiter's Great Red Spot. Voyager 2 made the discovery while at a distance of 58.98 million miles from Neptune, currently the most distant planet from the Sun. Voyager 2 was scheduled to perform an extremely close flyby of Neptune on August 24, when it would approach to within 3,000 miles of the planet's cloud tops. This would be the fourth and final planetary flyby by Voyager 2, which was launched in 1977 and had flown by Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus. (Voyager Bulletin: Mission Status Report No. 91, Aug 17/89; AP, June 16/89; W Post, Jun 21/89)
Scientists at NASA's solar system exploration division announced that the Earth had experienced a "close call" in March with a newly discovered halfmilewide asteroid. The asteroid, named 1989FC, passed within 500,000 miles of Earthabout twice the distance to the Moonon March 23. The asteroid was discovered by Henry Holt, an amateur astronomer working on a NASA asteroid hunting project. NASA scientists estimated that if the asteroid were ever to collide with the Earth, the collision would release energy equivalent to 20,000 times that of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima and would leave a crater 10 miles wide and up to a mile deep. (NASA Release 8952, Apr 19/89; UPI, Apr 19/89; AP, Apr 20/89; NY Times, Apr 20/89; USA Today, Apr 20/89; LA Times, Apr 20/89; B Sun, Apr 20/89)
While heading toward a close approach of Neptune, the Voyager 2 space probe discovered the first complete ring around the planet. Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, had previously observed several ring arcs. The discovery of the complete ring around Neptune had been expected0*based on observations of rings on the other three large outer planets during previous Voyager planetary encounters. (NASA Release 89132, Aug 11/89; NY Times, Aug 23/89; W Post, Aug 23/89; WSJ, Aug 23/89; B Sun, Aug 23/89; UPI, Aug 23/89)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California announced the discovery of "ring arcs" orbiting Neptune. NASA scientists noted that, unlike the rings surrounding Saturn, Jupiter, and Uranus, Neptune's rings did not appear to completely surround the planet. (NASA Release 89132, Aug 11/89; NY Times, Aug 12/89; W Post, Aug 12/89; P Inq, Aug 12/89; C Trib, Aug 12/89; B Sun, Aug 12/89; WSJ, Aug 14/89)
Threetime space flight veteran George "Pinky" Nelson announced he would leave NASA on June 30 to accept academic and administrative positions at the University of Washington, Seattle. (NASA Release 8989, Jun 9/89)
NASA announced the selection of three contractors to research possible propulsion systems for the proposed Advance Launch System (ALS). NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, selected Aerojet General Corporation, Sacramento, California; Pratt and Whitney Division of United0*Technologies Corporation, West Palm Beach, Florida; and Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International, Canoga Park, California, to research ALS designs. The systems definition contract totaled $20 million. The ALS would be a nextgeneration launch system capable of transporting 150,000pound payloads into low Earth orbit. (Def News, Jul 17/89)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California announced the discovery of three additional moons of Neptune, bringing the total number of Neptune's known moons to six. The moons, designated 1989 N2, 1989 N3, and 1989 N4, ranged between 60 and 125 miles in diameter and were found to be in normal equatorial orbits in the direction of the planet's rotation. Prior0*to Voyager's observations, only two moons of Neptune had been observed. (NASA Release 89128, Aug 3/89; NY Times, Aug 4/89; W Post, Aug 4/89; LA Times, Aug 4/89;
Victor L. Peterson was named Deputy Director of the Ames Research Center in California. Since joining NASA in 1956, Petersen held several positions at the center. (NASA Release 9036)
The Ames Research Center in California awarded a fiveyear, $32.8 million contract to Silicon Graphics for a work station to be used in the Ames Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation Processing System Network. The work station would allow users to analyze and visualize their work in computational fluid dynamics and other largescale scientific simulation and modeling applications.0*(NASA Release C90w)
Ames Research Center in California awarded a costplusawardfee $210.8 million contract for software support. Under the contract Sterling Federal Systems, Inc. would provide computational support for problem applications and systems programming, systems design and engineering, software management and maintenance, and modification of existing software. (NASA Release C90y)
Scientists and engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, began extensive tests on its recently developed untended planetary rover. An unproven technology was needed for a vehicle on a distant planet controlled by ground crews on Earth inasmuch as roundtrip communication would be anywhere from 8 minutes to 40 minutes. Computer Aided Remote Driving allowed vehicle planning and identification of a 10sofmeterslongobstaclefree path, with a threedimensional display from stereo cameras aboard the vehicle. SemiAutonomous Navigation allowed an operator to determine a nominal extended route tens of kilometers long. (NASA Release 9085)
NASA's Langley Research Center selected Ball Corporation for a $90 million contract to develop an atmospheric instrument for the proposed Earth Observing System. The instrument, Spectroscopy of the Atmosphere Using Far Infrared Emission, would be designed to study middleatmosphere ozone distribution. (NASA Release, C90i)
NASA scientists warned that examination of data from the ozone hole over the South Pole showed record depletion. They added that ozone levels throughout the Southern Hemisphere were as low as they had ever been. The ozone hole has been monitored since 1979 with the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, an instrument on the GoddardManaged NIMBUS7 spacecraft. (C Trib, Oct 12/90; NASA Release 90137)
NASA announced the selection of 280 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts in their'"0*1990 Small Business Innovation Research program (SBIR). SBIR had aimed at stimulating technological innovation in small business for the past 8 years; the Phase I contracts normally would not exceed $50,000. (NASA Release 90144)
Boeing Space Operations, Inc. was awarded a $35.9 million costplusawardfee contract for program assurance engineering support at Ames Research Center in California. Under the contract, Boeing would provide reliability and quality assurance, system safety engineering, test engineering, management, institutional safety, and health and environmental0*services. (NASA Release C90o)
NASA unveiled its latest research laboratory at Ames Research Center in California. The Human Performance Research Laboratory was designed for study of prolonged space travel. Ground was also broken at the dedication for the new $8.6 million Automated Sciences Research Facility, designed to provide research and technology development in automation and artificial intelligence. (NASA Release 9053)
NASA scientists regained contact with Magellan after a 14hour loss. The spacecraft went into a safe mode, in which it shut down many of its systems and pointed its solar panels toward the Sun because of navigation problems it falsely interpreted. The ship's computer memory was sent back to Earth so scientists could determine the problem in Magellan's program. Scientists were pleased, however, with the first set of pictures taken during Magellan's test run over the planet. They, however, cautioned that Magellan's mission to begin regular mapping by `"August 29 would likely be delayed. (W Times, Aug 20/90; P Inq, (#Aug 19/90; W Post, Aug 18/90; NY Times, Aug 18/90; LA Times, Aug
Surprised NASA scientists released a photograph taken
NASA selected ST Systems Corporation for negotiation to a 5year, $37 million contract for operation and analysis support for Goddard's National Space Science Data Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. NASA also awarded CBI Services, Inc. a $28.2 million contract for work on Ames Research Center's 12foot pressure wind tunnel. (NASA Release C90dd; C 90ee)
Technical assistant Edwin Sherry, from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, explained a minor problem that the Spacecraft Magellan had developed three days earlier and a little more than halfway into its journey to map Venus. A computer chip failure, caused either by electrical corrosion or an electrically charged particle spewed out by the sun, necessitated frequent commands from ground crews to keep Magellan moving in the right direction. The craft's guidance system normally focused on two stars to ascertain and adjust its heading. Sherry explained that some difficulties with the vast array of electronics during flight were expected and that the mission was in no danger. Scientists hoped to send a new program aloft that would allow the ship's computer to bypass the damaged chip. (AP, Jan 4/90) (#'0*.815@8<H? (#'0*.815@8<H?
NASA selected 28 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in their Small Business Innovation Research Program. The awards were worth $13 million and part of an ongoing effort to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of the small business sector, and increase the commercialization of federally funded research. (NASA Release 9021)
Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of Teledyne Brown Engineering for negotiations leading to a $172 million contract for payload mission integration. Under the contract, the company would provide management, personnel, equipment, services, supplies, facilities, and materials for Shuttle/Spacelab missions. Spacelab, carried in the Shuttle's cargo bay, converted the Shuttle into a versatile onorbit research center. (NASA Release
NASA announced the selection of 39 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). SBIR seeks to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of small business in meeting federal research and development needs, and increase private sector commercialization of results of federally funded research. The awards included 36 small, high technology firms located in 17 states and were valued at about $19 million. (NASA Release 91-15; Huntsville Times, Jan 29/91)
NASA announced that as a result of the huge outpouring of volcanic material from Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, a research team of NASA atmospheric scientists was being sent to the West Indian island of Barbados to gather data to help evaluate the global atmospheric effects of this event. Several NASA scientists subsequently commented on Pinatubo's plume and its spreading. (NASA Release 91-103; W Post, Jul 8/91)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center's Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET), an instrument aboard NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory, had detected "the most distant and by far, the most luminous gamma-ray source ever seen." The EGRET team, led by Carl Fichtel, reported to the International Astronomical Union, Cambridge, Massachusetts, that a source of intense gamma radiation was detected between June 15 and June 28. The source was identified as the variable Quasar 3C279, located in the constellation Virgo. (NASA Release 91-117; W Post, Jul 29/91)
NASA announced the selection of MK-Ferguson Corporation, Cleveland for a contract to provide engineering, construction, and maintenance services to NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. (NASA Release C91-mm)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center/Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, announced a contract award to
An article pointed out that space exploration was not a short-term mission. Therefore, given the age of several existing Space Shuttles, Congress should plan ahead and appropriate funds for additional Shuttles for the 21st century. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 7/91)
Gerald Fishman of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center at a press conference spoke of the findings of the Gamma Ray Observatory to date. He said that an instrument called the Burst and Transient Source Experiment had detected 117 gamma ray bursts since launching. Thse bursts were randomly scattered, not from the center of the Milky Way Galaxy as previously thought. (AP, Sep 23/91; P Inq, Sep 24/91; USA Today, Sep 24/91; W Post, Sep 24/91; NY Times, Sep 24/91; W Times, Sep 24/91)
A local newspaper described the flight of the ER-2 (Earth Resources) giant high-flying spy plane that flew over the San Joaquin-Sacramento Valley. In 4 1/2 hours, the plane of the NASA-Ames Research Center captured more than 7 million acres on film. The photographs were to be a resource for the best use of water supplies in California.  (Bakersfield Californian, Sep 7/91)
NASA announced that the X-29, an unusual research aircraft built to investigate the feasibility of a forward-swept wing design, made its last flight in its high angle of attack research program on September 30 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 91-159; Antelope Valley Press, Oct 4/91)
NASA announced the selection of 70 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. The high technology firms were located in 21 states. (NASA Release 91-210)
The Huntsville Times published a history of NASA in connection with its Marshall Space Flight Center and the Army Ballistic Missile Agency Development Operations Division in Huntsville. Reference was made to the early days of the Redstone Arsenal as well as to statistics of employment and various Shuttle launches.  (Htsvl Tms, Jun 9/91)
Gerald Fishman, principal investigator of the Burst and Transient Source Experiment, said so far the experiment on the Gamma Ray Observatory was working as planned. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Apr 23/91)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, Massachusetts, for the contract to design, develop, and operate a science support center for the space-based Advanced x-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). AXAF was scheduled to be launched in 1998 as the third of NASA's Earth-orbiting Great Observatories. The center is to serve the international scientific community with an observation program for the x-ray telescope and the data it collects. (NASA release 91-46)
NASA announced that as part of its Planetary Astronomy Program of the Office of Space Science and Applications, a team of radar astronomers had identified a near-Earth metal asteroid for the first time. Their discovery, observed from the giant Arecibo radar/radio telescope in Puerto Rico, was published in Science magazine. The object, called 1986 DA, was observed and analyzed by a team under Steven Ostro of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. The asteroid contains mostly iron but also 8 percent nickel as well as some platinum-group metals and gold. (NASA Release 91-89; NY Times, Jun 11/91)
Bob MacMillan, public information manager for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, said scientists had ordered the Magellan spacecraft to reduce its mapping of Venus and stay in the shade to prevent recording equipment from overheating. (AP, Aug 28/91)
An editorial in a space journal advocated that NASA wind down its program for the construction of the National Aerospace Plane, the X-30, for which it has no funds, rather than wait until 1993 to decide. Instead the journal advocated NASA's focusing on "research and development that would continue its already impressive advances in materials and propulsion technology." (SP News, Dec 2-8/91)
NASA announced that Dudley McConnell, Associate Director for Applications for NASA's Earth Science and Applications Division, died of an apparent heart attack. (NASA Obituary; Fla Today, Oct 29/91; W Post, Oct 31/91)
Bruce Bunin, manager of Advanced Commercial Programs at Douglas Aircraft Company, stated that McDonnell Douglas Corporation had won a contract for up to $8 million from NASA's Langley Research Center to conduct system studies on the next-generation commercial supersonic transport. The five-year contract was part of NASA's High-Speed Research Program aimed at resolving environmental and economic issues and developing technology for a High Speed Civil Transport (HSCT). The HSCT team was to study atmospheric effects, noise and sonic boom reduction, advanced materials and lightweight structures, supersonic laminar flow control, engine cycles, and airline economics. (PR Newswire, Mar 11/91)
NASA announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center/Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, had selected H and H Consolidated, Inc. of Hampton, Virginia, for an operation/maintenance and Alteration contract of facilities and equipment services. (NASA Release C91-jj)
NASA engineers worried over data indicating that the critical 16-foot main antenna of Galileo, essential for the Jupiter probe, may have failed to unfold properly. Such a failure would limit the speed of transmitting data from Jupiter to Earth and reduce the number of photographs that could be sent. Galileo was unique among spacecraft launched to date in that it has a "dual spin" design with the antenna being located on the spinning section. Efforts were underway to see how the situation could be remedied. (LA Times, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 13/91; AP, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 15/91; NY Times, Apr 17/91; B Sun, Apr 18/91; W Times, Apr 18/91; USA Today, Apr 18/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported that thanks to a NASA program to establish a super computer network among black universities, Morgan State University had received a super computer. The university planned to make the super computer the foundation of a new Center for Applied Space Science and Engineering. (B Sun, Jun 7/91)
The Huntsville Times quoted the General Accounting Office as saying that contrary to earlier concerns, a survey revealed that potential retirements of skilled NASA scientists and engineers would not be a problem. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 1/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported a NASA announcement on November 8 that its $10 million effort to determine whether a hole in the Earth's protective ozone layer was developing over the North Pole, was delayed by mechanical problems in both the project's aircraft. Mike Kurylo, manager of NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Program, said the DC-8 jet had a crack in its landing gear and the high-altitude ER-2 aircraft was grounded for a problem with its wings. In addressing the same subject, the New York Times quoted the project's chief scientist as saying three ER-2 planes would be used to survey the ozone layer at high altitudes. (B Sun, Nov 9/91; NY Times, Nov 10/91)
Several media articles dealt with attempts to rescue spacecraft Galileo's mission. The Los Angeles Times described Galileo's flight, which was functioning perfectly toward Jupiter, apart from its malfunctioning antenna. Engineers sought both by heating and cooling the craft to unstick the antenna. The New York Times reported in detail on efforts by engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, operated by the California Institute of Technology for NASA, to free the antenna, thus salvaging the mission. If efforts failed, Galileo would be unable to communicate discoveries to scientists because the craft's small antennas could not transmit recorded pictures until returning to the vicinity of Earth. The third attempt to fix the antenna was pronounced a failure on August 20. Other possible courses of action were discussed. (LA Times, Aug 9/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 13/91; W Post, Aug 13/91; USA Today, Aug 13/91; AP, Aug 13/91; AP, Aug 20/91; UPI, Aug 20/91;  NY Times, Aug 21/91; P Inq, Aug 21/91; B Sun, Aug 21/91; UPI, Aug 21/91; AP, Aug 28/91)
NASA announced that undergraduate engineering students at Mississippi State University, Starkville, had won the competition to build a 50-foot mockup of the X-30/National Aero-Space Plane. (NASA Release 91-182; Fla Today, Nov 10/91)
Robert Brown and Paul A. Vanden Bout, astronomers at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Charlottesville, Virginia, using the 12-meter telescope on Kitt Peak, Arizona, in July discovered carbon monoxide in a strange object previously found by researchers in Ursa Major. A huge gas cloud, at the fringe of the universe, it might be linked to a galaxy in formation. (P Inq, Nov 21/91; LA Times, Nov 25/91)
The Magellan spacecraft temporarily lost contact with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, when its antenna was misdirected toward Earth. Contact was restored, and only 0.3 percent of the mission's scheduled surface mapping was lost. (C Trin, May 14/91)
NASA announced that at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, at Edwards, California, simulator research showed that multi-engine aircraft with specially programmed flight control systems could touch down safely using only the engines to turn and land. (NASA Release 91-85)
The Aerospace Industries Association said on December 11 that the U.S. aerospace industry would post record sales of $140 billion in 1991, but that employment during the year dropped 8 percent to 1.16 million workers. (LA Times, Dec 12/91)
According to AP, the National Research Council endorsed NASA's planned Earth Observation System, which it called "the largest single component of the most ambitious scientific enterprise ever undertaken." The Council stated it had some concern over the program's management, however, and urged the earth science and space research community to keep a close eye on the program. (AP, Jul 11/91; W Post, Jul 13/91)
NASA announced that the Magellan spacecraft, mapping the surface of Venus with imaging radar, had discovered the longest channel known in the solar system, 4,200 miles long. Steve Saunders, Project Scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, said it was not known what formed the channel. (NASA Release 91-141; LA Times, Aug 30/91; UPI, Aug 30/91)
NASA announced the selection of Lawrence J. DeLucas of the University of Alabama at Birmingham and Eugene H. Trinh of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to fly as payload specialists on the first U.S. Microgravity Laboratory mission, scheduled for June 1992. (NASA Release 91-66)
While commending Jay Apt's and Jerry Ross's work in freeing the jammed antenna of the Gamma Ray Observatory during their Atlantis mission, an editorial commentator advocated a rethinking of spaceflight goals and greater realism. (CSM, Apr 17/91)
NASA announced that its research plane F-16XL demonstrated laminar airflow over a significant part of its wing while flying at supersonic speeds. This could increase flight efficiency and reduce fuel consumption. The experiment occurred in a series of 28 flights at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. In this connection, the New York Times wrote about wind shear problems faced by aircraft, leading to airline disasters, and NASA's work on three predictive systems made by Lockheed Corporation, Rockwell International, and Turbulence Prediction Systems. (NASA Release 91-188; Daily Press, Newport News, Nov 20/91; Antelope Valley Press, Nov 21/91; NY Times, Nov 24/91)
Dr. Steve Saunders, Project Scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that Magellan to date had mapped more than 58 percent of Venus, including Aphrodite Terra, the largest of the highland regions. Various hypotheses exist regarding the formation of the different "continents" on Venus, and the mapping should clarify the situation. (NASA Release 91-31)
NASA announced that on July 15 at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, NASA's F/A-18 High-Alpha Research Vehicle maneuvered in flight for the first time using a specially designed thrust vectoring system. Such research flights were to continue over the next two years and were designed to make future jet fighters safer. (NASA Release 91-123)
The Chicago Tribune reported that Northwestern University scientists had discovered a process called sputtering that can coat hardened steel with titanium nitride films a few microns thick and double its hardness. The computer-controlled system was built for Northwestern's Basic Industrial Research Laboratory (BIRL) in a project that also involved funds from NASA and the Department of Energy. (C Trin, Jul 28/91)
NASA announced the development by its Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, of a new, more accurate, airborne radar system for topographic mapping of the Earth's surface. The instrument, called TOPSAR for topographic synthetic aperture radar, would be about three times more accurate than existing topographic mappers and had many commercial and scientific uses, according to Howard Zebker of the Pasadena laboratory. (NASA Release 91-205)
NASA announced that the spacecraft Galileo would execute a trajectory correction maneuver on March 20 to help aim it for the first-ever flyby of an asteroid next October. To perform the maneuver, Galileo would fire its small thrusters on and off during a three and one half hour period, thus changing its speed about five miles per hour. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, manages the Galileo project. (NASA Release 91-43)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, had selected the team of General Electric Corporation, Cincinnati, and United Technologies Pratt and Whitney Divsion, West Palm Beach, Florida, for a contract for propulsion materials to be used on a 21st century High Speed Civil Transport. (NASA Release C91-z)
Nature quoted scientists at NASA's Atmospheric Sciences Division in Hampton, Virginia, as reporting that forest fires--previously thought to be a major source of nitrous oxide--actually produce only about 7 percent of the amount in the atmosphere. The importance of the source of nitrous oxide relates to its action in the destruction of Earth's ozone layer. (W Post, Feb 25/91)
NASA's Soft X-ray Telescope aboard the Japanese Solar-A spacecraft launched from Japan's Kagoshima Space Center on August 30, made its first X-ray images of the sun. The purpose of the mission was to produce pictures of the genesis and life of solar flares to enable scientists to learn more about them. (W Times, Oct 3/91)
The Christian Science Monitor commended NASA for naming the orbiting Gamma Ray Observatory the Arthur Holly Compton Gamma Ray Observatory because of the late Nobel Prize laureate's studies of the subject. Moreover, the renaming focused attention on one of NASA's "outstandingly successful missions." (CSM, Oct 9/91)
Lennard Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator, announced that the two largest mirrors for NASA's Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility have been successfully tested in the new X-ray Calibration Facility at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 91-145)
News editor Budd McLaughlin of the Huntsville News denied the blame placed on the media by Jack Lee, director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, for NASA's poor public image. (Huntsville News, Apr 1/91)
NASA announced that its Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, had selected RMS Technologies, Inc., of Landover, Maryland, for a contract for the computing, communication, and network mission needs of the center. (NASA Release C91-y)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected Cortez III Service Corporation, Alamogordo, New Mexico, for a $140 million support service contract for center operations. (NASA Release C91-n)
NASA announced some of the results of its Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), built by NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. The LDEF was in a space environment from April 1984 to January 1990, with various materials samples and experiments on board. The 57 science and technology experiments gathered data on space radiation, atomic oxygen, meteoroids, contamination, space debris, space systems, and life sciences. Implications of LDEF results were being used in the design of lunar bases and Mars-bound aircraft. (NASA Release 91-113)
Marshall Space Flight Center Director Jack Lee told the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce that the news media were to blame for NASA's bad image during the preceding year. In discussing Marshall's economic impact on the area, Lee cited increases in its budget, which had risen from $1.8 billion in 1983 to a requested $3.6 billion in fiscal 1992. Of this amount, an estimated $1.08 billion would be spent in Alabama. Moreover, Marshall civil service and contractor employees represented about 12 percent of the total Huntsville population. (Hntsv Tms, Mar 26/91)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California, began analyzing the photos of Venus produced by the Magellan Spacecraft. JPL operates Magellan for NASA. The pictures show a tortured landscape featuring extreme volcanism, particularly surface bulges 30 to 140 miles wide called "arachnoids." (LA Times, Feb 4/91)
NASA announced it would be a major participant in the multi-agency High Performance Computing and Communication (HPCC) to begin in FY 1992. NASA had the lead role in coordinating interagency software and algorithm research and development. In this connection, NASA would buy advanced test beds from industry and use test beds developed by the Department of Defense to evaluate and build initial applications. NASA would also develop software to solve major computational challenges involved with robotic design and control. NASA centers would be equipped with the latest network communications to support the National Research and Education Network and NASA would expand the HPCC research program of NASA-funded research institutes and through NASA grants to universities.
NASA announced that a soccer ball-shaped carbon molecule might be the perfect propellant for a spacecraft engine that produced thrust by expelling charged atoms or molecules. Stephanie D. Leifer, an engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, and Winston A. Saunders of the California Institute of Technology proposed to use the molecule Carbon 60 as a fuel in ion engines. (NASA Release 91-197)
The Department of Energy requested $30 million to create a new space exploration program relating to civilian space activities. The new request brought the Energy Department's 1992 budget request for space exploration to $142 million, compared with NASA's $94 million. Some experts and officials saw the Energy Department's role in space as desirable, both to prevent NASA's monopoly and because the Department maintained active technology development programs whereas NASA allowed its technology research and development to wither as it struggled with existing programs. (W Post, Apr 30/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer carried an article about the new issue of Science magazine and its reports on the likely creation of hole in the Arctic ozone. The article quoted Robert Watson, head of NASA's atmospheric ozone program, as saying that Earth's ozone layer was declining as much as 8 percent each decade; scientists previously thought it was only 2 to 4 percent. Also NASA research found that losses occurred in the spring as well as winter, raising concern that ultraviolet radiation might threaten crops, forests, and ecological processes. (P Inq, May 31/91)
A discussion of the robot explorer Magellan's probe of Venus during its 16 months and more than 3,000 orbits, mapping more than 90 percent of the surface, appeared in the Washington Post. Lead scientist Stephen Saunders of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, which manages the mission, was quoted as saying that scientists were looking for "active plate tectonics" such as occur on earth, such as "continental drift." To date, no such discoveries occurred. (W Post, Oct 21/91)
An editorial in a space publication stressed the need for space flight to gain some Congressional advocates and for NASA's new launcher plan to be salvaged before it was too late. (SP News, Apr 22-28/91)
According to Patrick McCormick of NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines might cool global temperatures by a few tenths of a degree for as long as five or 10 years. (W Post, Aug 14/91)
NASA announced that the first mirror for its Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF) space observatory was successfully completed at Hughes Danbury Optical System, Danbury, Connecticut, and shipped on June 12 to Eastman Kodak, Rochester, New York, for assembly. The AXAF observatory was to consist of six nested pairs of mirrors to obtain high resolution x-ray images of the universe. (NASA Release 91-95)
Scientists of NASA's Magellan Project, together with the US Geological Survey, invited the public to propose names of notable women for the many impact craters and large volcanic vents being discovered on Venus. Names sent to Magellan offices at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory were to be compiled for the Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature, a committee of the International Astronomical Union (IAU). The IAU, which makes the final approval, meets only every three years and thus new names cannot be considered until 1994. (NASA Release 91-38; W Times, Mar 22/91; C Trin, Mar 27/91)
NASA announced that the application of its sensor technology led to the development by a Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia team, headed by Allan J. Zuckerwar, of a portable fetal heart monitor. The marketing of this monitor was to be part of the NASA program to transfer the agency's space age technology to the private sector. (NASA Release 91-90)
Ellen Stofan, a Magellan scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said the planet Venus may be venting interior heat through giant hot spots called coronae, a form of volcanism. She indicated that Magellan data had revealed many exciting new aspects of coronae. (NASA Release 91-48)
The Daily Press recounted the dedication on October 10 of the 100-ton Variable Density Wind Tunnel as a National Historic Landmark. The ceremony occurred at NASA's Langley Research Center. The wind tunnel was responsible for more efficient wing designs of aircraft and established NASA's predecessor, the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics as a technologically competent organization. (Daily Press, Oct 11/91)
RMS Technologies, Inc., Marlton, Pennsylvania, announced it had received a contract from NASA to provide operational support for workstations, other computers, and peripheral equipment at NASA's Lewis Research Center. (P Inq, Jul 24/91)
NASA announced the selection of 301 research proposals (from 2,583 received) for immediate contract negotiation in NASA's 1991 Small Business Innovation Research Program. While meeting federal research and development needs, the program aims to stimulate technological innovation. (NASA Release 91-184)
According to the Washington Post, for the fourth time since April, NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena were trying to free the antenna on the robot explorer Galileo. The scientists deduced that three of the 18 ribs of the antenna were stuck in the closed position. Being unable to deliver direct force, they sought to "shake" the structure by alternately heating and cooling it. On December 14-15, NASA tried again to free the jammed antenna without success. (W Post, Dec 15/91; UPI, Dec 16/91; W Post, Dec 17/91; W Post, Dec 18/91; USA Today, Dec 18/91)
NASA announced the selection of nine scientists as team members in the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) Microwave Observing Project. The SETI project has two elements: Targeted Search and Sky Survey. The Targeted Search was to use the largest available antennas and search over a 1 to 3 gigahertz (GHz) frequency range, looking for patterns that could indicate an artificially generated signal. The search would conduct the most sensitive search yet conducted of nearby (less than 80 lightyears distant) solar-type stars. The Sky Survey would use the 34-meter antennas of NASA's Deep Space Network sites to scan the whole sky over a 1 to 10 GHz frequency range. The survey could detect signals from the vicinity of distant sunlike stars or from areas beyond the solar-type stars. SETI observations were to begin on Columbus Day 1992, with the Sky Survey deployed at Goldstone, California, and the Targeted Search mounted at the National Science Foundation's Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico.
A column by Robert C. Cowen cited variances in figures for global warming among NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and the University of Alabama at Huntsville from those of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, the Climate Research Unit of East Anglia in England, and the Soviet Union's Hydrometerorological Scientific Research Center. According to the British and the Goddard Institute, 1990 was the warmest year on record globally but according to the Marshall Center, using different data, the hottest years in descending order were 1987, 1988, 1983, and 1990. (CSM, Jul 31/91; B Sun, Aug 1/91)
NASA announced that NASA 816, a modified Convair F-106B, had been retired after more than 30 years of flight research. It was to be moved to the new Virginia Air and Space Center in Hampton. (NASA Release 91-73)
The Orlando Sentinel Star published two special reports on NASA and Space Shuttles. The first was a review of the first ten years of space flight: the dreams in contrast with the reality of costs and delays experienced. The conclusion was that "The price of a rushed design on a shoestring budget has meant, for the Shuttle, unreliability." The second article dealt with NASA's plans for the next decade with reference to such items as the Personnel Launch System, a small capsule or space plane on top of an expendable booster rocket to carry astronauts and some cargo to a Space Station; the Advanced Manned Launch System, a reusable vehicle combined with a reusable booster, capable of carrying more persons and cargo; and the National Aerospace Plane (NASP), which would burn a "slush" mixture of liquid and solid hydrogen. Most research funds to date went into the development of the NASP. (O Sen Star, Apr 7/91)
The media reported that NASA engineers had debated whether to remove additional sensors in Columbia that might be cracked. NASA planned to create a new investigative team to review the process of flaw detection. (NY Times, May 24/91; W Post, May 24/91; B Sun, May 24/91; W Times, May 24/91; USA Today, May 24/91; AP, May 24/91; UPI, May 24/91)
NASA announced that an array of powerful, interconnected computers would help NASA solve some of the complex problems associated with designing aircraft propulsion systems. The Lewis Advanced Cluster Environment system at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, is a network of 33 IBM RISC/6000 computer stations that can perform up to 1 billion floating point operations per second and has three billion bytes of memory, making it the world's most powerful IBM workstation cluster. (NASA Release 92-195)
Researchers from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, used laser-ranging instruments aboard the Wallops P-3B (HL) Orion aircraft to measure the Arctic sea ice above the water and the Greenland polar glacier elevations in order to study global climate changes. The data gathered was to be compared to previous studies and used to develop a baseline for future studies. Scientists are interested in developing accurate measurements of sea ice and glaciers because changes in these systems may indicate trends in world climate. Appreciable changes in these ice systems, such as increased melting, could directly affect global climate. (NASA Release 92-38)
In the current issue of the British journal Nature, two scientists, Martin I. Hoffert of New York University and Curt Covey of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California, reported new findings, largely developed from geological studies, on how Earth's climate responded to changes in atmospheric heat-trapping carbon dioxide and other influences in the distant past. Using climatic data from two periods in the past, one 20,000 years ago in the midst of the last ice age, and the other in the mid-Cretaceous period 100 million years ago, the two scientists found that if atmospheric carbon dioxide doubles from its present level, the average global climate will become about 4 degrees Fahrenheit warmer. These findings agree with computer models of climatic change. They are also compatible with earlier work by NASA scientists at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, whose climatic studies predicted that a doubling of carbon dioxide would reproduce a warming of about 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit. (NY Times, Dec 15/92)
A recent U. S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs oversight subcommittee report said that millions of dollars had been wasted in recent years because of poor auditing and contract management at 39 federally funded research and development centers. The report concluded that standard government accounting and auditing requirements were often "missing or ignored" at the privately owned but publicly funded research centers, which together received contracts worth more than $10 billion last year. Among the laboratories criticized was the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which received $1 billion in
Engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that the Magellan spacecraft, already threatened with suspension of operations to save money, had developed serious transmitter trouble and for more than a week had been unable to send usable data and pictures for the completion of its mapping survey of the Venusian surface. Magellan's only functioning radio transmitter begun overheating, a repeat of similar trouble more than a year ago. Engineers hoped to devise a solution within a few days. (NY Times, Jul 15/92; NY Times, Jul 18/92)
Project officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that the Magellan spacecraft would use its backup transmitter to resume mapping the surface of Venus with imaging radar on January 24, following a week of routine battery recharging. (NASA Release 92-8)
NASA reported that the agency would start supersonic flight tests of a new electronic control system that would improve the performance, reliability, and safety of high-speed military aircraft, future commercial supersonic transports, and the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane. A NASA F-15 research aircraft was to begin supersonic testing at the Performance Seeking Control in April 1992 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 92-44, Apr 1/92)
NASA selected the ColeJon Corporation of Cleveland, Ohio, for negotiations leading to award of a support service contract for operations, maintenance and repair of facilities at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio. Estimated value of the contract was approximately $30 million. (NASA Release C92-3)
A Senate Appropriations subcommittee recommended spending no additional funds for NASA's advanced solid-rocket motor plant in Mississippi. On July 29, the House of Representatives voted 249 to 159 to eliminate $265 million in research and development funds for the project, leaving only $50 million to close it down. (W Post, Jul 31/92; Htsvl Tms, Jul 30/92)
An experimental aircraft known as the X-31 had flown maneuvers at a 70-degree angle of attack, the Pentagon announced.  All of the plane's experimental flights were flown at the NASA Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California. (AP, Sept 28/92)
NASA scientists, reviewing results of seven months' observations, said that after a record buildup of ozone-damaging chemicals last January, the amounts rapidly dissipated because of sudden warming in February and March. While the tests continued to show a thinning of the ozone layer that protects the earth from ultraviolet rays, the sudden warming prevented any severe ozone depletion over the Arctic region, the scientists said. Nevertheless, they said, the potential for severe ozone destruction over parts of the United States, Canada, and Europe remains a matter of serious concern because of the high concentrations of destructive chlorine that were detected. (W Times, May 1/92; NY Times, May 1/92; W Post, May 1/92; USA Today, May 1/92; LA Times, May 1/92)
NASA unveiled its high-flying, unpiloted atmospheric research aircraft called "Perseus" at Manassas, Virginia. Perseus-A is the first aircraft designed specifically for atmospheric science. It will carry up to 110 pounds of instruments to a maximum altitude of 82,000 feet and is expected to begin flying scientific missions in 1994. Perseus-A was built for NASA by Aurora Flight Services Corporation in Manassas at a cost of $1.5 million. Company engineers expected Perseus to break the world altitude record for unmanned aircraft and the record for altitude in horizonal flight by an airplane. (NASA Release 92-227; W Post, Dec 19/92, Dec 28/92)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and at California Institute of Technology recently reported that they had found water ice on the planet Mercury. Radar beams aimed at both of the planet's poles bore telltale signs of having bounced off of frozen surfaces. (Time, Nov 2/92)
According to a report in Aviation Week & Space Technology, wind tunnel facilities at Russia's Sibnia research and development center were being made available to Western companies. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
Scientists with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said that the ozone hole over the Antarctic that has formed annually since 1987 had closed up again after setting records for depleting Earth's protective ozone layer. After falling from October 12 to December 5, ozone levels rose above the levels considered to be a "hole" on December 6. The hole formed earlier and lasted longer this year than ever before, the scientists said. (UPI, Dec 10/92)
NASA engineers decided to stop operating the radar aboard the Magellan Venus mapping probe until early September in an attempt to preserve the spacecraft's one fully operational transmitter until Magellan swings over one of the large regions of the planet that it has not mapped. Ground controllers had relied on Magellan's backup transmitter since January, but the backup unit had developed radio noise that interfered with its periodic transmissions of scientific data. (Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
NASA awarded research grants to three universities to develop teacher training courses that would enable middle school teachers to incorporate aerospace topics and concepts into their classrooms and to create new and imaginative practices in learning. The Teacher Training Pre-Service Program is a two-year program. The following schools were selected from responses to a solicitation of proposals: Fayetteville State University, Eastern Michigan University, and the University of Alabama. Each was to receive a $83,000 grant and were expected to provide matching, non-Federal funds. (NASA Release 92-50)
Astronomer Duncan Steel of the Anglo-Australian Observatory in Sydney warned of a possible collision between the Earth and  Comet Smith-Tuttle in the year 2116. Several years would be needed to track the comet to determine its orbit with accuracy and to decide whether or not a collision is likely. (The Sun, Oct 26/92; W Times, Oct 27/92)
NASA researchers began a three-week airborne study to increase understanding of microscopic plant productivity in the  equatorial region of the Pacific Ocean. The principal scientific objective was to understand why microscopic plant productivity involving phytoplankton is so limited in the Pacific compared to the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA Release 92-135)
NASA astronomers at Kitt Peak National Observatory announced that they had observed what they believed to be a galaxy in the process of forming. They estimated that the galaxy is more than 10 billion light years distant. (W Times, Nov 1/92; NY Times, Nov 3/92; AP, Nov 11/92)
Scientists probing river muck have discovered bacteria that can "eat" the main chemicals threatening the ozone layer, the U.S. Geological Survey reported. The bacteria that break down chlorofluorocarbons, known as CFCs, were found along the Potomac River in Virginia and in pond, marsh, and swamp sediments in Maryland, South Carolina, and Virginia. The CFC-eating bacteria are harmless to humans, but can operate only in the absence of oxygen, according to Derek Lovley, a microbiologist working at the Geololgical Survey in Reston, Virginia. (W Post, May 2/92)
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies said chemicals, particularly sulfurs, spewed into the atmosphere by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines are reflecting 2 percent of sunlight back into space, reducing heat. The impact is global; local temperatures might not be affected. Scientists said early studies of the effects of Pinatubo's eruption indicated volcanoes play a far greater role in climate change than once thought. (USA Today, May 19/92; W Times, May 19/92; W Post, May 19/92; P Inq, May 19/92; B Sun, May 19/92)
NASA reported that an SR-71A "Blackbird" research aircraft will test a key propulsion system for the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane (NASP). The SR-71A would act as a high-speed testbed to prove the concept of burning hydrogen fuel outside the X-30's engine exhaust nozzles as a way to improve overall flight efficiency. If the program operations received approval, the SR-71A would be modified and flown at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The NASP Joint Program Office, Wright-Paterson AFB, Ohio, funded the preliminary design work for the experiment. The NASP program is a joint effort involving NASA, the Department of Defense, and a U.S. industry team. (NASA Release 92-29)
NASA researchers found unexpectedly high productivity of microscopic plants near the equator in the Pacific Ocean during a recent airborne study aimed at increasing understanding of these plants in the region. The plants, called phytoplankton, play an important role in the absorption of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. (NASA Release 92-179)
Flights of the X-31 Enhanced Fighter Maneuverability demonstrator aircraft resumed at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The X-31s were being flown at Ames to show the value of thrust vectoring (directing engine exhaust flow) coupled with an advanced flight control system for close-in air combat at very high angles-of-attack. (NASA Release 92-52)
NASA said that construction had started on a high-flying, light-weight, unpiloted research aircraft called "Perseus" that NASA was to use to measure ozone levels and other atmospheric conditions. NASA viewed Perseus as the first step toward general use of advanced aircraft for many aspects of Earth sciences research such as climate and radiation studies, tropical dynamics, meteorology, and for studies of the stratosphere and troposphere. Aurora Flight Sciences Corporation of Manassas, Virginia, won the $2.25 million contract to design, build, and flight test two Perseus aircraft. Flight tests were slated to begin in late 1992.(NASA Release 92-110)
A press briefing was scheduled to be held by a science team for the ATLAS-1 mission on March 23, 1992, at the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama. The briefing was to discuss the mission's science activities and was to consist of two panels. (NASA Note N92-18)
NASA researchers said they had "flown" a complete three-dimensional high-performance aircraft in a supercomputer for the first time. The research was part of an effort to reduce wind tunnel tests of new aircraft designs. The new supercomputer techniques have promise in aerodynamic studies of fighter aircraft and in other areas where fluid flow is modeled, such as weather prediction, spacecraft entry, artificial heart design, etc. (NASA Release 92-105)
The Magellan spacecraft fired its four thrusters to swoop within 113 miles of the surface of Venus for study of the planet's gravity and prominent surface details. Since its deployment in 1989, the Venus probe has used radar to map 99 percent of the planet, exceeding its goal of 70-90 percent. With its mission completed beyond expectations, NASA scientists expected to shut down Magellan in May 1993 as a cost-cutting measure. (NASA Release 92-148; USA Today, Sept 15/92; LA Times, Sept 15/92)
Associated Press reported that three soldiers had burned to death as hundreds of construction troops rioted at Baiknour Space Center in Kazakhstan after complaining of "inhuman treatment" by their superiors. Baikonur was the main space launch site in the former Soviet Union. (P Inq, Feb 27/92)
NASA engineers were preparing to do the first assembly of a large-scale, parabolic antenna in a huge water tank whose buoyancy lets researchers simulate working in the microgravity environment of space. The tests would help establish assembly times for such antennas, evaluate work procedures and task coordination, and check the compatibility of the hardware itself. (NASA Release 92-84)
Responding to evidence that Earth's protective ozone layer is thinning or disappearing faster than was forecast, environmental officials from 81 countries met in Copenhagen to consider revising the Montreal Protocol on the control of substances that attack ozone. The main point of the meeting, sponsored by the United Nations Environment Program, was to set a timetable for the phaseout of chlorofluorocarbons, halons, and carbon tetrachloride. (The Sun, Nov 22/92;
NASA announced the selection of 321 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts under the agency's 1992 Small Business Innovation Research Program. The program aims to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small business to help meet federal research and development needs and to encourage commercial applications of federally supported research innovations. (NASA Release 92-204)
A group of NASA scientists sampling the air over southern Africa found massive pollution usually associated with the industrial centers of the Northern Hemisphere. Most of the pollution is caused by peasant farmers burning huge tracts of scrub brush to clear their land for planting. The group arrived in southern Africa in early October after studying a virtually identical problem in Brazil. Together, the pollution from the two regions was thought to be changing the atmosphere throughout the Southern Hemisphere. Some 180 scientists from 13 countries were involved in what was considered the most detailed atmospheric study ever made of the South Atlantic. (AP, Oct 12/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92)
Virginia Governor L. Douglas Wilder was scheduled to dedicate on Sunday April 5, the new Virginia Air and Space Center in Hampton, Virginia. The $30 million facility, which was to serve as the new official visitor center for the NASA Langley Research Center, has a 300-seat IMAX theater and was to feature exhibits on the Viking Orbiter and Viking Lander, as well as numerous exhibits on the history of flight and space exploration. (W Post, Apr 1/92)
Recent studies showed that the technology spinoffs from National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) research and development had already had a positive impact on U. S. aerospace, automotive, medical, chemical, food processing, and energy industries. The studies predicted that the Gross National Product could expand by about $26 billion over the next 10-15 years as a result of productivity gains fostered by the program and that employment also could increase by an average of 40,000 jobs annually. In particular, the studies showed that NASP research could significantly benefit industries such as aerospace, motor vehicle, and emerging industries such as ceramics and high-speed civil transportation. (AvWk, Jul 27/92)
NASA scientists tapped into a 300-year-old lead coffin in St. Mary's City, Maryland, in a search for air free of man-made pollutants. Samples of such air was expected to aid in understanding ozone damage in the present-day atmosphere. Tests on this and other coffins also helped NASA scientists evaluate the effectiveness of a tool that examines metal for tiny cracks or corrosion that occur in aircraft or spacecraft. (USA Today, Oct 21/92)
A 50-foot-long X-30 National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) mockup rolled out of its hanger in ceremonies at Mississippi State University, Starkville. Forty-five students in Mississippi State's engineering program worked for five months to construct the 5,000-pound mockup at the University's Raspet Flight Research Laboratory. Throughout the project, they had access to NASP program officials, who advised them on technical aspects of the X-30's design. The program was directed by Dr. George Bennett. (NASA Release 92-86)
NASA announced that it had officially kicked off Phase II of its High-Speed Research Program, a partnership with U.S. industry to develop technology that could enable the development of a next-generation supersonic airliner. (NASA Release 93-202)
SBIR attempts to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small businesses to help federal agencies meet their research and development needs. (NASA Release 93-003)
The Wall Street Journal reported that NASA's Langely Research Center in Virginia was searching for an easy-listening
NASA announced that an ER-2 aircraft, an updated version of the U-2 spy plane, would spend seven months next year researching the ozone hole over Antarctica. The study, part of a joint New Zealand-U.S. atmospheric study into ozone depletion, would explore the extent of the hole in the ozone layer. NASA research pilot Jim Barrilleaux was to fly the NASA-owned ER-2 aircraft. The work was scheduled to begin in late March 1994. (RTw, Mar 4/93)
NASA announced that it had started flight tests of a fiber optic control system that could result in lighter, more fuel-efficient airplanes with more capable control and monitoring systems.  The tests, which used the F/A-18 Systems Research Aircraft, took place at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 93-199)
NASA announced the selection of 130 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The SBIR goals are to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of small businesses (including minority and disadvantaged firms) in meeting federal research and development needs and increase private sector commercialization of results of federally funded research. (NASA Release 93-219)
NASA, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), and the Southern California Small Business Utilization Council were  scheduled to co-sponsor the 1993 High Technology and Small Business Development Procurement Conference on March 1-2 in Los Angeles. About 200 government prime contractors, federal agencies, and other large procurement organizations were expected to participate in the conference. (NASA Release 93-029)
A rocky asteroid, rather than an icy comet, probably caused a huge explosion over Siberia in 1908 that flattened at least 40,000 trees over about 850 square miles. A research team from NASA and the University of Wisconsin used a computer simulation to determine that an asteroid measuring about 65 yards was a better explanation than the comet; the simulation revealed that comets would explode much too high in the sky to fit the projected altitude of the Tunguska blast. (B Sun, Jan 7/93; NY Times, Jan 7/93; LA Times, Jan 8/93; W Post, Jan 11/93; P Inq, Jan 7/93; WP, Jan 11/93)
NASA announced that Marta Bohn-Meyer, an aeronautical engineer at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, was one of 10 federal government employees chosen to receive the 1992 Arthur S. Flemming Award. The reward "recognizes U.S. government employees for outstanding and meritorious work," according to NASA.
The Plain Dealer reported that a group of African-American employees at NASA's Lewis Research Center had charged that the materials used in a pilot program intended to promote better communication between employees of differing cultural groups instead fostered racism. NASA was investigating. (The Plain Dealer, May 25/93; Space News, May 31-June 6/93)
NASA announced a new initiative to commercialize NASA inventions by using top graduate students at Case Western to come up with new product ideas and strategies. NASA's Lewis Research Center, the Battelle Memorial Institute, and Case Western Reserve University, all based in Cleveland, Ohio, were involved in the program. (NASA Release 93-91)
The Washington Post reported that ozone layer problem appeared to be on the way to a solution. Thanks to the Montreal Protocol, an international treaty obligating signatory countries to phase our ozone-destroying chemicals, scientists expected the threat of ozone destruction to peak in 2000. In that year, according to the latest scientific projections, the ozone layer should start slowly getting thicker and better able to block the sun's harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. (W Post, Apr 15/93)
Orbital Sciences Corporation said its Orbital Imaging Corporation unit had been awarded a two-year, $7 million contract to provide atmospheric research data to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center.  (W Times, August 31/93)
NASA announced that scientists using the Earth-orbiting Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory had discovered a powerful pulsar that had become one of the brightest x-ray sources in the sky during the past two weeks. (NASA Release 93-141)
Richard T. Barrett, a senior design engineer at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, was awarded the Federal Laboratory Consortium Award of Excellence in Technology Transfer for 1993. (NASA Release 93-73)
In mid-June a new breed of spacecraft, the Delta Clipper Xl (DC-X), was scheduled to be launched for a brief test. If things go according to plan, the craft would hover briefly 100 feet in the air, and then settle back in its launching pad. The spacecraft, built by McDonald Douglas Aerospace, was to take off vertically and land the same way. Some experts in the field suggested that the DC-X might mark the next phase of U.S. space exploration. (Business Week, June 21/93)
NASA selected Recom Technologies, San Jose, California, a small disadvantaged business, for negotiations leading to award of a contract for Computational Administrative, Professional, and Engineering Services to support NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. (NASA Release C93-t)
Louis Williams, director of high-speed research for NASA, lectured at NASA's Langely Research Center about an environmentally safe, economically sound supersonic transport (SST) that is within the nation's technological reach. The plane, which would ferry 300 people across the Pacific Ocean in four hours, would go twice as fast as the Concord and carry three times as many people. Government research on the project began in 1990 and was scheduled to run another two years; early research focused on the project's environmental goals, which Williams maintained were being met. The federal government gave $450 million to the project.
NASA announced that it had begun flight tests of a fiber optic control system that could result in lighter, more fuel-efficient airplanes with more capable control and monitoring systems.  The tests, using the F/A-18 Systems Research Aircraft at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, were developing fiber optic systems that weighed less and took up less space than the copper wiring in today's aircraft. (NASA Release 93-199)
NASA announced that it would fund three new university research centers charged with fostering the next generation of researchers and engineers in hypersonic aeronautics--flight at more than five times the speed of sound.  Scheduled to receive $200,000 annually for three years were Syracuse University, New York; the University of Maryland, College Park; and the University of Texas at Arlington. (NASA Release 93-152)
Astro D, a cooperative x-ray astronomy mission with Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) and NASA, was scheduled for launching February 11 from the ISAS Kagoshima Space Center in Japan.
NASA announced that Salisbury State University had become the first college in Maryland named to participate in a joint study program with NASA. The university was expected to receive a $110,000 grant over three years from NASA's Joint Venture Institutions program. (B Sun, June 4/93)
NASA announced that a NASAF-15 research aircraft made a touchdown on April 21, using only engine power for control. The plane landed at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The flight was part of NASA's attempt to develop a computer-assisted engine control system that lets a plane land safely with only engine power if its normal control surfaces are disabled. (NASA Release 93-75)
NASA announced that it had tested helicopter rotor performance in icing conditions.  The tests were performed in the Icing Research Tunnel at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio.  The new experimental database resulting from these tests was to be used to further refine and validate a computer code that predicts helicopter rotor performance loss occurring when ice accumulates on the rotors during an icing encounter. (NASA Release 93-147)
NASA reported that the agency had overcome a thruster glitch to successfully complete the reboost of its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory (GRO), adding five years to the spacecraft's on-orbit lifetime. (Defense Daily, Dec 22/93)
A Utah State university group sponsored by NASA's National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program Office was scheduled to launch a high-altitude research balloon on January 11 to measure ozone distribution and wind parameters in the Earth's stratosphere. The balloon, which was to fly across the Gulf of Mexico to Florida, was the eleventh launched by this team and the first of 24-hours duration.
Eleven high school students participated in an eight-week Summer High School Apprenticeship Research Program (SHARP) at NASA's Dryden space center this summer.  Four days a week, the participants completed a regular eight-hour workday, working alongside engineers and others, learning firsthand what it takes to succeed in these careers.  The fifth day was spent in career exploration, perhaps a tour of different facilities at Edwards AFB or a visit to a university such as UCLA.  (Antelope Valley Press, Aug 12/93)
Arkansas Governor Jim Guy Tucker and Thomas J. Lee, Director of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, signed a memorandum of understanding to conduct a joint effort to transfer NASA-derived and NASA-contractor derived technologies to businesses, industries, academic institutions, research facilities, and individuals in the state. (NASA Release  93-138)
Writing in Sports Illustrated, Robert H. Boyle took to task those members of the media who have asserted that environmental problems such as depletion of the ozone layer and acid rain don't exist, that they were cooked up by scientists greedy for funding. Boyle pointed the finger at talk show host Ross Limbaugh but said that mainstream publications such as the Washington Post and the Wall Street Journal had also been guilty of misrepresenting environmental problems.  (Sports Illustrated, Jul 12/93)
By firing small jets 10 times in one-minute bursts, NASA engineers have raised the orbit of the giant Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory by 66 miles and saved it from crashing to Earth. The observatory was scheduled to travel around Earth in an egg-shaped orbit until late November when a second series of firings was to circularize its travels so that it would be at 280 miles altitude all around the globe. (AP, Oct 19/93)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected NYMA, Inc., Greenbelt, Maryland, for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for scientific, engineering, technical, administrative, and related support activities of Lewis' mission responsibilities. (NASA Release C93-q)
Officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, announced that an SR-71 Blackbird reconnaissance aircraft, once used as a spy plane, took off this week on its maiden science flight. The plane was equipped with an ultra-violet camera to study stars and comets.
Vigyan Corporation, Hampton, Virginia, last week asked the General Services Administration's Board of Contract Appeals to overturn what was thought to be the largest minority-set-aside contract ever, a $180 million pact with Nyma Corporation, Greenbelt, Maryland, for engineering support services at NASA's Lewis Research Center. Vigyan specifically charged both Nyna and NASA with conflict of interest, saying the company's winning proposal listed a current NASA employee "who possesses both proprietary and source-selection information" relevant to Vigyan's bid." (Federal Gomputing Week, Aug 23/93)
Arkansas Governor Jim Guy Tucker and Thomas J. Lee, Director of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, signed a memorandum of understanding to conduct a joint effort to transfer NASA-derived and NASA-contractor-derived technologies to businesses, industries, academic institutions, research facilities, and individuals in the state. (NASA Release  93-138)
Federal Computer Week reported that a small woman-owned Florida firm had protested Marshall Space Flight Center's decision to let companies with up to 1,500 employees bid on a small, disadvantaged business (SDB) set-aside program there. Challenger Engineering Inc., St. Petersburg, Florida, maintained that NASA's procurement policy was unfair to smaller minority-owned firms that could not compete with larger companies. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 1/93)
NASA announced that engineer Karl Anderson from the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, had invented a process that yields more accurate, faster stress measurements. Anderson's method uses a circuit called a "constant current loop"; the system prevents errors caused by temperature changes in the wires that link instruments, called strain gauges, to recording devices. (NASA Release 93-002; AP, Jan 25/93; Antelope Valley Press, Jan 20/93)
NASA said that scientists at the NASA-Langley Research Center had developed a radar that can detect wind shear before pilots fly into it. The FAA considers the Langley device an improvement over other wind shear radar on the market, according to an FAA spokesperson. NASA nominated Langley's radar work for the 1993 Robert J. Collier Trophy, a national award given annually by he  National Aeronautics Association to those who have made the greatest achievement in aeronautics and astronautics. (Daily Press, Nov 22/93)
Officials at the University of California, Berkeley,  announced that a violent overnight wind storm had destroyed a multimillion-dollar radio telescope. The 85-foot diameter dish, which was built in 1962, was located at the Hat Creek Observatory in the Lassen National Forest 70 miles northeast of Redding. NASA used the dish as part of its Crustal Dynamics Program, which measures motion of plates that compose the earth's crust. (UPI, Jan 22/93)
The Spacelab Life Sciences-2 (SLS-2) mission scheduled for October would offer scientists unprecedented opportunities to learn more about how life adapts to the microgravity environment of space flight.  For the first time in the history of space flight, scientists were to collect tissues during the mission.  Crew members were to draw blood samples from both themselves and rats and were to dissect five rats in space.  (NASA Release 93-173)
LTX Corporation announced that NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had taken delivery of a Synchro mixed signal test system for use in the radiation effects and testing laboratory in Pasadena, California. (PR NEWSWIRE, Aug 11/93)
NASA announced that it would participate in the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People's (NAACP) national Afro-Academic Cultural, Technological, and Scientific Olympics (ACT-SO) competition, to be held in conjunction with the groups's annual convention in July.  Two thousand high school students, representing 600 cities, were scheduled to compete for national honors.  NASA scientists and engineers were to participate as science fair judges.  National winner would receive certificates from NASA and a sponsored visit to a NASA field center.
According to Space News, seven months after a NASA-appointed Management Review Team reported that lax security had created a high risk of espionage at the Ames Research Center in Northern California further investigations by the FBI and NASA's inspector general had not substantiated those charge. In the meantime, however, Ames had implemented many of the team's recommendations. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, and the Ohio Aerospace Institute were scheduled to host a conference in Cleveland, March 30 and 30, focusing on the new world of Cyberspace. The conference, called the Vision 21 Symposium on Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering in the Era of Cyberspace, would provide "a panoramic view of the research and technology that will assist humans in exploration activities," said Dr. Sheila Bailey, conference chairperson. (NASA Release 93-50)
Under its High-Speed Research Program (HSRP), which began in 1990, NASA was doing basic research on developing a "clean" supersonic airliner, including preliminary studies of the potential of new materials. As part of this work, NASA was studying the atmospheric effects of supersonic aircraft in the stratosphere. The third report from this study, still in draft form and unlikely to be published in 1993, promised to dampen the optimism of previous research. (New Scientist, Aug 14/93)
Researchers hoped that the lead coffins buried beneath the floor of the 17th-century Great Brick Chapel in St. Mary's City, Maryland, contained 300-year-old air. However, according to Joel Levine, the scientist who headed the team analyzing the air at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, the coffins appeared to contain modern air, as signalled by the presence of Chlorofluorocarbons, which were first manufactured in the 1940s.
NASA announced that a specially modified NASA F-15 research aircraft had arrived at the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The F-15 was to be involved in a research program aimed at substantially advancing the cruising efficiency and flight maneuverability of future U.S. aircraft. (NASA Release 93-115)
Director Dale Compton and Deputy Director Victor Peterson, the two top directors at NASA's Ames Research Center, were scheduled to retire at the of the year. The retirements come at a time when women and members of minority groups have complained that the center's top jobs are reserved for an "old boy network" of white men. (San Jose Mercury News, Dec 11/93)
Throughout the balloon's flight, teams of amateur radio operators in Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida were to receive information from the balloon's gondola; this information was to be relayed by high-frequency radio to the Utah State University team. Other flights of an longer duration were scheduled to be launched from Canada, the United States, Mexico, and Central America. (NASA Release 93-8)
Richard B. Hoover of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was named NASA inventor of the year for his invention of the Water-Window Imaging x-ray Microscope. This instrument should enable researchers to see in great detail high contrast x-ray images of proteins, chromosomes, and other tiny carbon structures inside living cells. (NASA Release 93-024)
NASA has chosen 38 research proposals to be incorporated into phase II of its Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The projects will be conducted by 36 small business from 18 states; the projects have a value of approximately $19 million. NASA will select approximately 100 additional research proposals in January and February 1993.
The Delta Clipper-Experimental, a 42-foot prototype for a new generation of reusable spacecraft, climbed to about 300 feet, hovered, moved laterally about 350 feet, then made a vertical landing at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico.  This was the spacecraft's second successful test flight. (B Sun, Sep 12/93; National Journal, Oct 2/93)
NASA announced that researchers at the NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, had developed a new and unique group of ceramic processing chemicals that might revolutionize the ceramic industry.  The new processing chemicals might lead to high purity ceramic products that could better withstand temperatures over 2102 degrees F (1200 degrees Celsius). (NASA Release 93-143)
NASA announced that researchers at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, had developed an ion exchange material that in laboratory tests effectively removed contaminants from water. Tests showed that the new material was easy to use and inexpensive to produce. (NASA Release 93-86)
NASA announced that it had chosen the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas to become the NASA Specialized Center of Research and Training in Integrated Physiology. The new center would focus on arriving at a better understanding of how different organ systems of various species react to space flight. (NASA Release 93-040)
The Hook Telescope on Mt. Wilson in California, which once ranked as the world's biggest, was written off as an astronomical anachronism eight years ago. However, using the latest electronic sensors and image-enhancers, scientists and philanthropists led by Robert Jastrow of the Mt. Wilson Institute and the founder of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Flight, were reported working to salvage the Hooker Telescope.  Jastrow had raised $250,000 for repairs and was seeking another $250,00 to make the telescope useful into the 21st century. (LA Times, Aug 2/93)
Nasa announced the selection of 111 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). These proposals and the 38 previously selected proposals came from 130 small, high technology firms located in 27 states. The SBIR program is intended to stimulate technological innovation by using small businesses, including minority and disadvantaged firms, to help meet federal research and development requirements and to encourage the commercial application of federally funded research innovations. (NASA Release 93-33; Washington Technology, Feb 25/93)
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and the California Institute of Technology announced that they had developed a computer software system to catalog and analyze the estimated half billion sky objects in the second Palomar Observatory sky survey. (NASA Release 93-067)
NASA announced that a NASA F/A-18, modified to test the newest and most advanced system technologies, made its first research flight on May 21 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The Systems Research Aircraft (SRA) was evaluating technologies that would benefit both civilian and military aircraft. (NASA Release 93-95; Mojave Desert News, May 27/93)
The Associated Press announced that NASA engineers had searched for the source of a mysterious "bang" in Shuttle Endeavour's engine compartment. The sound was heard as the Shuttle was being prepared for a June 3 launch. (AP, May 14/93)
Dr. Lonnie Reid, a fluid dynamics expert at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, was scheduled to be inducted into the Ohio Science Technology and Industry Hall of Fame in Columbus on February 7.
NASA has begun full-scale development of the first spacecraft to rendezvous with and orbit an asteroid.  Called Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR), the mission received funding in the FY 1994 budget and was scheduled to be the first in NASA's new Discovery program of small-scale, cost-effective space exploration missions to be launched. (NASA Release 93-220)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Magellan Project officials announced the successful first-of-a kind experiment to "aerobrake" a spacecraft by dipping it into the atmosphere of a planet.  The Magellan spacecraft's orbit was changed from highly elliptical to nearly circular by dragging it through the top of the thick Venusian atmosphere repeatedly over a period of 70 days, ending on August 3, 1997.
Robert S. Harrington, 50, an astronomer with the United States Naval Observatory in Washington, died of cancer January 23 at George Washington University Hospital. Dr. Harrington was known for his work concerning the possible existence of a 10th planet beyond the orbit of Plato. He also focused on precise stellar distances, solar system dynamics, and multiple star dynamics.
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, scientists have developed a multifunctional glass that detects pollutants in the air by a dramatic change in color.  Dr. Albert Stiegman, a JPL chemist, and his associates described the development in a paper in the journal Chemistry of Materials. (NASA Release 93-209)
NASA awarded 20 universities grants for the first phase of a new training program that ultimately would create a cadre of young engineers skilled in multi-disciplinary design and analysis methods. Each university was to get about $50,000 to define a multi-disciplinary curriculum and graduate-level research program in the aeronautics field that would be accomplished with industry. The universities also were to prepare proposals for Phase II of the effort. (NASA Release 93-210)
NASA announced the selection of 317 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase 1 contracts in NASA's 1993 Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR).  Over 2,850 proposals were submitted by small, high technology businesses from all parts of the United States. (NASA Release  93-207)
NASA announced that it had selected Computer Sciences Corporation, Applied Technology Division, Falls Church, Virginia, to negotiate a contract for scientific computing operations, maintenance, and communication services in support of the Center Scientific Computing Complex (CSCC) at the Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA (NASA Release C93-1; W Times, Jul 22/93))
NASA's appointment of France Cordova as the agency Senior Scientific Adviser, on a three-year leave of absence from Pennsylvania State University was featured. She was to serve as the principal link between NASA and the science community and ensure that NASA programs were regarded as scientifically and technologically well-founded. She was also to coordinate an integrated strategic plan for all the scientific disciplines within NASA. (The Penn Stater, Feb/94)
On February 9, the Discovery was to launch the Orbital Debris Radar Calibration Spheres, designed to help locate "little junk" orbiting in space, which could pose a hazard to space flight. (CSM, Feb 7/94)
Numerous federal agencies, including NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), were accused in a Senate report of "offloading" by devising elaborate practices for circumventing federal law so that hundreds of millions of dollars in government business could go to favored companies. The Senate Governmental Affairs subcommittee on oversight of government management said they had "abused and misused" the law and otherwise could have cut costs by half. (W Post, Jan 28/94)
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, released photos of the Chicxulub crater on the Yucatan peninsula in Mexico. The photos, taken from NASA's spaceborne radar, showed the site where scientists considered an impact 65 million years ago might have caused climatic changes that killed the dinosaurs. (USA Today, Jul 29/94)
An article described awards of the National Science Foundation (NSF) to historically black colleges and universities and institutions serving Latinos and Native Americans. Specific reference was made to Clark-Atlanta University in Georgia, which had built a multimillion-dollar science research facility, doubled its science faculty, increased the number of students in science and mathematics, and attracted large federal grants, including funds from NASA. As a result of its efforts, Clark-Atlanta was now a finalist for one of six $25 million NSF grants. (C Trib, Oct 22/94)
NASA announced that it and the National Space Agency of Ukraine (NSAU) had agreed July 13 to explore possible cooperation in remote sensing and Earth sciences, telemedicine, space biology, space welding, advanced concepts and technology, and student and scientist exchanges. Robert W. Clarke, NASA Associate Administrator for Policy Coordination and International Relations, headed the U.S. delegation and Valeriy G. Komarov, Deputy Director General of NSAU, headed the Ukrainian delegation. (NASA Release 94-119)
NASA announced the resignation of Jeremiah W. Pearson as Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight and the appointment of Wayne Littles as new Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 94-191; AP, Nov 16/94; H Post, Nov 17/94; W Post, Nov 18/94; NY Times, Nov 21/94; AvWk, Nov 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, announced the award to Gilcrest Electric and Supply Company, Elyria, Ohio, of a contract to provide technical and fabrication services for the Center's in-house research and development program. The Lewis Center also announced the selection of R&R International, Akron, Ohio, for a contract for facilities operations and technical support services. (NASA Release C94-o; NASA Release C94-p)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science Wesley T. Huntress announced two new science missions, both aboard small, relatively inexpensive spacecraft. The first, the Transitional Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE), would observe the sun to study the connection between its magnetic fields and the heating of the sun's corona. TRACE, scheduled for launch in 1997, would have Alan Title of the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, California, as the principal investigator. The second spacecraft, the Wide-Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE), scheduled for launch in 1998 to study the evolution of galaxies, would be headed by Perry B. Hacking of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. The two missions were part of NASA's Small Explorer Program for highly focused science missions. Small Explorer spacecraft weigh approximately 500 pounds, and the missions were expected to cost approximately $50 million for design, development, and operations through the first 30 days in orbit. (NASA Release 94-152)
NASA and contractor engineers were studying a number of existing engine designs as they tried to lower the propulsion technology risk for private development of a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) in the early 2000s. Operability rather than performance would be the key to any RLV engine. According to Len Worlund, director of the Advanced Transportation Technology Office at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to get reusability, NASA and its partners were working to build components that better withstood repeated firings. They were also trying to lower the high turbine temperatures that had saddled the Shuttle's engines with crack-prone cooling shields that required frequent repairs. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)
NASA announced the selection of six Hispanic-Serving universities to receive five-year, Institutional Research Award grants for multidisciplinary research in science and engineering. The universities were to receive $400,000 the first year, $600,000 the second year, $800,000 the third year, and $1 million in the fourth and fifth years, for a total of $3.8 million over the five-year period. The universities selected were: California State University at Los Angeles; Florida International University, Miami; New Mexico Highlands University, Las Vegas; City College of New York; University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras; and University of Texas at San Antonio. (NASA Release 94-85)
The Boeing Company announced that it planned to cut about 900 jobs at its plant in Huntsville, Alabama, because it lost an eight-year, $1.05 billion contract with NASA. However, Boeing anticipated that Computer Sciences Corporation, which won the NASA contract, would hire most of the affected workers. (NY Times, May 10/94)
NASA announced the selection of BDM Federal, Inc., McLean, Virginia, to form a Remote Sensing Public Access Center for demonstrating, testing, and transferring technology to help provide public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. (NASA Release 94-131; Federal Computer Week, Aug 22/94)
The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, awarded the Engineering Design Group, Inc., Tulsa, Oklahoma, a contract for engineering, construction and environmental services in the rehabilitation, modification and construction of research and institutional facilities and systems. This small-business cost-plus-fee contract had a two-year basic period and three one-year renewals, a base value of $13.6 million, and a total value of $45 million. (NASA Release C94-e)
An example was given of the way in which NASA-sponsored research in aeronautics, in this case at the Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, had practical applications in daily life. The example involved a redesign of big rig trucks, based on Ed Saltzman's research, which made the trucks more fuel efficient. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Oct 16/94)
One of NASA's high-altitude, remote-controlled, Perseus research aircraft crashed, severely damaging the plane. NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center operated the craft, which was used to collect data from the upper reaches of the atmosphere--it could fly up to an altitude of 90,000 feet. (Antelope Valley Press, Nov 23/94; H Chron, Dec 5/94; LA Times, Dec 5/94)
Sayed Z. Shariq, director of the Office of Commercial Technology at NASA's Ames Research Center, said NASA had reshaped its technology transfer program so as to make it an integral part of NASA's business relationships with the private sector. In this regard, Shariq said that Government should adapt to industry's practices and both NASA and industry should work together during the research and development, product planning, prototyping, and fabrication stages. In addition, agency staff performance evaluations, incentives, and awards should be structured to foster commitment to the commercial program. One of the first signs of NASA's commercialization mission was the Aerospace Industry Technology Program, funded at $20 million for fiscal 1994. (AvWk, May 16/94)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced the award of a grant to Sierra College, Rocklin, California, for a hands-on community college engineering curriculum as part of the government's technology reinvestment project. (NASA Release 94-63)
NASA announced the selection of ten organizations to receive a total of $6.8 million to help develop applications and technologies as part of NASA's efforts to stimulate public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. (NASA Release 94-194)
Two NASA-sponsored scientists, Scott Hudson of Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, and Steven Ostro of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, created the first three-dimensional model of an asteroid based on radar data. The asteroid was the double-lobed 4769 Castalia, discovered by Eleanor Helen of JPL at the Palomar Observatory in 1989. The model and resulting pictures appeared in the February 18 issue of Science magazine. (NASA Release 94-26)
NASA was to award a Program Information System Mission Services (PrISMS) contract worth up to $800 million by May 1. Three companies were seeking to win the eight-year Marshall Space Flight Center contract: Computer Sciences Corporation, Harris Corporation, and incumbent Boeing Computer Services, Inc. The winning PrISMS vendor was to manage NASAwide communications, provide some NASAwide information management services, and run extensive computational services at Marshall. PrISMS had a two-year base with six one-year options; 10 percent of the work was to be set aside for small, disadvantaged businesses. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 25/94)
NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology (OACT) scheduled a one-day forum, including an Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP), to encourage high-risk, high-payoff technology development. NASA responsiveness to industry's need was shown by industry participation in all aspects and phases of the AITP program, with representatives making presentations on both program content and structure. The fiscal 1994 budget allocation for this technology initiative was $20 million. (NASA Note to Editors N94-6)
NASA announced the signing of a collaborative agreement of the chief executive officers of the nation's 28 largest aerospace contractors, NASA, and the U.S. Department of Education in a plan to improve the nation's mathematics, science, and technology education goals. The agreement was in furtherance of President Clinton's Goals 2000: Educate America Act, which he signed March 31, 1994. (NASA Release 94-190)
NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology announced its solicitation of proposals from all sources for industry-led research and development projects under the Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP). AITP aims to develop and apply advanced technology rapidly in the aerospace industry and in the non-aerospace commercial marketplace. (NASA Release 94-91)
NASA announced the discovery in the southern constellation Scorpius of an unusually bright X-ray source by an instrument aboard NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory. It remained to be determined whether the new source was a black hole, a pulsar, or some new object, according to B. Alan Harmon of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 94-140)
NASA announced the selection of 42 additional proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in its Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The programs supplemented the 130 firms announced in December 1993. (NASA Release 94-18)
A scale model of Boeing's High Speed Commercial Transport was undergoing testing in the supersonic wind tunnel at NASA's Ames Research Center. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)
JoBea Way, a radar scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, came up with the idea for KidSat in November 1993 while working with scholarship students in NASA's Space Radar Laboratory program. KidSat was a project to establish a permanent orbiting research payload that only students could operate to broaden their educational horizons. Sally Ride, director of the California Space Institute at the University of California, San Diego, was backing the project, which would enlist help from NASA and other organizations such as the National Science Foundation and private charitable foundations. The aim would be to begin the first KidSat classroom lessons in the 1995-96 school year. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
Paul F. Holloway, Director of NASA's Langley Research Center, said the Center had no desire to serve as a site for the two new wind tunnels. The Center feared its existing research would suffer if the new structures were located there. California, West Virginia, Tennessee, and Washington were vying as wind tunnel sites. (Daily Press, Apr 27/94)
NASA announced the selection of Honeywell, Inc., for a contract for developing flight deck technologies in support of NASA's High Speed Research program. NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, was to manage the eight-year project. The advanced technologies to be developed included design for a potential future High Speed Civil Transport. (NASA Release C94-r)
NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, announced the selection of EG&G Langley, Inc., Hampton, Virginia, for a contract to provide maintenance, construction, and engineering support for the Center. (NASA Release C94-m)
Kenneth Iliff, NASA Dryden Flight Research Center's first chief scientist, was featured. He developed a mathematical methodology used by nearly all the free world's flight test organizations to study flight dynamics, performance, and aerothermodynamics. (Antelope Valley Press, Nov 1/94)
Celebrating National Engineers Week, more than 20 engineers from NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center visited classrooms around Antelope Valley to discuss their careers. (Antelope Valley Press, Feb 24/94)
NASA announced the selection of two Space Grant Consortiums: Virginia and Colorado, and two universities: Pennsylvania and Cincinnati, to participate in the Student Launch Program. The program was intended to provide undergraduate students hands-on experience in flying space and Earth science experiments on suborbital sounding rockets and scientific balloons. (NASA Release 94-113)
NASA's Astrophysical Data Service allowed access to an astronomical data base that ultimately was to contain nearly a billion stars and several million galaxies. The data resulted from the comprehensive National Geographic Sky Survey made by the Mount Palomar Observatory in the 1950s. To this Mount Palomar added a second survey, underway for several years, of the northern sky covering more than 50 million galaxies and nearly 2 billion stars. (W Times, Feb 13/94)
NASA announced the selection of two Winston-Salem State University faculty members to participate in the NASA/University Joint Venture Program (JOVE). The program enabled faculty and students to become involved in space science research. NASA was to invest $138,000 over three years to support Winston-Salem State's program participation. As part of the program, two faculty members would spend 10 weeks in the summer of 1994 at NASA field centers being "mentored" by NASA scientists. (NASA Release 94-48)
NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, and Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan, announced they had concluded a two-year cooperative agreement for the transfer of NASA-developed technology to improve the design and engineering of Ford vehicles. This was the first broad technology transfer process between NASA and any automotive manufacturer. (NASA Release 94-166; H Post, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 13/94)
NASA created or saved an estimated 5,300 direct and indirect jobs in the U.S. economy in the preceding 18 months because of technology transfer programs at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Of these, some 1,170 were in Alabama, according to Harry Craft Jr., manager of the MSFC Technology Transfer Office, 1,078 in Pennsylvania, and 430 in Tennessee. Most of the companies helped by the Office were small businesses. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 24/94)
NASA announced the identification of nine proposals to begin cooperative agreement negotiations in NASA's Aerospace Industry Technology Program (AITP). AITP was established to focus industry's research and development efforts on dual-purpose aerospace technologies that showed potential for strong commercial applications that might also benefit NASA's programs. In addition to NASA funding, each project also would involve 50 percent or more in non-government cost-sharing. (NASA Release 94-165)
A laudatory assessment was given of NASA's Technology Transfer program with specific reference to the Marshall Space Flight Center. According to Harry Craft, Jr., Technology Transfer office manager, the program had three elements: Industrial Outreach, Space Act Cooperative Agreements, and Dual Use Programs. Each was intended to increase cooperation between government and industry. In the Industrial Outreach area, industries came to NASA with problems they needed to resolve, requiring less than 40 hours work. For more complex problems, Space Act Cooperative Agreements were used. The Dual Use Program was a technology reinvestment program in which both government and industry contributed funds and technology to benefit both parties. (Huntsville News, Nov 30/94)
A NASA engineering team succeeded in lifting the endangered Compton gamma-ray observatory to a safe orbit after its propulsion system malfunctioned. NASA said the reboost had extended the mission life of the observatory by five years, thus meeting its original two-to-eight-year life span--it was launched on April 5, 1991. (CSM, Feb 23/94)
NASA announced its selection of 15 organizations to receive a total of $20 million to help develop applications and technologies as part of NASA's efforts to provide public use of Earth and space science data over the Internet. The remote sensing database applications would make the information more accessible to a wider audience than in the past. (NASA Release 94-138)
NASA announced the successful completion of the first and largest of eight mirrors for the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The mirror was scheduled to be a part of the AXAF telescope which was to be launched in 1998. (NASA Release 94-139)
A federal grand jury indicted Ram Bachan Ram, chairman of the mathematics department at Hampton University, on seven counts of mail fraud related to alleged plagiarism in submitting a proposal for a research grant to NASA. The proposal concerned "Implications of Pressure Diffusion for Shock Waves," and for it Ram received $100,810 from NASA's Langley Research Center. However, it developed that Ram had stolen the proposal and findings from the work of a professor at Clemson University in South Carolina. (Virginia Pilot, Mar 9/94)
NASA announced that the Ulysses spacecraft, the first probe to explore the sun's environment at high altitudes, had completed a pass on November 5 over the southern solar pole, ending the first phase of its primary mission. Members of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, reported the development including the fact that Ulysses found a uniform magnetic field at the sun rather than any magnetic poles. In the sun's polar regions, the solar wind was found to be flowing at a very high velocity of about 750 kilometers per second, nearly double the speed of the solar wind at lower latitudes. (NASA Release 94-187; LA Times, Dec 4/94; UPI, Dec 5/94)
Astronomer Alexander Wolszczan at Pennsylvania State University in an article published in Science magazine, claimed "irrefutable evidence" of at least two planets orbiting a nearby star--the first confirmed observation of planets outside the Earth's solar system. The planets were in orbit around an unusual neutron star located 1,200 light-years away in the constellation Virgo. Various NASA staff members commented on the discovery. Robert Millis, director of the Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona, said NASA had a major effort underway to search for planets around stars but its program focused on ordinary stars like the sun. (LA Times, Apr 22/94; USA Today, Apr 22/94; P Inq, Apr 22/94; W Post, Apr 22/94; NY Times, Apr 22/94)
NASA announced the establishment of a joint government research program that might result in developing plants that could withstand drought, unseasonable temperatures, soil salinity, and other adverse growth conditions. The program, called the Research Network on Plant Sensory Systems, was supported by NASA and the National Science Foundation. The program also was selected as NASA's ninth Specialized Center of Research and Training. (NASA Release 94-213)
Fifty-four minority high school students, mostly African Americans, from the Los Angeles area, began a four-week stay at Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio, studying computer science, Earth sciences, and mathematics. NASA sponsored the $300,000 Earth to L.A. program in order to encourage minority students to pursue such courses at traditionally black colleges and universities. Following the courses at Central State, the students would spend two weeks visiting 12 black colleges, looking toward future college entrance. (LA Times, Jul 21/94)
NASA announced that it would negotiate contracts with 15 small companies to enable them to fully develop innovative new high technology products they had proposed for application in the aerospace industry. The contracts would be financed under NASA's Small Business Technology Transfer Program. (NASA Release 94-111)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, announced the selection of Robert P. Madison International for an engineering, construction, and environmental services contract at the Lewis Research Center and at Plum Brook Station, Sandusky, Ohio. (NASA Release C94-i; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)
Sandy Valenti, project team leader at NASA's Lewis Research Center, said the Center had compiled an inventory of space-related technology that has relevance to biotechnology and the work of medical researchers in northeastern Ohio. NASA's goal was to support existing organizations in he community, such as local hospitals and universities. Five specific research areas in which NASA could provide technological support were fluid mechanics, electronics, communication and instrumentation, materials development and structural design, surface modification, and energy storage systems. (Crain's Cleveland Business, May 30/94)
NASA announced that it had selected 412 small business research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts up to $70,000 to perform a six-month feasibility study under its 1994 Small Business Innovation Research Program. Successful completion of Phase I would make companies eligible to compete in 1995 for two-year contracts in the amount of $600,000. (NASA Release 94-176; Huntsville News, Oct 26/94)
A Youth Science Symposium, "Your Place in Space," drew 400 middle school students to the California Museum of Science and Industry. Randii Wessen, a science systems engineer with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, was an instructor in one of the space-age exercises. Other students launched rockets and learned the fundamentals of comets and rockets. (LA Times, Dec 16/94)
Following a protest ruling in its favor, Recom Technologies, San Jose, California, received payment for its Computational, Administrative, Professional, and Engineering Services contract with NASA's Lewis Research Center. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 7/94)
The research of engineers at NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, was featured, together with its applications to industry. Specifically, pistons were discussed and the benefits of making them from carbon instead of aluminum. NASA had "working agreements" with Ford, General Motors, lawn mower engine maker Briggs & Stratton Inc., and engine maker K&B Manufacturing Company, that would allow them to use Langley piston technology if they should decide to make the pistons. (Daily Press, Oct 23/94)
NASA announced the preliminary findings of the investigating team at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, California. The findings indicated that a faulty vertical gyro was responsible for the accident November 22 that resulted in severe damage to a Perseus remotely piloted research aircraft. (NASA Release 94-218)
NASA announced that Suzanne Smrekar, a geophysicist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, who had been working on data from NASA's Magellan mission, had found that the planet Venus was still geologically active in places, even though radar images of its surface indicated little change in the past half-billion years. Data suggested that there were at least two, and possibly more, active hot spots on Venus. (NASA Release 94-105)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, and Lockheed Corporation of Calabasas, California, reached agreement to merge and create the world's largest space and defense company. The agreement remained to be approved by shareholders and regulators. According to Lockheed chairman Daniel M. Tellep the merger would result in "significant reduction of costs to the government." Biographic data on Norman R. Augustine, chairman and chief executive of Martin Marietta and president-designate of Lockheed Martin Corporation, were included. (W Post, Aug 30/94; CSM, Sep 1/94; W Post, Sep 4/94; U.S. News and World Report, Sep 12/94)
NASA announced that scientists at its Marshall Space Flight center, Huntsville, Alabama, had discovered unusual gamma-ray flashes in the upper atmosphere high above thunderstorms. The heretofore unseen flashes were detected by the Burst and Transient Source Experiment, a Marshall instrument aboard NASA's orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. (NASA Release 94-86; W Post, May 30/94)
Kenneth J. Szalai, Director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center, received the Distinguished Executive Presidential Rank Award. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 6/94)
Andrea Donnellan, a geophysicist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, stated that Oat Mountain in the Santa Susana range, north of the San Fernando Valley, had jumped several inches during the 6.6 earthquake that hit Los Angeles January 17. NASA collected data from a global network of 45 stations. (NASA Release 94-19; W Post, Feb 8/94; P Inq, Feb 13/94; National Black Review, Feb/Mar/94)
The General Accounting Office, in a report to Congress, said that NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, managed by the California Institute of Technology, was poorly controlled and lost about $1 million in property annually. (Reuters, May 10/94; O Sen Star, May 11/94; Fla Today, May 11/94; AP, May 11/94)
NASA encountered difficulties in its desire to deliver planetary video data to microcomputer users because of the limitations of the technology. Mike Martin, a science data systems technologist with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said that so far he and his colleagues had been unable to incorporate Apple Quick Time video into multimedia presentations to run on the Macintosh and multimedia PCs. (Government Computer News, Mar 21/94)
Scientists said that the first spacecraft to fly over the sun's south pole--the Ulysses probe, a joint project of the European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA--reached the climax of a 3 billion-kilometer journey through space the week of September 12. As it did so, 80 of the project's 120 scientists met at ESA's research center in the Dutch town of Noordwijk to assess data gained during the four-year space odyssey. Ulysses' chief scientist Richard Marsden believed that the mission would give scientists greater insight into how the solar wind interfered with radio communications and electrical devices on Earth. (Reuters, Sep 16/94)
NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had signed an agreement with McDonnell Douglas Aerospace in Huntington Beach, California, to reconfigure the Delta Clipper experimental vehicle (DC-X) using advanced lightweight materials and advanced auxiliary propulsion systems. NASA was acquiring the DC-X from the Department of Defense to test new technologies needed to develop a reusable launch vehicle that could assist NASA's ultimate goal of gaining low-cost access to space. (NASA Release 94-125)
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services, Inc., of San Diego, California, for contract negotiations for two definite launches and options for seven added launches using the Atlas intermediate expendable launch vehicle. The first mission was to be the Earth Observing System-AM-1 spacecraft scheduled for 1998. (NASA Release C94-g)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and a consortium led by Texas Instruments' Metallurgical Materials Division were trying to use advanced aerospace materials to develop a demonstrator automobile engine significantly lighter and more efficient than the ones in present use. They planned to use high-temperature, high-strength materials developed for the defunct National Aerospace Plane. NASA would provide funding under its Aerospace Industry Technology Program. (AvWk, Nov 7/94)
NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center's Western Aeronautical Test Range passed a milestone on March 18: the 10,000th mission monitored by the range. In this case it was NASA's F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle's second flight of the day. (Antelope Valley Press,Mar 19/94)
A critical article broke down the percentages NASA would devote to various programs during the 1995 fiscal year, out of the $14.4 billion approved by Congress. The following categories were listed: Space Shuttle, 25 percent; NASA bureaucracy, 15 percent; Space Station, 15 percent; Mission to Planet Earth, 9 percent; physics and astronomy, 8 percent; aeronautics, 6 percent; planetary exploration, 5 percent; advanced concepts and technology, 4 percent; mission communications, 3 percent; launch services, 2 percent; life and microgravity sciences, 2 percent; space communication and telecommunications, 1 percent; new construction, 1 percent; safety office, .5 percent; inspector general, .5 percent. Not included were wind tunnel operations. (O Sen Star, Oct 16/94)
NASA announced the appointment of J. Stuart Fordyce, currently Deputy Director of NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, as Chief Scientist at the Ohio Aerospace Institute, Cleveland, effective September 18. (NASA Release 94-130)
NASA announced that scientists at its Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, were observing rare gamma ray flashes above thunderstorms at a rate six times that of previous observations. Steve Goodman of Marshall's Space Sciences Laboratory said the observations were being made by the Burst and Transient Source Experiment aboard NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, which was recently modified by ground commands to be more sensitive to such events. NASA planned to bring together investigators from the fields of space and atmospheric physics to study the newly discovered events. (NASA Release 94-204; AP, Dec 7/94)
NASA announced the award of a contract to the Boeing Company, Commercial Airplane Group, Renton, Washington, for engineering design and trade studies in support of the National Wind Tunnel Complex (NWTC). The NWTC was a joint effort between government and industry to construct state-of-the-art transonic and low-speed wind tunnels to meet the turn-of-the-century needs of the aerospace industry. The Wind Tunnel Program Office at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, was to manage the contract. (NASA Release C94-u)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, awarded the Computer Sciences Corporation, Arlington, Virginia, an eight-year contract to provide Program Information Systems Mission Services (PrISMS). (NASA Release C94-l; W Post, May 4/94)
NASA announced that 166 small, high technology firms located in 31 states had been selected for Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. Funding for Phase II contracts could be up to $600,000 for a two-year performance period. (NASA Release 94-192)
A prototype of the Cockpit Weather Information Needs (CWIN) concept developed by Langley Research Center is being installed on a United DC-10-10. It will be operated for at least three months on scheduled, revenue flights to evaluate the cost and safety benefits. Initially the weather data will be limited to a nationaly radar summary and an air-to-ground lightning map. NASA has plans to add terminal forecasts and sruface observations. (AvWk, Jul 31/95)
A fully automated landing of a transport aircraft was made using only engine thrust for control. Landing was a McDonnell-Douglas MD-11 using a Propulsion Controlled Aircraft (PCA) system at NASA�s Dryden Flight Research Center. PCA is expected to become an important back-up system in the event of a loss of an aircraft�s hydraulic flight control system. (NASA Release 95-149; Fla Today, Sep 24/95; AvWk, Sep 4/95)
A device invented at NASA�s Langley Research Center may protect homeowners everywhere from deadly carbon monoxide fumes. It uses a new class of low-temperature oxidation catalysts to convert carbon monoxide to non-toxic carbon dioxide at room temperature. It also can remove formaldehyde gas. (NASA Release 95-218)
A 94-percent scale model of Boeing�s proposed Joint Advanced Strike Technology Fighter (JAST), now under construction, is planned to begin using the 80 by 120 foot wind tunnel at the Ames Research Center in early 1996. (AvWk, Mar 6/95)
Scientists at the University of Chicago advanced a new theory explaining the "mass extinctions" of living species that have occurred on Earth, the most famous being that of the dinosaurs 65 million years ago.  They theorized that supernovas burned off the Earth's ozone layer and caused the sun's rays to flood the surface with deadly radiation.  The theory borrows from work done on the effect of ozone depletion in Antarctica.  Scientists estimate that five mass extinctions have occurred on Earth, one every 120 million years. (AP, Jan 2/91; C Trib, Jan 3/95)
An historic wind tunnel at NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia is being retired. Originally called the �Full Scale Tunnel� when built in 1931, it was the largest wind tunnel in the world until 1945. (NASA Release 95-194; AvWk, Nov 20/95)
Large-scale conceptual models of the X-32 Common Affordable Lightweight Fighter are scheduled to begin at the Ames Research Center this summer and continue through the summer of 1996. The idea for the X-32, which could be introduced into service around 2010, is to have two versions. One would be a conventional take-off and landing aircraft. The second version would be much as the first, except configured for short take-offs and vertical landings. They would share a common fuselage and engine, while a powered-lift propulsion system would be used for vertical landings. (NASA Release 95-4)
NASA astronomers said that a stellar object that erupted last summer with powerful bursts of X-rays and jets of hot gas at near the speed of light may be a black hole or possibly a neutron star in the act of gobbling up a companion star. The object, a relatively close 10,000 light-years from Earth, was discovered in July when it exploded with flashes of the most powerful natural X-rays in the heavens. The radiation was detected by NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. (AP, Jan 12/95)
During an occultation of the comet Chiron and a star, an airborne NASA observatory was used to help determine the size of this comet that orbits like a planet(in a nearly circular orbit(in our solar system. According to an international team of scientists, Chiron is between 103 and 193 miles in diameter and 20 times the size of Halley�s comet. The Kuiper Airborne Observatory flew near Recife, Brazil on this project. Chiron orbits the Sun once in 50 years. (NY Times, Jan 10/95; UPI, Jan 6/95)
Remote control technology and the Internet are expected to play major parts in the operation of the South Pole Infrared Explorer telescope and the Antarctic Submillimeter Telescope and Remote Observatory, both in Antarctica. These instruments were built and are operated by the Center for the Astrophysical Research in Antarctica, a consortium of universities and research laboratories supported mostly by the  National Science Foundation.  Astronomers will be able to control these instruments from any place in the world with an Internet or modem connection. (NY Times, Jan 10/95)
A natural laser in space was detected coming from a young, very hot, luminous star in the constellation Cygnus. The laser was created as intense ultraviolet light from the star excites the densely packed hydrogen atoms in the gaseous, dusty disk surrounding the star. When infrared light shines on the excited hydrogen atoms, it causes the atoms to emit an intense beam of light at exactly the same wavelength, creating the circumstellar laser. This natural laser was detected on NASA�s Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO) during missions based on Hawaii. The existence of such natural lasers was predicted more than 15 years ago. (NASA Release 95-148; Reuters, Aug 29/95; Fla Today, Sep 10/95; Science, Sep 8/95)
The "New York Times" reported that University of Illinois atmospheric scientists had begun this month aiming a powerful laser beam into the atmosphere above the South Pole, expecting to illuminate many details about the deletion of the global ozone layer. The scientists hoped that the laser will help them create continuous three-dimensional maps of the chemical composition and physical details of the atmosphere throughout the year. (NY Times, Jan 24/95)
In experiments aimed at answering one of the most intriguing questions in particle physics and cosmology, scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico produced especially strong evidence that elusive particles called neutrinos do indeed have mass. If proven, the finding means that neutrinos could constitute a major component of the mysterious invisible matter, the long-sought missing mass, that cosmologists think fills and shapes the universe and could dictate its fate. Finding a mass for the ubiquitous neutrino would help toward completing an inventory of the missing matter, a tally that will determine whether the universe will fly apart, fall in on itself, or settle on a middle path. D. Hywel White, leader of the research team, said that the most likely explanation for the observed behavior of neutrinos produced by a proton accelerator was that these particles have some as yet undetermined amount of mass. (NY Times, Jan 31/95)
The "New York Times" reported that University of Illinois atmospheric scientists had begun this month aiming a powerful laser beam into the atmosphere above the South Pole, expecting to illuminate many details about the deletion of the global ozone layer. The scientists hoped that the laser will help them create continuous three-dimensional maps of the chemical composition and physical details of the atmosphere throughout the year. (NY Times, Jan 24/95)
NASA selected 30 research proposals for negotiation of Phase I contracts as part of the 1995 Small Business Technology Transfer Pilot Program (STTR), which is one of the ways that NASA takes the knowledge gained in air and space exploration an transfers it to the public. Companies that successfully complete Phase I activities are eligible to compete for Phase II awards the following year. The Phase II award allows for two-year, fixed-price contracts of up to $500,000. (NASA Release 95-103)
Data collected from a NASA airborne observatory fitted with a 36-inch telescope helped astronomers estimate the size of the largest known comet, Chiron.  Chiron is between 100 and 187 miles in diameter, 20 times the size of Haley's comet. (AP, Jan 8/95)
A team of national geologists working with NASA scientists dropped a 700-pound weight on a jumbled mound of rock in Canyonlands National Park in Utah in an attempt to determine whether Upheaval Dome is a badly eroded salt dome or the remnants of a 5-mile-diameter meteorite impact crater. Earlier studies of shattered rocks and quartz crystals had already convinced many researchers that an asteroid or comet fragment slammed into southeast Utah sometime between five and 100 million years ago. Impact craters such as Upheaval dome are common in the solar system, so the geologists were attempting to learn how such craters form. (Salt Lake City Tribune, Jan 10/95)
The Boeing Company and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation announced that McDonnell Douglas would merge with Boeing in a stock-for-stock transaction. The merger, the biggest in aerospace history, positioned Boeing to compete with Europe’s Airbus Industrie for nearly all commercial airline contracts. The merger also strengthened Boeing’s position as one of the most influential companies, both domestically and internationally, in the United States. The US$13.3 billion deal would place under a single umbrella nearly 200,000 employees, producing annual revenues in excess of US$48 billion. The Boeing Company also emerged from the deal with improved chances of winning major military contracts, whereas, previously, the company had few ventures involving the military aerospace industry. However, McDonnell Douglas had been the main supplier to the military of F/A-18 and F-15 Eagle-model fighter jets to the military. Thus, the merger brought together leaders in the commercial and military sectors of the aerospace industry, creating what one industry analyst called an “800-pound gorilla.” McDonnell Douglas stock rose 20 percent on the first day of trading following the announcement.(The Boeing Company, “McDonnell Douglas To Merge with Boeing, Combination To Be the World’s Largest Aerospace Company,” news release, 15 December 1996; Peter Kaplan, “Mission Inevitable,” Washington Times, 17 December 1996; David E. Sanger, “A Giant in Jets and Foreign Policy,” New York Times, 17 December 1996.)
NASA’s analysts at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), who had investigated the causes of the Challenger explosion, joined the probe into the crash of TWA flight 800, which exploded near Long Island, New York, on 17 July 1996. NASA offered the services of its MSFC investigative team to analyze why the center fuel tank of the Boeing 747 had exploded. Officials from the National Transportation Safety Board led the investigation, with support from a variety of other agencies, including NASA, the U.S. Navy, and the FBI.(Robert Davis, “Challenger Experts Aid in TWA Probe,” USA Today, 23 August 1996; Eric Malnic, “Experts at NASA Join Probe of TWA Crash,” Los Angeles Times, 23 August 1996.)
At the Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, Adriana C. Ocampo, a geologist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, announced the discovery of a chain of impact craters in Chad. According to a team of scientists, the presence of the craters suggested that a sizable comet or asteroid might have struck ancient Earth. Scientists discovered the craters using the Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C (SIR-C), which flew on Shuttle Endeavour’s Mission STS-59 in 1994. The impact craters were only the second chain of large craters ever discovered on Earth and the first impact craters found using the SIR-C technology. Ocampo warned that scientists still needed to excavate the ground extensively before they could be sure that the craters were indeed impact structures.(NASA, “Chain of Impact Craters Suggested by Spaceborne Radar Images,” news release 96-55, 20 March 1996. 46 NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-76—Press Kit,” news release 96-46, March 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Takes Off for Russian Mir Linkup,” Washington Post, March 23, 1996.)
A NASA research team published in the Journal of Geophysical Research its findings on urban- like pollution over the tropical South Atlantic Ocean. The team used data gathered from an experiment called the Transport and Chemistry near the Equator of the Atlantic (TRACE-A), conducted with the Brazilian Space Agency and scientists from South Africa. The scientists suspected that the high concentrations of ozone, like those found in densely populated urban areas, resulted from seasonal burnings in South America and Africa. According to the NASA researchers, the presence of pollution over the tropical ocean confirmed that humans had extended their negative impact on “traditionally pristine air” far beyond reaches directly above land. According to one researcher, the results of TRACE-A greatly improved the scientific community’s understanding of the atmospheric chemistry of the Southern Hemisphere.(NASA, “NASA Team Finds Urban-Like Pollution in Tropical South Atlantic,” news release 96-220, 30 October 1996.)
bombers marked the end of an era in the aerospace industry. The Wall Street Journal estimated that Boeing’s share of aerospace and defense revenues would increase to US$8−9 billion annually.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing To Acquire Rockwell Aerospace and Defense Units,” news release, 1 August 1996; NASA, “NASA Comment on Boeing Corporation Acquisition of Rockwell Aerospace and Defense Businesses,” news release N96-51, 1 August 1996; Associated Press, “Boeing To Buy Rockwell International’s Aerospace Holdings,” 1 August 1996; James F. Peltz, “Rockwell To Sell Space and Defense Divisions to Boeing,” Los Angeles Times, 2 August 1996; Jeff Cole and Steven Lipin, “Boeing Deal Will Strengthen Company,” Wall Street Journal, 2 August 1996.)
NASA announced the completion of a major benchmark in the development of its Advanced X- ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), as engineers completed the delicate task of assembling the high-resolution, cylindrical mirrors needed for the facility’s telescope. Engineers aligned and cemented the mirrors into place at the facility in Rochester, New York. Unlike optical telescopes, the AXAF used a series of shallow mirrors shaped like cylindrical cones to produce its image. AXAF’s mirrors were the largest set of such mirrors ever constructed.(NASA, “Completion of Mirror Assembly Marks Milestone for NASA’s Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility,” news release 96-212, 18 October 1996.)
NASA introduced a new technology with the potential to make much smaller and more efficient electronic devices: the Thin-Layer Composite-Unimorph Piezoelectric Driver and Sensor (THUNDER). Researchers at Langley Research Center (LARC) recognized the potential of piezoelectric material, because of its well-known capability to generate movement when subjected to an electric current. NASA hoped that the THUNDER technology would improve devices in “electronics, optics, jitter (irregular motion) suppression, noise cancellation, pumps, valves and a variety of other fields.” LARC’s interdisciplinary team had improved upon already available commercial-grade piezoelectric material, producing a more durable, cheaper, and more effective product. R&D Magazine announced that it would honor THUNDER as one of its top 100 most technologically significant new products of the year. Six companies signed agreements with NASA to develop THUNDER, and a dozen other companies expressed interest in negotiating similar pacts.(NASA, “NASA Rolls Out Award-Winning ‘Thunder’,” news release 96-197, 1 October 1996.)
NASA and the ESA made available images taken of Comet Hyakutake as it approached the Sun. The U.S. Naval Research Laboratory had captured the pictures during the appearance of the comet in late April 1996. The Naval Research Laboratory had built a special instrument⎯the Large Angle Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO)⎯to record the images. Operating aboard SOHO, LASCO suppressed the glare of the Sun, exposing the comet and its tails. In addition, the instrument produced the equivalent of a time-lapse movie of Hyakutake, thereby documenting the comet’s tails as they changed direction in reaction to the Sun’s forces. LASCO also allowed scientists to observe coronal mass ejections⎯the expulsion of hot gases. Researchers used the data to learn more about how comets interact with the Sun and about the behavior of comet tails.(NASA, “SOHO Images Comet Hyakutake’s Close Encounter with the Sun,” news release, 15 May 1996. 72 Paul Hoversten, “A Space Race with a Lofty Goal: Cash,” USA Today, 17 May 1996.)
A team of scientists from the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia discovered new evidence that pushed back considerably the scientifically estimated date of the origin of life on Earth. The researchers projected that the Earth’s age might be 350 million years older than previously thought. The research team, led by Gustaf Arrhenius, published its findings in the 7 November issue of Nature. The scientists argued that the presence of apatite (basic calcium phosphate) in Earth’s oldest known sediment sequences suggested that life had emerged on Earth 3.85 billion years ago. The scientific community met these findings with both excitement and skepticism.(S. J. Mojzsis et al., “Evidence for Life on Earth Before 3,800 Million Years Ago,” Nature 384, no. 6604 (7 November 1996): 55; Malcolm W. Browne, “Evidence Puts Date for Life’s Origin Back Millions of Years,” New York Times, 7 November 1996.)
Paul F. Holloway, Director of Langley Research Center (LARC) in Hampton, Virginia, announced his retirement. Holloway had served at LARC for his entire aerospace career, beginning in 1960. He became the Center’s Director in 1991, overseeing 4,500 employees and a budget of more than US$600 million. During his tenure, Holloway published 42 technical articles in the fields of hypersonic aerodynamics; boundary layer transition and flow separation; analysis of entry flight mechanics; and Earth orbital and planetary space missions. NASA awarded Holloway its Outstanding Leadership Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, Distinguished Service Medal, and Equal Employment Opportunity Medal. Holloway also received the Presidential Rank of Meritorious Service and two Senior Executive Service Distinguished Presidential Rank Awards. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin summarized Holloway’s contributions to NASA, saying that his “career spans almost the entire history of the Space Age, and his many achievements at Langley are a tribute to his talent, his professionalism, and his dedication to the importance of NASA aeronautical programs.”(NASA, “NASA Langley Director Paul F. Holloway To Step Down,” news release 96-127, 2 July 1996.)
NASA announced the start of a month-long research endeavor to explore the levels of radiation present at high altitudes, using a refitted ER-2 aircraft. The project focused on altitudes between 52,000 and 70,000 feet (15,900 and 21,300 meters), where radiation typically occurs because of cosmic and solar rays. The project had both scientific and public policy applications; researchers intended to use the data gathered to assess the safety of public, supersonic travel. The campaign, funded by NASA’s High-Speed Research Program, specifically investigated the plausibility of the High-Speed Civil Transport, still in the conceptual stage of planning, a commercial jetliner that would carry passengers at 2.4 times the speed of sound and at altitudes above 60,000 feet (18,300 meters). According to NASA Project Manager Donald L. Maiden, the speed of supersonic flight could mitigate any ill effects of high altitudes on passengers, because “Even though the exposure levels are higher at the higher cruise altitude, the typical flying public will actually receive less radiation exposure than on today’s subsonic transports because of the higher speed of the High-Speed Civil Transport.” NASA, the U.S. Department of Energy’s Environmental Measurements Laboratory, the Boeing Company, and the space agencies of Canada, Germany, and the United Kingdom collaborated on the project.(NASA, “NASA Studies High Altitude Radiation with Upgrade ER-2,” news release 97-118, 3 June 1997.)
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) selected Scientific and Commercial Systems Corporation of Falls Church, Virginia, to provide support services for its Huntsville, Alabama, facilities. The US$66 million contract included transportation and equipment services, as well as publishing, mail, and food support. MSFC arranged the contract as a cost-plus-incentive-fee, performance-based contract, to provide NASA with cost savings, as well as with flexibility to reorganize services as necessary.(NASA, “Virginia Firm Chosen To Provide NASA Institutional Services,” news release C97−r, 10 October 1997.)
NASA announced that it had granted Hitco Technologies exclusive rights to use a NASA- developed, heat-resistant material to produce high-performance pistons. NASA had developed the carbon-carbon composite in the 1960s, for use as a heat shield for missile applications. Researchers speculated that pistons composed of carbon-carbon, a material with virtually no thermal expansion, would allow engines to perform more efficiently, holding their shape and rigidity in temperatures well above 2,500°F (1,370°C). According to G. Burton Northam of Langley Research Center, the carbon-carbon composite was “the material of choice for the most demanding applications.” Allowing industry to use one of NASA’s patented technologies continued the trend of government-industry collaboration that Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had fostered.
A team of scientists from the University of California at Riverside announced that NASA’s orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had enabled them to discover a “vast halo” of gamma rays surrounding the Milky Way Galaxy. The astronomers clarified that the discovery of the halo did not make clear how or why the gamma rays encircled the galaxy. NASA’s orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory uses gamma rays to expose highly energetic particles that would otherwise be invisible because of their absorption in the atmosphere. The scientific community greeted the discovery with interest and questions.(K. C. Cole, “Halo Around Milky Way Reported,” Los Angeles Times, 6 November 1997; Reuters, “Gamma Rays Found Surrounding Milky Way,” 5 November 1997.)
NASA announced that a plan for collaborative research and development between NASA and five other government agencies might result in the creation of an Internet connection a million times faster than home computer modems. The Next Generation Internet (NGI) initiative dedicated US$300 million and three years to developing the NGI, to fulfill the promise President William J. Clinton had made in his State of the Union address: “We must build the second generation of the Internet so that our leading universities and national laboratories can communicate at speeds one thousand times faster than today; to develop new medical treatments, new sources of energy, new ways of working together.” NASA sites designated for early trials of NGI connections included Ames Research Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, Lewis Research Center, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
NASA researchers announced that data from the Galileo probe indicated that Jupiter has distinct wet and dry regions similar to the Earth. The finding refuted the previous supposition that Jupiter was mostly dry. When it descended to Jupiter in December 1995, Galileo landed in an extremely dry and hot portion of the planet⎯an area one member of the team called the Sahara Desert of Jupiter. Scientists assumed that the area was representative of the entire planet, until they were able to analyze more long-range images taken by the probe. The Galileo team concluded that Jupiter was remarkably similar to Earth, with wet, dry, hot, and cold regions, as well as rain, snow, and thunderstorms. Before the creation of Galileo, scientists had been unable to observe much of the planet because of surface clouds of frozen ammonia. According to Robert W. Carlson of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA’s most fundamental conclusion was that “There is weather on Jupiter.” However, scientists pointed out that, in contrast to Earth, Jupiter faces weather developments that are far more extreme and long lasting. Storms on the planet can last for years or even centuries.(NASA, “Galileo Finds Wet Spots, Dry Spots and New View of Jupiter’s Light Show,” news release 97-123, 5 June 1997; K.C. Cole, “Scientists Detect Rain on Jupiter,” Los Angeles Times, 6 June 1997; Associated Press, “Jupiter Wet and Dry,” 6 June 1997.)
NASA announced that lighting technology developed to grow plants in space might help treat cancerous brain tumors in children. According to a series of trials, some tumor-fighting drugs performed more proficiently when illuminated with the light-emitting diodes (LEDs) created for NASA’s Shuttle plant experiments. To gauge further the effectiveness of LEDs in assisting cancer-fighting drugs, Dr. Harry Whelan of the Medical College of Milwaukee obtained permission from the Food and Drug Administration to use the LEDs on a limited number of children with cancer. Whelan’s method involved injecting his patient with cancer-fighting drugs and then placing an LED probe near the affected area. Whelan believed that the light focused the drugs on the dangerous tumors only, leaving the rest of the patient’s brain unaffected. NASA’s Small Business Innovation Research program, allowing small businesses to adapt NASA’s technologies for extended public uses, initiated the trial of LEDs to fight cancer.(NASA, “Space Research Shines a Light on Tumors To Save Lives,” news release 97-259, 6 November 1997.)
NASA announced that, through its Small Business Innovative Research program, researchers had successfully used recycled plastic milk bottles to create a more effective, lightweight insulation for clothing and blankets. The material had the same honeycomb structure as that of the metal heat barriers used in spacecraft. According to the principal investigator, Steven D. Miller of S. D. Miller and Associates, “The blankets are better than wool or fleece because they are non-allergenic, and they dry five times faster. The new material is also four times warmer than wool in cold and damp conditions.” The research team hypothesized that agencies such as the Red Cross, or other emergency medical personnel, eventually would be able to use the new material to warm patients more quickly. After developing the product for space and commercial uses, NASA planned to allow Miller’s company to pursue further commercialization opportunities without NASA funding.(NASA, “NASA Technology Creates Market for Recycled Milk Bottles,” news release 97-39, 13 March 1997.)
Software magnate James W. Benson announced the formation of SpaceDev, a new company focused on launching a robotic craft to an asteroid. Benson argued that space “is a place, not a government project,” claiming that his company would gather new scientific data for a fraction of the money NASA spent annually on space exploration. Specifically, Benson stated that his Near Earth Asteroid Prospector would land on an asteroid, gathering images and scientific readings. He estimated that his company could complete such a feat for under US$50 million, about US$200 million less than NASA’s budget for a comparable mission. Benson and SpaceDev entered the realm of space exploration with overtly capitalist intentions. Benson planned to sell the data the company gathered to NASA and to universities for profit. Additionally, SpaceDev consultants estimated that asteroids might contain significant deposits of gold and other precious metals, worth US$1–4 trillion, which would become the property of whoever succeeded in accessing it. Of his overall theory on space and science, Benson clarified: “When we deliver science, we expect to get paid. We expect a profit. We offer more science for the dollar.”(Associated Press, “Company Promotes First Private Launch to Asteroid,” 10 September 1997.)
NASA unveiled a new facility, called the Chemical Crib, at Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC). Officials hoped the new facility would reduce chemical waste by as much as 50 percent in three years. Waste disposal had become an increasingly expensive problem for NASA. “For every dollar spent to buy chemicals,” NASA’s Hazardous Materials Officer reported, “we spend three dollars to dispose of them.” The Chemical Crib would use a variety of techniques and technologies to compress waste, such as breaking down photographic-waste chemicals into a sludge, possessing as little as 5 percent of the mass of the original waste. NASA planned to construct similar facilities at its other sites. Staff of DFRC’s Safety, Health, and Environmental Office believed that the new facility would not only benefit the environment, but also the Center’s budget.(NASA, “New NASA Facility To Reduce Chemical Wastes; May Provide Better Storage for Hazardous Materials,” news release 97-102, 19 May 1997.)
NASA and the Boeing Company unveiled a new stitching machine that experts believed would change the method of fabricating aircraft wing structures. The demonstration took place at Boeing Stitched Composites Development Center in Huntington Beach, California. The project team of engineers had replaced the large metal structures used in airplanes with strong, but light, composite materials. By reducing the weight of an airplane, engineers hoped to decrease fuel usage, with the eventual result of cost savings for consumers. Rather than using rivets to hold together an airplane’s wings, the NASA-developed stitching machine sewed together precut fabric layers in the shape of a wing. Next, the machine added braided stiffener materials to the wing, before setting the wing skeleton with resin. The process created a wing as strong as one built with metal structures, but at a fraction of the weight.(NASA, “New Manufacturing Method Could Lower Air Travel Costs,” news release 97-176, 13 August 1997.)
France’s Aérospatiale, British Aerospace, Germany’s Daimler-Benz Aerospace, and Spain’s CASA, partners in the Airbus Industrie airplane-manufacturing consortium, announced their intention to merge into a “unified civilian and military aerospace conglomerate that would compete in the world market with U.S. aerospace giants Lockheed Martin Corp[oration] and Boeing Co[mpany]” The partners provided no details regarding how the merger would take place, but the public statement represented “another move toward a unified European aerospace industry,” an idea that had been elusive “because of the competing national interests of the various countries.”
George W. Lewis Jr., NASA aeronautical engineer and son of George W. Lewis, former research director of NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, died at his home at the age of 81. He had worked for 30 years in Cleveland, Ohio, at Lewis Research Center, which NASA had named for his father.(Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), “George W. Lewis, 81, Was An Engineer at NASA,” 9 October 1998.)
The European Southern Observatory (ESO) successfully tested the first of four linked, identical telescopes of 8.2-meter (27-foot) diameters, comprising the Very Large Telescope (VLT). The VLT is the world’s largest and most advanced Earth-based telescope, with a collective diameter equal to16 meters (52 feet). The telescope’s “first light” images (its first astronomically useful images) met the design goals. Exposures lasting up to 10 minutes confirmed that the telescope’s tracking was very accurate and stable. The ESO had built the new telescope in the Atacama Desert in northern Chile, where a dry atmosphere and stable climate guaranteed clear skies 350 nights of the year.(Financial Times (London), “Staring Out Across 14 Billion Light Years: Technology Very Large Telescope: The Earth-Based VLT Brings a Twinkle to a European Astronomer’s Eye,” 4 June 1998.)
NASA’s Ames Research Center awarded a six-year, US$90 million contract to Logicon Syscon Inc. of Falls Church, Virginia, to provide operations, development, maintenance, and modification of the Center’s aeronautical simulation facilities. The contract included the operation and maintenance of the world’s largest motion-base simulator, the Vertical Motion Simulator, designed to aid in the study of helicopter and vertical short takeoff and landing issues, as well as the Crew-Vehicle Systems Research Facility, designed for the study of human factors in aviation safety.(NASA, “NASA Awards $90 Million Contract to Virginia Firm,” news release c98-s, 2 November 1998.)
NASA’s Ames Research Center awarded a five-year, US$99.3 million contract to Sverdrup Technology Inc. of Tullahoma, Tennessee, to provide testing and facility operation, including wind tunnels and arc-jet testing.(NASA, “NASA Awards $99 Million Contract to Tennessee Firm,” contract announcement C98-q, 27 October 1998.)
NASA awarded Aerojet, a GenCorp Inc. company, a US$16.4 million contract to provide a de- orbit propulsion stage for the X-38 technology demonstrator vehicle. The contract for design, development, manufacture, test, and delivery of one propulsion stage for the first X-38 spaceflight test included a second option for five operational propulsion units for the crew return vehicle (CRV), if NASA selected the X-38 design for the CRV. Engineers at Dryden Flight Research Center were flight-testing the X-38, a prototype spacecraft intended to lead to the development and construction of a CRV for the ISS.(Defense Daily, “Aerojet Wins $16.4 NASA Contract for X-38 Propulsion,” 20 August 1998.)
Chryssa Kouveliotou of the Universities Space Research Association led a team of astronomers at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in confirming the existence of magnetars, a special class of neutron stars with a magnetic field one thousand trillion times the strength of Earth’s. The team calculated the strength of SGR1806-20, first discovered in 1979, by combining data from NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer satellite and the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics.(UniSci Science and Research News, “‘Magnetar’ Generates Most Intense Magnetic Field in Universe,” 21 May 1998; C. Kouveliotou et al., “An X-ray Pulsar with a Superstrong Magnetic Field in the Soft Gamma-Ray Repeater SGR1806-20,” Nature 393, no. 6682 (21 May 1998): 235–237; NASA, “Strongest Stellar Magnetic Field Yet Observed Confirms Existence of Magnetars,” news release 98-87, 20 May 1998.)
NASA announced that Raytheon STX Corporation of Lanham, Maryland, would provide routine data operations, research, and development support for the Space Science Data Operations Office and the National Space Science Data Center at GSFC, under a two-year contract with three one- year options. Valued at more than US$33 million, the contract covered the processing of space- science data and the acquisition, modeling, analysis, archiving, and dissemination of NASA’s archival data to the scientific community, educators, and the public.(NASA, “NASA Selects Raytheon STX To Provide Goddard Support,” contract announcement c98-v, 2 December 1998.)
NASA officially opened its new communications terminal on Guam, to provide “global, full- time and real-time communications support for NASA’s Space Network customers.” The Guam ground station replaced the interim ground terminal in Canberra, Australia, established to provide continuous, full-time, real-time communications support for NASA’s Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after it had “suffered an on-board tape recorder failure in March 1992.”
At the request of the United States, Israeli officials arrested Ehud Tenenbaum, the eighteen-year- old computer hacker who called himself The Analyzer, along with two other Israeli teenagers. Tenenbaum was ringleader of a group called Israeli Internet Underground. Prosecutors accused the teenage hackers of breaking into U.S. government and military computer systems, including NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), as well as into Israeli government computers and commercial and educational computer systems in the United States. The FBI said that all three had admitted their involvement, stating that they had worked in tandem with two juveniles in Cloverdale, California.
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had selected Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space of Sunnyvale, California, and TRW Inc. Space and Electronics Group of Redondo Beach, California, as industry team members for the Space Interferometry Mission. The Interferometry Mission would measure the precise location of stars and search for planets orbiting nearby stars. The two contracts, which together exceeded US$200 million, included mission formulation and implementation.(NASA, “Contractors Chosen for Space Interferometry Mission,” news release 98-162, 10 September 1998.)
The European Science Foundation and the U.S. National Research Council published a joint study analyzing 13 projects in astrophysics, planetary science, space physics, earth science, and microgravity research. The report advised the United States and its international partners to “set aside a specific part of their annual space budgets to plan for future critical joint exploration projects,” highlighting factors hampering cooperation within the projects analyzed. Hampering factors included cultural differences, poorly defined objectives, and “lukewarm support from the scientific community for projects undertaken more for political than research reasons.” The report set forth recommendations for successfully pursuing cooperative space projects within tight budget constraints.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Study: Space Projects Need Good Science,” 30 June 1998; European Space Foundation, “Transatlantic Study Identifies Keys to Success in International Space Collaboration,” news release, 30 June 1998, http://www.esf.org/media-centre/press-releases/ext-single-news/article/transatlantic- study-identifies-keys-to-sucess-in-international-space-collaborations-220.html (accessed 27 September 2007).)
Boeing Company announced plans to cut an additional 8,200 jobs by the end of the year 2000, to streamline facilities, to focus on manufacturing and assembly operations, and to eliminate redundant laboratories. The job cuts, affecting work sites in Arkansas, California, and Texas, included planned product phaseouts of the MD-80 and MD-90, and brought into question the future of the MD-11. As it shut down selected facilities, including an electronic manufacturing facility and the Site 9 modification center, Boeing planned to transfer thousands of employees involved with aircraft and missile systems, reusable-space-systems support, and satellites.(United Press International, “Boeing Cuts 8,200 Jobs,” 20 March 1998.)
At a ceremony marking its official opening, Virginia Governor James S. Gilmore III announced that Reston-based DynCorp was the first major investor in the Commercial Spaceport Launch Pad at Virginia Space Flight Center on Wallops Island, the nation’s third commercial spaceport. The Virginia Commercial Space Flight Authority, a collaborative effort of the state, the Center for Innovative Technology at Old Dominion University in Virginia, NASA, and private industry, had developed the communications facility, located at one end of NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility. The spaceport was one of 18 sites competing to launch the VentureStarTM, a privately owned space plane still in development, which could eventually carry construction materials to the ISS.(Sonja Barisic, “Firm Gives a Big Boost to Spaceport,” Roanoke Times (VA), 15 September 1998; Karen Jolly Davis, “$4.5 Million Contribution Gives Wallops Island Spaceport a Boost,” Virginian Pilot and the Ledger-Star (Norfolk, VA), 15 September 1998.)
Jeremy Lin of Taiwan’s Academia Sinica Institute and colleagues at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Socorro, New Mexico, reported in the journal Nature that measurements taken with the world’s largest radio telescopes—the Very Large Array (VLA)— had detected “peculiar bulges in the atmosphere of a giant star.” Huge plumes of gas thrust from beneath the surface of the red supergiant star, Betelgeuse, had likely caused the bulges. Betelgeuse is located in the shoulder of the constellation Orion, about 430 light-years from Earth. The research team used the Y-shaped, 22-mile-wide (35-kilometer-wide) cluster of 27 huge antennas of the VLA telescopes to capture the most detailed radio image ever taken of a star other than the Sun. The team discovered that some of the gas in the star’s atmosphere was much cooler than previously believed—about 5,750°F (3,200°C). The discovery of the lower temperatures enabled astronomers to understand “how huge amounts of dust are constantly blown away from the star.” Before the lower temperatures were identified, scientists had not been able to explain how the stellar dust formed, because at “higher temperatures the dust could not condense from the hot gas expelled from the star’s interior.” Astronomers believe that dust created and expelled by stars like Betelgeuse “is distributed throughout the universe and provide[s] the raw materials that gave rise to life on Earth.”(Malcolm W. Browne, “Atmosphere Bulges on None-Too-Distant Star,” New York Times, 21 April 1998.)
NASA awarded contracts to Boeing Information, Space, and Defense Systems; Kelly Space and Technology; Lockheed Martin Astronautics; and Orbital Sciences Corporation Space Access. The five contracting companies would study ways that NASA could meet its requirements for human spaceflight at a lower cost. The studies would examine three scenarios: 1) keeping the Shuttle operational until 2020, 2) replacing the Shuttle when it was cost-effective to do so, and 3) developing an alternative plan in case NASA’s funding remained at FY 1999 levels.(NASA, “NASA Contracts for Future Space Transportation Studies,” news release c98-n, 4 September 1998; Defense Daily, “NASA Awards Future Space Transport Study Contracts,” 8 September 1999.)
NASA announced the establishment of a Near-Earth Object Program Office at its Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), responsible for coordinating “NASA-sponsored efforts to detect, track, and characterize potentially hazardous asteroids and comets that could approach Earth,” and with facilitating communication between scientists and the public, were NASA to discover any potentially hazardous objects. NASA selected JPL to host the new program, because of “its expertise in tracking precisely the positions and predicted paths of asteroids and comets.”(NASA, “NASA Establishes Near-Earth Object Program Office at Jet Propulsion Laboratory,” news release 98- 123, 14 July 1998.)
S. George Djorgovski, an astronomer at California Institute of Technology; Dale A. Frail, an astronomer with the Very Large Array (VLA) Observatory in Socorro, New Mexico; and their colleagues issued a notice to fellow astronomers regarding a gamma-ray burst (GRB) detected on 2 July. Frail and Djorgovski had combined the resources of the VLA and the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii to pinpoint the source of the burst, which they calculated to be a galaxy, “alive with new-forming stars,” billions of light-years away from Earth. Although scientists did not yet know the cause of GRBs, Frail remarked, “the fact that this burst happened in a hot galaxy where new stars are being rapidly formed is probably the death knell for the theory that collisions between old, dying neutron stars are responsible for the gamma-ray bursts.”(John Fleck, “N.M. Scientists Track Galaxy Blast: Explosion Is Billions of Light Years Away,” Albuquerque Journal (NM), 9 July 1998.)
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that the ion engine responsible for the Deep Space 1 probe’s primary propulsion was back in operation after its unexpected shutdown two weeks earlier. Scientists believed that metallic grit or another type of contaminant located between two high-voltage grids had caused the engine to shut down after running for 41⁄2 minutes.(NASA, “Deep Space 1 Ion Propulsion System Starts Up,” news release 98-215, 25 November 1998; Associated Press, “Spacecraft’s Troubled Ion Engine Restarts,” Washington Post, 26 November 1998.)
NASA successfully launched Deep Space 1, a spacecraft that could “think for itself.” Driven by ion propulsion, Deep Space 1 was the first craft to rely on this technology for its primary propulsion. The craft’s destination was an asteroid 120 million miles (193 million kilometers) away from Earth. Although tracking stations encountered initial difficulties receiving signals from the spacecraft, Deep Space 1 communicated 2 hours after liftoff that it was on “the right course” and “in good shape.” NASA scientists expected the spacecraft to travel 450 million miles (724 million kilometers) to catch up with the moving asteroid. Without the ion-propulsion technology, it would have required 10 times more fuel to reach its target. The craft was also flying with 10 other “futuristic technologies,” such as lens-covered solar arrays to generate additional power, and a radio beacon to communicate with ground controllers without their prompting the probe from Earth.(New York Times, “U.S. Launches a Spacecraft That Thinks for Itself,” 25 October 1998.)
NASA modified its contract with Orbital Sciences Corporation in order to produce a second flight vehicle for the X-34 program. The modified contract expanded test objectives, allowing US$7.7 million in additional funds for the purchase of hardware and another US$2 million for additional testing and analysis, wind tunnel testing, and a second leading-edge thermal protection system.(NASA, “NASA Commits to Second Vehicle for X-34 Program,” news release 98-11, 21 January 1998.)
NASA scientists announced that, because the Deep Space 1 spacecraft had aimed its camera incorrectly when it flew within 15 miles (24 kilometers) of a small asteroid named Braille, the craft had failed to capture an image. However, the craft had succeeded in its primary mission to test 12 new technologies during the flyby, thereby validating the instruments’ future use in solar- system probes. Deep Space 1 was equipped with “a mind of its own,” enabling it to navigate through space without much assistance from ground control. The craft had traveled at 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometers) per hour relative to the asteroid, which was 117 million miles (188 million kilometers) from Earth. The flyby of the Braille asteroid, the final test of Deep Space 1’s Autonomous Navigation System, had been the closest any spacecraft had come to an object in our solar system without landing.(Washington Times, “Spacecraft Misses Asteroid Snapshot: Camera Can’t See Rock Called Braille,” 30 July 1999.)
The Perseus B research aircraft, built by Aurora Flight Sciences Inc., sustained moderate damage when it crashed on a California highway during a flight from NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. The craft was a “developmental vehicle designed to operate at high altitudes for extended periods on scientific sampling missions,” one of several aircraft that NASA was evaluating as part of its Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology program. Controllers could operate the craft remotely from a ground station, or the Perseus B could navigate autonomously along a preprogrammed flight path. At the time of the accident, ground-based Aurora Flight Sciences mission controllers at Edwards Air Force Base were guiding the Perseus B. DFRC flight safety officials, with assistance from Aurora Flight Sciences operations staff, formed an accident investigation team to determine the exact cause of the crash.(NASA, “Perseus B Damaged in Crash on California Highway,” news release 99-115, 1 October 1999.)
NASA released two initial images from its Chandra X-ray Observatory. One image traced “the aftermath of a gigantic stellar explosion in such stunning detail” that scientists believed they had detected evidence of a neutron star or black hole near the center. The second image showed “a powerful x-ray jet blasting 200,000 light-years into intergalactic space from a distant quasar.” Chandra was still in its orbital “check-out and calibration phase” when it captured the images, confirming that the observatory was performing up to expectations.(NASA, “NASA Unveils First Images from Chandra X-ray Observatory,” news release 99-98, 26 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-098.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
After assessing its safety aspects, officials from the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA’s) commercial space office approved the first space launch from a platform in the sea. The FAA issued the launch license to an international launch consortium known as Sea Launch. The Boeing Company, based in the United States, was a 40 percent partner in the consortium. The Sea Launch Company planned a demonstration launch for 27 March 1999, from a converted, self-propelled, oil-drilling platform in the Pacific Ocean. The consortium’s initiative, to launch communications satellites from a mid-ocean location at the equator, offered several advantages, such as the capability to lift heavier-than-normal payloads.(Federal Aviation Administration, “FAA Issues Launch License to First International Sea Launch Consortium,” news release APA 34-99, 15 March 1999, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsId= 4952 (accessed 27 December 2007); Associated Press, “FAA Gives Its OK to 1st Spacecraft Launched from Sea,” Salt Lake Tribune (UT), 16 March 1999.)
NASA announced that after just two months in space, the Chandra X-ray Observatory had taken “a stunning image of the Crab Nebula,” revealing for the first time “a brilliant ring about the nebula’s heart.” The Crab Nebula, located 6,000 light-years from Earth, in the constellation Taurus, is the remnant of a star that Chinese astronomers had observed exploding in 1054 A.D., when it “appeared suddenly and remained visible for weeks, even during daytime.” Astronomers had used “virtually every astronomical instrument” to study the Crab’s area of the sky, discovering that unlocking its mysteries led to “insight after insight” into how the universe works. Astronomers had linked the origin of pulsars to supernovas and confirmed the cosmic origin of chemical elements through the study of the “expanding cloud of filaments” in the Crab. The new image showed the Crab pulsar “accelerating particles up to the speed of light and flinging them out into interstellar space at an incredible rate.” Using Chandra’s “exceptional resolution,” scientists had traced the jet all the way to the neutron star, where the ring pattern clearly appeared. Previously, Hubble Space Telescope images had revealed “moving knots and wisps around the neutron star,” and other x-ray images had shown the outer portions of the jet, only hinting at the ring structure.(NASA, “Chandra Discovers X-ray Ring Around Cosmic Powerhouse in Crab Nebula,” news release 99-109, 28 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-109.txt (accessed 15 February 2008); Paul Hoversten, “Photos Get to the Source of Pulsar,” USA Today, 29 September 1999.)
NASA researchers at MSFC unveiled an experimental 50-foot (15-meter) track using magnetic levitation (maglev) technology to propel a 30-pound (13.6-kilogram) model of a spacecraft, at a speed of 60 miles (97 kilometers) per hour, in 0.5 seconds. MSFC researchers had sought to reduce launch costs, as well as to reduce space-vehicle size with the development of a maglev launch-assist system. The maglev track was theoretically capable of propelling and releasing a spacecraft at 600 miles (965 kilometers) per hour; wing design would then lift the craft and “give it a kick start” before the ignition of the rocket’s engines. MSFC Manager of Launch Technologies Sherry Buschmann commented that the researchers believed the use of maglev technology could cut launch vehicle size by 20 percent. NASA’s industry partner in the experimental technology was PRT Advanced Maglev Systems Inc. of Park Forest, Illinois.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “New NASA Track Races Toward Cheaper Trips to Space,” news release 99-260, 4 October 1999; Kent Faulk, “NASA Spacecraft Float to Future: Researchers Test Levitation as Way To Boost Launches,” Birmingham News (AL), 7 October 1999.)
Robert Thomas “R.T.” Jones, who had “led the development of the swept-back jet wing design that revolutionized air travel and enabled planes to break the sound barrier,” died at the age of 89. Jones had begun designing the swept-back wings in 1944, when airplane wings were perpendicular to the fuselage, while working at NACA (National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics), NASA’s predecessor agency. In 1945 Jones had conducted airflow studies, showing that a cone-shaped shock wave cut across the tips of straight wings, causing deterioration at Mach 1, the speed of sound. Jones had concluded that a swept-back design would preserve the wings and reduce drag. Although his idea was initially ignored, “virtually every commercial and military jet uses the design today.” Jones’s later research had included work on the oblique wing, “mounted on a pivot on top of the fuselage.” The oblique wing maintained a right angle to the fuselage for maximum lift during takeoff, but the pilot could manipulate it so that, at cruising altitude, one wing tip pointed forward and one backward, saving fuel, generating less engine noise, and eliminating the sonic boom. Although Jones’s oblique wing design had never advanced beyond the testing stage, some aeronautical designers continued to study its possibilities.(Washington Post, “Robert Jones Dies; Led Breakthrough on Wing Design,” 15 August 1999.)
The Boeing Company announced that it had completed negotiations on a cooperative agreement with NASA to develop an experimental space plane. The US$173 million contract stipulated that Boeing and the federal government share costs equally. Boeing and NASA hoped that the X-37 space plane, previously called the Future-X Pathfinder, would “serve as a test bed for new reusable launch technologies,” helping to achieve the “goal of reducing the cost of placing space vehicles and cargo into orbit.” Boeing envisioned a vehicle that would be “unpiloted, autonomously operated, and capable of speeds up to Mach 25, while demonstrating aircraft-like operations.” NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center led the X-37 government team, comprising the U.S. Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base and NASA facilities, including Ames Research Center, Kennedy Space Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Dryden Flight Research Center.(The Boeing Company, “NASA, Boeing Sign X-37 Vehicle Agreement,” news release, 14 July 1999, http://www. boeing.com/news/releases/1999/news_release_990714t.html (accessed 19 February 2008); John O’Dell, “California Southland Focus Boeing, NASA Agree on Space Plane Contract,” Los Angeles Times, 15 July 1999.)
More than 10,000 white-collar workers walked off the job at the Boeing Company, in protest over failed contract negotiations. Most of the strikers came from the aerospace giant’s work site in Seattle, Washington.
NASA announced its agreement with Lockheed Martin on a plan for the X-33 space plane program. The agreed plan included aluminum fuel tanks for hydrogen fuel, a revised payment schedule, and a target launch date in 2003, contingent on Lockheed Martin’s winning additional funding under the Space Launch Initiative for completing the project. NASA had funded the project through March 2001. The restructured plan focused on “providing milestone payments” to Lockheed Martin’s team, following the completion of tests and the delivery of hardware and software systems this year. The plan also gave greater emphasis to mission safety, quality, and mission success. Arthur G. Stephenson, Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, pointed out that, despite setbacks, the program’s successes had included the creation of technology applicable to the space program and to the commercial aircraft industry, such as a revolutionary new rocket engine; a robust, reusable, metallic thermal-protection system; and software and sensors that automatically determine and predict failures and errors before they affect the flight.(NASA, “NASA, Lockheed Martin Agree on X-33 Plan,” news release 00-157, 29 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-157.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA released to the Internet a database of 1.9 million celestial images, the largest collection of images of stars and other celestial bodies ever made freely available for public use. The rapid improvement of technology had made possible the release, which brought to home computers information that could have filled 6,000 CD-ROMs. The Two-Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS), which used two 51-inch (130-centimeter) telescopes to survey the sky, had collected the images. The University of Massachusetts at Amherst and the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had collaborated on 2MASS, creating a database of great value to scholars and the public alike.(NASA, “Twin-Telescope Sky Survey ‘Gives You the Stars’,” news release 00-108, 14 July 2000.)
A team of three high school students from the North Carolina School for Science and Mathematics in Durham won first place in the Siemens-Westinghouse Science and Technology Competition. The team won for discovering the first evidence of a neutron star in the nearby supernova remnant IC443, using data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and the National Science Foundation’s Very Large Array (VLA) Observatory. The students had located a point-like source of x-rays embedded in a supernova and had determined that the central object was most likely a pulsar, a young and rapidly rotating neutron star. Bryan M. Gaensler, a pulsar expert at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who had reviewed the team’s paper, remarked that the students had produced “a really solid scientific finding.”(NASA, “Students Using NASA and NSF Data Make Stellar Discovery; Win Science Team Competition,” news release 00-195, 11 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-195.txt (accessed 7 April 2008). 1067 Andrew Kramer for Associated Press, “Russian Company To Build Spacecraft To Carry Customers,” 13 December 2000.)
NASA announced the selection of Sverdrup Technology Inc. to fulfill a contract providing engineering, science, and technical services at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). The two- year contract, with three one-year priced options valued at US$300 million over five years, would go into effect on 15 October.(NASA, “Tennessee Technology Firm Selected for $300 Million Contract,” news release c00-n, 6 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-n.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
Astronomers using the telescope at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico captured the first- ever images of the so-called Metal Dog Bone asteroid, officially named 216 Kleopatra. Scientists had categorized the asteroid as a main-belt asteroid, theorizing that the New Jersey–sized rock was the result of an ancient, violent collision. Steven Ostro of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory called the find “one of the most unusual asteroids we’ve seen in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Scientists made the discovery by bouncing radar signals off the asteroid and cataloging the signals’ echoes. By gathering a comprehensive collection of echoes, the research team had been able to assemble a computer model of the asteroid’s shape. The use of radar signals with a moderately powered telescope had made the long-distance discovery possible. Ostro marveled at the technology, describing the find as akin to “using a Los Angeles telescope the size of the human eye’s lens to image a car in New York.” Many of the astronomers working on the project spoke of their amazement at the size, shape, and metallic complexion of the asteroid. They also clarified that the asteroid posed no danger to Earth.(NASA, “Astronomers Catch Images of Giant Metal Dog Bone Asteroid,” news release 00-74, 4 May 2000. 921 Birmingham Post (AL), “Serious Bone Loss for Cosmonauts Not Mir Speculation,” 5 May 2000.)
NASA announced that a team of Lockheed Martin scientists using NASA’s Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) spacecraft to observe coronal loops⎯coils of hot, electrified gas⎯believed they had located the source of the heating mechanism that makes the Sun’s corona 300 times hotter than its visible surface. A thirty-year-old theory had assumed that the coronal loops heated evenly, but the TRACE observations had indicated that most of the heating occurs at the base of the loops, near the point from which they emerge and return to the solar surface. The team had observed 41 loops extending from 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) to more than 180,000 miles (290,000 kilometers) from the solar surface and had found that, although threads within shorter loops heat more evenly, longer threads cool noticeably as they attain height. The team had calculated the loops’ energy levels and estimated that “heating typically occurs in the first 6,000 miles of a loop’s length.” Richard Fisher, head of the Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics at NASA’s GSFC, remarked that understanding how the coronal loops function could shed light on coronal-mass ejections (CMEs). CMEs can disrupt or destroy satellite components orbiting Earth and prompt surges in electrical transmission lines, causing blackouts on Earth.(NASA, “Fountains of Fire Illuminate Solar Mystery,” news release 00-146, 26 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-146.txt (accessed 25 April 2008); Peter N. Spotts, “Scientists Begin To Unravel a Stubborn Solar Mystery,” Christian Science Monitor, 27 September 2000.)
Lockheed Martin Systems Integration announced that the U.S. Navy had selected the company to build seven SH-60R Multi-Mission Helicopters, under the first SH-60R low-rate initial production (LRIP) contract, moving Lockheed Martin from development and testing to the production phase of the SH-60R program. The contract required Lockheed Martin to integrate the flight avionics systems, mission avionics systems, and stores and defense systems.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Awarded First SH-60R Avionics Production Contract,” news release, 23 August 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/LockheedMartinAwardedFirstSH60R Avio.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
NASA announced that its Chandra X-ray Observatory had revealed a “luminous spike of x-rays,” known as a hot spot, located approximately 800,000 light-years away from its black-hole source. Scientists commented that the images captured x-ray behavior that astronomers had not predicted. Andrew S. Wilson of the University of Maryland explained, “the brightness and the spectrum of the x-rays are very different from what theory projects.” A possible explanation offered for the brilliant hot spot of x-rays was that a series of shock waves had catapulted across the galaxy electrons with energies as high as 50 thousand billion times the energy of light.(NASA, “Spectacular X-ray Jet Points Toward Cosmic Energy Booster,” news release 00-89, 6 June 2000.)
NASA’s Glenn Research Center (GRC) in Cleveland, Ohio, opened a new laboratory dedicated to the study of ballistics. The laboratory, housed in the complex’s Building 49, featured a 40-foot (12-meter) gas gun that could shoot projectiles at speeds of up to 1,500 feet (457.2 meters) per second. A camera with the ability to capture 2.5 million images per second allowed researchers to observe the behavior of the projectiles and chart the results of their impact on aviation equipment. “The whole idea,” Team Leader Dale A. Hopkins explained, “is to watch the impact and see how materials struck by the projectiles behave . . . not just whether they survive, but how they deform and fail.” GRC had designed the new facility to test materials used for aircraft engine housings and for flywheel containment. Researchers hoped that the new tools would help engineer aircraft that could withstand the pressures of high-speed and high-altitude flight better than those already available could. GRC had been testing ballistic materials since 1980.(NASA, “New Lab Ready To Test Sudden Impact,” news release 00-34, 3 March 2000.)
NASA’s Langley Research Center awarded contracts valued at US$1.8 million to two companies for operating airport-surface surveillance systems intended to prevent runway accidents, a top safety priority of the FAA and the National Transportation Safety Board. The contracts required Sensis Corporation of Dewitt, New York, and Rannoch Corporation of Alexandria, Virginia, to operate the Airport Traffic Identification System (ATIDS) and the Dynamic Runway Occupancy Measurement Systems (DROMS) at Detroit’s Metropolitan Wayne International Airport, for six months, establishing and validating the systems in a “live” environment. The contracts also required Sensis to deploy and evaluate DROMS at Memphis International Airport and to interface the system with the existing Sensis-operated ATIDS at that airport.(NASA, “Contracts Awarded for Airport Surface Surveillance Systems,” news release C00-m, 28 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-m.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA announced that new technology recently tested at Ames Research Center (ARC) had converted sounds emanating from landing-gear wind noise into color images on computer screens, “enabling engineers to pinpoint loud and preventable aircraft flight noise more easily than in the past.” The imposition of nighttime curfews on noisy takeoffs and landings had prompted aircraft manufacturers to develop quieter planes. Paul T. Soderman, leader of the ARC aeroacoustics group, explained that the ability to visualize the cause of wind noise coming from landing gear enables engineers to analyze the problem so that they can find ways to reduce significantly noise. The engineers had created the sound images using a computer linked to a quarter-scale landing-gear model and an array of 70 microphones inside the wall of a wind tunnel. The researchers had then removed various combinations of landing-gear parts in the wind tunnel, resulting in significant noise reduction.
NASA announced that the Chandra X-ray Observatory had detected iron-emission lines in the afterglow of a gamma-ray burst (GRB), marking the first time such lines had been “unambiguously detected” in association with GRBs, and the first time scientists had been able to measure their properties precisely in x-ray wavelengths. Luigi Piro, lead author of a paper published in the 3 November issue of the journal Science, explained that the discovery provided an important clue to understanding the origins of the bursts. The new data enabled scientists to rule out the theory that two neutron stars or black holes collide to cause a GRB, one of various theories about how the bursts originate. Instead, Piro suggested that the bursts were more likely the result of “something similar to a supernova explosion, but much more powerful.”(NASA, “NASA’s Chandra Captures Telling Gamma-Ray Afterglow,” news release 00-173, 3 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-173.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); L. Piro et al., “Observation of X-ray Lines from a Gamma-Ray Burst (GRB991216): Evidence of Moving Ejecta from the Progenitor,” Science 290, no. 5493 (3 November 2000): 955–958.)
The 20 July 2000 edition of Astrophysical Journal Letters published research of Gibor Basri chronicling the first sighting of a flare from a failed star, or brown dwarf. Using the Chandra X- ray Observatory, a team of scientists from the University of California at Berkeley had spotted the brown dwarf and its bright x-ray flare. Scientists believed that examining the x-ray flare would help them better understand dying stars and the explosive activity and magnetic fields of low-mass stars. Early analyses indicated that the brown dwarf’s x-ray flare was approximately 1 billion times more powerful than the x-ray flares emitted from the planet Jupiter. Scientists reacted to news of the discovery with excitement and surprise. Robert E. Rutledge of California Institute of Technology stated that he and his colleagues were “shocked,” clarifying: “we did not expect to see flaring from such a lightweight object. This is really the mouse that roared.” The task of spotting an x-ray flare had been difficult, because the brown dwarf emitted the flares only periodically. However, the intermittent flares made the successful capture of an image all the more significant. The observation of the brown dwarf’s occasional release of x-ray flares confirmed the theory that brown dwarfs only release energy when they heat to temperatures above 4,500°F (2,500°C).(Gibor Basri et al., “An Effective Temperature Scale for Late M and L Dwarfs, from Resonance Absorption Lines of Cs I and Rb I,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 538, no. 1 (20 July 2000): 363−385; NASA, “Chandra Captures Flare from Brown Dwarf,” news release 00-103, 11 July 2000.)
NASA’s Stardust spacecraft entered safe mode after a stream of high-energy protons emanating from a solar flare hit the craft. Stardust, on a mission to return samples of a comet, had been 130 million miles (210 million kilometers) from the Sun, traveling at about 12,000 miles (19,000 kilometers) per hour, when the solar flare erupted on 9 November. The solar wind had brought the stream of protons into contact with the craft hours later, in the middle of the night, confirming that NASA engineers and scientists monitoring the situation had reason to feel concerned.(Associated Press, “NASA’s Stardust Spacecraft Survives Encounter with Solar Flare,” 21 November 2000. 1036 Associated Press, “NASA’s Stardust Spacecraft.”)
NASA announced that a team of scientists had used the Chandra X-ray Observatory to solve one of astronomy’s fundamental problems⎯determining the distance from Earth to a cosmic object. Peter Predehl, the lead researcher on the project, had found that by scattering x-rays between Earth and a given object, the dust grains and scattered materials between the two points could serve as measuring posts to determine the distance covered by the x-ray. Because of the Chandra Observatory’s superior resolution and strength, particles that scientists could not otherwise have observed would serve as points of context. Researchers were confident that they could use the new approach to help determine the size of nearby galaxies. Furthermore, the newly devised means of measuring the distance between objects and Earth had implications for understanding the universe and its age.(NASA, “Chandra Shows New Way To Measure Cosmic Distances,” news release 00-66, 25 April 2000.)
NASA announced that a team of astronomers had discovered what they believed to be the earliest known structure ever to form in the universe. The researchers had used the Hale Telescope at Palomar Observatory in California and the National Science Foundation’s Mayall Telescope in Kitt Peake, Arizona, to find an ancient quasar. By measuring the quasar’s redshift to determine how fast the quasar was moving away from the galaxy, scientists had been able to calculate the cosmic distance separating Earth and the quasar. The odds of discovering such a distant and relatively fast-moving quasar were remote, especially since scientists could monitor only a fraction of the sky at any one time. The discovery had the broader value of providing a reference point by which to assess those bodies between Earth and the quasar. Daniel Stern of NASA described the finding’s utility: “Finding a quasar at this distance is like turning on a flashlight at the edge of the universe.”(NASA, “Newfound Quasar Wins Title ‘Most Distant in the Universe’,” news release 00-30, 18 February 2000.)
NASA’s Langley Research Center selected Swales and Associates Inc. to provide research and development, engineering, and support services, under a contract valued at up to US$240 million over five years. Specific work areas covered under the contract included full-spectrum aerodynamics, gas dynamics, fluid dynamics, aerothermodynamics, acoustics and aeroacoustics, metallic and nonmetallic structures and materials, and spaceborne and airborne systems.(NASA, “NASA Awards Support Services Contract to Maryland Firm,” news release C00-o, 24 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-o.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
Chairman and founder of Beal Aerospace Technologies Inc. Andrew Beal announced his decision to cease all business operations effective immediately. The company had sought to develop low-cost, reliable, commercial space launch systems and had “made significant advances in low cost hydrogen peroxide propulsion systems.” Beal expressed confidence that, despite the company’s cost overruns and schedule delays, Beal Aerospace Technologies could have successfully developed its BA-2C rocket-launch system if it had remained in operation. Beal outlined the risk factors that had been beyond the company’s control and had led to the decision to cease operations: 1) NASA’s and the U.S. government’s commitment to the subsidization of competing launch systems; 2) federal laws mandating the company’s “potential liability for pre-existing environmental contamination at the only available Cape Canaveral launchpads”; and 3) uncertainty about receiving approval from the U.S. Department of State to launch from the company’s launch facilities in Guyana. Beal remarked that government subsidization of launch systems was the primary reason that the company had to choose, either to become a government contractor, like the Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin, or to cease operations.(Beal Aerospace Technologies Inc., “Statement from Andrew Beal Regarding Cease of Operations by Beal Aerospace,” news release, 23 October 2000.)
Raymond Toricelli of New Rochelle, New York, pled guilty to breaking into two NASA computers in 1998, to steal user names and passwords to gain access to other systems. The two computers, which helped launch robotic spacecraft, were at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California. Toricelli had also set up a chat room to direct people to a pornography site, which paid him 18 cents per referral; broken into a San Jose University computer system to gain access to other networks; and stolen more than 15 credit card numbers online. He stated that he had never intended to damage the computers he illegally entered. Prosecutors planned to seek a prison term of 8 to 14 months at Toricelli’s sentencing on 7 March 2001. The maximum penalty for his crime was 27 years in prison and a US$950,000 fine.
An international team of astronomers led by Kailash C. Sahu of the Space Telescope Science Institute reported the discovery of what appeared to be planet-like celestial bodies clustered around a group of 10 million stars some 8,500 light-years from Earth. The team had used the HST to make their discovery, which formed the basis of their hypothesis that the strong gravitational force of the dense star cluster might have pulled the quasi-planets away from their parent stars. The researchers’ article in Nature prompted both skepticism and praise. Stephen P. Maran, an American Astronomical Society spokesperson, summarized the reason for the excitement surrounding the find: “If it is confirmed, the finding suggests there is something big here that we don’t understand.” In addition, Sahu’s research team reported that they had observed six microlensing events during their study, thereby focusing the attention of the scientific community on Albert Einstein’s theory of microlensing that the gravity of a celestial body can bend the light of a more distant object, thereby acting as a magnifying glass for space exploration.(Kailash C. Sahu et al., “Gravitational Microlensing by Low-Mass Objects in the Globular Cluster M22,” Nature 411, no. 6841 (28 June 2001): 10221024; Kathy Sawyer, “A Dim Discovery in a Bend of Light; Celestial Orbs Detected Through Microlensing May Hold Clues to Stars’ Birth,” Washington Post, 28 June 2001.)
NASA astronomers linked the world’s two largest telescopes, both located at the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii. Using a process known as interferometry, the scientists used the two telescopes to capture images of a faint star in the constellation Lynx. According to Anne L. Kinney, Director of NASA’s Astronomical Search for Origins program, “combining the light from the two largest telescopes on Earth is a fabulous technical advancement.” Using a tunnel that collects light waves that the telescopes have captured, to combine the images, the two telescopes worked together to allow astronomers to peer farther and more clearly into space than ever before. Scientists hailed the achievement as a significant step toward creating a new class of astronomical telescopes.(NASA, “An Astronomy First: Telescopes Double-Team Hawaiian Night Sky,” news release 01-42, 14 March 2001; Associated Press, “World’s Strongest Telescope Link Created,” 15 March 2001.)
tdrs_jmedia.htm (accessed 25 November 2008). by Richard S. Ellis of the California Institute of Technology, had combined the natural magnifying power of galaxy cluster Abell 2218 with observations from the HST and the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii to execute the technique successfully. As a result, the team had been able to detect faint light emitted by a small cluster of stars located nearly 13.4 billion light- years from Earth. Based on detectable characteristics of the stars, the scientists believed that a star cluster in its early formation stages had produced the detected light, and that, during the early formation of the universe, the infant star cluster may have combined with other star groups to create galaxies.(Richard Ellis et al., “A Faint Star-Forming System Viewed Through the Lensing Cluster Abell 2218: First Light at z ~ 5.6?” Astrophysical Journal Letters 560, no. 2 (20 October 2001): L119–L122; William Harwood, “Pre- Galactic Star Cloud Is Discovered,” Washington Post, 6 October 2001.)
Lieutenant Governor of Florida Frank T. Brogan and Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASA’s KSC, broke ground on a new research facility located just south of KSC. The new project, officially named the Space Experiment Research and Processing Laboratory (SERPL), joined researchers from the state of Florida, NASA, the Florida Space Research Institute, and the University of Florida. The research center would devote significant resources to ISS research and to examining the commercial potential of space-related research. Bridges described the venture as widely beneficial, saying, “SERPL and the unprecedented opportunities for collaboration that it represents are key to Kennedy’s evolution to a recognized center for technology development. We expect this partnership to pay dividends to NASA, the State of Florida, and the space industry well into the future.(M2 Presswire, “NASA and Florida Join Forces To Develop Space Science Facility,” 9 February 2001.)
For the first time, astronomers detected a supermassive black hole consuming material in the Milky Way. Frederick K. Baganoff of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a team of scientists using NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory to observe a source of radio emissions called Sagittarius A* had noticed a rapid rise and decline in x-ray emissions in its vicinity. The scientists, who believed that Sagittarius A* is connected to a black hole in the center of the galaxy, speculated that the emissions emanate from matter falling into the black hole. The Chandra observations had provided the best view yet of the area just outside of the black hole’s event horizon―the point of no return for all matter falling into a black hole. The discovery added significantly to previous research indicating that the Milky Way Galaxy contains a black hole or some other large, dark object.(NASA, “Chandra Catches Milky Way Monster Snacking,” news release 01-179, 5 September 2001.)
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) announced that Charles Elachi would become Director of its 5,000-employee, US$1.3 billion research facility in Pasadena, California. Elachi, an expert in the field of remote sensing best known for developing radar systems, had assumed JPL’s top post after 30 years of service with NASA. JPL had interviewed more than 70 candidates over eight months before selecting Elachi. Concerning JPL’s challenge to encourage further exploration while meeting tight budgets, Elachi remarked, “It’s basically striking a balance between faster implementation and cheaper implementation and making sure we have success.” Having lost two separate spacecraft headed for Mars in 1999, JPL stood at a critical juncture as Elachi assumed control.(Associated Press, “New Director Named for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory,” 31 January 2001; Usha Lee McFarling, “30-Year Veteran of JPL Is Chosen as Its Leader,” Los Angeles Times, 31 January 2001.)
Using data from the European Space Agency’s (ESA’s) Infrared Space Observatory, a team of NASA and university researchers identified three stars that they believed contain enough hydrogen to create a Jupiter-like gas planet. The scientists, from Italy, the Netherlands, and the United States, indicated that the stars Beta Pictoris, 49 Ceti, and HD1235344 have particularly fertile environments, which might eventually form planets. Perhaps most significant, the researchers found a “thousand times more hydrogen” in several stars than scientists had discovered in earlier studies.(W. F. Thi et al., “Substantial Reservoirs of Molecular Hydrogen in the Debris Disks Around Young Stars,” Nature 409, no. 6816 (4 January 2001): 60–63; Associated Press, “Study Finds Nearby Star Systems Capable of Making Big Planets,” 3 January 2001.)
Scientists led by Ken Ebisawa of NASA’s GSFC published research that helped resolve a long- standing question about whether the emission of x-rays from the plane of the Milky Way Galaxy was truly diffuse or derived from numerous discrete sources. The scientists had used the Chandra X-ray Observatory to carry out an unprecedented survey of a region of the galactic plane that had no known x-ray point sources, in the deepest examination ever made of hard x-rays in the region referred to as the zone of avoidance. Chandra had revealed 36 new x-ray point sources and an area of diffuse emission. Properties of the new point sources had indicated that they were probably located outside the Milky Way. In addition, Chandra’s survey had indicated that the diffuse x-ray emission revealed the galactic omnipresence of hot plasma with a higher energy density than any other substance in interstellar space.(NASA, “Astronomers Go Behind the Milky Way To Solve X-ray Mystery,” news release 01-161, 9 August 2001; Ken Ebisawa et al., “Origin of the Hard X-ray Emission from the Galactic Plane,” Science 293, no. 5535 (31 August 2001): 1633–1635.)
The Pentagon selected an international team of contractors, led by Lockheed Martin, to build the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF), a multi-role fighter plane that the United States, the United Kingdom, and other countries planned to use. The Pentagon planned for the JSF to function as a single, fungible, low-maintenance replacement for the various aircraft that different military branches in the United States and elsewhere had been using. The program, valued at approximately US$200 billion, included three versions of the JSF, to fulfill the different requirements of the various military branches in the United States and Europe. All of the versions would have stealth and supersonic capabilities. BAE Systems, Lockheed Martin, and Northrop Grumman would initially produce 22 aircraft during the system design and development phase; the companies expected to construct nearly 3,000 aircraft under the program.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Team Wins Joint Strike Fighter Competition, Pledges Full Commitment to This Cornerstone of Future Defense Capability,” news release, 26 October 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/LockheedMartinTeamWinsJointStrikeFi.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
A research team announced the results of a NASA-funded study using microgravity to investigate the properties of everyday materials. Led by Jennifer A. Lewis, the team of researchers had pioneered a new approach to stabilizing particles in fluids, a process they termed nanoparticle haloing. By suspending movement of fine particles in fluids such as paint, Lewis and her colleagues had succeeded in manipulating the complexion of the liquid. Perhaps of greater significance, they had been able to ensure that the fluid did not break down as quickly as it would have done otherwise. The researchers believed that nanoparticle haloing would have wide application, such as in making the fluids more useful and long lasting. As Lewis said, “This designer capability will assist us in developing improved materials.” NASA’s Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) made the project possible, offering grants for studies that might benefit from the use of a microgravity or low-gravity environment to examine the fundamental states and characteristics of materials.(NASA, “Suspended in Space: Researchers Make Important Discovery About Materials,” news release 01-154, 31 July 2001.)
Daniel Wang, a University of Massachusetts professor and leader of a study team of astronomers, announced that his team had discovered a giant halo of hot gas spiraling a galaxy similar to the Milky Way and relatively near Earth. The researchers had used the Chandra X-ray Observatory and the HST to observe galaxy NGC 4631, some 25 million light-years from Earth. The discovery not only revealed the increasing power of the astronomical tools at the disposal of scientists, but also contributed to astronomers’ knowledge about the structure and evolution of galaxies. Wang explained the significance of the discovery: “Scientists have debated for over 40 years whether the Milky Way has an extended corona, or halo, of hot gas . . . by studying similar galaxies like NGC 4631, we can get an idea of what’s going on within our own galaxy.” The study’s results also provided new information about how energy and mass spin around galaxies, as well as about the possible effects of rapid star formation.(NASA, “Chandra Detects Halo of Hot Gas Around Milky Way–Like Galaxy,” news release 01-146, 19 July 2001.)
A team of astronomers released images taken by NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, revealing that black holes are present throughout the universe, across space and time, more pervasively than previously estimated. The researchers had found that black holes were even more common millions of years ago than they are today. The scientists had used new x-ray technology to examine galaxies several billion years old. The research had focused on a small sliver of the skya deep fieldthat the Chandra X-ray Observatory had probed looking for black holes and other bodies. Based on the findings in the relatively small sampling, the researchers had estimated that the universe might contain as many as 300 million black holes. Chandra had captured images using exposure times of up to 10 days and focusing on the same region of the sky for more than one year. The astronomers believed that their new images had exposed the early history of the universe, perhaps traveling as far back in time as 90 percent of the way to the Big Bang. In examining this distant patch of sky, the researchers had discovered black holes of all types and masses.
At a news conference, NASA scientists announced the preliminary findings of Deep Space 1’s 22 September flyby of Comet Borrelly, a type of comet that originates in a region near Pluto. NASA’s Deep Space 1 spacecraft, operating two years past its planned mission duration, had passed within 1,400 miles (2,250 kilometers) of Borrelly, returning the best images and data of a comet ever captured. The encounter was only the second time that a spacecraft had come within such a distance of a comet’s nucleus, as well as the first close flyby of a comet of Borrelly’s type. In 1986 ESA’s Giotto spacecraft had flown within 373 miles (600 kilometers) of Halley’s comet, which belongs to a category of comets that originate from outside Earth’s solar system. In addition, NASA scientists reported that the data captured by Deep Space 1 had substantially enhanced existing scientific knowledge of comets. Scientists found a number of Deep Space 1’s observations surprising, including the discoveries that the comet’s icy jets discharge in tall columns rather than in a diffuse spray, that a cloud of charged particles emanates from off the comet’s center, and that solar wind flows asymmetrically around the particle cloud.(Warren E. Leary, “Probe Sends Postcards from Comet’s Core,” New York Times, 26 September 2001; NASA, “Deep Space 1,” http://nmp.nasa.gov/ds1/ (accessed 17 November 2008).)
NASA announced several new findings made possible by the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Farhad Zadeh of Northwestern University had used Chandra to locate “a cauldron of 60 million degree gas enveloping a cluster of young stars.” The discovery marked the first time that scientists had located such high-energy x-rays surrounding young stars. Zadeh also noted that the newly discovered cluster, located some 25,000 light-years from Earth and estimated at 1 to 2 million years old, had provided evidence in support of the theory that stellar winds generated by stars can produce very hot gas. In addition to Zadeh’s find, Andreas Zezas of the Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics announced that his team of scientists had found new midmass black holes in several starburst galaxiesregions where stars form and explode frequently. Researchers had long hypothesized that such an environment might exist but had previously been able to locate only a few midmass black holes. Zezas credited the powerful Chandra X-ray Observatory with allowing astronomers to examine far-flung galaxies more closely than before. Kimberly A. Weaver of NASA’s GSFC, who had contributed to Zezas’s project, hypothesized that the concentration of midsize black holes could possibly lead eventually to the formation of a single, massive black hole.(NASA, “Star Factory near Galactic Center Bathed in High-Energy X-rays,” news release 01-113, 6 June 2001; John Noble Wilford, “Hot Stellar Winds Captured by X-ray Orbiter,” New York Times, 12 June 2001; NASA, “Chandra Sees Wealth of Black Holes in Star-Forming Galaxies,” news release 01-110, 6 June 2001.)
The Commission on the Future of the United States Aerospace Industry released its final report on the industry’s health and future well-being. President George W. Bush had created the Commission, composed of aerospace industry executives, lawyers, and policy analysts, to analyze the U.S. aerospace industry’s stability, financial health, and relationship to national security. The Commission had concluded that the United States should establish a national aerospace policy; create a government-wide framework to implement that policy; reduce legal and regulatory barriers, to enable the industry to grow and become more internationally competitive; and increase investments in the nation’s aerospace industrial base, infrastructure, personnel, and long-term research. In addition, the Commission’s report provided numerous recommendations to the industry concerning how to meet those objectives, such as increasing and sustaining public and private investment in the aerospace industry and aerospace technologies, transforming the nation’s air transportation system, and enhancing the defense industrial base.(Commission on the Future of the United States Aerospace Industry, Final Report (Arlington, VA, November 2002); The Boeing Company, “Boeing Supports Recommendations of U.S. Aerospace Commission,” news release, 18 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021118a.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
Two separate teams of astronomers reported that NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and the HST had observed two stars, possibly composed of a form of matter unknown to scientists. Researchers examining data from Chandra and the HST had noted that the neutron star RX J1856.5–3754 was far smaller than expected and, therefore, had concluded that the star might be composed, not of neutrons, but of quarkscomponents of protons and neutrons that scientists had never before observed outside of the nucleus of an atom in laboratories on Earth. Another team of astronomers had analyzed Chandra’s observations of neutron star 3C 58 and had found that the star’s temperature was less than 1,000,000°C (1,800,032°F), a far lower temperature than scientists would expect for a star composed of pure neutrons. Thus, that star also appeared to be composed, either of quarks, or of another form of matter unknown to scientists.(NASA, “Cosmic X-rays Reveal Evidence for New Form of Matter,” news release 02-65, 10 April 2002; Jeremy J. Drake, “Is RX J1856.5-3754 a Quark Star?” Astrophysical Journal 572, no. 2 (20 June 2002): 996–1001; Patrick O. Slane, David J. Hefland, and Stephen S. Murray, “New Constraints on Neutron Star Cooling from Chandra Observations of 3C 58,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 571, no. 1 (20 May 2002): L45–L49.)
Astronomers from the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics and the European Southern Observatory published research detailing their discovery of a diffuse emission of x-rays from a cluster of forming stars known as RCW 38. The new discovery contrasted with astronomers’ conventional understanding of bodies that commonly emit high-energy particles, namely supernovas and exploding stars in the intense magnetic fields surrounding neutron stars and black holes. The astronomers, using NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, had discovered that neither type of body was evident in the RCW 38 stellar region, which is, instead, an area of active star formation. Although the scientists remained uncertain about the source of the x-rays, as well as the effects of the x-rays on the star cluster, they hypothesized that these x-rays could affect the chemistry of the bodies that would form planets around the stars in the cluster.(NASA, “Young Star Cluster Found Aglow with Mysterious Cloud,” news release 02-251, 18 December 2002; Scott J. Wolk et al., “Discovery of Nonthermal X-ray Emission from the Embedded Massive Star-Forming Region RCW 38,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 580, no. 2 (1 December 2002): L161–L165.)
Scientists obtained the first measurements ever taken of the dimensions and compositional matter of a neutron star, providing important new information about the fundamental nature of matter and energy. Using ESA’s XMM-Newton space telescope, Jean Cottam of NASA’s GSFC and other researchers captured the first measurements of the gravitational redshift of a neutron star. Gravitational redshift occurs when an intense gravitational field such as that of a neutron star warps light or other electromagnetic radiation. Thus, by calculating the star’s redshift, the scientists were able to estimate its gravity, compositional material, and other characteristics. The researchers found that the star EXO 0748-676 is likely composed of normal nuclear matter, as scientists had previously theorized. The researchers’ observations regarding neutron stars, specifically, and matter and energy, generally, occurred under conditions that scientists are unable to replicate on Earth. The researchers thought that the findings might reveal new information about the creation of the universe, because, theoretically, the temperature and pressure of neutron stars is similar to the temperature and pressure that was present just one second after the Big Bang.(ESA, “XMM-Newton Closes In on Space’s Exotic Matter,” ESA news release 69-2002, 6 November 2002, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ESAK117708D_index_0.html (accessed 2 February 2010); NASA, “Exotic Innards of a Neutron Star Revealed in a Series of Explosions,” news release 02-214, 6 November 2002; Jean Cottam, Frederik Paerels, and Mariano Mendez, “Gravitationally Redshifted Absorption Lines in the X-ray Burst Spectra of a Neutron Star,” Nature 420, no. 6911 (7 November 2002): 51–54.)
NASA scientists Eric J. Rignot and Robert H. Thomas published results of one of the most detailed and widespread examinations of polar ice sheets ever performed. Researchers had already determined that changes in the thickness of polar ice correlated with changes in sea level but disagreed about the extent to which the thickness of the ice sheets was changing. Analyzing recent remote-sensing measurements of ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica, Rignot and Thomas discovered that the thickness of the ice sheets was changing more rapidly than previously thought. Although the data was indeterminate concerning changes in some parts of the ice sheets, Rignot and Thomas found clear evidence that large regions of the polar ice sheets were rapidly changing, with accumulation of ice in some areas and attrition in others. Despite such variations, the scientists found that, overall, the major polar ice sheets were losing mass. Specifically, Greenland’s ice sheet was losing 50 cubic kilometers (12 cubic miles) of mass annually, and the West Antarctic ice sheet appeared to be losing nearly 48 cubic kilometers (11.5 cubic miles) of mass per year.(NASA JPL, “NASA Study Finds Rapid Changes in Earth’s Polar Ice Sheets,” news release, 30 August 2002; Eric Rignot and Robert H. Thomas, “Mass Balance of Polar Ice Sheets,” Science 297, no. 5586 (30 August 2002): 1502– 1506.)
Radar images of near-Earth asteroid 2000 DP107 revealed that it is a binary system, composed of two objects orbiting each other. The finding suggested that many near-Earth asteroids could be binaries. The images, taken by NASA’s Goldstone telescope facility and the National Science Foundation’s Arecibo Observatory, revealed that the asteroid was not one, but two objects, a nearly 800-meter-diameter (2,625-foot-diameter) primary and an almost 300-meter-diameter (985-foot-diameter) secondary, revolving around their common center of mass. The researchers suggested that approximately 16 percent of near-Earth asteroids larger than 200 meters (655 feet) in diameter could be binary systems. In addition, the analysis suggested that binaries with similar orbits might result from a close encounter of an asteroid and a planet, in which the planet’s gravitational pull breaks off a portion of the asteroid. Scientists consider binary asteroids potential hazards to Earth and worthy of further study.(J. L. Margot et al., “Binary Asteroids in the Near-Earth Object Population,” Science 296, no. 5572 (24 May 2002): 1445–1448; NASA JPL, “Some Asteroids Have Astronomers Seeing Double,” news release, 11 April 2002.)
NASA announced an agreement with the National Institute of Aerospace Associates (NIAA), an organization of universities and nonprofit organizations engaged in aerospace research, to create the National Institute of Aerospace (NIA) at NASA’s LaRC. NASA described the agreement with NIAA as a long-term commitment to expand its collaboration with universities, industry, and other entities. The new NIA would host advanced aerospace and atmospheric research and the development of related technologies, offering graduate degrees in engineering and science, facilitating the growth of new business opportunities, and stimulating the commercialization of new intellectual property. The basic five-year cooperative agreement was valued at US$69 million, and the contract’s total value could increase to US$379 million with the acceptance of three five-year options.(NASA, “NASA Selects Corporation To Lead Innovative Research Institute,” news release c02-aa, 26 September 2002.)
Researchers using data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory found a substantial, pulsating source of x-rays in Jupiter’s atmosphere near the planet’s north magnetic pole. Existing theories could not explain either the pulsations or the location of the x-ray source. Scientists had posited that energetic oxygen and sulfur ions steadily precipitate from Jupiter’s inner magnetosphere, entering the planet’s polar regions and producing a northern aurora of x-rays. However, images from Chandra revealed that most of Jupiter’s northern auroral x-rays originate at latitudes that only ions precipitating from Jupiter’s outer magnetosphere could reach. In addition, researchers found that the hot-spot source of the x-rays was pulsating at 45-minute intervals, contradicting scientists’ theory that the x-ray emissions originate from a steady precipitation of ions in the inner magnetosphere. Although this discovery invalidated previous theories, scientists were not yet able to explain the process they had observed. Specifically, according to Chandra’s measurements, the researchers found insufficient energetic oxygen and sulfur ions within the required distance of the ion source―at least 30 times Jupiter’s radius―to account for the observed x-ray emissions.(NASA, “Jupiter Hot Spot Makes Trouble for Theory,” news release 02-34, 28 February 2002; G. R. Gladstone et al., “A Pulsating Auroral X-ray Hot Spot on Jupiter,” Nature 415, no. 6875 (28 February 2002): 1000–1003.)
A team of NASA scientists using uninhabited aerial vehicles (UAVs) to research electrical storms achieved a flight-duration milestone. The research was part of the Altus Cumulus Electrification Study (ACES), a project that examined the causes of electrical storms and their effects on the planet. The ACES research team employed Altus II UAVs to study thunderstorms over Florida, capping off four weeks of research flights with the study’s longest flight, lasting for 6 hours and 32 minutes and monitoring four successive thunderstorms. General Atomics Aeronautical Systems had built the Altus II, which could fly near thunderstorms for hours, at altitudes of up to 65,000 feet.(NASA MSFC, National Space Science and Technology Center, “NASA Lightning Study Achieves Flight- Duration Milestone, Monitoring Four Storms in Single Mission,” news release N02-011, 23 August 2002.)
Scientists found that a bright blue ring of dust surrounds Earth’s solar system, beginning outside of Saturn’s orbit and extending beyond the orbit of Neptune. However, viewed from outside the solar system, this band of dust appears to surround the Sun. The discovery of the dust ring provided empirical support for the idea that this feature around a mature star indicates that the star harbors a planetary system. Therefore, researchers planning missions would be able, based on whether the star has a dust ring, to narrow down the list of which stars to study in their search for planets and planetary systems. ESA scientist Markus Landgraf had led the research team, which had made the discovery using data collected by Pioneer 10 and 11.(ESA, “ESA Scientist Discovers a Way To Shortlist Stars That Might Have Planets,” ESA news release SNR 1- 2002, 15 February 2002.)
In an article published in the journal Geophysical Research Letters, scientists using data from NASA’s high-altitude research balloon reported a discovery that, potentially, could improve the research methodology for studying gases that contribute to ozone-layer depletion. Although scientists already knew that reactive hydrogen gases destroy stratospheric ozone and were able to detect hydrogen peroxide from space, they had problems with computer models used to analyze hydrogen-peroxide concentration in the atmosphere. However, in the reported study, researchers funded by NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise had compared a new predicted rate of hydrogenperoxide formation with the levels of the gas measured by two instruments on board NASA’s high-altitude research balloons. The new data had revealed a high degree of agreement between the actual and the predicted measurements. The researchers noted that, although their newly discovered rate of hydrogen-peroxide formation had no appreciable impact on rates of stratospheric ozone loss, they expected the findings would help to analyze the deleterious effects on Earth’s ozone of other, less easily measured, hydrogen gases.(NASA JPL, “NASA Study Leads to Better Understanding of Ozone Depletion,” news release, 9 May 2002; L. E. Christensen et al., “Kinetics of HO2 + HO2 → H2O2: Implications for Stratospheric H2O2,” Geophysical Research Letters 29, no. 9 (7 May 2002): 1299.)
NASA’s Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) reentered Earth’s atmosphere nearly 10 years after its launch on 7 July 1992. NASA had initially planned for the spacecraft to operate for only three years but had extended the EUVE’s scientific mission twice, ending operations on 26 January 2001. The EUVE did not have an on-board propulsion system, and NASA scientists had not designed it to survive reentry intact. Thus, in February 2001, mission engineers had left the spacecraft in a decaying orbit, so that it would destruct upon reentering Earth’s atmosphere. The EUVE, the first astrophysics mission to explore the extreme ultraviolet spectrum (the energy range between 70 and 760 Å), had examined nearly 1,000 sources near Earth, including three-dozen objects outside of the Milky Way Galaxy.
NASA announced the selection of the instrument and science teams that would provide instruments for NASA’s Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST), the intended successor of the HST. The team selected to provide the primary near-infrared science camera comprised engineers and scientists from the project team’s leader, the University of Arizona at Tucson, as well as from Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center, EMS Technologies of Canada, and COM DEV Limited, also of Canada. The team selected to build the NGST’s mid-infrared instrument included engineers and scientists from NASA’s JPL, NASA’s Ames Research Center (ARC), ESA, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and the University of Arizona at Tucson. In addition to the principal instrument scientists, NASA had selected scientists to serve on the NGST Science Working Group, including Heidi B. Hammel, Simon Lilly, Jonathan Lunine, Mark McCaughrean, Massimo Stiavelli, and Rogier Windhorst.(NASA, “NASA Selects Instruments and Science Team for Next Generation Space Telescope,” news release 02- 109, 10 June 2002.)
Using images from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, scientists found evidence that an ancient eruption had burst through a cluster of galaxies, which could explain why those galaxies act like massive magnetic fields. Scientists believed that the universe’s largest known structures bounded by gravity―called galaxy clusters―might be the source of highly energetic and recurring explosions, which cause the clusters to behave like huge cosmic magnets. Chandra’s images of the galaxy cluster Abell 2597 had revealed a cloud of hot gas with two dark circular cavities called ghost cavities, containing little x-ray or radio emissions. The images suggested that powerful explosions around a black hole in the cluster’s center might have occurred when these ghost cavities expelled material from the black hole’s vicinity, creating gaps in the cluster’s hot gas. Scientists believed that these cavities might eventually move to the edge of the cluster, similar to the movement of air bubbles to the surface of water, thereby transporting magnetic fields to the cluster gas. The images suggested that these explosions are recurring. If the recurring explosions continue to create more cavities, this could explain the strong magnetic field of the extremely hot gas throughout the cluster.(NASA, “Chandra Finds Ghosts of Eruption in Galaxy Cluster,” news release 02-02, 8 January 2002.)
Analyzing observations of the dwarf galaxy NGC 1569, a group of astronomers led by Crystal L. Martin of the University of California Santa Barbara found the first evidence that such galaxies produce most of the heavy elements in the universe. Heavy elements, defined as all elements other than hydrogen and helium, are essential for planet formation and can strongly influence astronomical phenomena such as the rate of galaxy formation. Scientists had theorized that, during the early development of the universe, heavy elements emanating from dwarf galaxies played a dominant role in enriching the intergalactic gas that formed other galaxies. Data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory enabled Martin and her team to test this idea. They found that NGC 1569 emitted large quantities of heavy elements in extremely hot x-ray winds, the first direct evidence of metal-enriched winds from dwarf galaxies. The researchers noted that the findings left open the question of whether or not dwarf galaxies or other galaxies dominate the intergalactic metallic enrichment process.(NASA, “Dwarf Galaxies Give Universe a Breath of Fresh Oxygen,” news release 02-134, 23 July 2002; Crystal L. Martin, Henry A. Kobulnicky, and Timothy M. Heckman, “The Metal Content of Dwarf Starburst Winds: Results from Chandra Observations of NGC 1569,” Astrophysical Journal 574, no. 2 (1 August 2002): 663–692.)
NASA engineers completed a successful demonstration of a solar-powered UAV for remote- sensing applications. Engineers with NASA’s Suborbital Airborne Sciences programs had guided the Pathfinder-Plus UAV throughout a flight lasting nearly 4 hours, during which the aircraft had captured more than 300 high-resolution digital images of a coffee plantation on the Hawaiian island of Kauai. NASA had developed the UAV for Earth science research, but project engineers described the flight demonstration as evidence that their integration of the UAV technology with decision-support systems would have additional practical applications. For example, project engineers hoped that the UAV technology might eventually enable farmers and ranchers to produce harvests more effectively and efficiently. The solar-powered UAV had a ground-controlled aerial imaging system. In fact, an undergraduate student nearly 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) away at California State University in Monterey Bay controlled one of the craft’s digital cameras during the demonstration.(NASA, “NASA Mission Demonstrates Practical Use of UAV Technology,” news release 02-200, 16 October 2002.)
In an article in the journal Nature, scientists reported that they had used images from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory to reveal how objects in the most active area of the Milky Way Galaxy affect each other and other parts of the galaxy. The scientists had used 30 separate images from Chandra to construct a montage of the Milky Way’s central regions, revealing hundreds of white dwarf stars, neutron stars, and black holes, shrouded by the extremely hot gas around a massive black hole. The researchers found that emissions from highly ionized iron, previously attributed to diffuse hot gas, had actually originated from discrete sources in the Milky Way’s white dwarf stars, neutron stars, and black holes. The findings helped clarify the relative contributions of diffuse and discrete sources of x-rays emitted from the galaxy.(NASA, “Chandra Takes In Bright Lights, Big City of Milky Way,” news release 02-03, 9 January 2002; Q. D. Wang, E. V. Gotthelf, and C. C. Lang, “A Faint Discrete Source Origin for the Highly Ionized Iron Emission from the Galactic Centre Region,” Nature 415, no. 6868 (10 January 2002): 148–150.)
Lockheed Martin, NASA, and the state of Mississippi opened the Lockheed Martin Mississippi Space and Technology Center at NASA’s SSC. Officials planned for the 220,000-square-foot (20,440-square-meter) facility to commence operations by the end of 2002. Lockheed Martin announced that its new facility would include a center for production of propulsion and thermal systems for spacecraft, as well as an integrated metrology center. The company also announced that it would provide engineering and manufacturing services at the facility. Lockheed Martin officials cited the location of NASA’s Center of Excellence for propulsion testing at SSC as a critical factor in their decision to consolidate the company’s capabilities at the single facility.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Mississippi Space and Technology Center Opens Doors at John C. Stennis Space Center, MS,” news release, 5 August 2002, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/ LockheedMartinMississippiSpaceTechn.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
Scientists with NASA’s JPL made contact with Pioneer 10, the first object made by humans to leave the solar system. NASA scientists had last made contact with the space probe on 9 July 2001 but had lost contact with Pioneer 10 from August 2000 to April 2001. Pioneer 10, launched on 2 March 1972, had been the first spacecraft to pass through an asteroid belt, the first to make direct observations of Jupiter, and in 1983, became the first object made by humans to leave the solar system. After Pioneer 10’s mission had ended on 31 March 1997, scientists with JPL’s Deep Space Network had continued to track the spacecraft’s signal as part of a study of communications technology. In addition, NASA had used the probe for training flight controllers in the acquisition of radio signals from space.(NASA, “An Early NASA Pioneer Still on the Job in Deep Space,” news release 02-44, 4 March 2002.)
Burton I. Edelson, who influenced NASA’s space science and Earth science programs, died at the age of 75. Edelson had served as NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science and
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency awarded the Boeing Company a contract to design a fuel cell–based propulsion system for a pilotless, ultra-long-endurance UAV. According to Boeing, the UAV’s propulsion system would incorporate existing automotive–fuel cell technology, to create a vehicle with a variety of commercial and military applications.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Receives Contract for UAV Advanced Propulsion System,” news release, 3 September 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q3/nr_020903m.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
President George W. Bush signed National Security Presidential Directive-15 (NSPD-15), initiating a review of all U.S. space policies. According to NSPD-15, the review’s purpose was to update the country’s National Space Policy―last revised in 1996―to better address domestic and international developments affecting the nation’s space capabilities. The review provided recommendations in three specific areas: commercial remote sensing and foreign access to remote-sensing space capabilities; space transportation policy; and existing national policy statements related to space activities. The National Security Council (NSC) was to chair the review with support from the Office of Science and Technology Policy. In addition, the NSC had established the Space Policy Coordinating Committee (Space PCC), which would include representatives from federal agencies with roles in the formation of U.S. space policy, such as the International Trade Administration and NOAA.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002, p. 43; U.S. National Security Professional Development Integration Office, “National Space Policy Review: Fact Sheet” (report, National Security Presidential Directive/NSPD-15, Arlington, VA, 2002), http://www.nspd.gov/ rawmedia_repository/4ff02489171c66d9a66ae29824384025.pdf (accessed 18 August 2008).)
NASA announced the successful test of a launchpad-abort test vehicle designed to support its OSP Program. Wind tunnel tests had demonstrated the Lockheed Martin–designed Pad Abort Demonstration (PAD) vehicle’s stability and maneuverability under simulated conditions approximating escape from a catastrophic failure of a launch vehicle. The tests, which followed the completion of September’s PAD Preliminary Design Review, marked a significant success in the development of a safe and effective crew-escape system, clearing the way for the initial testing of the vehicle’s engine in November 2003 and the first set of parachute drop tests in December 2003. NASA had not pursued the PAD Project to integrate crew-escape capability into spacecraft design since the Apollo program ended.(NASA, “NASA Conducts Successful Pad Abort Demonstration,” news release 03-359, 6 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03359_pad_abort_demo.html (accessed 5 February 2009). 551 Agence France-Presse, “France, Russia Sign Deal for European Space Pad,” 7 November 2003.)
The CAIB carried out preliminary tests at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, firing foam at a fiberglass replica of the wing of an orbiter. The impact of a 1.67-pound (0.76-kilogram) piece of foam fired at 533 miles per hour (858 kilometers per hour) created a narrow 22-inch-long (56-centimeter-long) gash in the fiberglass wings. The CAIB conducted the test in preparation for an official test with panels composed of reinforced carbon-carbon (RCC), a material two and one-half times more resilient than fiberglass. In addition to determining whether foam could damage the fiberglass, the CAIB intended the test to calibrate the mechanism for testing the RCC without using up scarce RCC samples.(John Schwartz and Matthew L. Wald, “Mockup Wing Is Torn by Foam in Shuttle Test,” New York Times, 30 May 2003; Mark Carreau, “Foam Test Leaves Gash in Shuttle Wing Replica,” Houston Chronicle, 30 May 2003. 450 Leonard David, “Japan Recovers Capsule That Carried Made-in-Space Product,” Space.com, 29 May 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/japan_capsule_030529.html (accessed 4 December 2008).)
NASA announced that it had awarded US$39.9 million in additional work under the consolidated space operations contract (CSOC) with Lockheed Martin Space Operations Company, to fund NASA’s JPL’s maintenance and operation of the Deep Space Network in the United States, as well as to provide technical support to the Spanish and Australian Deep Space Network complexes. The additional work brought the total value of the CSOC to US$2.1 billion.(NASA, “NASA Awards $39.9 Million Contract Addition to Lockheed Martin,” news release c03-i, 25 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03i.html (25 August 2008).)
NASA researchers announced that the ER-2, a modified U-2 aircraft, had collected tiny interplanetary dust particles (IDPs) in Earth’s stratosphere, which likely contained bits of ancient stars. The particles, collected over a period of two decades, included the only samples of comets that researchers were able to study in a laboratory. Lindsay Keller, a researcher in the Office of Astromaterials Research and Exploration Science at NASA’s JSC, remarked that the stardust grains were typical of the kind of dust available at the beginning of the solar systemthe building blocks of the Sun and planets. Scott Messenger, an astrophysicist at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, described the IDPs as rich in stardust and molecular cloud material, suggesting that the particles had remained essentially unchanged since the solar system’s formation. To detect the remnants of the early stars, scientists had used Washington University’s new type of ion microprobe, which measured isotopic ratios on scales much smaller than previously possible.(NASA, “NASA Finds Remnants of Ancient Stars in Earth’s Upper Atmosphere,” news release 03-084, 27 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03084.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
NASA announced the creation of the first detailed map of the water contained in Earth’s atmosphere, a map that would help scientists better understand the nature of atmospheric water vapor and its implications for climate change and ozone depletion. In July 2002, NASA had taken detailed measurements of water isotopes in the atmosphere using Alias, an aircraft laser infrared absorption spectrometer flying aboard NASA’s WB-57F high-altitude jet aircraft. The new laser technique had enabled scientists to map the water isotopes with sufficient resolution for researchers to use the map to study water transport, as well as to examine the detailed microphysics of clouds―key parameters necessary for understanding atmospheric composition, storm development, and weather prediction. The resulting map showed heavy hydrogen and heavy oxygen atoms, from Earth’s surface to 25 miles (40.2 kilometers) above the planet. NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise had funded the mission, which had used six aircraft provided by NASA and other federal agencies, to record observations above, in, and below the clouds.(NASA, “The Measure of Water: NASA Creates New Map for the Atmosphere,” news release 03-394, 5 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03394_water_map.html (accessed 23 March 2009).)
NASA announced the successful test of a High Power Electric Propulsion (HiPEP) ion engine using commercial-utility electrical power, marking the first successful test of an engine that could “lead to revolutionary propulsion capabilities for space exploration missions throughout the solar system and beyond.” The test used the largest microwave ion thruster ever built. The test was also the first in a series, demonstrating the high-velocity and high-power thrust necessary for the new nuclear electric propulsion (NEP) applications. NASA’s Project Prometheus had been studying the HiPEP―one of several candidate propulsion technologies―for possible use on the Jupiter Icy Moons Orbiter (JIMO). The JIMO Mission’s design included a small nuclear reactor as its power source and electric thrusters to provide propulsion. NASA planned for JIMO to study Jupiter’s three icy moons―Ganymede, Callisto, and Europa. Director of Project Prometheus Alan R. Newhouse remarked that the test represented a “huge leap in demonstrating the potential for advanced ion technologies.”(NASA, “NASA Successfully Tests Ion Engine,” news release 03-377, 20 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03377_ion_engine.html (accessed 5 February 2009).)
NASA engineers and investigators, together with members of the CAIB, watched as engineers fired foam insulation at a mockup of the leading edge of an orbiter wing, creating a 16-inch-wide (40.6-centimeter-wide) hole in the reinforced-carbon-carbon panel. Engineers used a compressed nitrogen gas cannon to fire a 1.7-pound (0.77-kilogram) piece of foam at the wing mockup at a speed of 530 miles per hour (853 kilometers per hour), duplicating the force exerted on Columbia’s wing when a piece of foam of the same size hit the orbiter during launch. The test results showed that it was possible that a foam block falling from the external tank could have breached the orbiter’s leading edge, allowing hot gases to penetrate the wing structure during reentry and resulting in the breakup of Columbia.(Alan Levin, “Shuttle Foam Test Leaves Hole,” USA Today, 8 July 2003; John Kelly, “Foam Punches Large Hole in Wing: Test is ‘Smoking Gun’, Shuttle Panel Says,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 July 2003.)
Boeing announced that its Integrated Defense Systems unit had signed a contract with the Japan Defense Agency and the trading company ITOCHU Corporation to build the first aircraft of the Japan Air Self Defense Force 767 Tanker Transport Program, comprising four aircraft and support. For its 767 Tanker Transport, Japan had selected the military derivative of the 767- 200ER commercial aircraft, reconfigured with an advanced Boeing air-refueling boom and an advanced remote aerial refueling operator system. With its selection of the convertible freighter configuration, Japan would have the flexibility to carry either cargo or passengers. The 767 Tanker Transport Program would enable Japan to meet its commitment to international cooperative efforts, such as delivering humanitarian aid and meeting the air-refueling needs of Japan and other countries around the world. (The Boeing Company, “Boeing, Japan Sign 767 Tanker Transport Contract,” news release, 4 April 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030404m.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
NASA and the U.S. Army transferred an XV-15 tilt-rotor aircraft to the National Air and Space Museum’s Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center near Washington Dulles International Airport in Virginia. J. Victor Lebacqz, Acting Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Aerospace Technology, described the XV-15―a unique type of aircraft possessing the takeoff, hover, and landing capabilities of a helicopter, with the range and speed of a turboprop aircraft―as one of NASA’s most successful research aircraft and a prime example of cutting-edge aerospace research. Tilt-rotor flight research had begun in the 1950s with the Bell XV-3 convertiplane. In 1977 the first of two XV-15s built by Bell Helicopter–Textron had made its maiden flight. The XV-15 had achieved speed and altitude records for its class, receiving multiple awards from national organizations. Its success had led to the development of the V-22 Osprey and to the world’s first civil tilt-rotor, the nine-passenger Bell-Agusta 609, which was under development and scheduled for delivery in 2007.(NASA, “Tilt Rotor Aircraft Joins National Air and Space Museum Collection,” news release 03-295, 16 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03295_tilt_rotor.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
NASA announced the successful completion of the systems-requirement review for the OSP program, evaluating the contractor teams’ concept designs for providing crew rescue and transfer for the ISS according to Level 1 requirements. The Boeing Company, Lockheed Martin, and a team composed of members from Orbital Sciences Corporation and Northrop Grumman had conducted systems analysis, trade studies, and concept feasibility in preparation for the review. The review had also set Level 2 requirements, addressing guidelines for safety, launch, emergency-return and crew-transfer missions, mission frequency, on-orbit mission duration, contingency cargo requirements, and docking and interfacing with the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Completes Orbital Space Plane Design Review,” news release 03-299, 23 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03299_orbital_plane.html (accessed 28 January 2009))
NASA awarded a contract valued at up to US$238.7 million to the Physical Science Laboratory at New Mexico State University, to operate and maintain scientific balloon facilities and to provide engineering support for the NASA Scientific Balloon Program. The four-year contract with two three-year options had a baseline value of US$39.8 million.(NASA, “NASA Selects PSL for Balloon Program Support Contract,” news release c03-g, 14 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03g.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
NASA announced the successful first test flight of Altair, its UAV. The purpose of the test flight was to evaluate Altair’s airworthiness and flight controls. NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise had established performance specifications for the craft, which was an extended-wing version of the MQ-9 Predator B military UAV―one of several UAVs designed for civil applications.(NASA, “NASA’s Newest Unmanned Aircraft Makes Successful First Flight,” news release 03-193, 9 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03193_altair.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
The remotely operated Helios Prototype aircraft crashed into the Pacific Ocean during a test flight within the confines of the U.S. Navy Pacific Missile Range Facility (PMRF) test range. Ground-based mission controllers had been flying the solar-electric, propeller-driven, proof-of- concept flying wing remotely. The craft had been aloft west of Kauai, Hawaii, for about 29 minutes at approximately 8,000 feet (2,438 meters), when the accident occurred, destroying it. High-efficiency solar cells, spread across the upper surface of its 247-foot-long (75-meter-long) wing, supplied power to its electric motors and other systems during daylight; at night, an experimental fuel cell–based electrical system generated power. The prototype, designed to fly at altitudes up to 100,000 feet (30,480 meters) had set a world record for altitude of winged aircraft―96,863 feet (29,524 meters)―during a flight in August 2001. NASA had intended the craft to fly single-day atmospheric-science and imaging missions at high altitudes, as well as to perform multiday telecommunications-relay missions at lower altitudes of 50,000 to 65,000 feet (15,240 to 19,812 meters). The prototype was one of several in development that NASA had sponsored and funded under the Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology program.(NASA, “Helios Prototype Solar Aircraft Lost in Flight Mishap,” news release 03-219, 27 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03219_Helios.html (accessed 12 December 2008); B. J. Reyes for Associated Press, “Record-Setting Solar Airplane Crashes,” 26 June 2003.)
NASA announced that it had awarded a follow-on contract to the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge, Massachusetts, to continue providing scientific and operational support for the Chandra X-ray Observatory. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had provided scientific and operational support since Chandra’s launch in July 1999. The follow-on contract, valued at US$373 million, funded support through 31 July 2010. NASA had planned Chandra’s mission to last five years from the time of its launch, but had extended the mission to 10 years because of Chandra’s success.(NASA, “NASA Awards Chandra X-ray Observatory Follow-on Contract,” contract release c03-z, 26 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_C03z_Chandra_Contrct.html (accessed 29 December 2008).)
2003/q2/nr_030411t.html (accessed 19 September 2008). system intended for space science missions. Under the third contract, EDD would support GRC in developing and testing technologies for the HiPEP project.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing EDD Wins NASA Contracts for Advanced Electric Propulsion,” news release, 14 April 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030414s.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
NASA announced the selection of the Lockheed Martin Commercial Launch Services’ Atlas 5 expendable launch vehicle for the Pluto New Horizons mission scheduled to launch in January 2006. The agreement with Lockheed Martin stipulated a firm fixed-price, launch-service task order under the terms of NASA’s launch services contract with Lockheed Martin. NASA planned for its Pluto New Horizons mission to conduct the first reconnaissance of the binary planet system of Pluto-Charon, gathering information about the surfaces, atmospheres, interiors, and space environments of Pluto and Charon.
Boeing announced the successful completion of Phase III testing of the X-31A Vector aircraft―the world’s only international experimental airplane in the X-plane series to receive international collaboration―demonstrating the use of thrust-vectoring technologies for performing extremely short takeoff and landing (ESTOL) operations. The U.S. Navy, Germany’s defense procurement agency, the European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company, and Boeing Phantom Works had conducted the ESTOL demonstrations, carrying out the final flight on 29 April at Patuxent River Naval Air Station in Maryland. The demonstrations had consisted of a series of fully automated ESTOL landings on an actual runway using a high angle-of-attack landing, proving that an integrated flight-and-propulsion control system had potential use in ESTOL. Such capabilities would give fighter aircraft greater operational flexibility and lower life-cycle costs.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing X-31A Vector Completes International Flight Test Program,” news release, 7 May 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030507a.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
Lockheed Martin announced it had teamed up with Argon Engineering to conduct a flight test and evaluation of Argon’s Lighthouse Communications Intelligence (COMINT) processing capability in a high-density urban environment. The test team had flown the Lighthouse COMINT sensor in the area of Phoenix, Arizona, for more than 24 hours, during eight flights ranging in altitude from 5,000 to more than 20,000 feet (1,524 to more than 6,096 meters). The series of flights confirmed that the sensor was “capable of handling the high dynamic signal densities of urban and military environments.” Wes Colburn of Lockheed Martin ISR Systems remarked that Argon’s open architecture Lighthouse COMINT system provided a dynamic sensor suite capable of meeting fighters’ needs in complex and modern electromagnetic threat environments. The flight tests had validated that the Lighthouse COMINT system was extremely capable in an airborne environment, as well as on submarines, ships, and land sites where it was already in use.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin and Argon Engineering Team Up for the First Flight of the Lighthouse COMINT System,” news release, 21 May 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/ press_releases/2003/LockheedMartinArgonEngineeringTeamU.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
Scientists from NASA’s ARC and Yale University announced that they had designed a complete map of gene activities in human tissue. The researchers had affixed pieces of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequences from the human genetic blueprint―known as the genome―to specially patterned glass slides. Using these slides, they had measured levels of ribonucleic acid―biochemical copies of DNA, which activating genes produce to make proteins. Among their findings, the scientists had discovered that certain DNA sequences, which they had previously believed are nonfunctioning, are actually functioning―they are encoding active genes. The NASA scientists hoped their results would enable other researchers to analyze genes for human diseases and to develop new treatments for them. In addition, their research had a specific benefit for NASA: the NASA scientists hoped it would help them understand how human genes respond to spaceflight, so that they would be better able to protect the health of astronauts.(NASA, “NASA Scientists Help Create Complete Human Genome Activity,” news release 04-376, 15 November 2004; Viktor Stolc et al., “A Gene Expression Map for the Euchromatic Genome of Drosophila Melanogaster,” Science 360, no. 5696 (22 October 2004): 655–660.)
The airline company Virgin Atlantic conducted the first successful test flight of its Globalflyer airplane. The company had designed the Globalflyer to conduct a flight around the world in 3.3 days without refueling, which, if achieved, would create a world’s record for the length of an unrefueled flight. During a test flight lasting 11⁄2 hours, the Globalflyer aircraftalso known as the Model 311 Capricornexhibited no significant mechanical problems. However, the experimental aircraft had required several modifications, such as the development of a cabinpressurization system, to reach its final design parameters. Previously, the longest duration for an unrefueled flight around the world had been nine days, a record set by Dick Rutan and Jeana Yeager in 1986.(Michael A. Dornheim, “Globalflyer Airborne,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 11 (15 March 2004): 38.)
Scientists revealed the first observations of the merger of two galaxy clusters, providing crucial support for a theory of the universe’s formation. The scientists, led by J. Patrick Henry of the University of Hawaii, used ESA’s XMM-Newton orbiting observatory to obtain data showing that the galaxy cluster Abell 754 formed from the collision of two distinct clusters. Galaxy clusters such as Abell 754 contain hundreds of galaxies and are the universe’s largest gravitationally bound structures. Measurements of Abell 754’s density, pressure, and temperature indicated that it is still in formation. Moreover, the evidence showed that Abell 754 had emerged from the collision of galaxy clusters, supporting the theory that the universe’s hierarchical structure had resulted from small galaxies and galaxy clusters merging into relatively larger ones.(NASA, “Massive Merger of Galaxies is the Most Powerful on Record,” news release, 23 September 2004.)
A group of astronomers reported new findings concerning two prominent enigmas of physicsdark energy and the expansion of the universe. Steve Allen of Cambridge University led a group of scientists who had used NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory to examine 26 clusters of galaxies, located 1 to 8 billion light-years from Eartha span of time covering the universe’s initial explosion and subsequent expansion. Previously, many scientists had theorized that a force called dark energy might have counteracted gravity, causing the expansion. Chandra’s observations of the distances between the galaxy clusters indicated that the universe’s expansion had accelerated, and Chandra’s data on the ratio of hot gas to dark matter within the galaxy clusters indicated that the density of dark energy had not changed. Both findings were contrary to many previous hypotheses. The astronomers stated that, although their findings were inconclusive, the data suggested that the constant density of dark energy causes the universe to expand eternally. This finding is consistent with Albert Einstein’s concept of cosmological constant, which states that the universe expands constantly and gradually.(NASA, “Chandra Opens New Line of Investigation on Dark Energy,” news release 04-163, 18 May 2004; Guy Gugliotta, “Astronomers Find More Evidence of ‘Dark Energy’,” Washington Post, 19 May 2004.)
NASA hosted representatives from 30 countries―including China―in talks about how to accomplish President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration. Experts and participants described Chinese participation in the talks as a small but significant advance toward the goals of global security and space exploration―China’s presence at the talks indicated its interest in collaborating with other countries, particularly the United States. According to analysts, Chinese contributions to space exploration could include expendable rockets, piloted spacecraft, and space robotics.(Mark Carreau and Patty Reinert, “NASA Makes First Overture to China,” Houston Chronicle, 19 November 2004.)
NASA announced that the Spitzer Space Telescope (SST), launched on 25 August 2003, had made several new discoveries. The SSTformerly called the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, or SIRTFwas the largest infrared telescope ever launched. Among the SST’s specific findings was the discovery of nearly 300 new stars in RCW 49, a region in the constellation Centaurus, 13,700 light-years from Earth. In addition, the SST had revealed high quantities of icy organic materials in planets forming around young stars in the constellation Taurus, located 420 light- years from Earth. The presence of organic materials in the newly forming planets could explain the origins of similarly icy bodies, such as comets. Scientists theorized that comets might have provided the water and other organic materials that enabled life to form on Earth.(NASA, “Raw Ingredients for Life Detected in Planetary Construction Zones,” news release 04-167, 27 May 2004; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Spots New Youngest Planet, Just a Million Years Old,” New York Times, 28 May 2004; NASA JPL, “About Spitzer,” http://www.spitzer.caltech.edu/about/index.shtml (accessed 31 March 2009).)
A NASA-funded study revealed evidence of newly discovered relationships between climate change, ice sheets, and sea-level rise. Researchers led by Ian R. Joughin of NASA’s JPL found that, between 1992 and 2003, the speed of the ice movements of Greenland’s Jakobshavn Isbræ glacier―which has the fastest flow of ice from land to ocean of any glacier―had doubled. The increased ice flow from this single glacier had led to nearly a 4 percent increase in the rate of global sea-level rise during the 20th century. Furthermore, remote-sensing data from Canadian, European, and NASA satellites indicated that the glacier’s accelerated ice flow was largely the result of the warming of Earth’s climate.(NASA, “NASA Study Finds Glacier Doing Double Time,” news release M04-192, 1 December 2004; Ian Joughin, Waleed Abdalati, and Mark Fahnestock, “Large Fluctuations in Speed on Greenland’s Jakobshavn Isbræ Glacier,” Nature 432, no. 7017 (2 December 2004): 608–610.)
Kevin L. Petersen, Director of NASA’s DFRC, appointed Steven G. Schmidt as DFRC’s Deputy Director. Schmidt had served as Special Assistant to NASA’s Administrator since January 2002. In addition, Schmidt had previously worked in numerous programs at DFRC, such as the X-33, X-43A, and the F-15 programs. Schmidt, who had begun working for NASA in 1994, had also served as Executive Director of the President’s Space Commission and as Executive Secretary for Management on the Columbia Accident Investigation Board.(NASA, “NASA Names Dryden Flight Research Center Deputy Director,” news release 04-188, 10 June 2004. 199)
NASA and ESA jointly announced that scientists had obtained evidence of a black hole consuming a star, an event known as stellar tidal disruption. Previously, scientists had only theorized the existence of such an event. Using observations from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESA’s XMM-Newton orbiting observatory, an international team of scientists had discovered a star that had been thrown from its orbit after a close encounter with another star and, subsequently, had moved into the gravitational field of a black hole. The black hole, with a mass estimated at 100 million times greater than the Sun, had exerted a gravitational pull on the star that led to its eventual disintegration. Stefanie Komossa of the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Germany led the group of scientists that had made the discovery.(John Noble Wilford, “Black Holes’ Vast Power Is Documented,” New York Times, 19 February 2004; Stefanie Komossa, Jules P. Halpern, and Suvi Gezari, “Follow-up Chandra Observations of Three Candidate Tidal Disruption Events,” Astrophysical Journal 604, no. 2 (1 April 2004): 572–578.)
NASA’s Stardust spacecraft performed a flyby of comet Wild 2, obtaining particle samples, as well as the most detailed, high-resolution images ever taken of a comet. Stardust was the first robotic mission created to collect material from outside the Moon’s orbit. Scientists planned to analyze the particle samples of the comet in January 2006, once the spacecraft had returned to Earth. During the flyby, Stardust flew within 240 kilometers (149 miles) of Wild 2, capturing images of the comet’s nucleus at resolutions ranging from 6.5 to 32 kilometers (4 to 20 miles) per pixel. NASA scientists hoped that the images would help them better understand conditions on comets and that the particle samplescomposed of materials identical to those that had formed planetswould reveal information about how comets and Earth’s solar system formed.(NASA JPL, “NASA Spacecraft Makes Great Catch . . . Heads for Touchdown,” news release 2004-001, 2 January 2004; NASA JPL, “Stardust: NASA’s Comet Sample Return MissionEncounter with Comet Wild 2,” http://stardust.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/details2.html (accessed 9 January 2009).)
Researchers announced that they had found a new type of celestial object, which they suspected was a new class of black holes. A group of scientists led by Rosanne Di Stefano of the Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics had examined data collected by NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory. The team had studied x-rays emitted by enigmatic objects located in nearby galaxies, finding that the volume of x-rays emanating from these objects was comparable to or greater than the volume emitted by relatively warmer, larger hard x-ray sources, such as neutron stars and supermassive black holes. The findings indicated that the newly discovered objects could be a type of black hole that the researchers termed “quasi-soft” x-ray sources.(NASA, “Enigmatic X-ray Sources May Point To New Class of Black Holes,” news release 04-067, 1 March 2004; Frank Morring Jr., “In Orbit,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 10 (8 March 2004): 19.)
The U.S. Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space concluded a hearing on the final report of the President’s Commission on Implementation of the U.S. Space Exploration Policy. The report, which the commission had released the previous day, addressed ways in which the federal government and private companies could implement the Vision for Space Exploration. Individuals testifying before the committee included Edward C. Aldridge Jr., who had led the President’s Commission; Paul D. Spudis of the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory; Maria T. Zuber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Department of Earth Atmospherics and Planetary Sciences; Laurie A. Leshin of Arizona State University; and retired U.S. Air Force General Lester L. Lyles, formerly Commander of the Air Force Materiel Command at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, Final Report on the President’s Commission on Implementation of U.S. Space Exploration Policy, 108th Cong., 2nd sess., 17 June 2004.)
NASA scientists reported that many of the samples from the Genesis space capsule had survived the spacecraft’s crash on 8 September 2004. NASA had launched Genesis in 2001 to obtain particle samples from solar winds, planning to use the particles in a study of the chemical composition of the solar system during its creation billions of years ago. However, Genesis’s sample-return capsule had failed to land on Earth as planned. Instead, it had crashed into the Utah desert, risking the destruction of the particle samples. However, although the crash had complicated the extraction and processing of the capsule’s fragile, wafer-like, sample-collection plates, NASA scientists had found many of the samples intact and usable for subsequent analyses.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Specimens Saved from Wrecked Capsule,” New York Times, 5 October 2004.)
Astronomers using NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) detected, for the first time, a large population of black holes known as type-2 quasars. Quasars―supermassive black holes―are the universe’s brightest objects. Although scientists had observed the light from type-1 quasars, they had never before been able to detect type-2 quasars because, despite the brightness of type-2 quasars, the gas and dust rings that surround them obscure the quasars’ visible light and block their emission of x-rays. Space telescopes and other scientific instruments rely on x-ray emissions to detect and to analyze these celestial phenomena. However, Alejo Martínez-Sansigre of the University of Oxford led a team of astronomers who used the SST to detect infrared light emitted by type-2 quasars, thereby capturing evidence of 21 quasars. The research also indicated that the growth of black holes has been concentrated in obscure regions of the universe and has tended to occur in the cores of forming galaxies during brief, highly productive periods. The new data suggested that thousands more such quasars might exist in the universe.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer Finds Hidden, Hungry Black Holes,” news release 05-211, 3 August 2005; Alejo Martínez-Sansigre et al., “The Obscuration by Dust of Most of the Growth of Supermassive Black Holes,” Nature 463, no. 7051 (4 August 2005): 666–669.)
NASA selected Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation of Broomfield, Colorado, to develop, manufacture, and provide prelaunch and postlaunch support for the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) Microwave Imager (GMI) instrument. The total contract value was approximately US$100.2 million over a period of seven years and nine months. The GMI, a conical-scan microwave radiometer, would fly on the GPM Core spacecraft as part of a multinational collaborative effort to measure global precipitation. The spacecraft, which NASA had not yet built, would be the first in a constellation of spacecraft deployed under NASA’s GPM mission. The GMI instrument would make calibrated, radiometric measurements from space at multiple microwave frequencies and polarizations. NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for the Science Mission Directorate Ghassem R. Asrar remarked that scientists need to know the amount and distribution of precipitation worldwide so that they can assess the quantity and quality of fresh water resources for food and fiber production, human consumption, and other societal needs. Experts in water resource management, agriculture, transportation, forestry, weather forecasting, and other fields, would be able to use future research findings based on GMI data.(NASA, “NASA Selects Firm To Provide GPM Microwave Imager Instrument,” news release c05-g, 15 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_c05g_gpm_imager.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Matt Branaugh, “Ball Gets In On NASA Mission,” Boulder Daily Camera (CO), 16 March 2005.)
NASA launched a 40 million-cubic-foot (12.2 million-cubic-meter) balloon, the Deep Space Test Bed facility, from Fort Sumner, New Mexico, carrying an automobile-sized aluminum gondola containing scientific experiments prepared by university and elementary school students. NASA had collaborated with the students to carry out research to analyze characteristics of Earth’s atmosphere from the unique laboratory traveling 30 miles (48.3 kilometers) above Earth. The primary payload was the High Energy Replicated Optics (HERO), a hard x-ray–focusing telescope. Engineers from NASA’s MSFC had designed HERO to create images from high- energy x-ray light. Undergraduate students from Pennsylvania State University, Montana State University, the University of Alabama, and Auburn University in Alabama had prepared experiments for the new laboratory. The experiments would identify pollution-related aerosols in the atmosphere, measure radiation and its impact on the integrity and behavior of the balloon, measure the external temperature of the balloon material, and gather magnetic-field data. Students from eight grade schools had prepared experiments to observe the effect of the flight environment on microscopic organisms and seeds, placing their experiments in brick-size plastic containers inside two large containers on board the balloon.(NASA, “NASA and Students Partner for High Altitude Research,” news release 05-121, 11 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05121_Student_Experiments.html (accessed 14 September 2009). 792 Richard M. Jones for the American Institute of Physics, “New NASA Administrator Appears Before Senate Appropriators,” FYI Bulletin 69, 17 May 2005, http://www.aip.org/fyi/2005/069.html (accessed 17 September 2009).)
The FAA published the first proposed regulations on commercial human spaceflight, a growing industry often referred to as space tourism. The Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004 (Pub. L. No. 108-492) required the U.S. Department of Transportation, which oversees the FAA, to implement regulations on commercial human spaceflights. Congress had passed the bill for to establish a balanced and clear regulatory regime that promoted the development of the growing commercial human spaceflight industry. Most of the FAA’s proposed regulations addressed passengers’ informed consent and crew members’ qualifications, as well as the training of both passengers and crew. The proposed regulations would remain subject to public comment for 60 days (until 27 February 2006). The FAA was required to issue the final regulations by 23 June 2006.(Darlene Superville for the Associated Press, “Gov’t Issues Proposed Space Tourism Rules,” 29 December 2005; Human Space Flight Requirements for Crew and Space Flight Participants, 70 Fed. Reg. 77, 262 (29 December 2005) (to be codified at 14 C.F.R. pt. 401, 415 et al.).)
Woodrow Whitlow Jr. became Director of NASA’s GRC, replacing the retiring Julian M. Earls. Whitlow had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s KSC since September 2003. Before that, he had served as Director of Research and Technology at GRC. Whitlow, who held bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral degrees in aeronautics and astronautics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, had begun working for NASA in 1979 as a research scientist at LaRC.(NASA Glenn Research Center, “Center Director: Dr. Woodrow Whitlow Jr.,” 10 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/about/bios/whitlowbio.html (accessed 31 July 2009).)
NASA announced that the Chandra X-ray Observatory had detected the most powerful eruption measured in the universe to date, generating a supermassive black hole that is growing at a remarkable rate. The eruption in the galaxy cluster MS 0735.6+7421 had been in process for more than 100 million years, generating energy equal to that of hundreds of millions of gamma- ray bursts (GRBs). In the past, scientists had usually detected the rapid growth of supermassive black holes by observing very bright radiation from galaxies. However, MS 0735.6+7421 had no detectable bright, central radiation, and the galaxy cluster’s radio jets were faint. Chandra’s x-ray observations of the hot cluster gas had revealed the true nature of the black hole. Michael R. Wise of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology remarked that, until Chandra had captured this information, scientists had no idea that the black hole was “gorging itself.” Chandra’s discovery demonstrated that, to observe and understand some of the most violent events in the universe, astronomers need x-ray telescopes.(NASA, “Most Powerful Eruption in the Universe Discovered,” news release 05-004, 5 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/jan/HQ_05004_chandra.html (accessed 11 May 2009).)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-108, legislation that provided US$16.5 billion in appropriations to NASA for FY 2006. In the bill’s conference report, Congress noted some specific programs that it wanted NASA to pursue. For example, Congress specified that NASA use the funds to develop the Crew Exploration Vehicle and Crew Launch Vehicle, as described in the Exploration Systems Architecture Study, NASA’s master plan for meeting the goals of the Vision for Space Exploration. Moreover, Congress also directed NASA to make more effective use of NASA Television―NASA’s own television station, which it had primarily used for internal communications―to promote public knowledge about and interest in space exploration.
NASA and its partner the Spaceward Foundation, a publicly funded, nonprofit organization dedicated to advancing the cause of space access, announced prizes totaling US$$400,000 for four competitions. The competitions would be the first under NASA’s Centennial Challenges program, designed to promote technical innovation in support of the Vision for Space Exploration and NASA’s goals. The first two competitions, the Tether Challenge and the Beam Power Challenge, would challenge innovators to focus on developing lightweight, yet strong, tether materials and wireless power transmission technologies. Winners of each of the initial 2005 challenges would receive a prize of US$50,000. The Tether Challenge would require teams to make the strongest tether of a specified diameter. Competing in a tournament-style bracket system, the tethers would be stretched until they broke, with the overall winner competing against NASA’s “house tether” to win the cash. The Beam Power Challenge would require teams to use wireless technology to lift a weight off the ground. NASA planned a second set of Tether and Beam Power challenges, with a greater degree of difficulty, for 2006.(NASA, “NASA Announces First Centennial Challenges’ Prizes,” news release M05-083, 23 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_m05083_Centennial_prizes.html (accessed 2 September 2005); Robert Roy Britt, “NASA Details Cash Prizes for Space Privatization,” Space.com, 24 March 2005, http://www.space.com/news/050323_centennial_challenge.html (accessed 2 September 2009).)
Alliant Techsystems announced the successful completion of the first in a series of ground tests for solar-sail technology, developed to enable solar-powered interplanetary probes and solar observatories. At NASA’s GRC’s Plum Brook Station in Ohio, NASA engineers fully deployed a 20 x 20 meter (65.6 x 65.6 feet) version of the solar-sail system, in a 100-foot-diameter (30.5- meter-diameter) vacuum chamber, to test the system’s functional deployment and attitude control. The test marked a critical milestone in the development of in-space propulsion technology using the Sun’s energy, instead of fuel propellant, to provide thrust. The In-Space Propulsion Program of NASA’s Science Mission Directorate was developing the solar-sail propulsion system.(Alliant Techsystems, “ATK and NASA Successfully Test First Solar Sail Propulsion System,” news release, 6 May 2005, http://atk.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=118&item=447 (accessed 16 September 2009).)
NASA announced that the Spitzer Space Telescope had captured the light from two known planets that are orbiting stars other than the Sun, enabling scientists to measure and compare extrasolar planets directly. This event marked the beginning of a new era in planetary science. Previously, scientists had confirmed the existence of extrasolar planets using one of two techniques of indirect discoverythe “wobble” technique or the “transit” technique. The wobble technique detected the gravitational tug that a planet exerts on its parent star, and the transit technique inferred the presence of a planet when the planet passed in front of its star, causing the star to dim. Both techniques depended on visible-light telescopes. By contrast, Spitzer observed infrared light, enabling astronomers to contrast a planet against the glow of its parent star. If detected using the transit technique, the glow of the parent star would have overwhelmed the glimmer of light reflected by the planet.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer Marks Beginning of New Age of Planetary Science,” news release 05-082, 22 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05082_Spitzer_First_Light.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
ESA’s CryoSat spacecraft was destroyed during a failed launch from Russia’s Plesetsk Cosmodrome. ESA had intended CryoSat as one of a series of Earth-observation spacecraft called Earth Explorers. ESA had built CryoSat to monitor the thickness of land and sea ice, to determine whether climate change is reducing Earth’s ice masses. Initial assessments of the launch failure indicated that the rocket launching the satellite had experienced a problem with its on-board flight-control system, a problem that had prevented the rocket’s upper stage from separating from its second stage.(ESA, “CryoSat Mission Lost Due to Launch Failure,” ESA news release 44-2005, 8 October 2005. http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMR3Q5Y3EE_index_0.html (accessed 14 July 2009); New York Times, “Arctic Study Satellite Crashes into Ocean,” 9 October 2005.)
NASA signed a memorandum of agreement (MOA) with the United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), in an effort to improve global conservation through increased use of NASA’s Earth science research and remote-sensing data. Under the agreement, UNESCO would use NASA-generated data to share scientific information about how Earth functions. In addition, the MOA would further an existing partnership between the NASA- supported Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) education program and UNESCO’s World Heritage Centre. NASA and UNESCO would train teachers in UNESCO-member states to work with UNESCO’s Natural World Heritage Site managers on collaborative conservation program activities.
NASA awarded contracts to two companies to develop commercial orbital transportation services for the ISS, creating the possibility of a commercial space transportation industry. The agreements also marked the first time that NASA had hired contractors to build a space transportation system for private-sector use, rather than for government use. Under the agreements, NASA would invest up to US$287 million in Rocketplane Kistler and US$207 million in Space Exploration Technologies Corporation, also known as SpaceX, enabling the two companies to develop a spacecraft that could provide crew and cargo services for the ISS. NASA’s provision of the funds would be contingent on the companies’ completion of designated milestones—including launching and docking a spacecraft with the ISS. According to a NASA official, NASA hoped that private companies would be able to turn low-Earth-orbit services— such as transportation of people or cargo to the ISS—into a profitable venture, thereby enabling NASA to focus on other objectives, such as missions to Mars and the Moon.(NASA, “NASA Selects Crew and Cargo Transportation To Orbit Partners,” news release 06-295, 18 August 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_06295_COTS_phase_1.html (accessed 15 March 2010); Mark Carreau, “Two Firms, Both Space Novices, Get Nod from NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 19 August 2006. 102 NASA, “Hubble Sees Faintest Stars in a Globular Cluster,” news release 06-292, 17 August 2006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_06292_HST_globular_clusters.html (accessed 15 March 2010); Harvey B. Richer et al., “Probing the Faintest Stars in the Globular Star Cluster,” Science 313, no. 5789 (18 August 2006): 936–940, http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/short/313/5789/936 (DOI 10.1126; accessed 29 June 2010).)
The U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy publicly released the U.S. National Space Policy, which President George W. Bush had signed on 31 August 2006. The first full revision of overall U.S. space policy in 10 years, this policy superseded the previous National Space Policy of 14 September 1996. U.S. national security issues were a prominent feature of the new policy, with many of its stated principles and goals addressing U.S. defense and intelligence activities in space. The policy also supported private enterprise in space and the implementation of human and robotic space exploration to extend human presence across the solar system.(Marc Kaufman, “Bush Sets Defense as Space Priority,” Washington Post, 18 October 2006; U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, “U.S. National Space Policy,” 31 August 2006, http://www.whitehouse.gov/ administration/eop/ostp/library/archives (accessed 2 April 2010).)
NASA announced that the aviation industry, including the Boeing Company, was using the unique wind-tunnel technology that NASA had developed to test new aviation concepts before applying them in flight. Unlike conventional wind tunnels, the National Transonic Facility at NASA’s LaRC used super-cold nitrogen gas at high pressure to duplicate true-flight aerodynamics capability, even with models as small as 1/50th the size of the typical test aircraft. According to facility chief aerodynamicist Richard A. Wahls, this capability “allows the aircraft manufacturers to produce better performing airplanes with less risk.” Boeing had purchased wind-tunnel time to evaluate high-lift system designs for its new 787 jet aircraft.(NASA, “Industry Uses NASA Wind Tunnels To Design New Airplanes,” news release 06-060, 8 February 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/feb/HQ_06060_LaRC_wind_tunnel.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
Scientists using NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) reported the first measurements of day and night temperatures ever made on an extrasolar planet. Previously, astronomers had been able to measure extrasolar planets’ global traits, such as mass and size, but had not been able to measure characteristics of particular portions of those planets. The scientists had observed a Jupiter-like gas giant, called Upsilon Andromedae b, which orbits very close to a star called Upsilon Andromedae. Gas giants are planets composed primarily of gas, rather than solid matter. The astronomers had discovered that Upsilon Andromedae b might be extremely hot on one side and extremely cold on the other. The observed temperature difference of 2,550oF (1,400oC) on the planet’s two sides indicates that the planet’s atmosphere absorbs and re-radiates sunlight127 rapidly, so that that gas circling the planet cools quickly, forming a stratosphere of cool gas.
NASA’s Mercury Surface, Space Environment, Geochemistry, and Ranging (MESSENGER) spacecraft performed the first of two scheduled flybys past the planet Venus, a maneuver intended eventually to steer the spacecraft to its final destination, Mercury. MESSENGER was the second spacecraft that NASA had launched to Mercury; the first had been Mariner 10, which had flown past the planet in 1974 and 1975. NASA had created MESSENGER to produce color maps of Mercury’s surface and to conduct compositional analyses of the planet’s atmosphere, magnetosphere, and surface. NASA had sent MESSENGER past Venus to collect new information about the planet—the closest planet to Earth—and to test equipment on the spacecraft. NASA had planned the Venus flyby as one of several planetary passages that, collectively, would help MESSENGER reach Mercury. During these planetary passages, the gravity of Venus and of the other planets would help decelerate MESSENGER, altering its trajectory so that the spacecraft would eventually attain orbit around Mercury. NASA planned for MESSENGER to fly past Venus again in June 2007, with the goal of reaching Mercury by 2011.(Britt Norlander, “Dropping By,” Science World, 23 October 2006, 6; Von Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2006.” 48)
Scientists using NASA’s HST reported research demonstrating how an enigmatic form of energy called dark energy has helped shape the universe’s structure. Unable to observe dark energy directly, scientists analyze it by measuring its effects on matter. Previous research had revealed that dark matter causes the universe to expand by counteracting the collapsing gravitational pull of matter throughout the universe. However, several properties of dark matter had remained a mystery, such as how strong it is and when it began to exert its expansive effects. Attempting to solve some of these puzzles, a team of scientists, led by Adam G. Reiss of the Space Telescope Science Institute, had examined HST data on the luminosity distances of the farthest known supernovae—a type of ancient exploding star—to measure the universe’s rate of expansion. The scientists found that dark energy had begun to accelerate the universe’s expansion as long ago as 10 billion years, and that the expansive force of dark energy, although weak, had been sufficiently consistent to counteract gravity. In addition, the research supported Albert Einstein’s theory of the existence of a “cosmological constant” that works against gravity to create equilibrium in the universe.(Adam G. Riess et al., “New Hubble Space Telescope Discoveries of Type Ia Supenovae at z ≥ 1: Narrowing Constraints on the Early Behavior of Dark Energy,” Astrophysical Journal 659, no. 1 (10 April 2007): 98–121, http://iopscience.iop.org/0004-637X/659/1/98 (DOI 10.1086/510378; accessed 29 April 2010); Dennis Overbye, “9 Billion-Year-Old ‘Dark Energy’ Reported,” New York Times, 17 November 2006.)
The House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to assess whether NASA’s current workforce strategy was developing the tools needed to meet NASA’s future needs. Subcommittee Ranking Member Mark Udall (D-CO) expressed concern that the proposed budget reductions to its aeronautics, microgravity life and physical sciences, and space and Earth sciences programs would further complicate NASA’s efforts to create a workforce with an appropriate balance of civil servants and private contractors. NASA’s Assistant Administrator for Human Capital Management Toni Dawsey testified that the overall objective of NASA’s workforce strategy, submitted to Congress in April 2006, was “to transform the composition of NASA’s workforce so that it remained viable for the long-term goals of NASA’s missions.” She stated that NASA was addressing its two most pressing workforce challenges— “uncovered capacity, caused by program changes and cancellations and budget constraints, and retaining Space Shuttle employees through its retirement in 2010.” NASA was maintaining sufficient work in house to protect and strengthen its core capabilities and had established a Shuttle Human Capital Working Group to oversee the complex Shuttle workforce issues. David C. Black, co- chair of the NRC committee that NASA had asked to explore “long-range science and technology workforce needs to achieve the Nation’s long-term space exploration vision,” also testified. In its interim report, the committee planned to recommend that NASA work with other government agencies involved in space-related work, as well as with the private sector, including universities, to “assess the nature, scope, and possible solutions for its skill mix.”(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, The NASA th Workforce: Does NASA Have the Right Strategy and Policies To Retain and Build the Workforce It Will Need? 109 Cong., 2nd sess., 13 June 2006, 14, 17, 81, 84, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath= 109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId=CHRG-109hhrg27971&packageId=CHRG- 109hhrg27971&fromBrowse=true (accessed 21 December 2010); U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, “What Will NASA’s Future Workforce Look Like?” news release, 13 June 2006, http://science.house.gov/ press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1140 (accessed 4 February 2010).)
Ohio University astronomers Thomas S. Statler and Steven Diehl, who had analyzed images of 56 elliptical galaxies, which NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory had made, reported that the data from the images had revealed an unsuspected turmoil in the galaxies, which appear calm in optical light. Statler and Diehl had determined that the previously held assumption—that the equilibrium shape of the multimillion-degree gas clouds in these galaxies would correlate with the shape of its stars—had been erroneous. Searching for an energy source for the explosive activity, the astronomers had drawn a correlation between the shape of the hot gas clouds and the power produced at radio wavelengths by high-energy electrons. Scientists can trace this power output back to the centers of the galaxies, where supermassive black holes are located. Statler’s and Diehl’s analysis indicated that the phenomena of repetitive explosive activity, fueled by the in-fall of gas into central black holes—a process known to occur in giant elliptical galaxies located in galaxy clusters—was also occurring in isolated elliptical galaxies. According to Statler, “these results are part of an emerging picture that shows the impact of supermassive black holes on the environment is far more pervasive than previously thought.”(Chandra X-ray Observatory, “NGC 0507: Black Holes Stir Up Galaxies,” http://chandra.harvard.edu/photo/ 2006/galaxies (accessed 17 December 2009); NASA, “NASA’s Chandra Finds Black Holes Stirring Up Galaxies,” news release 06-006, 10 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06006_Chandra_AAS_ update.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
Using images from the HST, astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, were able for the first time to witness the birth of a second red spot (dubbed Red Spot Jr.) on the planet Jupiter. The Great Red Spot, which dates at least to the seventeenth century, is a storm rising as high as 5 miles (8.05 kilometers) above Jupiter’s cloud level. The Great Red Spot is large enough to contain two or three planets the size of Earth. The new red spot, roughly half the diameter of the Great Red Spot, had begun as three white ovals—cooler, upper-level storms. Observers had first seen two of the ovals in 1915, and astronomers had seen the third in 1939. The three storms had merged between 1998 and 2000. Astronomers believed that Red Spot Jr., like the Great Red Spot, rises above the top of the main cloud deck on Jupiter. Scientists had theorized that the change in color of the oval to red, which occurred earlier in 2006, was the result of the storm’s exposure to the Sun’s ultraviolet light. They surmised that, when the storm dredged up material deep below Jupiter’s clouds and lifted it above Jupiter’s cloud deck, the Sun’s ultraviolet light chemically altered the material, giving it a red hue. Astronomers also speculated that the HST images could indicate a major climate change in Jupiter’s atmosphere, related to the new spot.(HubbleSite, “Hubble Snaps Baby Pictures of Jupiter’s ‘Red Spot Jr.’” news release STScl-2006-19, 4 May 2006, http://hubblesite.org/newscenter/archive/releases/2006/2006/19 (accessed 26 March 2010); John Johnson Jr., “Astronomers See Spot’s Runt, Clue of Jupiter Climate Change,” Los Angeles Times, 5 May 2006; Space Daily, “Hubble Takes Sharpest Shot Yet of New Red Spot on Jupiter,” 5 May 2006.)
NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and the private company Gulfstream Aerospace conducted the first test of the Quiet Spike, a 24-foot-long (7.3-meter) retractable, lance-like rod, affixed to the nose of NASA’s F-15B research aircraft and designed to suppress sonic booms during supersonic-jet flights. The term “sonic boom” refers to an accumulation of shock waves that develop around aircraft as they near the speed of sound (760 miles per hour or 1,223 kilometers per hour at sea level). Like an explosion, the sound energy generated by sonic booms can damage windows on the ground below a supersonic jet’s path. The FAA prohibits supersonic-jet flight over land, except in designated military flight corridors. DFRC and Gulfstream had designed the Quiet Spike, which created three small shock waves, traveling parallel to one another to the ground, thereby reducing the noise produced when supersonic jets break the sound barrier.(NASA, Dryden Flight Research Center, “Gulfstream, NASA Dryden Joust with Supersonic Shockwaves,” news release 06-39, 5 October 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/dryden/news/NewsReleases/2006/06-39.html (accessed 5 March 2010).)
A team of European astronomers, led by Christophe Lovis of the Observatoire de Genève in Switzerland, reported in Nature their discovery of a new system of three extrasolar planets in the constellation Puppis. The discovery of the three planets orbiting the Sun-like star HD 69830, which is approximately 41 light-years from Earth, marked the first time that astronomers had identified a system composed of several planets, each planet possessing a mass approximating that of Neptune. Theoretical calculations of the complexion of the three planets had indicated that the two closest to HD 69830 have a rocky composition similar to the planet Mercury. The astronomers reported that the outermost planet likely has a significant gaseous envelope, surrounding a core composed of rock or ice or a combination of the two, and that the temperatures of the planet are moderate enough to allow the existence of liquid water. The team had discovered the planets using the European Southern Observatory’s 3.6-meter (11.8-foot) telescope at the La Silla Observatory in Chile. The telescope was equipped with a precise spectrograph to detect small wobbles induced by the Puppis planets in the HD 69830 star. The technique of detecting and studying these wobbles enabled astronomers to measure the 64 gravitational influence of a planet on its parent star and, thereby, to infer the planet’s presence.
Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne announced the completion of the assembly of the first Common Extensible Cryogenic Engine (CECE) demonstrator, a deep-throttling 15,000-pound-thrust-class engine, fueled by a mixture of liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. Built in support of NASA’s Vision for Space Exploration, the CECE would validate key component technologies that high- energy, in-space propulsion systems would require for future space exploration. The CECE program would focus on descent propulsion for the Lunar Surface Access Module, as well as demonstrating technologies for other applications, such as the Earth Departure Stage and in- space transfer systems. In June 2005, NASA had awarded Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne the first portion of a US$40 million four-year contract to develop CECE.(Pratt & Whitney, “Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne Completes Assembly of First Common Extensible Cryogenic Engine Demonstrator,” press release, 5 April 2006, http://www.pw.utc.com/Media+Center/Press+Releases/ Archive+-+2006 (accessed 27 April 2010).)
NASA’s Voyager 1 achieved a milestone during its passage out of the solar system when it reached a distance of 100 Astronomical Units (AUs)—nearly 9.3 billion miles (15 billion kilometers) from the Sun. An AU is the average distance between Earth and the Sun, measuring approximately 93 million miles (150 million kilometers). Voyager 1 was already the most distant human-made object from Earth when it reached 100 AUs from the Sun. NASA had launched Voyager 1 and its twin spacecraft Voyager 2 in 1977 to explore Jupiter and Saturn and had continued to extend the operations of the two spacecraft. In the Voyagers’ current mission—the Voyager Interstellar Mission (VIM)—the spacecraft would explore the environment of the outer solar system and, eventually, that of interstellar space.(Von Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2006”; NASA, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Voyager: Mission Overview,” http://voyager.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/mission.html (accessed 14 September 2010).)
Scientists published research indicating that the number of galaxies in the universe had sharply increased 700 million to 900 million years after the Big Bang. The finding provided important information about the formation of galaxies and the composition of stars. Rychard J. Bouwens and Garth D. Illingworth of the University of California, Santa Cruz, had used data from NASA’s HST to determine that, beginning 700 million years after the Big Bang, the number of galaxies had increased tenfold in 200 million years. Another team of researchers, led by Masanori Iye of the National Astronomical Observatory in Tokyo, had found a similar increase in galaxy formation during the same period. These findings supported a prevailing theory of galaxy formation, which held that luminous galaxies were rare in the universe’s earliest times. As heavy elements, such as carbon, iron, and oxygen emerged, these new elements had formed the building blocks for stars and galaxies. The team cautioned that astronomers would need to make further observations to determine more certainly how galaxies had formed during the universe’s nascent years.(Dennis Overbye, “The Boom in Galaxies After the Big Bang,” New York Times, 14 September 2006; Rychard J. Bouwens and Garth D. Illingworth, “Rapid Evolution of the Most Luminous Galaxies During the First 900 Million Years,” Nature 443, no. 7108 (14 September 2006): 189–192, http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v443/n7108/ abs/nature05156.html (DOI 10.1038/nature05156; accessed 29 June 2010).)
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract to the Boeing Company to provide engineering and technical support for four specialized research aircraft—two F-15s and two F/A-18s—at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC). NASA had modified the aircraft to conduct a variety of flight-research missions to support NASA and other government agencies, as well as private industry. The contract’s value was as much as US$28 million during the five-year performance period lasting through April 2012.(NASA, “NASA Awards California Aircraft Support Contract to Boeing,” contract release C07-20, 20 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_C0720_Boeing_Aircraft_Support.html (accessed 16 February 2010).)
Jeanna Bryner, “Twisted Solution to Sun’s Mystery Heat,” Space.com, 21 March 2007, http://www.space.com/ scienceastronomy/070321_solarb_update.html (accessed 28 January 2010). NASA-AHS Robert L. Lichten Internship Award. The basis of the award was a paper that Greenwood had submitted to the AHS International 2007 Robert L. Lichten Competition, “Helicopter External Noise Radiation in Turning Flight: Theory and Experiment.” During his eight-week NASA-sponsored internship, Greenwood would divide his time between two NASA centers: ARC at Moffett Field, California, and Langley Research Center (LaRC) in Hampton, Virginia. Greenwood would work on NASA’s science and technology projects involving rotary wings.(NASA, “NASA Announces First Lichten Intership Award Winner,” news release 07-79, 30 March 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07079_ARMD_Intern.html (accessed 14 October 2009).)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to examine NASA workforce issues and recommendations made in recently released reports of two independent review panels—the National Academy of Public Administration (NAPA), and the NRC. The subcommittee noted a sizeable shift in NASA’s programmatic activities, to implement the Vision for Space Exploration; retire the Shuttle by 2010; complete the ISS; develop the Orion CEV and the Ares CLV; and deal with the growing retirement-eligible workforce, all within the framework of a limited budget. NASA Assistant Administrator for Human Capital Management Toni Dawsey testified that NASA’s Workforce Strategy, submitted to Congress in April 2006, articulated three underlying principles: “building and sustaining ten healthy Centers; maximizing the use of NASA’s current human capital capabilities; and evolving to a more flexible, scalable workforce.” John G. Stewart, a member of NAPA’s Panel on NASA Multi- Sector Workforce, summarized the panel’s major recommendations, including NASA’s adoption of “a longer range, risk-based planning strategy to anticipate and respond effectively to future program needs, budget shortfalls, and schedule revisions for [its] total multi-sector workforce.” David C. Black, co-chair of NRC’s Committee on Issues Affecting the Future of the U.S. Space Science and Engineering Workforce, testified that the committee had concluded that NASA did not currently have the in-house expertise, particularly in the areas of systems engineering and project management, to implement the Vision for Space Exploration. Black recommended that NASA adopt policies enabling it to obtain the highest quality personnel over the long term. Toni Dawsey acknowledged that NAPA’s and NRC’s reports confirmed NASA’s “assessments of the challenges facing us in the workforce arena and validate the actions that we have initiated to address the most critical and encompassing issues.”(National Research Council, Committee on Meeting the Workforce Needs for the National Vision for Space Exploration, Building a Better NASA Workforce: Meeting the Workforce Needs for the National Vision for Space Exploration (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2007); National Academy of Public Administration, NASA: Balancing a Multisector Workforce To Achieve a Healthy Organization (report, Washington, DC, February 2007), 95−101, in U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Building and Maintaining a Healthy and Strong NASA Workforce, 110th Cong., 1st sess., 17 May 2007; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “Subcommittee Focuses on Ensuring the Health and Vitality of NASA’s Current and Future Workforce,” news release, 17 May 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1833 (accessed 9 August 2010).)
NASA announced that it had begun testing SOFIA, the highly modified Boeing 747SP aircraft that NASA intended to use as an airborne observatory for “first light” infrared observations of the universe. Before arriving at NASA’s DFRC, engineers had installed a 17-tonne (18.7-ton or 17,000-kilogram) telescope in the aircraft’s aft fuselage and had cut a 16-foot-high (4.9-meter- high) telescope door in the fuselage. At DFRC, engineers had installed test instrumentation critical for the initial flight tests. In addition, they had equipped a telescope-cavity environmental-control system, designed to keep the telescope dry when the cavity door was closed, as well as when the craft had achieved the altitude required for operating the observatory. The first series of flight tests, conducted with the cavity door closed, would study the aerodynamics, structural integrity, stability and control, and handling qualities of the modified aircraft.(NASA, “Sofia Observatory Enters Aircraft Testing Phase,” news release 07-225, 12 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07225_sofia_first_flights.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
NASA announced its selection of four research teams, which would receive five-year grants valued at approximately US$7 million per team. The teams would become new members of the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), increasing the number of the NAI’s members to 16. The University of Wisconsin team proposed to study organic and mineralogical environments and signatures of life on Earth and on other planets, focusing on technologies for detecting microbial life within rock chemistry. The team from the California Institute of Technology planned to extend the research it had conducted at NAI during 2001−2006, using the Virtual Planetary Laboratory that the team had developed to explore the habitability and biosignatures of extrasolar Earth-like planets. The Montana State University team would investigate the role of iron-sulfide compounds in the transition from the nonliving to the living world, supporting NASA’s mission to investigate prebiotic chemistry and the development of signatures for terrestrial and extraterrestrial life. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology planned to investigate requirements for the development of multicellular life in Earth’s ancient past, concentrating on organic biosignatures preserved in the rock record and on the state of Earth’s early atmosphere.(NASA, “NASA Selects New Members of Astrobiology Institute,” new release 07-108, 9 May 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07108_Astrobiology_Grants.html (accessed 24 March 2010).)
NASA announced the selection of the Boeing Company of Huntsville, Alabama, as the production contractor for the Ares-1 upper stage. Under the contract, valued at US$514.7 million, plus US$610 million in options, a NASA-led design team would receive support from Boeing during the design phase. Boeing would take responsibility for production of the upper stage, manufacturing a ground-test article, three flight-test units, and six production-flight units to support NASA’s flight manifest through 2016. The cost-plus-award-fee contract covered a126 performance period that would begin in September 2007 and last through December 2016.
NASA released images of solar activity captured by the Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory (STEREO), a pair of spacecraft launched on 25 October 2006 to study the Sun. The images revealed a close view of the Sun’s activity, as well as a progressive view of the Sun’s radiation as it reaches Earth’s atmosphere. Scientists intended to use STEREO images to study the flow of energy from the Sun to Earth, in particular, coronal mass ejections (CMEs), which can cause dangerous solar storms. STEREO Principal Investigator Russell A. Howard stated that the new view from the spacecraft would improve scientists’ ability to forecast the arrival time of severe space weather, enabling them to predict the arrival of solar storms to within a couple of hours, instead of within a day.(Aalok Mehta, “Photo in the News: Stunning New Images of Sun Captured,” National Geographic News, 1 March 2007.)
The National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) announced that a landmark test flight of a balloon-borne solar telescope had succeeded, clearing the way for long-duration polar balloon flights to capture unprecedented details of the Sun’s surface. The project, called Sunrise, was an international collaboration among NCAR, NASA, Germany’s Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research and Kiepenheuer Institute for Solar Physics, Spain’s Astrophysics Institute of the Canary Islands, and the Swedish Space Corporation. U.S. partners Lockheed Martin and the University of Chicago were also participating. The balloon, which was larger than a Boeing 747 jet, launched 3 October carrying a gondola containing 6,000 pounds (2,722 kilograms) of scientific instruments. The balloon flew for 10 hours, reaching an altitude of 120,000 feet (36,576 meters), and released the gondola to descend to Earth via parachute. During the flight, the telescope captured stable images of the solar surface, and the various instruments on board captured additional data. David Elmore of NCAR confirmed that the test flight had verified the operations of the entire system, allowing the team to continue planning the first full-scale mission. NASA and the NSF had funded the projects. Associate Administrator of NASA’s Science Mission Directorate S. Alan Stern, in congratulating the NCAR team for their successful test flight, advocated the use of suborbital flight as a less expensive method of studying space than satellites and spacecraft.(National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), “Solar Telescope Reaches 120,000 Feet on Jumbo-Jet-Sized Balloon,” news release, 23 October 2007, http://www.ucar.edu/news/releases/2007/sunrise.shtml (accessed 29 September 2010); Katy Human, “Balloon Test Flight Hailed,” Denver Post (CO), 22 October 2007.)
NASA announced a modification to its contract with Lockheed Martin to design, test, and build the Orion CEV. The modified contract had three significant changes, including the addition of two test flights of Orion’s launch-abort system and the deletion from the initial design phase of the production of a pressurized cargo carrier for the ISS. The contract also added two years to the development period, extending it to December 2013, and increased the contract’s value from US$3.9 billion to US$4.3 billion. The modification reflected the continuing progress on Orion’s development and NASA’s evolving budgetary landscape.(NASA, “NASA Modifies Orion Crew Exploration Vehicle Contract,” contract release C07-21, 20 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_C0721_Orion_Contract_Mod.html (accessed 16 February 2010).)
NASA announced a landmark achievement of its Spitzer Space Telescope (SST). For the first time the SST had captured enough light from exoplanets—planets outside Earth’s solar system— to identify molecular signatures in their atmospheres. NASA described the event as a significant step toward achieving the ability to detect life on rocky exoplanets. Using a spectrograph to reveal the “fingerprints” of the objects’ chemical composition, the space-based infrared SST had obtained the data from two different gaseous exoplanets—HD 189733b, located 63 light-years from Earth in the constellation Vulpecula, and HD 209458b, located 150 light-years away in the constellation Pegasus. The telescope had monitored the planets as they transited behind their stars and temporarily disappeared from view. Once the exoplanets were no longer visible, Spitzer’s spectrograph measured the dip in infrared light. The data collected through this method, known as the secondary-eclipse technique, indicated that the two planets—known as “hot Jupiters,” because they are gaseous like Jupiter, but orbit much closer to their stars—are drier and cloudier than scientists had previously predicted. Although scientists had predicted that water vapor would prove a common feature of the atmospheres of hot Jupiters, the SST found no evidence of water vapor on either HD189733b or HD 209458b.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer First To Crack Open Light of Far Away Worlds,” news release 07-48, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_0748_Spitzer.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Eric Berger, “Another Step Closer To Finding a Planet Like Ours,” Houston Chronicle, 22 February 2007.)
NASA released findings from the collective efforts of its Chandra X-ray Observatory, HST, SST, and ground-based telescopes—the Very Large Array in New Mexico and the Multi-Element Radio Linked Interferometer Network (MERLIN) in the United Kingdom. The telescopes had captured imagery showing, for the first time, a powerful jet from a supermassive black hole striking a nearby galaxy. The system, called 3C321, contained two galaxies orbiting each other, each with a supermassive black hole at its center. However, NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory had shown a jet emanating from the black hole at the center of the larger galaxy and “punching” the smaller galaxy, which had swung into the larger galaxy’s path. The study’s leader, Daniel A. Evans of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, remarked that, although scientists had seen many black holes produce similar jets, this was the first time scientists had observed such a jet punching into another galaxy. Coinvestigator Martin J. Hardcastle of the University of Hertfordshire in the United Kingdom added that, although these jets are common in the universe, scientists struggled to understand some of their basic properties. Hardcastle said that 3C321 had provided the chance to learn about the behavior of jets when they slam into a galaxy and about the subsequent effect of such events on jets.(NASA, “‘Death Star’ Galaxy Black Hole Fires at Neighboring Galaxy,” news release 07-280, 17 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07280_Death_Star_Black_Hole.html (accessed 20 October 2010). 184 Todd Halvorson, “Whitson, ‘The Queen of EVA’: Commander Sets Record for Female Spacewalkers,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 December 2007; Robert Z. Pearlman, “Astronauts Mark 100th Station Spacewalk,” Space.com, 18 December 2007, http://www.space.com/news/cs-071218-100th-iss-spacewalk.html (accessed 29 November 2010); Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Inspect Space Station’s Solar Wing Joints,” Space.com, 18 December 2007, http://www.space.com/071218-expedition16-fourth-spacewalk-wrap.html (accessed 29 November 2010).)
NASA announced that it had signed a cooperative Space Act Agreement with the Challenger Center for Space Education of Alexandria, Virginia. The partnership would use hands-on interactive educational activities to interest students, as well as their families, teachers, and the public, in the study of engineering, mathematics, science, and technology. The Challenger Center, founded in 1986, consisted of a network of 50 Challenger Learning Centers that train teachers to use project-based learning and space exploration themes to engage skills in critical thinking, communication, decision making, and teamwork.(NASA, “NASA and Challenger Center Combining Efforts for Students,” news release 08-217, 28 August 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08217_NASA_Challenger_Center.html (accessed 25 July 2011).)
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract for the completion of a 210-day independent study of the design concept of the Constellations Program’s lunar-landing craft. NASA awarded the contract, totaling approximately US$1.5 million, to five different companies: Andrews Space of Seattle, Boeing Defense, Space and Security in Houston, Lockheed Martin Space Systems in Denver, Northrop Grumman in El Segundo, California, and Odyssey Space Research of Houston. Each company would receive a maximum payment of US$350,000 to assess the Altair lunar lander’s current design, recommend safety improvements, and propose partnerships between government and industry.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contracts for Design Study of Lunar Landing Craft,” news release C08-014, 17 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_C08014_Altair_BAA_Selection.html (accessed 13 January 2011).)
NASA announced that it had signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) for the implementation of the Joint Dark Energy Mission (JDEM). JDEM would measure the universe’s expansion with high precision, making it the first space- based observatory to study the nature of dark energy, specifically. Scientists hoped that understanding the properties of dark energy, which makes up approximately 70 percent of the total mass energy of the universe, would help them learn more about how galaxies form and gain their mass. NASA and DOE signed the MOU in accordance with recommendations of a 2007 study issued by the jointly funded Beyond Einstein Program Assessment Committee. The Committee had recommended that NASA should develop and launch JDEM first, out of the five proposed missions in NASA’s Beyond Einstein Program.
NASA announced that it had generated the highest-resolution topographical data of the lunar south pole to date, using the Goldstone Solar System Radar (GSSR) in the Mojave Desert in California. Scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had generated the data over six months during 2006, when the Moon’s axis was tilted at a relatively rare alignment, allowing for a good view of the pole. The GSSR had gathered the data using its 70-meter (230-foot) radar dish, which bounced 500-kilowatt radar signals, at 90-minute intervals, off an area of the lunar surface measuring 400 miles by 250 miles (644 kilometers by 402 kilometers). The resulting images showed a resolution of up to 20 meters (66 feet) per pixel, close enough to identify a feature the size of a house. They revealed that the topography of the area, located near Shackleton Crater, was extremely rugged, with craters 2.5-miles deep (4-kilometers deep) and mountains as high as Mt. McKinley. NASA scientists claimed that the newest data had more than 3 times the resolution and 10 times the vertical accuracy of the best mapping data acquired previously—data that the GSSR had captured during a 1997 study.(NASA, “NASA Views Landing Site Through Eyes of Future Moon Crew,” news release 08-071, 27 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/HQ_08071_goldstone_radar.html (accessed 28 December 2010); Kenneth Chang, “The Moon’s Craggiest Stretch Comes into Focus,” New York Times, 28 February 2008.)
A team of astronomers led by Alicia M. Soderberg announced in the journal Nature that they had made the first observations of a supernova in the process of exploding. Before this discovery, astronomers had only observed supernovas by means of their visible light, which had traveled at least a month before reaching Earth. However, by serendipity, Soderberg had viewed the supernova SN 2008D from the beginning of its explosion. She had been observing the star’s galaxy using NASA’s Swift X-ray Telescope, when she caught the initial explosion of SN 2008D, only visible in the x-ray wavelength. Soderberg had alerted the astronomy community of the event. Scientists had trained several telescopes, including NASA’s HST and NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, on SN 2008D. They had watched the star as it exploded over the following days. Scientists hoped that studying the initial x-ray burst of SN 2008D would teach them how to recognize and observe other supernovas in the future.(Dennis Overbye, “Scientists See Supernova in Action,” New York Times, 22 May 2008; Andrea Thompson, “Supernova Birth Observed for First Time,” Space.com, 22 May 2008, http://www.space.com/5371-supernova- birth-observed-time.html (accessed 16 March 2011); see also A. M. Soderberg et al., “An Extremely Luminous X- Ray Outburst at the Birth of a Supernova,” Nature 453, no. 7194 (22 May 2008): 469−474.)
NASA announced that it had selected Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX) for a contract with the Launch Services Program at NASA’s KSC. The indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity contract stipulated that NASA would be able to place orders for the launch services of the Falcon-1 and Falcon-9 launch vehicles through 30 June 2010, and that ordered launches could take place through December 2012. SpaceX would have to be able to launch payloads of 551 pounds (249.93 kilograms) or more into a circular orbit of 124 miles (199.56 kilometers) at an orbital inclination of 28.5°. Since 1999, NASA had awarded launch services contracts two times per year to multiple launch services providers. NASA allowed the companies awarded contracts to compete for missions in support of NASA’s Science Directorate, Space Operations Directorate, and Exploration Directorate. The contract’s potential value was between US$20,000 and US$1 billion, depending upon the number of launches NASA actually ordered.
NASA announced that it had renamed its GLAST telescope the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope, in honor of the early twentieth century scientist Enrico Fermi. Fermi had developed a theory to explain how cosmic particles could be accelerated to high speeds. His work formed the basis of the scientific study of gamma rays. NASA also announced that the telescope, which had launched on 11 June 2008, had successfully completed two months of instrument testing and calibration. Scientists hoped to use the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope to study gamma rays and to make new discoveries about black holes, pulsars, and the laws of physics.(NASA, “NASA Renames Observatory for Fermi, Reveals Entire Gamma-Ray Sky,” news release 08-214, 26 August 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08214_NASA_renames_GLAST.html (accessed 25 July 2011).)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics received testimony from S. Alan Stern, Associate Administrator for NASA’s Science Mission Directorate (SMD), and from a panel of research scientists, regarding the FY 2009 budget request for science programs. The president’s budget request had provided US$4.4 billion in direct funding for science programs, an amount representing 25 percent of NASA’s total budget request. Subcommittee Ranking Member Thomas C. Feeney (R-FL) called the budget “essentially flat,” but Stern testified that the budget accomplished all of the SMD’s objectives, including starting seven new missions, increasing research analysis, accelerating the suborbital program, beginning a lunar program, and initiating the Earth Science Decadal Survey.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “Witnesses: FY09 NASA Science Budget Makes Best of Limited Resources,” press release, 13 March 2008, http://science.house.gov/PressRoom/Item.aspx?ID=89# (accessed 19 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “NASA’s Science Programs: Fiscal Year 2009 Budget Request and Issues,” 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 13 March 2008, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg41067/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg41067.pdf (accessed 19 January 2011).)
European Space Agency (ESA) scientists announced that the Ulysses spacecraft had made its fourth pass over one of the Sun’s poles. Ulysses, engaged in an 18-year, ongoing joint mission operated by NASA and ESA, had completed an orbit of the Sun every 6.2 years. As it passed over the Sun’s poles, Ulysses occupied a unique position enabling the craft to sample solar winds, a vantage point unavailable to any other spacecraft or Earth-based observatory. This most recent flyby of the Sun’s north pole had occurred a week after scientists had observed the beginning of a new solar cycle. “This is a wonderful opportunity to examine the Sun’s north pole within a transition of cycles,” said Arik Posner, a NASA scientist for the Ulysses program.(European Space Agency (ESA), “Ulysses at the North Pole,” news release, 15 February 2008, http://www.esa.int/ esaSC/SEMLLN3MDAF_index_0.html (accessed 17 December 2010); Houston Chronicle, “Ulysses Flies over Sun’s North Pole,” 15 January 2008.)
NASA’s Human Research Program announced that it would fund nine ground-based studies on the effects of space radiation on human health. The selected study proposals, chosen from a pool of 60 submissions, would investigate issues such as damage to the central nervous system and risk predictions for cancer. Researchers from California, Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, New York, and Utah would split the total value of the US$13 million funding. The Human Research Program’s mission was to provide knowledge and technologies to improve human health during space exploration and to identify possible countermeasures for known problems.(NASA, “NASA Awards Space Radiobiology Research Grants,” news release 08-200, 5 August 2008, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08200_NRA_Space_Radiobiology.html (accessed 7 July 2011).)
NASA announced the cowinners of its 2007 Software of the Year Award: the Data-Parallel Line Relaxation (DPRL) software and the Adaptive Modified Gerberg-Saxton Phase Retrieval program. The DPRL, developed at NASA’s ARC, simulated the heat, pressures, and shear stresses that a spacecraft experiences while entering a planet’s atmosphere. Because it was more accurate than a test facility, the software allowed engineers to design optimally suited protective materials for spacecraft. NASA’s JPL had developed the Adaptive Modified Gerberg-Saxton Phase Retrieval program, which used algorithms to characterize possible errors in the imaging of a telescope’s scientific camera and then corrected the errors, improving the camera’s resolution and sensitivity. NASA had used the software in designing its James Webb Space Telescope, scheduled to launch in 2013. NASA’s Software of the Year Award recognized software inventions that had significantly improved NASA’s ability to explore space and had benefited science.
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing on NASA’s aeronautics R&D programs. Jaiwon Shin, NASA’s Associate Administrator of the Aeronautics Research Mission, was among the witnesses. The Subcommittee examined whether NASA’s aeronautics R&D programs were satisfactorily meeting the United States’ needs, especially regarding the impact of aviation on the environment, the development of aeronautics safety, and the development of the Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen). NextGen, a joint program of NASA, the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), and the Departments of Commerce, Defense, Homeland Security, and Transportation, proposed to overhaul the nation’s air transportation system. NextGen required an increase in applied R&D. However, to comply with the NASA Authorization Act of 2005, NASA had shifted its focus from applied R&D to fundamental research. Additionally, Congress had reduced NASA’s FY 2009 budget for the Aeronautics Research Program from FY 2008 levels by US$62.5 million. At the hearing, Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) expressed concern that NASA would not be able to maintain the relevancy of its aeronautics R&D in the face of decreased funding.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “Subcommittee Examines NASA’s Aeronautics R&D Program,” press release, 1 May 2008, http://sciencedems.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=2175 (accessed 16 June 2010); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “NASA Aeronautics Program Faces Challenges To Meet Air Travel Demands,” press release, 1 May 2008, http://gop.science.house.gov/Pressroom/Item.aspx?ID=100# (accessed 16 March 2001); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “NASA’s Aeronautics R&D Program: Status and Issues,” 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 1 May 2008, http://www.gpo.gov/ fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg41902/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg41902.pdf (accessed 16 March 2011).)
NASA’s Aeronautic Research Mission Directorate announced that it had awarded six research contracts, with a combined value of US$12.4 million, for the study of advanced concepts in subsonic and supersonic commercial transport. The 18-month studies would focus on the development of key technologies and advancements that would allow NASA to prepare innovative new commercial vehicles for public use sometime during 2030−2035. The studies were the first phase of a two-phase acquisition process; NASA would ask participants who successfully completed Phase 1 to submit proposals for Phase 2. The leaders of the six study teams were Boeing Company, GE Aviation, Lockheed Martin, MIT, and Northrop Grumman. Each team’s contract was valued at approximately US$2 million.(NASA, “NASA Awards Future Vehicle Aircraft Research Contracts,” news release C08-060, 6 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_C08-060_ARMD_contracts.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
NASA’s GRC announced that it had awarded a contract for the definition, design, fabrication, assembly, integration, test, and operation of spaceflight projects to ZIN Technologies of Middleburg Heights, Ohio. The cost-plus-incentive-fee, indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity contract covered a base period of three years, with two optional one-year extensions. The contract’s total value was US$94.5 million. The contractor would perform ISS flight investigations, particularly in the Exploration Technology Development Program and Human Research Program. The projects would include advanced technology development and demonstrations in power, energy storage and distribution, in-space propulsion, lunar surface and in-situ resource applications, space communications, and spacecraft fire safety.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contract for Space Flight Projects Systems Development and Operations,” news release C08-065, 10 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_C08065_GRC_ ZIN.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
NASA’s Langley Research Center (LaRC) announced that it had selected four companies to compete to supply its orders for developmental test hardware and aerospace model systems for use in ground tests, flight tests, space exploration, and spaceflight. NASA had designated the contracts, which would have a cumulative maximum value of US$30 million over five years, as awards for reliance-consolidated models and for centralization of design and fabrication practices at NASA’s Ames Research Center (ARC), Glenn Research Center (GRC), LaRC, and MSFC. The contract recipients were Advanced Technologies of Newport News, Virginia; ATK Micro Craft of Tullahoma, Tennessee; Tri Models of Huntington Beach, California; and Triumph Aerospace Systems−Newport News of Newport News, Virginia.(NASA, “NASA Selects Companies for Design and Fabrication,” news release C08-006, 23 January 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jan/HQ_C0806_Contract_model_systems_and_test_hardware.html (accessed 17 December 2010).)
NASA announced that the Constellation Program had awarded to 11 companies and a university contracts to conduct 180-day studies of the systems necessary for lunar outposts. NASA would use the studies’ recommendations to choose packaging options, to identify basic functions for lunar habitats, and to develop innovative avionics, computer software, and energy storage ideas, as well as equipment and techniques to assist in preparing for the outpost site. NASA had awarded contracts on six study topics. Oceaneering Space Systems of Houston would study alternative packaging options, and Honeywell International of Glendale, Arizona, would study avionics. ATK Space Systems Group of Brigham City, Utah, Battelle Memorial Institute of Columbus, Ohio, and Hamilton Sundstrand of Canoga Park, California, would study energy storage. The Boeing Company of Huntington Beach, California, ILC Dover of Frederica, Delaware, and University of Maryland, College Park, would study minimum habitation functions. Astrobotic Technology of Pittsburgh and Honeybee Robotic of New York would study methods for moving regoliths. The Charles Stark Draper Laboratory of Cambridge, Massachusetts, and United Space Alliance of Houston would study software. The maximum value of each individual award was US$250,000, and the total value of all contracts was approximately US$2 million.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contracts for Concepts of Lunar Surface Systems,” news release C08-48, 28 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_C0848_Lunar_surface_contract.html (accessed 18 May 2011).)
NASA announced that its Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) had passed the first round of flight-testing, after the craft successfully flew five times with its external door closed. The external door is a modification of the craft’s 747SP fuselage. The craft’s 10-foot (3-meter), 19-ton (38,000-pound or 17,237-kilogram) telescope would make observations through the door, collecting data that scientists would be able to use to study the birth and evolution of planets, stars, and galaxies. In addition to confirming SOFIA’s aerodynamics, control, handling, stability, and structural integrity, the tests also assessed the telescope’s tracking abilities. SOFIA, a joint partnership between NASA and the German Aerospace Center, was based at the Aircraft Operations Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, part of NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC).(NASA, “SOFIA Completes Closed-Door Test Flights,” news release 08-010, 16 January 2008, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2008/jan/HQ_08010_SOFIA_Flight_Series_End.html (accessed 7 December 2010).)
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract to Northrop Grumman Corporation’s Integrated Systems Division of San Diego, California, for services in support of its Northrop Grumman−manufactured Global Hawk aircraft. NASA’s DFRC planned to operate the two uncrewed aircraft. The indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity, sole-source contract, which would span from 6 August 2008 through 5 August 2013, carried a maximum value of US$25 million. The contract would include the operation of the aircraft, their ground control station, and related systems. Additionally, the contractor would supply technical assistance, including analysis, design support, operational and manufacturing support, simulation, and software development and engineering. NASA’s DFRC planned to use the high-altitude, long-endurance, long-distance aircraft in missions in support of Earth science research and the research of NASA’s SMD.(NASA, “NASA Awards Global Hawk Support Contract to Northrop Grumman,” news release C08-050, 7 August, 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_C08-050_GLOBAL_HAWK.html (accessed 7 July 2011).)
NASA announced that its Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope had captured the first gamma-ray burst (GRB) ever seen in high resolution. The burst, designated GRB 080916C, was the most extreme yet recorded, in terms of its tremendous power and speed. The Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope had detected the blast on 15 September 2008, and the Gamma-Ray Burst Monitor aboard the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope had recorded the event. Thirty-two hours after the blast’s detection, a team at the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching, Germany, had searched for the explosion’s afterglow. The team at the Max Planck Institute had then captured the field in seven wavelengths, using the Gamma-Ray Burst Optical/Near-Infrared Detector (GROND) on the 2.2-meter (7.22-foot) telescope at the European Southern Observatory in La Silla, Chile. The capture had enabled the Max Planck Institute team to determine that the blast had occurred 12.2 billion light-years away, in the constellation Carina. Fermi team members had used this information to show that the blast had exceeded the power of 9,000 ordinary supernovas and to calculate that, within the jet, gas bullets had likely moved at 99.9999 percent of the speed of light.(NASA, “NASA’s Fermi Telescope Sees Most Extreme Gamma-Ray Blast Yet,” news release 09-033, 19 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-033_Fermi_Gamma-ray_Blast.html (accessed 28 February 2011); Press Association (United Kingdom), “Record Radiation Blast Detected,” 20 February 2009.)
Rodger E. Doxsey, head of the Space Telescope Science Institute’s (STScI’s) HST Mission Office in Baltimore, died of cancer at the age of 62. Recruited as an HST Mission Operations Scientist, Doxsey had worked at STScI since 1981, nine years before the launch of HST. Since HST’s launch, Doxsey had been involved in the daily operations of the telescope. He had been responsible for all work necessary to support HST’s scientific operations, planning and scheduling, and calibration of data, and for building scientific mission specifications and issuing all commands necessary to HST’s instruments. Doxsey had worked with GSFC to develop HST’s new scientific instruments. Despite his illness, he had remained involved in the preparations for the final servicing mission to the telescope in May 2009. In 1991 NASA had recognized Doxsey with the highest honor it could give to a nonfederal employee, awarding him its Distinguished Public Service Medal. With this award, NASA noted Doxsey’s “outstanding leadership in developing the concepts of the scientific operations” of HST and in implementing the systems needed to accomplish those ends. In 2004 AAS had awarded Doxsey the Van Biesbroeck Prize for his “outstanding, unselfish dedication” to making HST “one of the most scientifically productive telescopes of all time.” Director of STScI Charles Mattias “Matt” Mountain described Doxsey as the “heart and soul of Hubble” at the Institute, saying that Doxsey “knew everything about the space telescope, from the smallest anomaly to the breadth of the extraordinary science delivered by the telescope.” Doxsey had worked with HST for more than 28 years.(Frank D. Roylance, “Rodger Doxsey, One of Space Telescope Team’s First Leaders, Dies at 62,” Baltimore Sun, 15 October 2009.)
NASA announced that its Kepler space telescope had detected the atmosphere of HAT-P-7, a known gas-giant planet, within a 10-day period of test-data collection, thereby demonstrating Kepler’s extraordinary scientific capabilities. NASA analysis showed that Kepler’s onboard telescope and light-detecting instruments were at least 100 times more precise than the ground- based instruments that had originally discovered HAT-P-7. The unprecedented precision of Kepler’s measurements of the planet yielded new information about HAT-P-7’s atmosphere, demonstrating Kepler’s accuracy in locating Earth-sized planets. Kepler had launched on 6 March 2009, on a mission to locate Earth-sized, potentially habitable exoplanets.(NASA, “NASA’s Kepler Mission Spies Changing Phases in a Distant World,” news release 09-180, 6 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09_180_Kepler_First_light.html (accessed 31 August 2011); John Johnson Jr., “NASA Says Kepler Spacecraft Proves It Can Find Earth-Sized Planets,” Los Angeles Times, 7 August 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of two scientific proposals to study the Sun and other exotic objects in the universe, such as neutron stars and black holes. NASA would develop the proposals into full missions, as part of its Small Explorer (SMEX) program. The winning proposals were the Interface Region Imaging Spectrography (IRIS) and the Gravity and Extreme Magnetism (GEMS). With Alan M. Title of Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center in Palo Alto, California, as Principal Investigator, the IRIS mission would use a solar telescope and spectrograph to explore the solar chromosphere, a region crucial in the quest to understand energy transport into the solar wind. NASA expected the mission greatly to extend the scientific output of existing heliophysics spacecraft. Jean H. Swank of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, would serve as Principal Investigator of the GEMS mission, designed to study the bending of space and curving of light in regions of extreme gravity—near objects such as ultra- dense neutron stars and stellar-mass black holes—and to detect and measure the polarization of the x rays that such objects emit. NASA planned for to launch both projects by 2015, with mission costs capped at US$105 million each, excluding the launch vehicles.(NASA, “NASA Awards Two Small Explorer Development Contracts,” news release 09-141, 19 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-141_SMEX_Selections.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
NASA and the National Science Foundation (NSF) announced the successful flight test of a newly designed super-pressure balloon prototype intended to carry large scientific experiments to the edge of space on missions lasting a minimum of 100 days. The project’s goal was to design a 22-million-cubic-foot (67-million-cubic-meter) balloon that would carry an instrument weighing up to 1 ton (907 kilograms, or 0.9 tonne) to an altitude of more than 110,000 feet (33,528 meters). The test flight launched a 7-million-cubic-foot (2.13-million-cubic-meter) balloon, the largest single-cell, super-pressure, fully sealed balloon flown to date. The launch took place on 28 December 2008 from McMurdo Station, NSF’s logistics hub in Antarctica. Successfully demonstrating the durability and functionality of its unique pumpkin shape and novel material—a lightweight polyethylene film approximately the thickness of plastic food wrap. The balloon reached a float altitude of more than 111,000 feet (33,833 meters), which it was still maintaining on 8 January, its eleventh day of flight.(NASA, “New NASA Balloon Successfully Flight-Tested Over Antarctica,” news release 09-003, 8 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-003_Antarctic_Balloons.html (accessed 14 January 2011).)
NASA’s ARC announced that LCROSS’s observation of its 9 October 2009 impact on the lunar surface had succeeded. During LACROSS’s descent into the Centaur crater, nine instruments on board had captured each phase of the impact sequence. The ultraviolet/visible and near-infrared spectrometer and camera data had revealed a faint but distinct debris plume. LCROSS Principal Investigator and Project Scientist Anthony Colaprete remarked that the ejecta brightness of the plume was at the low end of NASA’s predictions. However, that description could provide a clue to help determine the properties of the material that Centaur had impacted. LCROSS had also captured Centaur’s impact flash in both of its mid-infrared thermal cameras over a couple of seconds. The temperature of that flash would provide valuable information about the composition of the material at the impact site. Although creating a plume had been the key to the mission’s success, LCROSS had not detected a debris plume, initially. The new images, captured by a different camera on board the spacecraft, confirmed that Centaur’s impact had, indeed, created a plume.(NASA Ames Research Center, “NASA’s LCROSS Captures All Phases of Centaur Impact,” ARC news release 16 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/LCROSS/main/LCROSS_impact.html (accessed 30 September)
NASA announced its partnership with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST), to collaborate in lunar and asteroid science research. The Saudi Lunar and Near-Earth Object Science Center would become an affiliate partner with the NASA Lunar Science Institute at NASA’s ARC. The partnership fell within the scope of a MOU on Science and Technology, which the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United States had signed in 2008. U.S. Ambassador to Saudi Arabia James B. Smith recognized the partnership as an important advance in the growing U.S.-Saudi program of bilateral science and technology cooperation.(NASA, “NASA Partners with Saudi Arabia on Moon and Asteroid Research,” news release 09-284, 15 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09-284_NASA-Saudi_statement.html (accessed 16 December 2011).)
In coordination with NASA’s Office of the Chief Engineer and Office of Human Capital Management, NASA’s Innovative Partnerships Program announced the selection of its inaugural group of Innovation Ambassadors. NASA had established the program to target opportunities for creating NASA partnerships and for identifying new sources of innovation outside the traditional aerospace field. NASA anticipated selecting a group of Innovation Ambassadors annually, assigning the selected ambassadors to positions at several leading innovative external research and development organizations in the United States. During these assignments, which would last as long as a year, the selected individuals would share their expertise with their assigned research and development organization while learning about the organization’s innovative products, processes, and business models. Upon returning to NASA, the ambassadors would share new ideas with their NASA colleagues and would implement innovations within their respective NASA divisions. NASA had selected ARC’s Robert S. McCann, who would work with the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center in Palo Alto, California, studying the application of artificial intelligence to health systems management and human-machine teams; JSC’s Eric C. Darcy, who would work with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory in Golden, Colorado, to develop mathematical models for lithium-ion battery performance; GSFC’s Lawrence M. Hilliard, who would work with Primary Simulation, of Silver Spring, Maryland, to apply “laser ball” technology to interactive educational tools; and Kelly J. Snook, also from GSFC, who would work at Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s (MIT’s) Media Laboratory in Cambridge, Massachusetts, to study the use of sound as a means of visualizing and analyzing scientific data.(NASA, “NASA Selects First Innovation Ambassadors,” news release 09-182, 4 August 2009, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09_182_Innovation_Ambassadors.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
A team of astronomers published research in the journal Nature, revealing that temperatures on the gas giant exoplanet known as HD 80606b can rise from 980°F to 2,240°F (527°C to 1,227°C) within 6 hours. The researchers had studied infrared measurements collected by NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (SST), to determine the amount of heat emanating from HD 80606b as its orbit neared its star. The planet travels around its star along an oblong orbit every 111.4 days—an orbit that scientists described as the most eccentric of any known planet. At its closest point to its star, HD 80606b receives 825 times more irradiation than at its farthest point. The eclipse that occurs in the moment before the planet’s closest approach to its star had enabled the astronomers to measure separately the amount of heat emanating from the planet, distinguishing it from the star’s heat. They had succeeded in measuring precisely how hot the planet becomes as it approaches its star. A computer model using Spitzer data had revealed global storms and shock waves in the planet’s atmosphere every 111 days, as it swings close to its star. The simulation showed that the increasing heat and expansion of the atmosphere produces very high winds—5 kilometers per second (3 miles per second), or more than 11,000 miles per hour (17,703 kilometers per hour)—moving from the day side of the planet to its night side.(Clara Moskowitz, “Extreme Exoplanet’s Wild Ride,” Wired, 29 January 2009; Jeanna Bryner, “Exoplanet Sees Extreme Heat Waves,” Space.com, 28 January 2009, http://www.space.com/6364-exoplanet-sees-extreme-heat- waves.html (accessed 27 April 2011); see also, Gregory Laughlin et al., “Rapid Heating of the Atmosphere of an Extrasolar Planet,” Nature 457, no. 7229 (29 January 2009): 562−564, http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2346/nature/ journal/v457/n7229/pdf/nature07649.pdf (DOI 10.1038/nature07649; accessed 27 April 2011).)
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract modification to L-3 Communications Integrated Systems LP of Waco, Texas, to extend through 31 December 2009 the period of performance for further developmental engineering in support of the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) mission. The joint program of NASA and the German Aerospace Center, SOFIA included a high-altitude, airborne, German-built 2.5-meter (100-inch) infrared telescope. Mounted in a cavity in the rear fuselage of a highly modified Boeing-747SP jetliner, the telescope had scientific instruments capable of celestial observations ranging from visible light through the submillimeter, far-infrared spectrum. L-3 Communications was responsible for completing development and testing of the SOFIA Airborne System, including modification, fabrication, installation, integration, and verification of various systems to meet mission requirements. The contract modification covered completion of the SOFIA subsystems, such as the mission-control and communications system; engineering and flight-test support for the telescope-cavity-door-open flight tests and the science programs; and support for reviews leading to NASA’s public aircraft certification. The option modification brought the total value of the contract to approximately US$37.7 million. NASA had not yet exercised the two additional one- year-option periods allowed under the initial cost-plus-award-fee contract with L-3 134 Communications Integrated Systems. The initial contract had taken effect in February 2007.
NASA’s GSFC selected Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation to build a second GMI for the GPM mission. Ball had designed the identical instruments—GMI 1 and GMI 2—as multichannel, conical-scanning, microwave radiometers, which would serve an essential role in the near-global coverage of GPM. Ball planned to conduct full instrument testing on GMI 1 in mid-2010, with launch aboard the spaceborne GPM core observatory scheduled for 2013. The GMI-2 launch would follow in 2014. Ball had designed the 8-foot-high (2.4-meter-high) GMI instruments to rotate at 32 revolutions per minute, to perform temporal sampling of rainfall accumulations and more frequent and higher quality data collection, using two stable calibration points.(Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation, “Ball Aerospace Selected for Second NASA GMI Microwave Imager,” news release, 30 November 2009, http://www.ballaerospace.com/page.jsp?page=30&id=363 (accessed 21 December 2011).)
NASA named Arthur F. “Rick” Obenschain, Deputy Director of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to lead the Mishap Investigation Board (MIB) for the 24 February OCO launch failure. As Chair of the MIB, Obenschain would lead four yet-to-be-named members, tasked with gathering information, analyzing the facts, identifying the launch failure’s causes and contributing factors, and making recommendations for actions to prevent a similar incident. As Deputy Director of GSFC, Obenschain shared responsibility for executive leadership and overall direction and management of the Center, in addition to providing executive oversight and technical evaluation for development and delivery for Goddard space systems launches and operations. Previously, Obenschain had headed the Flight Projects Directorate, where he had 25 been responsible for the daily management of more than 40 space and Earth science missions.
NASA announced that it had selected six universities to receive research grants totaling nearly US$30 million. The selected universities served large numbers of underrepresented and minority students. The grants would help the universities establish multidisciplinary scientific, engineering, and commercial research centers, capable of making significant contributions to NASA’s programs. Through the NASA Group 5 University Research Center awards program, each university would receive up to US$1 million per year for up to five years, based on their performance and on availability of funds. The awards continued NASA’s commitment to supporting new aerospace science and technology concepts and expanding the nation’s base for aerospace research development. Through these efforts, NASA hoped to achieve a broad-based, competitive capability for aerospace research and technology development. NASA also hoped the awards would help underrepresented minorities obtain advanced degrees in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Selected from among 35 institutions that had submitted proposals, the six universities to receive awards were California State University in Long Beach, for the Center for Human Factors in Advanced Aeronautics Technologies; Delaware State University in Dover, for the establishment of a NASA Optical Sciences Center for Applied Research; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University in Greensboro, for the Center for Aviation Safety; North Carolina Central University in Durham, for the NASA Center for Aerospace Device Research and Education; University of Texas in Brownsville, for the Center for Gravitational Wave Astronomy; and University of Texas in El Paso, for the Center for Space Exploration Technology Research.(NASA, “NASA Awards Grants for Research Centers at 6 Minority Universities,” news release 09-213, 16 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-213_Minority_University_Grants.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA’s MFSC and the Chandra X-ray Observatory announced that a long observation from Chandra, the SST, and ground-based observatories had identified for the first time the source of energy producing so-called cosmic blobs. The Chandra observations had helped reveal that the so-called blobs are not infant galaxies, as astronomers had previously thought, but more likely “adolescent” galaxies about to stabilize. The telescopes had observed a collection of 29 blobs in one large field in the sky called SSA22. The blobs had become visible from Earth when the universe was approximately 2 billion years old, or 15 percent of its current age. Chandra data had revealed a signature in five blobs indicating the growth of supermassive black holes—a point- like source with luminous x-ray emission. An additional three blobs provided possible evidence for such black holes. Further observations, including Spitzer data, had determined that remarkable levels of star formation dominated several of these galaxies. Calculations had revealed that the radiation and outflows from the black holes, and from the bursts of star formation, were powerful enough to light up the hydrogen gas in the blobs. Scientists stated that, although the gas in the blobs would not likely cool down to form stars, it would add to the hot gas found between galaxies, indicating that SSA22 could evolve into a massive galaxy cluster. James E. Geach of Durham University in the United Kingdom, lead author of the study, which the Astrophysical Journal would publish in its 10 July 2009 issue, remarked that scientists would need to look further back in time to capture data indicating that the blobs were forming galaxies and black holes.(Chandra X-Ray Center, “Galaxies Coming of Age in Cosmic Blobs,” news release, 24 June 2009, http://chandra. si.edu/press/09_releases/press_062409.html (accessed 5 August 2011); Clara Moskowitz, “Secrets of Space Blobs Revisited,” Space.com, 24 June 2009, http://www.space.com/6885-secrets-space-blobs-revealed.html (accessed 8 August 2011); Seth Borenstein, “Telescope Finds Space Blobs Are Pubescent Galaxies,” Associated Press, 25 June 2009.)
ATK announced that, together with NASA and industry partners Lockheed Martin Corporation and Orbital Sciences Corporation, it had successfully performed a ground-test firing of the attitude-control motor-thruster system of the launch-abort system (LAS) for NASA’s Orion crew exploration vehicle (CEV). The test, conducted at ATK’s facility in Elkton, Maryland, marked a milestone in the development of the Orion spacecraft. The fifth in a series of ground tests of the craft’s attitude-control motor system, the High Thrust-8 (HT-8) demonstration provided validation that several flight-weight subsystems were performing as designed. According to a contract with Orbital Sciences Corporation, ATK was responsible for the design of the attitude- control motor, which would provide steering for the LAS in the event of a catastrophic failure on the launchpad or during Orion’s initial ascent. Orbital Sciences Corporation was responsible for delivering the LAS motors for Lockheed Martin, the prime contractor for NASA’s Orion Project.(ATK, “NASA and Orion Industry Team Successfully Test Orion Launch Abort System Attitude Control Motor Thruster System,” news release, 1 April 2009, http://atk.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=118&item=911 (accessed 3 June 2011); Guy Norris, “ATK Pad Abort Thruster Test,” Aviation Week, 2 April 2009.)
NASA released the first comprehensive map of Earth’s solar system, including a map of its location in the Milky Way galaxy. NASA had produced the map using data collected over six months by two detectors on NASA’s Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) spacecraft. The map revealed the local interstellar medium, the region that separates the nearest reaches of the galaxy from the heliosphere. This region acts as a “protective bubble,” shielding Earth’s solar system from the most dangerous cosmic radiation traveling through space. According to IBEX Principal Investigator David J. McComas, of the Space Science and Engineering Division at Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, the IBEX sky map marked the first time that scientists could leave the Sun’s atmosphere and begin to understand Earth’s place in the galaxy. The map also enabled astronomers to place in context the observations from NASA’s Voyager spacecraft. Since their launch in 1977, the twin Voyager spacecraft had each traveled into the interstellar boundary. However, the IBEX data showed a ribbon of bright emissions that neither Voyager craft had detected. Launched in October 2008, NASA’s IBEX had a mission to map the heliosphere. The journal Science had published a series of papers outlining the results of the mission.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Provides First View of Our Place in the Galaxy,” news release 09-241, 15 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-241_IBEX.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Agence France-Presse, “NASA Probe Helps To Map Solar System,” 16 October 2009.)
