Soviet academician M. Sissakian, Presidium member of Soviet Academy of Sciences, was quoted as saying U.S.S.R. hoped to bring mars i back to earth.
Difficulties in Centaur launch vehicle development were forcing nasa to program 1964 Mars probe for Atlas-Agena vehicle, New York Times reported. Use of Atlas-Agena would mean smaller payload, with about 60 lbs. of instruments instead of 200 lbs.	_
Soviet press agency Tass reported the planet Mars has “experienced the effects of meteorites to a much greater degree than the earth.” Emblen Sobotovich, senior scientist at Leningrad Radium Institute, said meteorites were preserved on Mars for long periods of time because Martian atmosphere contained almost no moisture, Tass reported.
Reported that the U.S. would send a Mariner B spacecraft to Mars in late 1964, to land on the red planet in early 1965. The launching of this heavily instrumented probe would mark the beginning of the scientific search for extraterrestrial life.
In Voice of America broadcast, Alan H. Shapley of the National Bureau of Standards’ Central Radio Propagation Laboratory, reviewed the “new dimension to research in ionospheric science” added by space vehicles. He pointed out that “scientific expeditions landing on the surface of Mars or Venus, whether manned or unmanned, will have to communicate by radio with terrestrial headquarters. We must know which frequencies wlli get through the planetary ionosphere, and which can be used with the radiomirror effect to talk from one part of the planet to another. So far we have had only [the earth’s] ionosphere to study, but this is like the doctor with only a single case. To understand a disease he needs many cases.”
In speech before the Woman’s National Press Club, Adlai Stevenson, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, said that the U.S., U.S.S.R., and other qualified nations should pool their space efforts under the auspices of the United Nations. “Perhaps their children,” he said, “will sail to Mars together.”
Rocket-powered instruments wlli be traveling as far as Jupiter by 1975, Robert J. Parks, director of jpl Planetary Programs, said in interview. Parks said by 1975 the planets Mars and Venus probably would have been studied “quite closely” by instruments.
aec Chairman Glenn T. Seaborg told panel discussion of International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna that a U.S. nuclear-powered spacecraft now in the initial-test phase could take two men on a round trip to Mars in the 1970’s. He said that the round trip, including one-month visit on Mars, would take about a year.
Soviet news agency Tass announced mars i interplanetary probe was now more than 7 million mi. from earth; all onboard equipment was working normally and the spacecraft was sending back radio reports to earth, mars i was expected to pass within 120,000	mi. of Mars in June 1963.
U.S. News and World Report carried article on “Red Space Failures,” pointing to official U.S. policy with regard to Soviet launchings: “No Soviet feat [in space] has ever been publicly challenged in Washington and no failure publicly announced.” It reported that while Premier Khrushchev was at the United Nations in September 1960, “a Soviet cosmonaut was sent more than a hundred miles into space and killed”; that in a five-month period in 1960-61, four Soviet space probes were fired toward Mars and Venus, but failed; and that during the same period “a dozen other Soviet space shots went awry . . .”
Soviet news agency Tass distributed announcement by U.S.S.R. Academy of Science giving new details on mars i interplanetary probe. Announcement said scientists had held 37 radio communications with mars i during first month of the probe’s journey and that more than 600 orders had been transmitted to it. Command, measuring, and computing centers onboard the spacecraft were reported working properly. Announcement said mars i would pass planet Mars at distance of about 119,000 mi. (193,000 km) and added that its trajectory would have to be corrected sometime during the flight. Data from probe indicated space radiation had increased about 50 to 70% since 1959 Soviet lunar probes made measurements; other data indicated extremely low density of meteor matter at great distances from earth. Announcement said mars i onboard equipment included television to photograph Martian surface; spectrograph to study ozone absorptions in Martian atmosphere; equipment to measure magnetic fields and radiation in space and around Mars; and radiotelescope to register streams of low-energy protons and electrons.
Soviet space probe mars i was 1,677,704 mi. from earth and “continuing satisfactorily” on its flight to Mars, Prof. Vsevoldod Fedynsky of Moscow Univ. said in Tass interview.
Soviet interplanetary probe mars i was 2,725,337.592 mi. away from earth at 4 AM est, Tass reported.
Tass reported interplanetary probe mars i began broadcasting scientific data on command from earth. The Mars probe, about two mlliion mi. away from earth, was reported functioning normally.
