jpl awarded Avco Corp. Research and Advanced Development Div. an $83,000 contract for study of entry and landing of ballistic capsules on Mars and Venus. (M&R, 9/2/63,12)
Soviet astronomer G. A. Tikhov concluded that Martian vegetation, if it exists, is blue rather than green, because of light and temperature conditions on Mars. In translation/abstract of Tikhov’s report, issued by Dept, of Commerce, he reported that “plants in the Far North on earth should have entirely different optical properties than in temperate latitudes and on mountains. Martian plants should be closest to the Arctic and mountain species, whose spectra have quite inconspicuous chlorophyll bands.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/14/63)
At aaas meeting in Cleveland, Dr. Allan Brown, biology prof. at Univ. of Pennsylvania, urged that U.S. initiate a program to land a scientific probe on Mars in 1969, because the Martian “surface could be sampled during spring and summer when there would be the best chance of detecting plantlife organisms.” He recommended adapting Saturn IB booster to carry a several-hundred -pound instrumented payload. Dr. Brown estimated significant scientific probe of Mars could be achieved in 1969 at cost of $2.9 billion over six years. He suggested international cooperation on the project “should be more easily achieved than in any other area of space research or exploration in which both U.S. and Soviet programs are involved.” {M&R, 1/6/64, 14)
Reporting under a nasa contract to study requirements for a manned mission to Mars in “the unfavorable (1975-1985) time period,” Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div. proposed a nuclear-chemical four-stage vehicle carrying a seven-man crew on a 400-day trip. Mission would begin out of 300-mile earth orbit: first stage would boost vehicle into Mars trajectory; 140 days later, second stage would put vehicle into 300-mile orbit of Mars, where for 20 days the crew would study the planet; third stage would provide escape from Mars and 240-day trip back to earth; fourth stage would provide retrothrust for re-entry. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/4/63,27) The most controversial point raised during the conference was statement on the large amount of faulty or careless manufacture and assembly of Mercury spacecraft. On the MA-9 backup spacecraft, for example, some 720 discrepancies were recorded, of which 526 were attributable to unsatisfactory workmanship and 444 of these required specially scheduled time to correct. (msc Releases 63-153-158; Project Mercury Summary)
Soviet Cosmonaut Major Andrian Nikolayev, touring India with his bride, Cosmonaut Valentina Nikolavev, said in New Dellii that U.S.S.R. was planning a spacecraft capable of sustaining the life of a crew for three years. This was the estimated time for a manned flight to Mars or Venus and return, with some 14 months of this actual roundtrip flight time and the other two years waiting on the planet for the proper orbital relationship for the return flight. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/12/63)
U.S.S.R. mars i passed planet Mars, but with its communications systems dead as they had been since March 21. All subsequent attempts to restore communication had failed. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/26/63)
Tass reported Soviet scientists had lost contact with mars i interplanetary probe on March 21, when it was about 66,000,000 mi. from earth. Probe was continuing on its flight toward vicinity of Mars but telemetry data indicated difficulty in orientation system had misaligned its radio antennas. Tass said mars i had recorded considerable change in boundaries of radiation belts around earth; “sphere of maximum intensity” in innermost belt was farther out than previously noted. Intensity of cosmic rays had almost doubled m last four years, Tass said. Important findings were made concerning stability and energy of interplanetary and solar plasma, and mars i made possible first scientific observation of junction of earth’s ionized gas envelope with outermost belt of charged particles. Other data on intensity of magnetic fields in space and distribution of meteoric particles were /B.U	K/’I'7/CQ. A „. lFl S /Ol /K9 OA \ A UW1 UUU. \ A/Ull. AJ to/U / i.1 / y XA (/. rr Iv.y KJ J LJ % / \J*Jy y
Cathode of experimental ion engine set endurance record of 1660 hours operation. Electric propulsion engineers at lrc estimate they reached 16 per cent of the cathode life required for a round-trip Mars mission. (Lewis Chronology, 7)
Soviet interplanetary probe mars i was nearing halfway mark on its flight to vicinity of Mars, news agency Tass announced. Tass quoted Mstislav Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, as saying mars i was about 30 million mi. from earth. ( upi, Wash. Daily News, 2/5/63)
Routine radio contact with mars i interplanetary probe was made over distance of 98,863,000 km. (61,430,502 mi.), about 12,000,000 km. (7,364,400 mi.) farther than last U.S. radio contact with mariner ii Venus probe, according to Tass. (mariner ii’s last contact was at 54.3 million mi.) (Pravda, 3/17/63, 1, afss-t Trans.)
nasa devices for detecting life on Mars, to be ejected from Mariner interplanetary probes and soft-landed onto planet’s surface, were discussed in article in The National Observer. Gulliver, first in series, would be 1.5-lb. dome-shaped device equipped with two 23ft. sticky strings; upon landing, strings would shoot out of dome and then reel back inside, gamering up samples of whatever is on surface to be deposited m solution of distilled water, sterile beef broth, malt extract, vitamins, other nutrients, and radioactive carbon. If adhesive gathers microbes similar to those on earth, microbes would multiply in the solution and produce radioactive carbon dioxide which would be detected by Geiger counter in dome and radioed back to earth. Another device, known as Multivator, designed by Dr. Joshua Lederberg of Stanford Univ. and still under development, was designed to make 24 different biological and chemical tests of micro-organisms. Third life-detecting device is Wolf Trap, named after its designer, Dr. Wolf Vishniac of Univ. of Rochester; it would suck in samples of planetary soil or air and introduce them to broth somewhat like that of Gulliver. (National Observer, 2/11/63)
nasa issued procedures on decontamination of lunar-landing spacecraft and planetary-landing spacecraft, based on recommendations ' by nas-nrc Space Science Board made public this date. Because sterilization procedures employed on previous Ranger lunar spacecraft—particularly heat cycle—were suspected of directly contributing to Ranger mission failures, nasa lowered decontamination requirements for current Ranger spacecraft. It was now only required that microbes on Rangers be “reduced to a minimum.” Regarding lunar probes, Space Science Board said: “. . . The lunar surface with its high temperatures, intense ultra-violet radiation, paucity of moisture, and high vacuum is a most unfavorable environment for proliferation of terrestrial organisms . . . .” It recommended U.S. “. . . minimize contamination to the extent technically feasible . . . [and develop] a sterile drilling system to accompany an early Apollo mission to return an uncontaminated sample of the lunar subsoil . . . .” n\sa procedures ^or M*rs I2.nd.1r* " missions required. th»t sjpEics-craft be sterilized and that this decontamination be effectively achieved without jeopardizing spacecraft reliability. Regarding Mars probes, Space Science Board said: “. . . The contamination of Mars through the impacting of nonsterile probes from the Earth could destroy an opportunity to carry out a meaningful search for life forms on Mars with remote detectors. This opportunity is unique and its loss would be a catastrophe . . . .” It recommended U.S. “. . . accord the highest priority to the prevention of the biological contamination of Mars until sufficient information has been obtained about possible life forms there so that further scientific studies will not be jeopardized . . . .” (nasa Release 63-200; nas-nrc Release; nas-nrc Space Probe Sterilization)
mars i interplanetary probe was 78,843,000 km. (48,980,675 mi.) from earth, Soviet newspaper Izvestia reported. From Feb. 20 to March 1, scheduled radio contacts were made; “a series of control commands were transmitted to the station.” Tass said that on March 1 “a number of corrective guidance commands were transmitted to the spacecraft. The strength of radio signals, which are being received from the interplanetary station, decreased somewhat . . . .” (Izvestia,, 3/3/63, 5, afss-t Trans.; Pravda, 2/2/63, eos Trans.)
According to Soviet press agency Tass, mars i spacecraft was 59,460,000 km. from Earth at 9:00 a.m. Moscow time, traveling at 12.7 km/sec as it moved away from Earth. Routine interrogations had been conducted during the past week and scientific information from mars i had been obtained, (eos Translation, 3/6/63, of Tass, Pravda, 2/13/63)
Flight of balloon carrying 36-in. telescope to 80,000-ft. altitude for study of planet Mars was postponed at Palestine, Tex., after balloon developed a leak while being inflated. This was 13th time the launching had been postponed. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/23/63)
Soviet press agency Tass reported in Krasnaya Zvezda that routine radio communications with mars i interplanetary probe were conducted Feb. 13-19 and that telemetry information was received from the probe. Tass said that at 9:00 a.m. Moscow time mars i was 67,432,000 km. from earth. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/20/63,1, afss-t trans.)
nasa was examining the nuclear-pulse propulsion concept (Orion) which had been studied under usaf contracts for some live years. Nuclear-pulse—a series of controlled nuclear explosions—was considered a possible means of propulsion for fast manned trips to Venus, Mars, and Jupiter in the 1975-1995 time period. The fast trip would be desirable because component lifetimes would run around 10,000 hrs., somewhat over one year. It would therefore be highly desirable that the round-trip be possible in one year’s time. If Orion were chosen as the propulsion system, some amendment to the nuclear test-ban treaty might be necessary to legalize its use. nasa was studying the Orion potential through a contract issued in June 1963 to the General Atomics Div. of General Dynamics.	11/4/63, 34)
“First conclusive detection” of water vapor on Mars was announced by Cal Tech. Mars’ water supply was found to be minimal—perhaps as little as half a cu. mi. compared with millions of cu. mi. on earth. Finding was made by analysis of spectrum of light from Mars gathered by Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar Observatories in California. (Hill, NYT, 6/5/63,17)
Water vapor and carbon dioxide on Mars were detected by Stratoscope II, project scientists announced at Palestine, Tex., press conference. Results of data gathered by balloon-mounted telescope, which observed Mars from vantage point above 98 per cent of earth’s atmosphere March 1-2, were based on preliminary analysis of taped infrared-bolometer data; further analysis was expected to provide information on presence of other life-related compounds and on amount of the compounds present in Martian atmosphere. (AP, Chicago Trib., 3/5/63; Wall Street Journal, 3/5/63)	,	.
National Geographic Society announced two scientists with astronomical instruments were recently lofted by plastic-skinned balloon to 15-mi. altitude in experiment to record radio sounds from stars. National Geographic Society outlined other recent scientific contributions by man’s oldest means of flight, including balloon-lifted telescop e camera which made unprecedented photographs of sunspots and another instrumented payload which obtained man’s clearest observations of planet Mars. Balloon-carried instrumentation now probing upper atmosphere is obtaining valuable data on astrophysics, meteorology, and aeromedicine. {Chic. Trib., 8/20/63)
nasa announced mariner ii Venus probe had been so successful that repeat flight scheduled for 1964 had been canceled. Interplanetary efforts would be concentrated instead on such projects as sending probe toward Mars in 1964 and later flight to Venus with advanced Mariner probe in 1965. (nasa Release 63-3; jpl Release)
Izvestia reported about 400 spectrograms of Mars had been taken this year at observatoiy of Astrophysics Institute, Kazakhstan Academy of Sciences, in project to investigate properties of blue haze concealing details of Martian surface. (Izvestia, 5/12/63, 6, afss-t Trans.)
Instruments onboard mars i interplanetary probe confirmed existence of a third radiation belt, Soviet news agency Tass announced. Third radiation belt had been discovered in 1959 by Soviet rockets which had gathered particles at 50,000-mi. altitude, Tass said, and its existence was verified when mars i recorded stream of charged particles far beyond the second radiation belt. Number of particles in this outermost belt greatly exceeded that in first two belts, according to Tass. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/17/63)
U.S.S.R. mars i probe lost contact with tracking stations when 65 million miles out because of malfunction in the spacecraft attitude control system, according to Alexandre A. Mironov, Soviet Embassy scientific adviser in Washington. (Av. Wk., 10/21/63, 28) During October: H. H. Koelle, Director of Future Projects Office, msfc, in “Trends in Earth-to-Orbit Transportation Systems,” in Aeronautics and Aerospace Engineering, noted that the next year would be interesting in that both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. were expected to come up with big increase in payload in orbit. The U.S. Saturn I was expected to put 10 tons in orbit. “Also, I would not be a bit surprised if the U.S.S.R. launched a payload in the 40- to 50-ton class before this [next] year is over. The next step increase will be provided by the Saturn V in about 1967, when a 100-ton capability will be reached by the U.S. Many people hope that at least by that time the U.S.S.R. single-flight capabilities will have been equalled or exceeded.” Space transportation was developing fast, Koelle concluded: “While air transportation needed two generations to improve the efficiency of passenger transport by three orders of magnitude, we expect to improve the economy of Earth-to-orbit cargo transportation by four orders of magnitude in one generation.” {A&AE, Nov. 63,25-30)
Soviet scientists lost contact with mars i interplanetary probe when it was about 66,000,000 mi. from earth; however, no mention was made of this fact by the Russians until May 16 (see May 16). (Balt. Sun, 5/17/63; Av. Wk., 5/27/63,24)
Report by three-man nasa advisory committee concluded that “shielding [against radiation] of the crew for Project Apollo is not possible within the time and weight limitations of the project.” The crew “will simply have to accept the relatively low probability of encountering a major solar flare during their relatively brief excursion to the moon.” Report estimated 10,000 lbs. of polyethylene shielding would be required to protect men in 10-ft.-diameter spacecraft for a week. For flights to Mars or Venus, more than 20,000 lbs. of polyethylene would be required. “The accomplishment of manned flights to the vicinity of Mars and Venus may have to be delayed until some means are found for reducing these shielding weights,” report stated. (AP, NYT, 12/10/63,24; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/9/63)
Results of nasa research project reported: 18 species of earth bacteria survived in “Mars jars” in which atmospheric conditions of Mars were simulated. One type enlarged itself by four or five times in the Martian environment. {M&R, 9/2/63)
A Mars Excursion Module (mem) would be the best means of landing men on Mars, according to Temple Neuman of Philco Corp.’s Aeronutronic Div., which had just completed a study of the subject under nasa contract. The mem would carry two men, house and feed them for 40 days, and enable them to bring back 800 lbs. of equipment and samples, for a gross vehicle weight of about 55,000 lbs. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/2/63, 12)
At aas meeting in Washington, S. Karrer and C. C. Kiess reported new evidence suggesting planet Mars has toxic clouds of oxygen and nitrogen compounds, probably nitrogen dioxide gas. Bv spectroscopic techniques splitting the light from the planet’s telescopic image, they found the pattern yielded by nitrogen dioxide gas. Kiess said that phenomena of the Martian appearance through earth telescopes can be explained by changes in the nature and color of nitrogen and oxygen compounds under changing Martian temperatures. (Barbour, Wash. Post, 12/28/63, B2)
Soviet newspaper Pravda said mass i space probe was more than 26-million mi. from earth and successfully continuing its flight toward planet Mars. There was no mention of mid-course correction maneuver to bring the probe closer than its estimated 120,000-mi. distance from Mars in June. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/31/63)	... During January: Series of Gemini parachute design qualification tests was successfully completed at El Centro, Calif., for nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Parachute system would undergo two more test series before qualification; system would be backup mechanism for two-man Gemini spacecraft recovery in case of water landings. ( msc Roundup, 1/23/63,1)
