NASA selected Philco Corp. for negotiation of contract for feasibility and preliminary design studies for automated biological laboratory (abl) to detect and describe indigenous life on the planet Mars. The one-year study would define life-detection payloads for Voyager-class missions, which were under study bv NASA Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release 64-182)
jpl had recommended use of a steerable entry vehicle or steerable parachute system for 1969 Mars probe, Missiles and Rockets reported, jpl wanted to land the complete vehicle and achieve telemetry from the Martian surface, notably on whether or not signs of life existed. Chief area of interest was Syrtis Major, prominent green area on Martian equator that might be one of the more likely spots to support life. (M&R, 4/20/64,11)
Dr. Harrison Brown, Cal Tech geochemist, said in Science article that as many as 2,000 earth-like planets capable of supporting life may exist in the nearest corner of the Milky Way Galaxy. Based on studies of this portion of the universe—volume of 10,000 cubic parsecs—Dr. Brown theorized: “Virtually every main sequence star should have a planetary system associated with it.” He calculated there were approximately 1,000	such stars in the region and 60,000 dark bodies of Mars’ size or bigger, or an average 60 “dark companions” to each of the stars. He determined a typical star should have four such planets, and of these “on the average some two planets per visible star might provide suitable environment for the emergence of life- processes which are based upon chemical systems similar to those on earth.” Dr. Brown’s paper propounded higher probability of life in the universe than previously theorized. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/11/64)
Preliminary design for re-entry spacecraft for manned Mars missions during 1971—75 period was submitted to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center after six-month study by Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Msc announced. The earth re-entry module would travel to Mars and 'back attached to 4- to 6-man Mars spacecraft, then would be detached and used for last eight hours. It is designed to withstand re-entry heating of about 35,000° F. at speeds up to 44,000 mph, protecting crew with ablative heat shield about 3^ in. thick, (msc Release 64-6; MSC Roundup, 1/22/64, 1, 3)
NASA announced industry design competition for Automated Biological Laboratory (abl) for detecting possible life on Mars. An abl would be landed by Voyager spacecraft to be flown in 1970’s. Proposals resulting from preliminary studies would lead to contract for a one-year effort to review scientific objectives, define an experimental payload suitable for landing and operation on Mars, and establish spacecraft and launch vehicle requirements, abl would incorporate several life-detection devices still in developmental stages and would be equipped to analyze and describe any organisms discovered by such devices. (nasa Release 64-134)
MARINER IV passed the 50-million-mi. mark on its 325-million-mi. flight to Mars. The spacecraft was operating normally and transmitting items of information at a rate of 33%/sec. Nearly 10 million scientific and engineering measurements in space and outside the earth’s orbit had been transmitted in its first 29 days of flight, (nasa Release 64-326)
mariner iv lost its lock on Canopus. “Current analysis supports the theory that a dust particle reflecting the light of the sun passed through the field of view of the Canopus tracker,” NASA said. Loss of lock on the star would not alter the spacecraft’s course, would merely affect its attitude, which would be of importance only when the spacecraft neared Mars and attempted to photograph the planet. NASA planned to command the spacecraft to reacquire Canopus soon. jpl, manager of the Mariner program for NASA, reported that a solar plasma probe experiment, which had functioned perfectly for eight days, had ceased to transmit useful information. (AP, Houston Post, 12/8/64)
Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Director of NASA Biosciences Div., told Missiles and Rockets that it probably would be 1971 or 1973 before U.S. landed Automated Biological Laboratory (abl) on Mars: “I think it would be awfully optimistic to think that we could fly a fully integrated laboratory system to the Martian surface in 1969. I would like to hope such a mission would be feasible in 1971, and the 1973 launch window would also provide a good opportunity.” Other unnamed NASA officials were said to have considered launch of abl with Saturn V booster in 1971 as improbable, citing the high cost and “problems with sterilization methods which have to be solved.” abl missions would be part of the Voyager planetary program. (Mc&R, 8/24/64,15)
mariner IV, bound for Mars, began passing through a second stream of meteoroids. In its first 23 days of flight, the craft had made 7Y2 million scientific and engineering measurements in interplanetary space and was 3,748,352 mi. from earth, traveling at 6,970 mph relative to earth. Its velocity relative to the sun was 72,902 mph. The straightline distance from the spacecraft to Mars was 107,592,980 mi. (NASA Release 64-323)
Martin Marietta recently completed NASA-funded, DOD-concurred-upon study of Centaur upper stage mated with various Titans. Most promising configuration—particularly for heavy Surveyor spacecraft and for advanced Mars missions—was using Centaur as trans-stage for Titan III-A (without the strap-on solids). (SBD, 5/7/64, 34)
Resolution approved at final session of cospar recommended that no spacecraft be landed on Mars if there were more than one chance in 10,000 that it was carrying earthly micro-organisms that could contaminate Mars. Resolution also said no nation should attempt an “unsterilized fly-by” of Mars if there were more than three chances in 100,000	of its accidentally hitting the planet. (AP, Tulsa Daily World, 5/21/64)
At cospar, Harvard Univ. scientist Dr. Carl Sagan said acetaldehyde gas, believed to exist in atmosphere of Mars, turns to sugar on contact with ultraviolet sunlight. Martian life, which probably is microorganic, possibly gives off the acetaldehyde gas and then feeds on the sugar that falls from the atmosphere, Dr. Sagan said. (AP, Houston Post, 5/18/64)
FY 1965 Independent Offices Appropriation Bill containing $5,250 billion NASA appropriation, was signed into law by President Johnson. NASA Administrator James E. Webb issued statement on the effect of the appropriation, saying that nasa would “maintain the basic momentum and direction of the program as presented to Congress but will make a number of adjustments to meet the Congressional reduction of $195 million, to effect those specific changes directed by Congress, and to take advantage of experience gained from operations conducted during the nine months since the budget was submitted. “Although these adjustments will affect launch schedules and program milestones, Dr. Dryden, Dr. Seamans, and I are convinced that it is best to make a maximum effort to gain operational leadership in manned space flight and that the manned lunar landing should continue to be targeted within this decade. This will stretch NASA and its contractors to the limit, but we have advised the President that we are not at this time willing to give up this goal which is so challenging- and which is so important as a focus for the efforts we must continue to make in all our programs. . . . “The target date is only five years away. Our assurance that it can be met is less than under President Johnson’s budget, but we still hope that with hard work, dedication, continued successes, and continued support we can meet it. We are going to make a hard try. “This decision does not involve the transfer to manned flight of funds from space science and applications programs or advanced research and technology programs. These programs will require some adjustments, but will not be drastically reduced as would be necessary if funds were reprogrammed to benefit manned space flight. “In the program for unmanned planetary exploration, the combination of a heavy workload at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the short lead time available, and the importance of applying our resources to a major advance beyond the limited Mariner make it unwise to undertake a Mars mission in 1966 with the current Mariner-type spacecraft. The development of a spacecraft with much greater scientific promise for launch to Mars in 1969 is being initiated. . . .” (NASA Release 64-221)
Paul G. Johnson of aec—nasa SNPO said at aiaa meetings that early explorers of Mars may pass by planet Venus on way back to earth, to slow down spacecraft to safe re-entry speed. Side trip would lengthen voyage by a few months. Johnson also said that nuclear rockets might make Mars trip possible in 1980’s. Mission could involve six to eight crewmen and take from 400 to 500 days, (nasa Release 64-165)
Washington Evening Star editorialized about recent discovery that “Mars is covered by great yellow clouds of gaseous compounds of nitrogen and oxygen, or smog” and about scientists’ conclusion that the clouds preclude any chance of man’s finding life on Mars: “Quite the contrary. This clearly indicates that Martian life exists and the Martians are one, hopefully two, generations ahead of us in smogging up the atmosphere. As for landing there, all we need are spacemen from Los Angeles.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/8/64)
