NASA’s mariner iv, en route to Mars, passed the 20-million-mile mark in its distance from earth. The spacecraft was functioning normally and was transmitting data on scientific measurements taken in interplanetary space, (nasa Release 65-58)
NASA announced it would request preliminary design proposals from private industry for the unmanned Voyager spacecraft that would land scientific instruments on Mars in 1971. From these proposals, several contractors would be chosen to perform a 3-mo. program design definition. Previous NASA studies had indicated the system might consist of a spacecraft “bus” or main body, a propulsion and braking system, and a landing capsule. (NASA Release 65-15)
The impact of a meteorite might have begun life on earth, Dr. Brian Mason, U.S. National Museum, told the annual meeting of the Geochemical Society of America in Kansas City. Scientists had speculated that the presence of organic compounds—substances containing carbon and nitrogen—in meteorites indicated that life exists, or had once existed, elsewhere in the universe. Mason noted that such compounds could be made without life, but added: “I believe . . . they may be a forerunner of life. A falling meteorite may be the way life got started.” Mason said that most meteorites appeared to come from the asteroid belt which orbits the sun between Mars and Jupiter. This belt might be a planet that never collected to become a single body, he suggested. Dr. Mason was conducting research on the chemical differences a man-earth environment had imposed on meteorites. (Houston Chron., 12/5/65)
Discussing the need for sustaining engineering funds for Centaur starting in fy 1966, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications: “A preliminary study and design phase is being initiated by NASA this Fiscal Year [for adaptation of the Centaur to the Saturn ib] . The primary mission for this vehicle is the Voyager. Initial studies indicate this vehicle is capable of launching a payload to Mars in excess of 8000 pounds during all of the opportunities in the 1970’s. Generally, the modifications necessary to create this stage combination are not particularly difficult. They do represent a large engineering effort, but there is nothing apparent at this time which indicates that new technologies will be required. The Centaur will be mounted, along with the Voyager, inside a fairing the size of the Saturn (260-inch diameter). By constructing this size fairing the technical problems associated with adaptation of the Centaur to this new booster are significantly reduced and the diameter required for all of the Voyager missions is obtained.” Dr. Newell described NASA’s sustaining university program as an effort “to broaden the national research base in areas of importance to the national space effort and increase our capability to replenish continually the reservoir of basic knowledge. . . . “In response to the continuing manpower requirements, NASA conducts a predoctoral training program, under which grants are made to universities to select and train outstanding students in space-related fields. Specialized training for selected students offers them identification with the national space effort, and involves them directly in the new programs of the space age. . . . “At the present time, about 1,957 students are in training at 131 institutions. The disciplines represented by these 1,957 students are distributed as follows: physical sciences, 51 percent; engineering, 37 percent; life sciences, 8 percent; behavioral sciences, 4 percent ... In September 1965, about 1,275 new students will begin their three years of study and research as NASA predoctoral trainees. At that time, 142 institutions, located in every state in the union, will be participating. With the proposed budget of $25 million for fiscal year 1966, about 1,300 new students would enter the program. Consequently, the NASA goal of an output of 1,000 Ph.D.’s per year will not be reached before fiscal year 1968 or fiscal year 1969 ... Of the students participating to date, 40 trainees have received their Ph.D. degrees. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 634—35)
Smithsonian Institution’s National Air Museum placed on display a quarter-scale model of the gt-3 spacecraft, a full-scale model of ranger IX along with some of the photos it took, and a model of mariner IV Mars probe. The spacecraft were part of an exhibit depicting NASA’s broad program of space research. (NASA Release
mariner iv, nasa’s Mars flyby and photographic probe, reached the distance of one AU (Astronomical Unit) from earth at 9 p.m. EST. An Astronomical Unit is the mean distance of the earth from the sun that had been established, partially from data received from mariner ii, as 92,956,000 mi. The probe had traveled over 271 million mi. in its orbit; its velocity relative to the earth was 51,442 mph. (nasa Release 65-171)
mariner iv, 49,373,799 mi. from earth and traveling 34,738 mph relative to earth, had covered 206,868,340 mi. in its journey toward Mars at 9:00 a.m. est. (nasa Release 65-111)
mariner iv spacecraft took and recorded IOV2 photographs of black space on command from the Goldstone Tracking Station in California. Playback of five of the black-space pictures began on command, mariner iv now was more than 171 million miles from earth, 11 million miles from Mars, (jpl Release)
NASA announced it had determined the areas of Mars to be photographed by mariner iv’s tv camera during the July 14 fly-by. Recording of the first picture would occur when the spacecraft was approximately 8,400 miles above the Martian surface, mariner’s camera would be pointing at the northern Martian desert, Amazonis. The camera would then sweep southeast below the Martian equator covering the Mare Sirenum, the southern desert Phaethontis, Aonius Sinus, and into the terminator or shadow line. The spacecraft would be about 6,300 mi. above Mars for the final picture, (nasa Release 65—42)
NASA announced that mariner iv, scheduled to reach the vicinity of Mars July 14, had traveled over 168 million mi.—more than half way. (NASA Release 65-80)
Saturn V launch vehicle was under consideration by NASA for its Voyager program of unmanned planetary exploration, beginning with a 1971 Mars mission. NASA had considered developing a Saturn IB/Centaur launch vehicle, but the greater thrust of the three-stage 7.5-million-lb. thrust Saturn V would give more flexibility to planning early Voyager missions and would also provide the launch vehicle capability at the beginning of the Voyager program necessary for future missions. Saturn V, being developed by MSFC, would undergo its first flight test in 1967. (nasa Release 65-328)
mariner iv, launched two months ago, was 11,873,789 mi. from earth and moving toward Mars at a speed of 12,291 mph relative to the earth at 9 a.m. est. Velocity relative to the sun was 67,086 mph. (nasa Release 65-21)
$12 million, 210-ft.-dia. antenna at jpl’s Goldstone Tracking Station, Calif., was being readied to permit the tracking of very distant space vehicles sending faint signals to earth, including mariner iv, now in solar orbit. Called the Mars station, the antenna would be able to track a signal with a strength of only one-thousandth of one-billionth of one watt. (Wash. Post, 10/8/65, A3)
mariner iv successfully performed a final .tracking correction before its encounter with Mars on July 14. A preprogramed command electronically altered the look-angle of the star sensor to compensate for the changing relationship between the spacecraft, the sun, and Canopus. The star sensor must be pointed at Canopus so that the Mars probe would be properly aligned and stabilized in attitude. (nasa Release 65-198)
Dr. N. M. Sissakian of the Soviet Academy of Sciences said in an article in Krasnaya Zvezda that the attention of Soviet biomedical researchers had been increasingly drawn to the complex effects of combinations of spaceflight factors. They were interested in the stability of cells and organisms to very low temperatures, and the effect of artificial cooling of animals on their ability to withstand oxygen deprivation, acceleration, radiation, and other factors. The ability of algae and lower animals to survive a vacuum was of interest to exobiologists, as was the ability of certain chemical compounds to screen out harmful effects of ultraviolet irradiation. As part of the continuing effort to simulate conditions existing on other planets and study their effects, soil infusoria were found able to adapt to the wide temperature range in a chamber simulating Martian atmosphere. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/3/65, 6)
Pictures of Mars relayed to earth by mariner iv would be released to the public within 36 to 48 hrs. after they were taken July 14, NASA announced, mariner iv was expected to take more than 20 photographs in about 21 min. and radio them back to earth in digital form; while not as detailed as the Ranger photographs, they were expected to make a valuable contribution to space exploration. mariner iv would pass within 5,600 mi. of the planet. The pictures would be taken at somewhat greater distances while Mars was in sunlight relative to the spacecraft, fNASA Release 65-210; upi, NYT, 6/29/65)
mariner IV had functioned in space for more than 1,100 hr. on its 6,000-hr. flight to Mars, and had flown 81.3 million mi., leaving some 245 million mi. to be travelled before the spacecraft would encounter Mars next July. The earth-MARiNER distance was 8,342,946 mi. at 9 a.m. EST with the spacecraft travelling 9,276 mph relative to the earth and 69,462 mph relative to the sun. (nasa Release 65-12, 1/14/65)
mariner iv changed the rate of sending scientific data from 33^3 to 8U; bits of information per second by an automatic switching operation. This was the first command initiated by the spacecraft itself since it performed its mid-course maneuver Dec. 5. mariner iv had traveled nearly 63 million miles in its 325-million-mile flight to Mars; the straight-line distance between earth and the spacecraft was 6,156,704 miles. Systems were operating normally after 36 days in space. (nasa Release 65-4)
Plans for the exploration of Mars called for an engineering test shot in 1969 and an unmanned landing in 1971, Robert F. Fellows, NASA program chief for planetary atmospheres, said at Fifth Annual Space Conference at VPI. Additional unmanned Mars landings were scheduled for 1973 and 1975: larger capsules—up to three tons— were expected to' land in the early 1980’s. Fellows said that the 1971 mission would require two pieces of hardware: an orbiter that would circle Mars for up to 50 yrs. and a capsule that would be lowered to the surface of the planet. The orbiter would have a scientific payload up to 300 lbs. to relay information to earth for about a year. The capsule would penetrate the thin Martian atmosphere protected by a heat shield and, after landing, deploy its instruments, take soil samples, and relay the data to earth. Fellows confirmed that the interplanetary mission after Mars would be to Venus, with Jupiter next, (ap, Wash. Post, 8/26/65, A10)
NASA requested that final proposals for scientific experiments for the 1971 Voyager missions to Mars be submitted by Nov. 19. Selection would be made by July 1, 1966. All 1971 Voyager experiments on the landing craft would be subject to strict sterilization requirements. (nasa Release 65-297)
At aiaa/aflc/asd Support for Manned Flight Conference in Dayton, Ohio, Temple W. Neumann of Philco Corp. reviewed studies of manned Mars missions and discussed the importance of “early biological precursor missions” to Mars. He concluded: “It has been shown that the lack of biological, as well as critical environmental, data about Mars can have important ramifications in not only the cost, but possibly even in the feasibility of performing early manned missions to Mars. The importance of preliminary knowledge about the interaction of possible Martian organisms with man and his equipment has been shown to significantly affect surface operations, decontamination requirements, and equipment reliability. Further, the need for some preliminary data about the nature of Martian organisms is necessary in order to intelligently design an experimental program for use by the first manned landing expedition. The conclusion can therefore be supported that a precursor biological mission, such as that represented by the current ABL studies, is mandatory in the early 1970 time period if manned missions are to make effective use of the mid-1980 launch opportunities.” (Text, aiaa Paper 65-249)
mariner iv, speeding toward Mars for a rendezvous in July, has knocked out the romantic notion that the ruddy planet is the site of a dying civilization millions of years older than ours and far wiser,” wrote David Dietz in the Knoxville News-Sentinel. Continuing: “This theory holds that the planet is drying out, losing its atmosphere and its water supply and that the inhabitants have taken refuge in underground cities. “Well, if this is the case, one thing is certain. The Martians forgot to take their radios with them. For the past five months, Mariner 4 has been sending a steady stream of radio chatter back to earth ... If little Mariner 4 can do that, there is no apparent reason why the Martians couldn’t do the same, providing, of course, that there are Martians of superior intelligence.” (Dietz, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 5/21/65)
mariner iv was 70 million mi. on its 325-million-mi. flight to Mars after 40 days in space. All systems were operating normally (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/7/65)
A full-scale model of NASA’s mariner iv Mars probe went on display at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air Museum. Panels explaining the Mariner program would also be displayed; photographs of the Martian surface would be added to the exhibit as they were received. (NASA Release 65-231)
Experts had observed that some plants had an unusual ability to adapt to the most severe physical conditions, reported Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. Plants had been deprived of oxygen or supplied with very small amounts of it, had been exposed to argon or nitrogen atmospheres, and had been exposed to extreme cold in experiments which tested the effects of a simulated Martian climate on plant growth. It had been found that the cucumber, a heat-sensitive variety of plant, could withstand an argon atmosphere and frost; lettuce, tomatoes, beans, turnips, and other plants had been grown in compartments supplied with extremely small amounts of oxygen. This led to the speculation that not only lichens but small shrubs might be indigenous to Mars and that there may in fact be a rich and varied Martian flora. (Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika, 8/65, 96)
mariner iv finished transmitting its 21 photographs of Mars and sent about 10 percent of a 22nd picture before its tape ran out. The later pictures were eagerly awaited by JPL scientists because they should show the dark regions of Mars that some people believed harbor life. The photos were scheduled to be released later this week. (Wash. Post, 7/25/65, A7)
British scientist Dr. J. E. Lovelock told the Third International Symposium on Advances in Gas Chromatography in Houston that although pictures taken from space probes indicated no sign of life on Mars as we know it, life may be there. Dr. Lovelock said it was urgent that the unmanned spacecraft that would land on Mars be designed “so they would not rule out the possibility that life may take different forms and be of some entirely different nature on planets beyond our own.” {Houston Post, 10/19/65)
Photographs of Mars returned by NASA mariner iv showed surface features which could be interpreted as possible Martian canals, wrote Eric Burgess, a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in London in a letter to the Society. Burgess interpreted a dark, 30-mi.-wide streak shown on photograph No. 11 as a rift valley. This surface feature occurred at the same location on Mars where some astronomers claimed to have seen canals. Burgess said the photograph revealed that the escarpments passed through the rim of a large lOO-mi.-wide Martian crater, indicating that this particular rift valley appeared after the formation of the crater. (L.A. Times, 8/16/65)
nasa mariner iv was 85 million miles from earth and traveling faster than 48,000 mph, nasa announced. A radio signal from the spacecraft, traveling at the speed of light, would take more than 7% min. to reach a ground station. The Mars probe was returning scientific measurements and engineering data continuously and daily setting a new record for distance of communications, (nasa Release 65-167)
U.S.S.R.’s zond ii would pass within 900 mi. of Mars on Aug. 6, according to Soviet space scientist Prof. Mstislav Keldysh. This announcement was relayed by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, who quoted Keldysh as saying ZOND II weighed about 2,000 lbs. Dr. Sheldon speculated that the probe’s considerable weight—four times more than mariner iv—could mean “it may be doing something more than a simple fly-by” of Mars, (upi, Denver, Post 3/10/65; upi, NYT, 3/11/65, 42)
mariner iv received 12 commands from JPL to check out spacecraft equipment that would be used if the spacecraft was still operating normally when it reached Mars next July 14. These commands dropped a lens cover off the television camera, turned on a scanning platform that carried the camera and two Mars sensors, turned on portions of television system and checked out the capability of mariner iv to perform the encounter sequence. It was not planned to take television pictures during this sequence. The lens cover was dropped at this time rather than at planet encounter to shake loose any possible dust particles that might interfere with the Canopus sensor, a light sensing device that locked on the star Canopus to prevent the spacecraft from rolling. (NASA Release 65—43)
MARINER IV was nearly 40 million mi. from earth, traveling 30,000 mph relative to the sun. It had covered 188 million mi. in its orbit around the sun. The Mars probe had transmitted to earth more than 160 million bits of engineering and scientific information about planetary space, (nasa Release 65-95)
A warning that “In looking for life on Mars we could establish for ourselves the reputation of being the greatest Simple Simons of all time” came from Dr. Philip H. Abelson in an editorial in Science. Dr. Abelson was editor of the magazine and director of the Carnegie Institution’s Geophysical Laboratory. He said he did not believe that life, particularly life resembling that on earth, would be found on Mars and proposed “a few inexpensive experiments” on earth to save years, billions of dollars, and the possibility of “considerable eventual disappointment” if the search for life on Mars should prove fruitless. Attempts to sterilize spacecraft to prevent them from carrying earth organisms to Mars might add “many years and billions of dollars” to the cost, the editorial said. It suggested, instead, careful selection of experiments to be sent to Mars and “relatively inexpensive studies here on earth” to determine whether sterilization were really necessary. (Clark, NYT, 2/13/65; Wash. Post, 2/13/65) During February: Dr. Leo Steg, manager of General Electric Co.’s Space Sciences Laboratory, Missile and Space Div., was named Engineer of the Year—1964. He was cited for outstanding contributions to the advancement of space science and the engineering profession. The award was presented by an amalgamation of 41 societies during the 1965 National Engineers’ Week in Philadelphia. (Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 13)
NASA awarded $100,000 in initial funds to General Dynamics Corp.’s Convair Div. to determine vehicle design modifications and ground support requirements for combining the Centaur as a third stage with the two-stage Saturn ib launch vehicle. The combination was being proposed to launch unmanned Voyager spacecraft to Mars in 1971. Study would be under direction of lrc. (nasa Centaur Proj. Off.; Gen. Dyn. Corp. Release)
Soviet astronomer Sofia Kozlovskaya reported at the All-Union Conference on Planetary Cosmogony in Moscow that the density of matter on Mars and Venus was greater than that on earth: matter of Venus had approximately two per cent more iron; Mars had approximately six to eight per cent more iron than earth. In making these calculations, Sofia Kozlovskaya used a new “more exact model of the earth” which she had built with the data from recent seismic observations. (Tass, 7/20/65)
NASA’s mariner IV began feeling the gravitational pull of Mars a week before it was scheduled to take the first close-up pictures of the planet. The tug was noticed at 5 p.m. edt in a slight change in speed as the 575-lb. spacecraft, 128,054,720 mi. from earth and 1,721,770 mi. from Mars, neared the end of its 228-day trip. At noon, the speed relative to Mars was 9,879 mph. Tracking engineers said the speed, which had been dropping two mph every six hours, would lessen because of Mars’ gravity at a rate of one mph every six hours through July 10 when the speed would begin to increase. No further sensing of the planet’s presence in space was expected until July 14 when instruments aboard mariner iv might detect an increase in radiation, (ap, NYT, 7/8/65, 13; ap, Orl. Sent., 7/7/65)
mariner iv set world space communications distance record shortly after 3:00 a.m. EST when it reached a straight-line distance from earth of 66 million mi. Soviet scientists reported two years ago that they lost radio contact with their MARS I spacecraft March 21, 1963, after 149 days of flight at more than 65 million mi. (nasa Release 65141)
NASA’s mariner iv spacecraft, at 8:02 a.m., EST, automatically switched from its omnidirectional antenna to fixed narrow beam antenna to communicate with earth, thereby becoming radio-ready for the remaining 130 days of its Mars flight. JPL received report from tracking station at Canberra, Australia, of a prompt increase in signal strength. (NASA Release 65-78)
JPL scientists had sent notices to professional and amateur astronomers asking them to keep the strip of Mars over which mariner IV would fly next July 14 under surveillance from now on, with special emphasis on photography in March. “We don’t know what we may learn through this procedure,” a JPL spokesman said, “but we want all the information we can get. Suppose, for example, mariner photographs what looks like a dust storm. We’ll have a better chance of determining that fact if we have pictures of the same phenomenon taken through earth telescopes, even though it’s a different storm months earlier.” (ap, Seattle Post-Intelligencer, 2/15/65)
United Press International (upi) reported that nasa had postponed until next week an attempt to have mariner iv photographic probe take pictures of the blackness of space. The pictures would provide scientists with a means of editing mariner iv’s photos of Mars. Communication problems forced the delay. (UPI, NYT, 8/27/65, 19)
Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of the National Aeronautics and Space Council staff told mit students:	“The Russians are pretty cautious about disclosing much about their launch vehicles, but we know pretty well what vehicles they’re using.” Dr. Sheldon noted that ZOND II, the Soviet Mars probe, would pass near the planet perhaps one month after mariner iv. The U.S. Mars probe was due to come within 5,400 mi. of the planet on July 14.	(Boston Globe, 2/17/65)
The rash of reports on strange visitations to earth received comment from Walter Sullivan in the New York Times: “Whether or not [flying saucer enthusiasts] are aware of it, this is the time when space probes would be arriving from Mars, if inhabitants of-that planet were engaged in a similar effort [to the mariner iv Mars flyby]. The earth overtakes Mars every two years and two months, coming within a few dozen million miles of it. There was such an approach this spring. The United States and the Soviet Union anticipated it by firing vehicles toward Mars last November. If there were any Martians equipped to do so, they would have fired their vehicles toward earth at about the same time,” (Sullivan. ATT, 7/13/651
