Checks of distributions of Martian and lunar crater diameters indicated that the visible surface of Mars was 2.2-to-3 X 109 years old, Alan B. Binder, Univ. of Arizona, reported in Science. This result implied that in the early history of Mars large-scale subaerial erosion occurred. Of 69 Martian craters with diameters greater than 10 km., 13% had central peaks. This compared favorably with the frequency (11.7%) of central peaks among lunar craters and may indicate the peaks resulted from the impact mechanism rather than post-impact volcanism. Well-defined system of lineaments shown in mariner iv photographs may indicate that Mars had lost appreciable angular momentum during its history. (Binder, Science, 5/20/66, 1053-5)
Team of jpl scientists left Cal Tech on first NASA-sponsored investigation of Antarctica. Scientists would spend 2lA mos. in Wright, Victoria, Taylor, and Beacon Valleys taking samples and conducting tests that might prove valuable in future unmanned exploration of Mars. (jpl Release, 11/13/66)
Six-week NASA-sponsored exploration trip to search for plant life in Chile’s Atacama Desert—area resembling Martian terrain because of its extreme aridity—was begun by Richard W. Davies, jpl Advanced Studies Section, and two other jpl scientists. Explorers, who planned to send back 1,000	lbs. of sandy soil for analysis, would concentrate on high plateau near Calama, 80 mi. inland and 5,000 to 8,000 ft. above sea level. Similar trip last year had yielded a microflora in top four inches of sand. (jpl Release)
Comparing U.S. and U.S.S.R. Mars exploration efforts in Science, Bruce C. Murray, Cal Tech Associate Professor of Planetary Science, and Merton E.	Davies, rand Corp., said of nasa’s mariner iv July 14, 1965, flyby: "The American scientific community should, and evidently does, feel proud and gratified that the Mariner mission to Mars, through successful utilization of national resources, not only accomplished a remarkable technological feat but also discovered extraordinary new facts ... beyond the reach of earth-based instruments.” Authors termed "disappointing” U.S. decisions to terminate Mariner program, fly extra Mariner C spacecraft to Venus in 1967, drop plans for 1971 Voyager launch, and "fill the gap” with an abbreviated 1969 Atlas-Centaur program. U.S.S.R., they noted, had spent "between five and ten times as much on flight programs for planetary exploration” as U.S. and, in spite of "six consecutive failures in their efforts to explore Mars,” may have developed a reliable 2,000-lb. spacecraft for Mars flyby. Authors predicted U.S.S.R. would launch two Zond spacecraft in December 1966: "It will be surprising to us if at least one . . . does not reach the planet and return new facts about it.” They suggested 1971 as earliest likely date for Soviet landing of survivable payload on Martian surface and concluded that by 1967 "the U.S. will be ready to make an enduring national commitment to the exploration of the planets, and be ready to demonstrate intellectual appreciation of discovery as well as enthusiasm for technological achievement.” (Science, 2/25/66, 945-54) Week of February 28: NASA delegation extended President Johnson’s invitation for European participation in U.S. manned and unmanned space programs in discussions with officials of West Germany, France, U.K., and Italy. Delegation had been instructed not to make any offers or commitments but to express potential opportunities of participation in future U.S. space flights on equal basis with U.S. scientists. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 2/28/66, 23) During February: Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of msfc Research Projects Laboratory, summarized progress in development of electric propulsion in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "The first laboratory experiments with electrostatic thrustors began in 1958. In the early thrustor models, power efliciencies and propellant-utilization efficiencies were 20-30%; lifetimes did not exceed a few hours; ion-current densities were less than 1 milliamp/cm2; the problem of beam neutralization was unsolved— was not even well understood. Mission applications seemed far in the future. Today, only seven years later, electrostatic thrustors are very close to flight readiness. Two systems, the ion-bombardment system and the surface-ionization system, have reached power efficiencies and propellant efficiencies above 90%; they produce ion currents of about 20 milliamp/cm2. Beam neutralization has proven in the laboratory as well as in actual space tests, and engine lifetimes of several-thousand hours have been demonstrated. With a few more years of refinement and quality engineering, these ion thrustors will be ready for extended missions into interplanetary space. . . .” (A&A, 2/66, 71-2) During February: Arnold Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, noted two viewpoints on achieving Soviet cooperation in space research in Astronautics & Aeronautics:	. . the one holds that the answer . . . lies in finding a suitable device, either bilateral or international—a new idea, an imaginative approach, a twist ... for example, a proposal for an international space laboratory. . . . "The other view is that the device is substantially irrelevant and that it is the basic relationship between the two countries, the basic political and military realities, which will determine at any given time whether cooperation is feasible or not.” (A&A, 2/66, 20)
jpl selected Litton Industries, Inc., Guidance and Control Systems Div., for negotiation of a $3-million contract to design, fabricate, and check out data automatic subsystem (Das) for 1969 Mariner (unmanned) flights to Mars, jpl had management responsibility to NASA for Mariner/ Mars project, (nasa Release 66-289)
Threat of contamination of Mars made search for that planet’s indigenous life, at any stage of evolution from prebiotic to extinct, an urgent undertaking, according to Biology Working Group’s section on exobiology in third and final report of nas Space Science Board Summer Study (June-July 1965) at Woods Hole, Mass. Report, Space Research: Directions for the Future, Part Three, said: ". . . the exploration of Mars, with initial emphasis on the detection and characterization of possible Martian life, should constitute the major scientific goal of the United States space program in the period following the manned lunar landing.” High priority in field of environmental biology was given to study effects of weightlessness, with particular attention to "synergistic or antagonistic effects from simultaneously imposed stresses of radiation and weightlessness.” Orbiting research facilities with six- to eight-man crews to study effects of prolonged space flight preceding extended manned missions were recommended by Medicine and Physiology Working Group. Report urged series of manned flights, ground-based studies, and biosatellite experiments to yield data for planetary exploration. Group examining NASA-university relations urged increases in training budget and facilities and research grants, plus a program providing graduate students'with flight opportunities. (Text)
NASA had tentatively selected six experiments to be carried on two Mariner Mars spacecraft scheduled for launch by Atlas-Centaur boosters between early February and mid-April 1S69: two television cameras, infrared spectrometer, infrared radiometer, ultraviolet spectrometer, celestial mechanics experiment, and S-band occultation experiment. Experiments were selected to extend knowledge of Martian atmosphere and visible features of Martian terrain and to gather additional data to continue planning for landing instrumented capsules on the planet, jpl had project management responsibility for Mariner Mars 1969 missions. (nasa Release 66-174)
Analysis of available evidence concerning possibility of an advanced form of life on Mars by Univ. of Maryland astronomy professor Dr. Ernst J. Opik appeared in Science. Dr. Opik said the most heavily eroded craters visible in photos taken by mariner iv during the July 14, 1965, flyby dated from the earliest period of the planet’s history, implying that Mars had never had a dense, moist, earth-like atmosphere for any extended period and would therefore be a poor prospect for life. Dr. Opik argued strongly for at least a primitive form of vegetation, citing in particular a region of 1.2 million sq. km. that had darkened rapidly from 1946 to 1954. He likened this to the change a distant observer would have seen on earth as a consequence of the virgin lands development program in U.S.S.R. Vegetation was the best explanation for such changes; however, if it were not vegetation, "it must be something specifically Martian.” The planet, he added, "may become a source of great surprises in the future.” (Science, 7/15/66, 255-65)
mariner iv spacecraft, which took the world’s first close-up pictures of Mars July 14, 1965, was again in contact with earth, reporting on the space environment and its own operating performance after 18 mos. of flight. NASA said telemetry from mariner iv, received over a 197.5-million-mi. radio link with the Deep Space Network’s Goldstone Tracking Station, indicated that all spacecraft systems were operating properly. Launched Nov. 28, 1964, mariner iv had exceeded its design life by more than 100% and gave indications it might function until 1968. (nasa Release 66-135; jpl Release)
jpl had awarded $200,000 contract to Avco Corp.’s Space Div. for task work in jpl’s new $1.5 million Sterilization Assembly Development Laboratory (sadl). Starting in mid-1967, SADL would be sterilization testing headquarters for Voyager spacecraft, scheduled for Mars landing in the 1970s. (jpl Release)
LaRC would test parachutes for possible landing of instrumented unmanned capsules on Mars beginning in summer 1966, in support of NASA’s Voyager planetary exploration project. Parachutes would be carried by balloons and sounding rockets to 130,000-ft. altitude—where thin earth atmosphere simulates Martian atmosphere—and would then be deployed behind test units accelerated to mach 1.2 in level flight [see Aug. 30]. (nasa Release 66-90; LaRC Release)
First anniversary of first close-up photos of Mars taken by nasa’s mariner iv from distance of 134 million mi. Spacecraft was launched Nov. 28, 1964. (NYT, 7/26/66, 49)
nasa selected Northrop Corp. for final negotiations on $5-million contract for design, development, fabrication, and testing of "engineering mechanics subsystems for Mariner Mars ’69 spacecraft.” Contract would be managed by JPL. (nasa Release 66-170)
nasa selected Martin Co. for negotiation of $3-million, incentive-fee contract to build 11 experimental spacecraft equipped with parachute payloads "to investigate parachute designs and techniques for landing instrumented capsules on Mars.” Four would be launched by high-altitude balloon systems and seven by Honest John-Nike rockets under ' LaRc’s Planetary Reentry Parachute Program, (nasa Release 66-229)
NASA mariner iv, launched from etr Nov. 28, 1964, for Mars flyby July 14, 1965, was 216 million miles from earth—greatest distance it would reach before gradually returning to within 30 million miles in 1967—and still operating. Goldstone Tracking Station of NASA’s Deep Space Network (dsn) tracked a signal from the spacecraft, but no attempt was made to receive data because of the extreme distance, dsn would continue attempting to contact mariner iv once a month to see if it was still operating. Daily engineering and scientific data from the spacecraft had been suspended Oct. 1, 1965, by ground command that set new space communications record of 191,059,922 mi.—more than twice the distance from earth to the sun. {nasa Release 66-7)
Evidence for volcanic origin of lunar craters was presented in a letter to Nature by Univ. of Western Australia geologist G. J. H. McCall. Eleventh frame of photographs by nasa’s mariner iv spacecraft revealed scalloping in walls of Martian craters comparable to scalloping in terrestrial calderas—such as Krakatau, Indonesia, Aso, Japan, and Crater Lake, Ore. McCall had also detected scalloping in lunar craters, which he believed "closely resemble terrestrial volcano-tectonic craters.” Taking "pronounced scalloping ... to be a valid indication of volcano-tectonic subsidence,” McCall questioned whether lunar craters could be explained by hypervelocity impact. (McCall, Nature, 9/24/66, 1384-5)
First of series of high-altitude experiments to investigate parachute designs and techniques that might be incorporated into Voyager spacecraft scheduled for unmanned soft landing on Mars in 1973 was conducted by nasa from Walker afb. The 15-ft.-diameter, 1,600-lb. disc-shaped flight unit containing packaged test parachute, instruments to record loads and parachute deployment, and ring of 12 small rockets for acceleration was carried by balloon to 120,000- to 125,000-ft. altitude then released on ground command. Acceleration rockets apparently ignited as planned, propelling unit upward at about 850 mph into arching trajectory. Parachute deployed; system descended in planned recovery area at wsmr. Test was apparent success; extensive performance analyses were being made. Balloon system had been tested July 18. Parachute project was managed by LaRC and coordinated with jpl, which managed Voyager program, (nasa Release 66-225; AP, Balt. Sun, 8/31/66)
Mars polar caps are white with dry ice, not frozen water in the form of frost, wrote Dr. Robert B. Leighton and Dr. Bruce C. Murray of Cal Tech in Science. Their argument was based on mariner iv’s July 14, 1965, flyby which indicated that planet’s atmosphere is very thin and largely composed of carbon dioxide which, in frozen form, is dry ice. Theory that white on Mars polar caps is ordinary frost was based on observations of its reflectivity in the infrared and on manner in which it affected orientation of light waves. Authors believed there might be frozen water on Mars, but suggested it is all underground in the form of permafrost. (Science, 7/8/66, 136-44)
Six years of exploratory work at jpl and nasa centers on practical problems of landing on Mars was summarized by R. P. Thompson of jpl in Astronautics & Aeronautics. He concluded that: (1) design of first lander should be simple and conservative, and capable of thorough testing so that no single failure mode would cause "catastrophic failure of mission”; (2) independent backup should be provided for every critical event in landing sequence with "selective” redundance to achieve high reliability; and (3) capsule should be instrumented to allow diagnosis of failures. (A&A, 7/66, 66-73) During July: David H. Stoddard, M.D., Director of NASA Occupational Medical Division, cited in Hospital Topics two "ideal” physiological monitors developed in space medicine—biotelemetry, which permitted immediate observation of data, although subject was aware he was being monitored; and electrocardiocording, which did not allow immediate observation but "permits the subject to go where he pleases, do what he pleases and to almost forget that he is being monitored.” (Hospital Topics, 7/66, 39)
Computer technique developed by JPL scientist Dr. Robert Nathan and applied to 12 photos of the lunar surface transmitted by NASA’s surveyor i spacecraft revealed details as small as 1/50 of an inch and, in some cases, apparently doubled observable characteristics. Enhancement process had been used successfully to intensify photos transmitted by NASA’s three Ranger spacecraft and mariner iv Mars probe. (nasa Release 66-206; jpl Release)
nasa would negotiate $1.25-million contract with Texas Instruments, Inc., for design, fabrication, and testing of telemetry subsystem for 1969 Mariner missions to Mars. Motorola, Inc., was selected for design, fabrication, and testing of command subsystem for Mariner spacecraft under $2-million contract. Both contracts would be managed by jpl. (nasa Release 66-186)
System of two interconnected balloons 815-ft. long designed to test parachute deceleration system of nasa’s Voyager spacecraft—scheduled to land on Mars in 1973—was lofted by usaf from Holloman afb. Helium in small upper balloon inflated main balloon—largest ever launched— to 26-million-cu.-ft. capacity as both rose to 130,000-ft. altitude where atmosphere was believed to be as thin as that on Mars. 1,800-lb. simulated Voyager spacecraft payload was jettisoned by radio command seven hours after launch, successfully parachuted to earth, and was later recovered near Phoenix, Ariz. Main balloon rose to higher altitude and ruptured as expected. Parachute program was managed by LaRc; Voyager program by JPL. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/19/66; Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 34)
NASA had invited 33 firms to submit proposals on a 12-mo. study of Mars and Venus flyby missions in 1975-1982 period using Saturn/Apollo hardware with minimum modifications. Study would emphasize earth escape stages based on modifications of the upper stages of Saturn V launch vehicle (S-II and S-IVB), orbital tanking and assembly operations, launch windows, spacecraft, and probes to be launched from spacecraft to planet’s surface, (msfc Release 66-73)
msfc had awarded General Electric Co. a $147,884, 12-mo. contract to study design and systems requirements of an electrically propelled space vehicle for manned Mars landing missions and to identify areas of technology in which concentrated research would produce maximum benefit to manned planetary program, (msfc Release 66-271)
NASA’s mahiner iv had completed two years in space, flown 1,025,082,830 mi., and continued to operate properly, reporting its condition to earth three times a week. Launched Nov. 28, 1964, spacecraft had completed primary mission Aug. 2, 1965, after transmitting to earth 22 pictures of Martian surface. Photos were made when it flew within 6,118 mi. of planet July 14, 1965. (nasa Release 66-304; jpl Release)
New absorption bands, probably caused in part by reduced gases in the Martian atmosphere, had been found in near-infrared spectrum of Mars by Fourier spectroscopy, Lewis D. Kaplan, jpl, and Janine and Pierre Connes, Observatoire de Meudon and Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France, reported in Science. The authors believed the presence of such constituents might have "important implications for the possibility and nature of life on Mars.” (Science, 8/12/66, 739-40)
