Results of preliminary qualitative study of Mariner VI photos were summarized in Science by Dr. Robert B. Leighton, Dr. Norman H. Horowitz, Dr. Bruce C. Murray, and Dr. Robert P. Sharp of Cal Tech; Alan G. Herriman and Dr. Andrew T. Young of JPL; Bradford A. Smith of New Mexico State Univ.; Merton E. Davies of rand Corp.; and Conway B. Leovy of Univ. of Washington: Surface of Mars “appears similar to that of the Moon, but there are significant differences; some features seen from Earth are characterized; the ‘blue haze’ hypothesis is disproved; and new phenomena associated with the polar cap aTe discovered.” Mars resembled moon in abundance, form, arrangement, and size of craters, but there appeared to be break in size-distribution curve of craters in some parts of Mars not characteristic of moon—apparently because Mars had more effective weathering and transportation process than moon. Similarities between Martian and lunar surfaces included craters with slump blocks, terrace, and radial dry-debris avalanche chutes on steep inner surfaces; central peaks, polygonal outlines, blocky ejecta rims, and irregular ejecta; and irregularly sinuous ridges. Differences included more subdued relief of many Martian craters, flatter floors, fewer central peaks, more subdued debris blankets, absence of obvious secondary craters and rays, and greater abundance of “ghost” craters. Photos showed no sinuous rifles and no distinctive earth-like phenomena such as mountain ranges, tectonic basins, stream-cut topographs, dune fields, playa flats, or other arid-region features. (Science, 8/15/69, 685—90)
jpl radar readings which showed 8.3-mi altitude variation in Mars’ north equatorial zone and included corrected figures for Mars’ ephem-eris, or orbital path, were expected to ensure accuracy of TV cameras aboard Mariners VI and VII, NASA said. Experimenters hoped to obtain photos identifying objects 900 ft across at close approach and pictures were expected to be 500 times better than those taken to date by earth-based telescope cameras. Readings were obtained at NASA’s Goldstone Tracking Station in California by team directed by Dr. Richard M. Goldstein during planet’s closest approach to earth (Mars had been within 45 million mi of earth June 9). They would be of great interest to astronomers because they showed that areas which appeared light to telescopes might be either high or low in elevation. Optically dark areas appeared to be of medium elevation to radar-scanners. (nasa Release 69—111; jpl Release 530)
Results of four radio occultation measurements of Mars’ atmosphere, ionosphere, and surface configuration by Mariner VI and VII were reported in Science by jpl’s Dr. Arvydas J. Kliore, Dr. Gunnar Fjeldbo, and Boris L. Seidel and Goddard Institute for Space Studies’ Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool. Measurements had provided refractivity data in Mars atmosphere at four points above its surface. For atmosphere consisting predominantly of carbon dioxide, surface pressures between 6 and 7 millibars at three points of measurement and 3.8 at fourth, indicated elevation of 3.1—3.7 mi (5—6 km). Temperature profile measured by Mariner VI near equator in daytime indicated temperatures in stratosphere about 100°K warmer than those predicted by theory. Measurements by Mariner VI taken at 79°N at beginning of polar night indicated conditions were favorable for condensation of carbon dioxide at almost all altitudes. Mariner VII measurements taken at 58°S in daytime and 38°N at night also showed carbon dioxide condensation was possible at altitudes above about 15.5 mi (25 km). Measurements of electron density in ionosphere showed upper atmosphere was substantially warmer than in 1965, possibly because of increased solar activity and proximity to sun. (Science, 12/12/69, 1393—7)
Press conference on Mariner VI preliminary results was held at JPL. Scientists reported experiments had revealed that recurring white blob seen in previous Mars pictures was 300-mi wide crater with peak in center; linear features known as canals were actually large, irregular, low-contrast splotches without specific detail; temperature in equatorial area ranged from 75°F to —100°F; atmosphere was almost nonexistent; Mars had no sharply defined borders separating light and dark areas; and Martian surface was more heavily cratered than previously believed. Dr. Charles A. Barth of Univ. of Colorado said any life on Mars would be very different from life on earth, perhaps form that used carbon dioxide. He said uv spectrometer had found atomic carbon and carbon monoxide, but no traces of nitrogen—essential to life on earth. Dr. George C. Pimentel of Univ. of California at Berkeley said infrared spectrometer had detected presence of unknown compound related to methane, building block of life on earth. He also reported detection of super-thin layer of water ice hanging in atmosphere above Mars equator. (Auerbach, W Post, 8/3/69, A3; Lannan, W Star, 8/3/69, A5)
NASA’s Mariner VI spacecraft (launched Feb. 24) was 21,731,091 mi from earth and would fly past Mars July 30. Mariner VII (launched March 27) was 19,526,893 mi from earth and would fly past Mars Aug. 4. Both spacecraft were operating normally. (JPL Release 521)
Selection of investigators and investigation areas for .1973 Viking mission to Mars was announced by NASA. LaRC would manage overall project and be responsible for lander portion of spacecraft. jpl would manage orbiter portion and be responsible for tracking and data acquisition. Viking, follow-on to 1964—1965, 1969, and 1971 Mariner Mars flights, would consist of two instrumented spacecraft in Mars orbit, each of which would detach landing capsule for softlanding on Mars. Mission objectives included detection of life if it existed. (nasa Release 69—166)
LaRC announced award of $313,620,000 cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Corp. for construction of lander portions of two Viking spacecraft scheduled to softland on Mars in summer 1973 and for project integration services. (LaRC Release)
LaRC issued Rfps for design and financial proposals for planetary lander and project integration portions of NASA’s Viking project. Viking spacecraft—consisting of lander and orbiter—were to be procured for two planned flights to Mars to search for scientific data in 1973. (nasa Release 69-36)
Scientific data provided by two spacecraft included more than 2,000 uv spectra and more than 400 infrared spectra of atmosphere and surface. Infrared radiometer returned more than 800 near-encounter and 100,000 far-encounter surface and atmospheric measurements. TV cameras produced 198 high-quality analog pictures of Martian surface. Tracking data provided measurements of mass and ephemeris of Mars, but degree of success of celestial mechanics experiment was yet to be determined. S-band occultation experiment determined electron and temperature profile of-ionosphere and temperature and pressure profile of lower atmosphere. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA’s Mariner VII, launched from ETR March 27, successfully executed midcourse maneuver in response to radio commands from Woo-mera, Australia, tracking station. Spacecraft, more than 2.5-million mi from earth, would fly within 2,000 mi of Mars Aug. 5. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/9/69, A5; Reuters, W Post, 4/9/69, A7)
NASA announced selection of 38 scientists organized into eight teams to assist in design and development of Martian softlander for 1973 Viking missions. Teams would participate in early instrument development, designing softlander, and planning missions. Final selection of investigations and participating scientists for both landers and orbiters making up 1973 Viking missions would be made December 1969, when initial results of Mariner flybys of Mars in summer 1969 would be available. Planetary Programs Directorate would have management responsibility for Viking Mars 1973 mission; LaRC had been assigned overall project management and direct responsibility for managing planetary iander portion; jpl had management responsibility for orbiter spacecraft, (nasa Release 69—31)
First pictures of Mars taken by NASA’s Mariner VI, launched Feb. 24 to fly by Mars equator, were received at JPL. Full-disc photos, taken between 771,500 and 450,000 mi from Mars, were flashed on screen every five minutes. They showed Mars as dull, gray, egg-shaped body with crack in surface and bright spot—southern polar cap—with ragged edge. Better pictures were expected as spacecraft traveled closer to Mars. (AP, B Sun, 7/30/69, Al; Lannan, W Star, 7/30/69, A3)
NASA announced release of The Book of Mars, one-volume digest of facts and theories about Mars by Dr. Samuel Glasstone, illustrated with photos taken during Mariner IV mission 1964—65, when spacecraft flew within 6,000 mi of Mars surface. Book traced history of man’s acquisition of Mars data and compared Mars with other planets. (nasa Special Release)
Washington Daily Neivs editorial commented on Condon Report on UFOs: “Dedicated disciples of the little green men from Mars school no doubt will find the Condon report represents another diabolical plot to suppress truth. But most Americans will find the report something less than a surprise. Apart from wasting time, continuing study would waste taxpayer money.” (W News, 1/18/69)
NASA’s Mariner VII televised two good test pictures before start of its first series of 34 approach shots more than 1 million mi from Mars. (AP, W Star, 8/2/69, A3; NASA News Release, 9/11/69)
jpl engineers sent signals to Mariner VI to turn on TV camera and scientific experiments that would measure Mars surface characteristics and atmosphere. Spacecraft (launched Feb. 24) began tracking Mars and would begin taking first of 33 far-encounter pictures 771,500 mi from Mars early July 29. Full-disc photos would be received at jpl July 29. (AP, B Sun, 7/29/69, A5)
First measurement of Mars uv dayglow, made during Mariner VI Mars flyby July 31, was reported in Science by Univ. of Colorado astrogeophysicists C. A. Barth, C. W. Hord, J. B. Pearce, K. K. Kelly, A. I. Stewart, G. E. Thomas, and G. P. Anderson; Johns Hopkins physicist W. G. Fastie; and JPL’s 0. F. Raper. Emission features from ionized carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide were measured in 1,900 A to 4,300 A spectral region. Lyman alpha 1,216 A line of atomic hydrogen and 1,304 A, 1,356 A, and 2,972 A lines of atomic oxygen were observed. Prime objective of experiment was to search for nitrogen in Martian atmosphere. First analysis had shown no evidence of nitrogen emissions in uv spectrum of upper atmosphere (Science, 9/5/69, 1004-5)
JPL engineers reported Mariner VII, en route to Mars, had suffered sudden change in velocity—possibly because of gas leak from pressure can in infrared spectrometer—that could throw off its approach to Mars. Also, 20 of 92 telemetry channels, including one that aimed TV camera platform toward Mars, had not operated properly after controllers lost contact with spacecraft July 30. When engineers turned on TV cameras, however, they began taking pictures that appeared to be of Mars. (Auerbach, W Post, 8/2/69, A4; NASA News Release, 9/11/69)
NASA selected Martin Marietta Corp. for $280,000,000 costplusincentivefee/ award-fee contract for Viking lander system and technical integration of project to send two instrumented spacecraft to Mars during summer of 1973. (nasa Release 69—82)
jpl press conference reported new information on Mars from the Mariner VI flyby. The far-encounter photo above, taken 463f2S0 miles from Mars July 29, showed Meridiani Sinus and Sabacus Sinus as a dark feature near the equator. The bright area at the top was Cydonia. The south polar cap showed at the bottom of the planet. i UVS'. NARROW-ANGIE TV use compatible with airport locations, and to analyze feasibility of compatible land development in high-noise areas, (dot Release 18369) ■ Apollo 8 commemorative medallions containing metal carried on mission were being distributed to NASA employees “as a token of appreciation for each individual’s efforts in making the United States lunar program possible,” NASA Hq. Weekly Bulletin said, (NASA Hq WB, 8/4/69, 1) August 4—5: NASA’s Mariner VII transmitted first closeup photos of Mars south pole as it flew within 2,100 mi of planet. Dr. Robert P, Sharp, geologist at Cal Tech, said 31 photos might look like “baby pictures of Earth. This is what the Earth might have looked like some four billion years ago before it developed an atmosphere and oceans to weather its surface and nurture life.” Photos taken on pass Aug. 4 were transmitted to JPL Aug. 5. Polar cap, which had appeared gleaming white in more distant photos, looked dull gray in closeups. Pictures showed south polar cap with snow-like substance-—possibly frozen carbon dioxide—piled up in vast dunes; pocked with deep, steeply walled craters; and much darker than desert to north. Floor of bright circular Hellas desert area, believed to be shallow crater or collapsed area, was strangely free of meteorite impact craters. Mariner VII (launched March 27) with Mariner VI (launched Feb. 24) had provided most detailed information to date on Mars, including 198 photos covering 20% of planet and detailed scientific data from onboard experiments. Data indicated: thin Martian atmosphere had no detectable nitrogen; south polar cap, which appeared white and smoothly circular in telescope pictures, was ragged with dark splotch in center; surface temperatures ranged from 75°F to —100°F; some of narrower thin dark lines called canals might be segments of rubbled rims of craters up to 300 mi across; and Martian surface, though heavily pocked, was not as rugged as lunar surface. (AP, B Sun, 8/6/69, Al; AP, W Star, 8/6/69, A7; Auerbach, W Post, 8/6/69, A3)
Washington Post published results of July 26—28 Gallup survey, which found public lukewarm about Government funding of manned Mars landing. While majority of young adults favored idea, majority of those 30 or over opposed it. Generally, 39% of those polled favored attempt to land man on Mars, 53% opposed, and 8% had no opinion. Blacks opposed by 3-to-l ratio. (W Post, 8/7/69, F4)
New determination of abundance of water in Mars atmosphere was reported in Science by Illinois Institute of Technology astronomers Tobias Owen and Harold P. Mason. New spectrograms of planet had been obtained in region of water-vapor band at 8,200 A during February and March 1969. Amount of precipitable water was found to be about 15 /x. Abundance reaffirmed that some water was present at current epoch but otherwise had little bearing on evolution of Martian atmosphere. Water vapor did not imply liquid water existed on Martian surface. (Science, 8/29/69, 893—5)
nasa selected General Electric Co. to receive three-year, $4-million, costplus-award-fee contract with two-year option to provide engineering and mission-related support to LaRC for Viking Project—series of planetary probes which would begin softlanding on Mars in 1973. (nasa Release 69—128)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser, addressed Independence Day celebration at Dearborn, Mich.: “For untold millions of years the human animal was chained to the earth. Sixty years ago he found a way of soaring into its atmosphere. Ten years ago he learned to break the chains of gravity and to soar out into space. This month the first man will set foot on another world. Later this month two spacecraft will reach Mars and send back new information about that Planet. Americans will have no reason to be ashamed of their nation on those days. Is it worth while? Is it worth while to lift the spirits of millions of human beings? If not, what else is worth while?” . Developing lunar landing technology was relatively easy. “The laws of nature which made it possible have been well known for a long time. The engineering skills required . . . were available and were brilliantly organized. Hundreds of thousands of Americans worked together to make this dream come true. They had faith and they had hope. “The problems of our cities and the other social problems which beset us are not all that easy. In this area human beings are not working together but are in conflict. We find that we do not yet know the cause • of these troubles nor do we yet have the mechanisms for curing them. Hence we must study, we must experiment, we must try and we will often fail. . . . And we shall learn from our failures.” (Text; CR, 1/29/69, E6415-7)
NASA’s Mariner VII Mars probe (launched March 27) obeyed radio command to lock its sensors on star Canopus. Spacecraft would fly past Mars night of Aug. 4. Command was radioed from NASA tracking station in Woomera, Australia. (AP, W Post, 4/2/69; UPl, C Trib, 4/3/69)
In Washington Post Thomas O’Toole traced NASA plans for planetary exploration from May 1971 launch of two Mariner spacecraft for Mars to Grand Tours of planets beginning in 1977 and 1979. “What comes after the two Grand Tours? Nobody really knows, but the space agency’s dreamers about unmanned missions have a plot already written and it reads a little better than most science fiction does.” Spacecraft would circulate through asteroid belt for year, making asteroid counts and photographing larger asteroids. Beyond that, scientists would like to rendezvous with a comet and investigate Saturn’s rings. (W Post, 11/2/69, B3)
