Quincy (Mass.) Patriot Ledger editorial noted President’s space goal message had not included Mars mission as major goal at this point. “More important is the consolidation and mastery of the space environment closer to earth, as well as greater application of space research to human problems. Fortunately, this is the emphasis of Mr. Nixon’s new program.” (Q Patriot Ledger, 3/10/70)
The Wartime Journals of Charles A. Lindbergh were reviewed by Eric F.	Goldman in New York Times Book Review: Journals covered 1937-1945, “when the celebrated flyer was in Europe surveying military aviation; the battle between President Franklin Roosevelt and the isolationists, during which Lindbergh stumped the United States as the star speaker of the anti-interventionists. . .; war years when, denied an Air Corps commission, he served as a civilian aeronautical expert in private industry and in the Pacific, also managing to work in 50 combat missions; and the weeks just after the Nazi surrender, which found him again in Europe, attached to a Naval Mission studying wartime developments in plane design and missiles.” Journals snowed Lindbergh as “a first-rate mind who was widely informed yet retained certain key areas of na'ivet6, an instinctive tinkerer with a passion for science as an idea and a gifted scientist who worried over the ‘narrow-mindedness’ of the pursuit, a man who read Plato the night before inspecting aviation factories and Dostoevsky in between speeches before roaring crowds, a hard-hitting bombadier screeching down over Japanese installations while he contemplated the beauty of God’s nature and the dignity of man.” (NYT Book Review, 9/20/70,1,42) Owen S. Merrill of JPL Nuclear Power Sources Group outlined progress of radioisotopic thermoelectric generator (rtg)being developed by aec for NASA and jpl. RTG was only known source considered capable of producing 500 w of power over 9- to 12-yr period required for NASA Grand Tour missions to outer planets. Melvin Swerdling, jpl spacecraft power systems specialist, described improved nickel-cadmium batteries with increased discharge-charge cycle capability, designed by jpl for nasa Mariner Mars 1971 spacecraft, (jpl Release 563)
At NASA Hq. news conference on future NASA plans Julian Scheer, Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, announced that 10-kg (22-lb) meteorite recovered Jan. 9 near Lost City, Okla., had come from orbit which took it outside Mars’ orbit at planet’s farthest point from sun. (Transcript)
Scientists at Smithsonian Institution’s Astrophysical Laboratory said studies of 10-kg (22-lb) meteorite that fell near Lost City, Okla., Jan. 9 had provided firmest evidence to date of intensity of cosmic rays beyond sun. Data obtained had raised possibility that manned spacecraft venturing to planets beyond Mars might have to be armored against swarms of high-energy “space bullets.” Meteorite was estimated to have weighed 227 kg (500 lbs) originally and was assumed to be fragment of explosive collision between two huge objects 6 million yrs ago. (AP, B Sun, 4/24/70, A3; Smithsonian PAO)
Supersonic Planetary Entry Decelerator (sped) experiment, launched from Wallops Station, simulated Mars reentry spacecraft speeding through thin atmosphere. A June photograph shows the parasol for sped deployed in systems check-out before mating to a single-stage Castor rochet motor. The flight experiment aided study of deployment characteristics required fora parachute to land instruments on Mars.
Mariner-Mars missions in 1971 were described by team of jpl scientists headed by Dan Schneiderman in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “The first of these voyages of exploration begins. . .when, between May 6 and June 3, two Mariner-type spacecraft will rise from launch pads at Cape Kennedy on the way to Mars to become the first spacecraft to orbit that planet.” To obtain maximum scientific information, two identical spacecraft would perform separate missions, A and B. Each spacecraft would orbit Mars for 90 days in differing inclinations and periods. “Together they will cover 70% of the surface, permitting the study of seasonal effects. The information gained will help in selecting suitable landing zones for the unmanned Viking project which will land an instrument package on Mars.” Missions would carry six science experiments including TV experiment. TV pictures would enlarge understanding of dynamic characteristics, history, environment, and surface physiography of Mars and improve maps of surface. They were not expected to provide direct evidence of possibility of life, but to furnish indirect evidence of Mars’ suitability as habitat for life. (A&A, 8/70, 64-77)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Institute for Space Studies, discussed eventual colonization of outer planets in New York Times Magazine: While most Homo sapiens would remain on earth in world of future, small percentage—“restless, inquisitive, innovative, continually seeking out challenges and testing the limits of the environment”—would “move out to become a small, hardy population on Mars. Within a few decades of the year 2000, a pioneering band of men—and women—will be living on Mars. ... Children will be born on Mars. Later, the spacefarers will go beyond Mars and beyond the solar system. Some day they will find the earth and its debilitating gravitational pull as difficult a place in which to survive as today’s land-adapted men find the water out of which the ancestral fishes emerged 300 million years ago. Eventually they will constitute a new species, evolved out of Homo sapiens, but linked to the ancestral planet only by sentiment.” (NYT Magazine, 5/10/70, 30)	.
An 85-g (3-oz) palladium generator-separator developed for use in space could be used for air-pollution detection on earth, jpl announced. Unit was heart of gas cnromatograph system developed by NASA and jpl for use by Viking Molecular Analysis Science Team in analyzing Martian soil and atmosphere in mid-1970s. It was particularly sensitive to major U.S. air pollutants like sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, and oxides of nitrogen, (jpl Release 558)
Results of study of infrared spectra recorded by Mariner VI and VII were reported in Science by Univ. of California at Berkeley chemists Kenneth C. Herr and Dr. George C. Pimentel. Reflections at 4.3/x suggested presence of solid carbon dioxide in upper atmosphere of Mars. (Science, 1/2/70,47-9)
