Selection of the Chryse valley near the mouth of the Martian Grand Canyon and of Cydonia in the Mare Acidalium, 1600 km (1000 mi) northeast, as landing sites for NASA’s two unmanned Viking spacecraft in July and August 1976 was announced at an Hq. press conference. The two spacecraft were scheduled for launch on their year-long, 740-million-km (460-million-mi) journey toward Mars in the summer 1975. The sites had been selected by prominent scientists after a one-year evaluation of 22 potential areas for scientific interest and the probability of a successful landing. The possibility of finding water at these sites increased the chances of finding evidence of life. Backup sites were Tritonis Lacus and Alba. Arriving at Mars, the spacecraft would enter a highly elliptical orbit and then separate into two parts, an orbiter and a lander. Each lander would carry a miniature chemical laboratory to analyze Martian soil for signs of life. A 3-m (10-ft) retractable claw would scoop soil samples for analysis. Other instruments would analyze the atmosphere and measure pressure, temperature, wind velocity, and quake activity. The orbiter would perform visual, thermal, and water-vapor mapping. (Transcript; nasa Release 73-91)
Climatic changes on Mars indicated by Mariner 9 (launched by NASA
New Mexico Univ. geologist Dr. Bradford A. Smith said riverbeds on Mars probably had dried because of orbital changes. When the Mars orbit was more elliptical than at present, the perihelion would be much closer to the sun, perhaps producing long-term climate changes which might, “at certain times, permit liquid water to exist.” Dr. Conway B. Leovy, Univ. of Washington, said dust storms encountered by Mariner 9 were “phenomena which will recur on Mars depending on the particular astronomical relationship between the perihelion and the solstice.” Dust storms might have been responsible for “the remarkable laminated terrain which has been observed in both polar zones.” Scientists had determined from Mariner 9 photos that the planet was a more varied and dynamic body than expected. Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Sciences, said: “Mars is like three planets: the old cratered planet, the young volcanic active planet that you see, and then an entirely different situation in the polar regions in Mars.” Mars as “planetary laboratory” of towering volcanoes, deep rift valleys, broad plateaus broken by fault lines, ancient planes with moonlike craters, sand dunes, clouds with water ice, and ever-changing polar caps would “substantially increase our basic knowledge of planets . . . and . . . when that history is written you will find that planetary exploration has contributed in a major way to the health and welfare of life on this planet.” (Transcript)
Results of the Mariner 9 ultraviolet spectrometer experiment to measure seasonal variation of ozone on Mars were reported in Science by Univ. of Colorado and Cal Tech scientists. Observations made between Nov. 14, 1971, and Oct. 27, 1972, had shown ozone to be present in polar regions of Mars and to have seasonal variation. In summer, the amount in the polar atmosphere was less than three micrometer-atmospheres. In autumn, ozone increased and was found in association with formation of the polar hood. In winter, the maximum amount of ozone was present, “57 micrometer-atmospheres over the polar hood and 16 over the polar cap. In spring, the amount over the polar cap decreases mono-tonically until by the beginning of summer the ozone disappears. Ozone is not observed in the equatorial region during any season.” (Barth et al., Science, 2/23/73, 795-6)
The U.S.-U.S.S.R. Working Group on Interplanetary Exploration released a statement following a weeklong meeting in Moscow. Scientists had met to analyze data about the Mars surface and atmosphere for selection of future landing sites for unmanned spacecraft. They also had discussed new results from exploration of Venus by Venus 8 (launched by U.S.S.R. March 27, 1972) and earth-based optical and radio measurements. Recommendations for cooperation would be announced when confirmed by both sides [see March 5]. The Group had been established under a NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences agreement of January 1971. U.S. scientists were led by Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs in nasa’s Office of Space Science. Soviet participants were headed by Academician Georgy I. Petrov, Director of the Institute of Space Research, (nasa Release 73-20)
“The equatorial sinuous channels on Mars detected by Mariner 9 point to a past epoch of higher pressures and abundant liquid water. Advective instability of the martian atmosphere permits two stable climates—one close to present conditions, the other at a pressure of the order of 1 bar [100 kilonewtons per sq mi] depending on the quantity of buried volatiles. Variations in the obliquity of Mars, the luminosity of the sun, and the albedo of the polar caps each appear capable of driving the instability between a current ice age and more clement conditions. Obliquity driving alone implies that epochs of much higher and of much lower pressure must have characterized martian history. Climatic change on Mars may have important meteorological, geological, and biological implications.” (Science, 9/14/73, 1045-8)
The U.S.S.R. launched its Mars 4 probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 12:31 am local time (3:31 pm edt, July 21) into a parking orbit from which it was inserted into a 470-million-km (290-million-mi) trajectory toward Mars. All systems performed satisfactorily, Tass reported. The spacecraft would reach Mars in February 1974 to continue scientific exploration of the planet and the space near it begun by Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971). United Press International reported Western sources as saying the apparent aim of Mars 4 was to softland research instruments and TV cameras on the Martian surface. Mars 4 would be the fourth Soviet spacecraft to reach Mars. Mars 1 (launched Nov. 1, 1962, to fly by Mars) had transmitted data to the earth for more than four months during its journey, before communications went dead. Mars 2 had been put into orbit around the planet and transmitted data to the earth into August 1972. An instrumented capsule from the spacecraft crashlanded on the Martian surface Nov. 27, 1971, becoming the first man-made object to reach the surface. Mars 3 had also attempted to softland an instrumented capsule, during a dust storm. TV pictures were transmitted to the earth for 20 sec before transmission ceased abruptly. The spacecraft ended its mission in August 1972. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/73; fbis-Sov, 7/23/73, LI; upi, NYT, 7/23/73, 8; A&A 1962, 1963, 1971, 1972)
The next 10 yrs in transportation could be the decade of the hovercraft, Jane’s Surface Skimmers said in its 1973-74 edition. Editor Roy Mc-Leavy noted that'the Soviet Ekranoplan already carried 900 fully armed troops at more than 350 km per hr (220 mph) over almost any surface. Hovercraft production would almost certainly develop into “one of the world’s major industries.” U.S. Navy surface ships might cost as much as $50 million; France was studying “hoverfrigates”; and the U.S.S.R. was joining in “this more sophisticated approach to naval strategy.” (AP, W Post, 11/29/73, A32) November 28—December 1:	An International Colloquium on Mars was held at Cal Tech and Jet Propulsion Laboratory by nasa, the American Astronautical Society, and the American Geophysical Union to evaluate new ideas stimulated by the successful Mariner 9 mission to Mars (launched by nasa May 30, 1971). Four hundred scientists from 10 countries participated in the program, which discussed Martian surface history and evolution, atmospheric history as related to interactions with the surface, and future exploration of Mars, (nasa Release 73-255; jpl pio)
Photo-mapping of Mars by Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) had revealed multiple circular features surrounding both poles which might indicate that the Martian north and south poles had moved, California Institute of Technology scientists reported in Science. Some of the concentric patterns were centered on points displaced from the present north and south poles of Mars, implying that these were ancient positions of the poles and testifying to a slow drift of the Martian spin axis. Such a drift of the earth axis could explain the evidence for radical climate changes in the past—fossil coral reefs in Greenland and fossil forests in the South Pole—and revive the debate with scientists who believed the climate changes were due to the constant moving of the earth’s continents and oceans. (Murray, Malin, Science, 3/9/73, 997999)
The U.S.S.R. had abandoned its women’s cosmonaut training program, the Washington Evening Star and Daily News reported. Gen. Georgy T.	Reregovoy, commander of the Soviet cosmonauts, had said in an interview with the Polish newspaper Express Wieczerny in Warsaw, “We train only young men, not women.” (upi, W Star & News, 2/23/73, A3) February 24:	A Raltimore Sun editorial commented on the Feb. 15 press conference on the Pioneer 10 Jupiter probe (launched March 2, 1972) : “There was reason to worry for Pioneer’s wellbeing, as it traveled the section beyond Mars; so many chunks of rock float along there, on such erratic tracks, that our expensive new-model spacecraft could have inadvertently smacked into something a great deal bigger than itself. Even a sideswipe might have thrown it off course. Happily, it has registered contact only with the sort of fine-grained debris that litters space in general.” Pioneer 10 had indicated the existence of more asteroids between the earth and Mars than previously realized and fewer between Mars and Jupiter. “Or is it so new a phenomenon, that the closer to earth’s big cities you come, the thicker the traffic gets?” (R Sun, 2/24/73)
nasa’s Pioneer 11 probe, launched April 5, was traveling at 120 000 km per hr (74 000 mph) and had covered 48 million km (30 million mi), one fifth of its 20-mo journey to the planet Jupiter. All experiments and spacecraft systems were functioning well. Instruments were sampling the sun’s field and wind, measuring solar and galactic cosmic ray particles, measuring hydrogen and helium in interstellar space, and making sky maps of the zodiacal light (sunlight reflected from cosmic dust between the earth and Jupiter). Meanwhile, Pioneer 10 (launched March 3, 1972) had covered 560 million km (350 million mi) of its 1-billion-km (620-million-mi) flight path and was due to arrive at Jupiter in December. Good data were being returned from all scientific instruments. Pioneer 10 was defining for the first time the interplanetary medium far beyond the orbit of Mars and the Asteroid Belt, (nasa Release 73-107)
