nasa and European Space Research Organization officials met in Paris to discuss future cooperative missions to the planets. Joint mission possibilities included an out-of-the-ecliptic flight to study the sun, missions to Jupiter and Mercury, and experiments on missions to Venus and Mars. NASA would receive suggestions for the 1980s from European nations during the next few months, nasa Director of Planetary Programs Robert S. Kraemer had said that international cooperation would be necessary for one third to one fourth of the payloads the agency envisioned for the next 15 yrs. (nasa, Spec Asst to Deputy Assoc Admin, interviews, 20-21 Jan 75; Couvault, Av Wk, 1 April 74, 38-9)
NASA had deleted a backup Viking lander spacecraft and would substitute the proof test orbiter for one of two flight orbiters to help offset significant cost increases and meet target dates for the two 1975 missions to explore the planet Mars, NASA reported to Speaker of the House Carl Albert. Technical problems in the guidance-and-control computer, biology instrument, and lander proof-test capsule qualification had delayed cornpletion of the landers, made the schedule “extremely tight,” and increased costs an estimated $48.8 million over the $89 million in the FY 1975 budget. NASA notified the House that' it planned to use for Viking $48.8 million available from the Skylab program after its successful completion. (Text in Viking Proj Hearings, House Subcom on Space Science, 21-2 Nov 74)
Grigory Khozin of the Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Institute of U.S. Studies expressed resentment of criticism by some U.S. press members and others of Soviet motives and technical ability in the cooperative Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Writing in the weekly Literaturnaya Gazeta, Khozin particularly censured suggestions of early Soviet reluctance to cooperate in space and of Soviet spacecraft docking difficulties, made in the recent book U.S.-Soviet Cooperation in Space by former U.S. Ambassador to the U.S.S.R., Foy D. Kohler. He accused “certain U.S. circles” of being “glad to cast a shadow” on ASTP and to “smear the forthcoming joint experiment precisely because it is a joint one [and] promotes the establishment of normal relations between countries.” Khozin declared that the U.S.S.R., as well as U.S. space program leaders and “ordinary Americans,” favored further close cooperation in space. (fbis-Sov, Sept 74, B2-3; Smith, NYT, 19 Sept 74) 18 September—21 October, 24 November-14 December: Two sets of critical surface-simulation tests were successfully conducted on the Viking lander proof-flight vehicle in a Martin Marietta Corp. thermal vacuum chamber under Martian temperature and pressure conditions. The tests verified the ability of Viking systems to withstand Martian temperatures and verified lander operations and ground support systems from the acquisition of a simulated Martian soil sample to analysis, interpretation, and reporting of data by Viking science teams. The spacecraft performed tasks—using the surface sampler, imaging system, meteorological sensors, x-ray spectrometer, seismometer, and thermal control systems—in temperatures ranging from 178 to 308 K (—135° to 95°F). (nasa prog off, interview, 21 Oct 75; Av Wk, 4 Nov 74,44-45)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, was quoted as saying in an interview: “From what we know today, there is no medical reason to bar a two-year mission to Mars. . . . We still need more data, but I don’t think the medical findings from a six-month or a year-long mission would differ appreciably from the experience with our three Skylab missions.” On a two-year mission to Mars (not likely to be considered before the early 1990s), “we’re going to have a hard time keeping people completely busy,” leaving astronauts more time to think of their isolation. “That’s another problem we’ll have to deal with.” Meanwhile, all the data indicate “that man is really adapting to the zero-gravity environment of space. He does that in a way that causes some very large fluctuations initially in various body systems” but, “with time, it appears that these fluctuations settle down.” (US News, 11 Feb 74, 62-64)
