The Soviet Union might attempt to land an automatic microbiological laboratory on Mars before the U.S. Viking spacecraft, whose twice-delayed launch is now scheduled for 20 Aug., could arrive, the Christian Science Monitor reported Finnish astronomer Heikka Oja as telling the British Interplanetary Society. By launching a probe between 17 Sept, and 3 Oct. and using higher speeds and shorter trajectories, the Russians could reach Mars in May 1976, 2 mo before the scheduled Viking arrival. Between 1971 and 1973 the Soviets had made 4 attempts to land probes on Mars; only Mars 3 (launched 28 May 1971) succeeded in softlanding a capsule (on 2 Dec. 1971). Landing in a dust storm, it ceased transmitting after 20 sec. Oja said the Soviets hoped to repeat this experiment, this time in a region near the south polar cap of Mars where the thin, mostly carbon dioxide atmosphere might contain moisture. (Gatland, CSM, 19 Aug 75) . .
The press commented on the mission of the Viking spacecraft to Mars [see 20 Aug.]. The Washington Post said that the essence of the space program had been “to provide mankind with new knowledge, not in hopes that this knowledge will be useful immediately here on Earth but in hopes that it will expand our understanding of the universe in which we live and . . . enable us to reach better solutions to our philosophical and political, as well as practical, problems.” The Viking missions had opened a new era in which the search for knowledge was to be done largely by machines; the rewards promised to be rich, beyond measure in strictly monetary terms. The Christian Science Monitor agreed, commenting that Viking represented “an opportunity for mankind’s self-awareness to take a greater stride away from earth-centered thinking than was afforded by Neil Armstrong’s historic step on to the moon.” Discovering organic life on Mars would strengthen the conviction that life existed abundantly throughout the universe and that we were not alone. Some had questioned whether the U.S. should spend a billion dollars on such a program when resources were hard pressed on earth, but anew discovery, that life was not a meaningless chance but part of a grand design, could give new inspiration to humanity’s efforts to deal with earthly problems. Here was a challenge for the architects of detente, the Monitor asserted. The U.S. and Russia had been needlessly duplicating scientific efforts, their cooperation amounting to little more than “arm’s-length information exchange.” The two countries had much to share. “By abandoning costly competition for a truly joint program, the two countries could gain from each other’s capabilities, minimize the cost to each of them, and pursue this cosmic outreach on behalf of all mankind.” (W Post, 22 Aug 75, A24; CSM, 22 Aug 75, 28)
A Today editorial had commented on the planned Viking flight to Mars: “Success of the Viking flight could mean additional Congressional support for more sophisticated flights in the future. ... It will be almost another year before we will have the answers to the Viking experiments. . . .At that time, we will be celebrating the 200th birthday of our country—and what better way to celebrate the birth of one nation than with the discovery of another?” (Today, 20 Aug 75)
Viking 2 was successfully launched at 2:39 pm EDT from the Eastern Test Range on a Titan-Centaur launch vehicle. The spacecraft entered on a trajectory toward Mars accurate to within the 3-sigma tolerance. If flown without midcourse correction, Viking 2 would reach Martian orbit 279 259 km from the target. The launch had been rescheduled from 1 Sept., after the launch crew during a 28 Aug. precountdown test discovered a degradation in the detection threshold of the orbiter’s S-band radio receiver. On 1 Sept., project officials decided to remove the spacecraft from the launch vehicle for additional evaluation. The launch was rescheduled for 9 Sept, after evaluation concluded that the anomaly had been caused by a faulty connector or conductor between the diplexer module and the high-gain antenna. Since the faulty part could not be isolated, the antenna and cabling were replaced, the orbiter and lander retested, encapsulated, and mated to the launch vehicle. After launch, all onboard systems and experiments were checked out. A trajectory correction maneuver on 19 Aug. targeted Viking 2 for a rendezvous with Mars on 7 Aug. 1976. Viking 2 was the second of two identical planetary probes [see 20 Aug.], each consisting of an orbiter and a lander, launched toward Mars in 1975 for rendezvous and orbital and surface exploration in 1976. (NASA MOR S-815-75—01—02, 16 Sept 75; Viking Science Activities rpt no. 89; Mission Operations Status Bulletins 10—14)
