Viking 2's lander dug a soil sample from beneath a rock on Mars and delivered it to the biological instrument package. All three experiments received a part of the sample; initial data from two of them—the labeled-release and the pyrolytic-release experiments—were sent to mission control at JPL. The third (gas-exchange) experiment was in a long incubation period that would continue through solar conjunction—a movement of the bodies which would put the sun between Mars and the earth— preventing communication with the Viking landers and orbiters. Conjunction would begin about 10 Nov. and continue through early Dec.; if the landers were revived successfully after the communications gap, more samples would be collected in mid-Jan. Leonard Clark, surface-sampler engineer, foresaw no problem in reactivating the arm mechanisms, adding that they had worked very well, “just the way they did during ground testing on earth before they left the manufacturer.” (Av Wk, 1 Nov 76, 15)
The rate of production of radioactive gas from a Mars sample monitored by an instrument on Viking 1 had “plateaued,” said Dr. Gilbert V. Levin, who designed the instrument, and the slowdown in activity was puzzling from both a biological and a chemical standpoint. A biological response would generally evolve gas for a longer period, whereas the count—if recording a merely chemical reaction—“took place at a very rapid rate initially and then, uncharacteristically, slowed down and took a long time to plateau.” A special team of scientists from several fields was convened to consider all possible nonbiological explanations for the unusual readings from Viking 1, and various laboratories around the U.S. were being enlisted to help test the theories. (ATT, 3 Aug 76, 18; W Star, 3 Aug 76, A-7; 1VSJ, 2 Aug 76, 1)
NASA Hq and LaRC announced that A. Thomas Young, former mission director for the Viking project, had been appointed Director for Lunar and Planetary Programs at NASA Hq and would begin his new duties 6 Dec. in the Office of Space Science. Young, who had worked with the Viking project since 1968 and helped develop Mars mission objectives, was most recently the mission operations manager and director of the 750-person Viking flight team at JPL in Pasadena, Calif. In his new job he would manage NASA’s unmanned planetary programs, including Viking, Pioneer, Mariner, and Helios, as well as studies in planetary astronomy, atmospheres, and geology; advanced scientific planning, programming, and technology; extraterrestrial materials research; and flight-program support. (LaRC Release 76-40; NASA Hq special anno., 5 Nov 76)
Tests completed in flight on the two Mars-bound Viking spacecraft showed that each had 2 ovens of the organic chemistry experiment in good working order. JPL spokesmen said they were confident the instruments would carry out the investigations planned on the Mars surface later in the year. Earlier data indicated that one oven on each spacecraft might have failed, but investigators would not be certain until the Mars landings, scheduled for early July and Sept. The ovens—3 on each Viking lander—were designed to heat surface samples to 500°C to release organic matter in the soil for analysis by the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer on each lander. (NASA Release 76-43)
Something found by Viking 1 on the surface of Mars behaved as if it were alive, said 6 biologists on the science team at JPL, who nevertheless refused to confirm the presence of life on Mars until results from Viking 2 were in. Viking 2 was on its way to a landing scheduled for 3 Sept, on Utopia Planitia (the Utopian plains) above which the air was found by Viking 1 ’s orbiter to contain 5 to 10 times as much water as that over the Chryse area where Viking 1 landed. A surface sample of Chryse itself dug by a mechanical arm was found to contain a surprising amount of water that boiled off when it was heated by an instrument on the Viking 1 lander. Four other instruments, 3 built to look for life, received samples of the Mars soil: one to look for photosynthesis, the second to look for signs of metabolism, the third to detect “breathing” or “sweating” characteristic of earth-type life forms. All 3 instruments appeared to detect what they were looking for, but the biologists explained the results as an exotic chemistry not connected with biology. Having quoted odds of a million to 1 against finding life on Mars, the biologists now said they could never state with 100% certainty that Viking had found life until they could return a Mars sample to earth, which some were afraid to do: Nobel prizewinner Dr. Joshua K. Leder-berg of Stanford University had told associates that Martian life forms brought to earth might threaten the 2 million species of life here by competing in unknown ways for food, water, or air needed to survive. (Thomas O’Toole, W Post, 3 Sept 76, A-2)
Radio links with the Viking landers on Mars were reestablished, ending a month of silent hibernation during which communications had been blocked by the passage of the sun between Mars and earth. Scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena sent a “wake-up call” to the robot laboratories on Mars that had been collecting a month’s supply of data during the blackout period; these data, to be played back beginning 20 Dec., would include images of the area around the two landers, inorganic chemical analysis, additional biology data, and any records to support the (thus far unsuccessful) search for marsquakes, using the seismometer on the Viking 2 lander. Resumption of activity would begin Viking’s 18-mo “extended mission,” which would provide more images of the Mars surface and polar regions, as well as measurements of water vapor and temperature, some at twice the resolution of previous observations; process more samples of the surface for life-detection tests and inorganic chemical analysis; photograph Deimos and Phobos, the moons of Mars; and monitor daily and seasonal weather changes, origins of planetwide dust storms, and any seismic activity that might occur. As Mars entered its closest approach to the sun in the spring of 1977, scientists would be watching for signs of the dust storms thought to be triggered by perihelion; when Mariner 9 arrived at Mars in 1971, the entire planet was engulfed in the greatest dust storms in the history of Mars observations and surveys from orbit were limited for several months. Such storms could endanger the Vikings on the surface of Mars, besides impeding the view from orbit. (W Post, 15 Dec 76, 2; NASA Release 76-208; W Star, 16 Dec 76, A-7; NYT, 21 Dec 76, 21)
Enticing hints but no firm answers” to the question of life on Mars were the product of an increasing volume of scientific data from the Viking 1 lander; “practically faultless operation” for more than 5 wk had produced enough information to keep the Viking scientists busy, especially the data from the 3 bioexperiments and a related molecular analysis of Martian soil. Results were “certainly not what would be expected” if earth-type organisms were present, but they were not explainable in terms of “simple” nonbiological chemistry, said Nature magazine. The labeled-release (LR) instrument added a small amount of water containing nutrients “labeled” with carbon 14 to its Mars sample, and incubated it at 15°C, warmer than the surface temperature of Mars. “Totally unexpected” was a massive and rapid release of radioactivity into the gas phase—presumably carbon monoxide or dioxide—and the radioactive count reached 4500 in 10 hr, leveling off at about 8500 in 48 hr. A second dose of radioactive nutrient produced an initial burst followed by a drop in radioactivity, and the graph “almost” flattened out for the remaining 4 days of the experiment; however, scientists were surprised to discover a possible trend to very slowly accelerating release of radioactivity. “Unfortunately,” said Nature, “the experiment (was) stopped for performance of a control test...” A repetition of this experiment later would extend incubation over wk or mo rather than days; “results certainly do not look like anything one would expect” from an earth sample in the same situation. Most popular explanation for the initial burst of activity was oxidation of the labeled nutrients. The gas-exchange (GE) experiment used gas chromatography to monitor a Mars sample wetted with a “soup” of nutrients to detect any changes in the instrument’s content of gas. First dampening of the sample produced “a remarkable burst of oxygen” that leveled off after several hr but remained stable for days. The experiment would continue “for some time,” to see if further changes occurred. Viking scientists were trying to duplicate results of the LR and GE experiments in earth laboratories using simple catalysts and oxidizing agents. The pyrolytic-release (PR) experiment, most technologically complex, proved “least equivocal when it comes to interpretation” of the results, Nature reported. A Mars sample incubated in a “Martian atmosphere,” with added water vapor and irradiation from a xenon lamp to simulate solar radiation, was heated to 625°C to drive off and account for unreacted carbon monoxide and dioxide and to pyrolyze any organic compounds trapped as vapor. The vapor trap, heated to 700°C, would release and oxidize any remaining organic compounds. A sterile sample should provide a peak ratio of about 500 to 1; the results from the Mars sample were about 75 to 1, “several times more active” than non-sterilized soil from the dry valleys of Antarctica. Results from the control experiment with heat-sterilized soil would be “crucial” because a high peak ratio would indicate that biological, rather than chemical, processes were going on in the soil that could fix atmospheric carbon monoxide or dioxide in the presence of light. If life were present on Mars, science would expect a high peak ratio from a surface sample strongly illuminated in atmosphere of about 90% carbon dioxide. Unfortunately, the initial run of the organic-chemistry analysis was spoiled by a failure of the surface-sampling arm to deliver a full load to the gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer. A further analysis would be performed on a full load obtained subsequently. Lack of detectable organic compounds in this sample would further complicate interpretation of the 3 biology experiments. (Av Wk, 30 Aug 76, 22; Nature, 26 Aug 76, 734)
The Tass news agency reported the soft landing of “the automatic interplanetary station” Viking 1 on the surface of Mars, adding that the first pictures of the surface showed “a foot-pad of the craft on . . . dust-covered terrain strewn with small sharp stones . . . According to the preliminary assessments, the ground consists of basalt rocks and volcanic lava. It is believed to be comparatively soft.” Tass noted the postponement of the Viking landing, originally scheduled for 4 July, and the search for bacterial life on Mars which was “one of the aims of this exploration.” (FBIS, Tass in English, 20 July 76)
Viking 2 apparently touched down at about 6:39 EDT in a field of windswept sand dunes on the Utopian plains of Mars at the edge of its northern polar cap, after a communications breakdown that left JPL scientists without contact during the last 3 hr of the spacecraft’s journey of more than 650 million km through space. The stabilization system on the orbiter, which served as a relay link between the lander and the deep space tracking network on earth, lost power 26 sec after separation of the lander at 3:40 pm EDT, and the high-power antenna on the orbiter no longer pointed at the earth. The blackout lasted nearly an hr, while mission personnel tried to reestablish communications. A low-power transmitter on the orbiter, installed to provide limited 2-way communications with earth, finally sent engineering data at 6:59 pm indicating that the lander had touched down. Lander signals were strong for 17 min until the orbiting relay link passed out of range. First pictures from the lander would be relayed about 3 am EDT on 4 Sept, as the first step in a “recovery plan” to put the experiments and systems back on schedule. All pictures and data taken by the lander were being stored on tape in the orbiter for later playback. Except for the orbiter malfunction, the pictures would have been available within 2 hr of the touchdown. The landing date of Viking 1, originally 4 July, had been postponed for 2 wk in order to ensure a safe site; the spot for Viking 2 was chosen because indications of frost or fog in the area made it likely to encourage the presence of life, scientists said. Results from Viking 1 suggested either that chemical processes never observed in earth laboratories occurred on Mars, or that life forms existed on Mars that were unknown on earth. Life search by Viking 2 would not begin for a wk; the 2 landing craft were about 7400 km apart on the surface of Mars, Viking 1 at Chryse near the equator (at a latitude comparable to that of Mexico City) and Viking 2 in a warmer area (at a latitude comparable to that of Montreal) more than 1600 km northeast of the Viking 1 site. (IVStar, 4 Sept 76, A— 1; B Sun, 4 Sept 76, A-l; ATT, 4 Sept 76, 1; WPost, 4 Sept 76, A-l)
As Viking 2’s lander was preparing for its scoop-and-analyze sequence on the rocky Utopia site of Mars, the Viking 1 orbiter fired its engines to shift orbit around the planet in 40° longitude jumps each day for 9 days before taking over the relay of communications from the Viking 2 lander. Viking 2's orbiter would then begin a polar-orbital scan of Mars to search for traces of organic materials—carbon-based molecules found in all life forms on earth—not yet detected by Viking 1 experiments. Viking 1 ’s lander would remain in standby mode after its weeks of testing at the Chryse site. Project scientist Dr. Gerald A. Soffen, commenting on the confusing results of the Viking 1 experiments (which hinted at the existence of life but offered no evidence of organic chemicals), said he had been prepared for the discovery of organic chemicals without life, but the suggestion of Martian life without organics was totally unexpected. Just after 6 a.m. EDT on 12 Sept., the 3-meter arm of Viking 2 dug its first sample of Mars soil and dropped it into the hopper leading to three biology instruments. First cycle of the pyrolytic-release experiment began when the soil reached the test chamber, to be incubated in a carbon monoxide-carbon dioxide atmosphere containing a radioactive tracer; after 5 days, the atmosphere would be flushed out and the soil sample heated to vaporize any organic material. A detector would measure the radioactive carbon that had been ingested by any organisms. The gas-exchange detector—looking for signs of photosynthesis in the dark— would reveal the presence of organisms that might exhale gases Such as oxygen or carbon dioxide through the night as well as in the daytime. (The first results of the same experiment on Viking 1 at Chryse had showed the soil was releasing six times as much gas as it would have in the absence of photosynthesis; a second trial had produced a signal a third as strong as the first, but still twice what it would have been if no photosynthesis were going on. Neither the readings nor their differences had been explained to everyone’s satisfaction.) The third biological instrument—the labeled-release experiment—would add a nutrient liquid to the test chamber on Tuesday and monitor over 10 days the release of radioactive tracer from any metabolized nutrient. A second soil sample would be used beginning Monday, 13 Sept., for an organic-chemistry analysis to detect carbon molecules, and for an x-ray fluorescence experiment to learn the composition of inorganic chemicals in the Mars soil. Scientists believed chances of finding definite traces of life would be better at Utopia, where five times more water had been measured in the air than at Chryse. They also planned to reduce chances of ambiguity in the Utopia readings by conducting the photosynthesis search at night, and by moving a rock to take a sample of Mars soil that was shielded from the killing solar ultraviolet constantly impinging on the planet’s surface and that was deeper than the sample taken at Chryse. (WStar, 12 Sept 76, A-14; W Post, 13 Sept 76, A-5; C Trib, 13 Sept 76, 6-16)
A lunar scientist in Johnson Space Center’s Division of Lunar and Planetary Sciences had suggested that low-viscosity lava rather than water could have caused the large channels seen on Mars, JSC announced. Ernest Schonfeld, in a paper to be presented at the annual meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union, said that the abundant large channels—one of the most puzzling landforms on Mars—were more easily explained by lava than by water; scientists had not been able to identify thick deposits of sediment that should have resulted from channel formation by water. Viking 1 had landed near the mouth of a large channel where thick sediments should have been deposited, but rocks at that site appeared to be volcanic. Schonfeld proposed that thin basaltic liquid melted below the Mars surface had flowed freely to erode the surface, and said that the coincidence of the age of volcanic activity on Mars and the erosion of the channels supported his idea. (JSC Release 76-72)
An all-systems simulation of landing Vikings 1 and 2 on the surface of Mars, to exercise the entire 750-person Viking flight team so that everyone knew exactly what to do when the time came later this year, began 20 Feb. and built up to a “Mars landing” 22 Feb., concluding today as a “fantastic success” according to James S. Martin, Jr., project manager at Viking Control in the Jet Propulsion Laboratory installation in the San Gabriel Mts. near Pasadena. The computer program had to be redesigned to facilitate uplink command to the spacecraft cameras, and more time had to be allowed for certain ground-control and data-processing procedures, but no major problems developed. In the room where a full-scale model of the Viking lander complete with operational cameras stood on a simulated Martian surface, prankish team members had put three tiny marine fossils from earth’s Paleozoic period on the sand within the camera field-of-view. When the camera came on to transmit after the simulated landing, the first picture was startling, but the fossils were immediately recognized, and the joke demonstrated that even tiny objects near the landing site would appear in the pictures transmitted from Mars. (NYT, 4 Mar 76, 32)
