NASA’s upcoming 5yr plan (1978-1982) had projected annual budgets for fiscal yrs 1980-1982 in excess of $4.7 billion, Aviation Week reported. The plan, an internal document used to guide the agency, would allow NASA as many as 7 major new mission starts in FY 1979, including a Mars rover and a Halley’s Comet rendezvous. (A v Wk, Mar 7/77, 47)	•
NASA planned to send a roving laboratory over the Martian surface during the next Mars landings, Nature reported. Dr. Gerald A. Soffen, chief Viking project scientist, said that, although no future Mars missions were officially scheduled, the outlook was favorable given the scientific success of, and public enthusiasm for, the two Viking landers. Speaking at a Paris conference to disseminate Viking information, Soffen invited U.S. and foreign scientists to participate in examining Viking data and in developing experiments for the next generation of Mars missions. (Nature, Mar 10/77, 112)
NASA announced that Pioneer 11 would fly just outside the rings of Saturn during its first encounter with the giant planet in 1979. The spacecraft would pass 30 000km (18 OOOmi) from the edge of the outermost ring and would swing in under the plane of the rings to a distance of 25 000km (15 OOOmi) from the planet’s surface. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, NASA associate administrator for space science, and A. Thomas Young, director of planetary programs, had made the decision to fly the Pioneer outside rather than inside the rings mainly because NASA wanted to use it as a pathfinder for the two Voyager spacecraft headed for Saturn encounter in 1980-81. The Pioneer would cross the ring plane at about the same distance as the trajectory that would use Saturn’s gravity to propel Voyager 2 toward Uranus. The uncertainties regarding a ring crossing even at 30 000km (18 OOOmi) from the outer edge of the rings called for NASA “to do everything we reasonably can to ensure Voyager’s success,” said Young. Should the Pioneer not survive the rings, NASA would have to revise its plan of sending Voyager 2 on to Uranus; however, a successful pass by Pioneer 11 would increase confidence in committing Voyager 2 to the Uranus option even if Voyager 1 had not achieved all its objectives at Saturn. An outside pass offered much better odds for success than an inner one, which would bring the spacecraft as close as 6000km (3700mi) to Saturn’s surface. The 1979 flyby by Pioneer 11 would be the first close encounter with Saturn; until the rings of Uranus were discovered, Saturn was considered the only ringed planet in earth’s solar system. The origin of the rings remained unknown, but their composition was defined by astronomers in 1970 as ordinary water ice, and radar readings in 1973 detected snowball-size chunks of solid material. (NASA Release 77-250)
Despite NASA’s failure to win FY 1979 funding for a new Mars mission, such a mission remained the major planning element in the agency’s planetary programs office, Aviation Week reported. A Mars rover/orbiter mission had strong support from the Natl. Academy of Sciences, to lay the groundwork for a sample-return mission using either Martian-orbit rendezvous or direct ascent from earth to Mars. At a KSC briefing, A. Thomas Young, NASA’s director of planetary programs, said the highest priority missions NASA might implement “in the near term” would include the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR), a lunar-polar orbiter, a Saturn orbiter probe, and a rendezvous with comet Halley or Encke, or both, or possibly with an asteroid. “As we go through the budgetary process, on one side I wish Mars would go away,” Young said. “But when you stop and think about rivers, volcanoes, enormous Mars icecaps, the chemistry potential for life, and the atmosphere, you realize that understanding Mars is so important toward understanding where earth has been and is going that you’ve got to treat it in a responsible manner.” He said NASA planning should benefit from the 2.4m-diameter space telescope, aimed primarily at bodies outside the solar system but sure to provide significant data on objects nearer earth. {AvWk, Nov 14/77, 55)
AvWk reported that James S. Martin, Jr., manager of the Viking project, would receive the Goddard award for “brilliant leadership of the Viking project to land an instrumented, automated spacecraft on the planet Mars.” (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 9)
Radio signals between the four Viking spacecraft on Mars and earth-based antennas had provided the most accurate confirmation so far of Einstein’s theory of relativity in an experiment conducted Nov. 25, 1976, when Mars moved behind the sun relative to the earth, causing a total blackout of communications with the Viking spacecraft. Radio signals transmitted to the Viking spacecraft from antennas at Goldstone, Calif., and Canberra, Australia, had produced “incredibly precise” measurement of the radio transmission. According to Adam I. Braufman of the Mass. Institute of Technology, the “uncertainty” over a space of some 322 million km was less than 2m, an accuracy of five parts in 10 million millionths. The Viking radio science team was trying to confirm Einstein’s prediction that the sun’s gravitational force would bend and delay radio signals (or any form of radiation) traveling close to a massive body such as the sun. Previous tests using the spacecraft communications systems tended to confirm the theory, but the Viking test proved much more accurate than the previous ones. (NYT, Jan 7/77, A-8; W Post, Jan 7/77, A-l)
NASA formally adjudged the Viking 75 mission, launched toward Mars on Aug. 20 and Sept. 9, 1975, successful, according to the post-landing mission operations report. All Viking instruments except the seismometer on the first lander (which failed to uncage itself) operated successfully and were continuing to send data to earth. The prelaunch mission objectives (advancing knowledge of Mars by orbital observation and by direct measurements in the atmosphere and on the planet’s surface) had been realized, the report said. (MOR S-815-75-01/02)
JPL reported it had assisted DFRC with an engine problem on a possible Mars reconnaissance plane, a small remotely powered vehicle (RPV) called the Mini Sniffer developed by DFRC’s Dale Reed for environmental research at 100 000ft above earth’s surface. The 13ft aircraft with a 22ft wingspan, powered by an airless 30hp engine running on hydrazine, was the first propeller-driven plane designed to operate above 50 000ft. JPL had taken a hand when asked by DFRC to help with an engine-catalyst problem; Dr. Jose Chirivella, who solved the problem, saw the possibilities of using the miniplane on Mars. Deployment of 16 mini RPVs, 8 from each of 2 carrier spacecraft, over Mars so that each could make 5 or more separate takeoffs and landings in different locations, could achieve a total of 80 possible missions. The carriers, orbiting about Mars, would serve as comsats to collect data from the mini RPVs for relay to earth. The Martian RPVs would be instrumented to collect seismographic, meteorological, and geochemical data; they would conduct aerial magnetic and gravity surveys, take high-resolution photos, look for subsurface water, and study the speed and direction of winds and the pressure and density of the atmosphere. They might also collect surface samples from widely separated areas, storing them at a central location for return to earth by later missions. The small craft could be folded into 3m-long canisters protected by coverings that would fall away when parachutes unfolded to support the vehicles as they opened out to flight configuration for descent and cruise through the lower Martian atmosphere, landing like helicopters under power from variable-thrust retrorockets. (JPL Universe, Dec 9/77, 1)
NASA announced resumption of communication with the four Viking-mission vehicles—two landers and two orbiters—at the end of the “conjunction” period during which contact was degraded and temporarily lost because of the changing position of Mars, behind the sun with relation to the earth since Nov. 1976. The Viking mission extended into the post-conjunction period would use the functioning spacecraft to obtain seasonal-variation data, do long duration sampling for statistically important experiments, and gather additional information not possible during the primary mission because of time or observational constraints. No known limitations would preclude completion of at least a year of extended mission and probably more, the announcement said, as the orbiters had made minimal use of their consumables during the early mission and had performed a minimal number of battery-recharge cycles. Lander B’s location at Mars 44°N would encounter temperatures below the qualification limits in the winter season, but the effect of this was unpredictable because lander tests had not gone beyond qualification limits. Extended-mission data collection had actually begun last Nov. when controllers had used the spacecraft transponders passively to measure ranging, tracking, signal-time delay, and solar-corona-induced perturbation. The extended mission would continue through May 1978, the announcement said, and data analysis would continue through Sept. 1977; requirements for data analysis beyond FY 1978 were under study. (MOR-S-815-75-01/02)
A short-circuit in the power supply of Viking l’s gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer (GSMS) had forced controllers at JPL to turn off the instrument Mar. 12, NASA reported. JPL received confirmation of the command from the Viking system Mar. 14. NASA had shut down the GCMS, which had analyzed the composition of Martian atmosphere and soil early in the mission, to avoid damage to other instruments such as the onboard computer and communications system. (NASA Release 77-51)
