The most extensive study ever made of Venus would begin in December when Pioneer Venus 1 and 2 arrived at the planet, NASA announced. Pioneer Venus 1 would swing into orbit around the planet Dec. 4, taking pictures and making measurements for one Venusian yr (225 earth days) or more. On Dec. 9 the four probes and transporter bus constituting Pioneer Venus 2 would plunge into the Venusian clouds at widely separated points to make detailed measurements of the dense atmosphere from top to bottom. These flights, the first devoted to studying the atmosphere and weather of another planet on a global scale, would use the largest number of vehicles so far for such a study, and would make measurements at the greatest number of locations. They also would seek information on characteristics of Venus’s upper atmosphere and ionosphere, as well as the lower atmosphere, and would study the interactions of these regions with the solar wind. At periapsis (orbital low point) the Pioneer orbiter would come as close as 150km (90mi) to the planet’s surface, dipping into the thin ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1978 ORIGINAL PAGE IS rJOVEMBER OF POOR QUALITX Venus upper atmosphere, sampling its composition, and making radar measurements of surface elevations and roughness. It would also take daily ultraviolet and infrared pictures of the thick clouds and atmosphere. The orbiter’s primary mission was designed to cover the time it took Venus to make one revolution on its axis; the slow rotation of the planet under the periapsis of the orbit would permit closeup radar mapping of the entire circumference. The four probes of Pioneer Venus 2 would enter the atmosphere at points 10 000km (6O00mi) apart over the planet’s earth-facing hemisphere: the large probe would enter Venus’s atmosphere near the equator on the day side; the day probe would enter Venus’s southern hemisphere Artist’s conception of Pioneer Venus arbiter and multiprobe investigating the cloud-covered planet on their arrival in late 1978. The orbiter (left) v/ould circle Venus for 8mo, relaying images of the clouds and measurements of the atmosphere, while making radar maps of the surface. The probe (right) would split into five entry craft, four to sample the atmosphere down to the surface at widely separated points; the transport bus would continue to sample the upper atmosphere until it burned up from friction. (NASA photo 78-H-20&) on the planet’s day side; the night probe, the night southern hemisphere on the night side; and the north probe, the north polar vortex on the night side. The transporter bus would enter in the southern hemisphere on the day side. Critical operations on arrival near the planet would be to inject Pioneer Venus 1 into orbit while it was out of radio contact behind Venus, and the entry and descent through the atmosphere of the four probes and bus. On Dec. 2, controllers at ARC would orient the orbiter for orbit insertion, and the next day would load command-memory sequences. On Dec. 9, the probes would be in position to make their hr-long descent through Venus’s atmosphere. Major operations problem would be retrieving probe data; during the critical lhr 38min of probe and bus operations at Venus, all the Pioneer spacecrafts would be transmitting simultaneously. Radio frequencies of the probe signals would shift rapidly because of huge entry decelerations — from 42 OOOkm/hr (26 OOOmph) to about 65km/hr (40mph)—and signal distortions caused by Venus’s dense atmosphere. One consequence would be that, after the 10- to 15-sec communications blackout during entry, signals would reappear again at new frequencies. To ensure recovery of the data, NASA had installed special equipment in DSN stations at Goldstone, Calif., and Canberra, Australia. To avoid loss of data, both DSN stations would use newly developed receivers and recorders with a frequency band wide enough to ensure receipt of the four shifting signals. The real-time system would use automatic tuners, but would lose some data. Scientists believed that the coordinated Pioneer Venus atmospheric data, combined with similar data from Mars, Jupiter, and other planets, would aid understanding of atmospheres in general. Studies of the interactions of temperatures, pressures, composition, clouds, and atmospheric dynamics different from those of earth should define mechanisms on another planet that would improve scientists’ understanding of earth’s complex weather processes. (NASA Release 78-181)
A new gallery, “Exploring the Planets,” opened Nov. 7 at the National Air and Space Museum, the Washington Star reported. Melvin Zisfein, acting museum director, said the gallery was “jammed full of information and contains more facts and figures and concepts than any other gallery in the museum. Yet the information is easy to digest. We tried hard to make sure you didn’t need a degree in astronomy to understand it.” Keeping up with new information on the solar system (the gallery would be updated continuously) was one of the challenges. The gallery, designed by Lucius Lomas, had succeeded in teaching without neglecting imaginative features visitors had come to expect at the museum. Visitors could make a “Descent to Venus” in a simulated cockpit of an interplanetary spaceship circa 2150. A “Flight over Mars” from an altitude of 100 000 to 200 000ft (actually relief maps of the Martian landscape sculpted on to rotating cylinders and viewed through special windows) was based on photos taken from Mariner 9 and Vikings 1 and 2. A full-scale replica of the Voyager spacecraft was the largest single object in the gallery. The relative sizes of Jupiter and 21 other planetary bodies was conveyed in a corner by brightly colored spheres made to scale: Jupiter was 10ft in diameter; Ceres, the largest asteroid, linch; the earth, 1ft. Six computer terminals offered “Space Academy exams” where visitors could test their knowledge of the solar system. (W Star, Nov 7/78, F 3)
AvWk reported NASA’s announcement that it would send Pioneer 11 to fly just outside the rings of Saturn as a pathfinder for two Voyager spacecraft scheduled to reach Saturn in 1980 and 1981. Passing 15 OOOmi rather than 3700mi from Saturn’s surface, the new course would place Pioneer 11 at about the same distance from Saturn as the trajectory of Voyager 2, if NASA should decide to use Saturn’s gravity to hurl Voyager 2 toward Uranus. The outside trajectory would permit NASA to achieve the maximum science return for all three spacecraft. Pioneer 11 should reach Saturn in Sept. 1978. {AvWk, Jan 2/78, 15; Lewis News, Jan 6/78, 2)
NASA announced that scientists working for NASA and NSF had discovered living organisms inside rocks on the frozen deserts of the Antarctic. The discovery, made in a region called the Dry Valleys whose harsh climate resembled conditions on Mars, would significantly extend the known limits of life on earth, and would have important implications in a search for extraterrestrial life. Dr. E. Imre Friedmann and Dr. Roseli Ocampo-Friedmann, a husband-wife team who had searched for more than 15yr for microbial life in rocks, had made the discovery. They had isolated the newly discovered microorganisms (bacteria, algae, and fungi) and were growing them in laboratory cultures for clues to their endurance. Although the Dry Valleys of Antarctica had appeared lifeless, and the region’s freedom from snow and ice, combined with constantly blowing winds, had produced an environment among the world’s harshest, the Friedmanns had found in the Dry Valleys a widespread rich microbial vegetation under the surface of rocks, in the airspaces of porous rocks, or in fissures. Rocks broken open had revealed the presence of organisms as a dark-green layer a few millimeters deep. Dr. Richard Young, NASA’s chief of planetary biology, said the Dry Valleys in many ways resembled the environmental extremes found on Mars by the 1976 Viking landers, which searched the Martian soil unsuccessfully for signs of microbial life or organic molecules. “If Martian life forms exist only in the interior of Martian rocks, as is principally the case in the Antarctic, that could easily serve as an explanation for the lack of evidence on Mars,” Young said. “This interesting (if speculative) analogy is of considerable interest to NASA in designing future attempts to study planetary surfaces for evidence of life.” NASA and NSF research grants had supported the Friedmanns’ work. (NASA Release 78-14)
NASA announced that Voyager 1 on its way to Jupiter and Saturn had completed transit of the asteroid belt, leaving the region Sept. 8. The belt, a band of rock and dust 360 million km (233 million mi) wide between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter with its inner edge about 105 million km (65 million mi) from earth’s orbit, was formerly believed an impassable hazard to spacecraft bound for outer planets and beyond. Voyager 1, launched after Voyager 2, had entered the asteroid belt Dec. 10 a few hours behind Voyager 2 on a master trajectory that would carry it steadily beyond Voyager2, which it would overtake Dec. 15. Voyager 1 would make its closest approach to Jupiter Mar. 5, 1979, at 286 000km (178 OOOmi); Voyager 2 would pass 643 000km (399 OOOmi) from Jupiter in July 1979. Both spacecraft would continue on to Saturn where Voyager 1 would arrive in Nov. 1980, Voyager 2 in Aug. 1981. (NASA Release 78-137)
NASA announced that JPL engineers had commanded the shutdown of the Viking 2 orbiter on July 25, when it ran out of attitude-control gas after circling Mars 706 times over the past 2 yr. Several mo previously, orbiter 2 had sprung a leak in one of its attitude-control jets; engineers had slowed the leak but could not stop it completely. Viking 2, launched Sept. 9, 1975, had traveled more than 643 735 000km (400 million mi) to reach Mars orbit Aug. 7, 1976. The Viking 2 lander, riding piggyback on the orbiter, had landed Sept. 3, 1976, in the Utopia Planitia region of Mars’s northern hemisphere. Plans called for the Viking 1 orbiter and both Viking landers, functioning well almost 3yr after launch, to operate through Feb. 1979. The Viking project would continue through Sept. 1979 to allow scientists and engineers to process a backlog of data from the spacecraft and experiments. NASA had designed the orbiters to operate for 150da after planetary encounter and to orbit for at least 50yr, in hopes of avoiding planetary contamination before they disintegrated. (NASA Release 78-115)
