Finland and Sweden would together build measuring equipment for two Mars space probes for launch in three years by the USSR, FBIS, Helsinki Domestic Service in Finnish reported. The work was significant, the service quoted Risto Pellinen of the Finnish Meteorological Institute as saying, because it was the first time Finns would build equipment to be launched into space. Altogether 11 countries and the European Space Agency would participate in the program. The Mars probes would study solar winds, the planet itself, its near surroundings, and its two moons (Phobos and Delmos). Finland with Sweden would build equipment to measure the nature and characteristics of space particles. Participants and funding sources for the Finnish program were the Center for the Development of Technology, the Academy of Finland, the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the Scientific-Technical Cooperation Committee of the Foreign Ministry, and the Meteorological Institute. (FBIS, Helsinki Domestic Service in Finnish, May 29/85)
Dr. John Billingham, chief of the Extraterrestrial Research Division at Ames Research Center (ARC) and founder of the ARC-based Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI), said at a Lewis Research Center (LeRC) ALERT colloquium that study of the earth's part in the 15-billion-year cosmic evolution held the key to searching for life beyond the solar system, the Lewis News reported. "By studying how our own planet formed and how basic elements required for life evolved, we can theorize that a similar life-structuring process may be occurring or had occurred elsewhere in the universe," Billingham said. As an example, he mentioned the collection of microorganisms scientists observed in 3.5-billion-year-old rock formations discovered in the marine environment of Western Australia. Scientists could use that data to study rock-like formations on other planets that might display a similar evolutionary process. Billingham believed that it was reasonable to assume that life, including intelligent life, existed in the universe because, with 400 million stars in earth's galaxy alone, the natural cosmic process included formation of planets—a rule, not an exception—and the basic stuff of life existed throughout the universe. Because the Viking program had failed to turn up signs of life on Mars, SETI would focus its sights on life beyond the solar system, Billingham said. To accomplish this would require either a manned interstellar vehicle or radio telescopes. The former option would require, to reach the nearest star, a four-stage spacecraft weighing 34,000 tons, traveling 3/10 the speed of light and using electrical power equal to 500,000 years of earth usage driven by antimatter—hardly a feasible option, he noted. However, researchers could design and build radio telescopes to listen to life from other cosmic sources, he said. Such a system would make use of the microwave window frequency range, a quiet region of the spectrum that provided the best chance of picking up extraterrestrial signals. To accomplish this, SETI's information system would need to develop the technology using the largest radio telescopes to amplify the signal (1 to 3 GHz) and to build a signal processing system driven by a specially designed SETI computer. Billingham said the biggest challenge facing the SETI program would be identifying the format, frequency resolution, and time of the signals in order to recognize and eliminate as much interference as possible, thus separating noise from sound manifestations. To determine signals of non-natural origin, SETI would apply a sequence of logical tests coupled with a huge computer-based storehouse of information that would filter out most of the interference signals. "A radio telescope placed in low earth orbit will help eliminate some of the interference problems," Billingham said, "and the prospect of a much larger lunar orbiting radio telescope would offer an even more advantageous interference-reducing listening position that would cover a radius of 1,000 light years." SETI was then preparing its first system radio telescope prototype for testing at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, where a 1,000-ft. radio telescope conducted signal searches. Once fully operational and in orbit, the new telescope would receive signals originating 30 to 40 light years away. "Either we are alone or not," Billingham concluded, "and either has large implications. And we wonder, indeed if there is intelligent life elsewhere, will it help us understand our own." (Lewis News, March 22/85, 2) SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
