NASA Administration Daniel Goldin said President Bush's goal of a manned flight to Mars by 2019 was unrealistic because it would take longer to develop the spaceship and fly the robotic missions that must precede humans. (USA Today, Apr 3/92)
Scientists prepared to decide whether Dante, a walking robot, would make a descent next month into an active Antarctic volcano. The project had two goals: testing the prototype robot for possible Mars missions, and getting a rare look at the minerals and gases ejected by the 12,000-foot icebound volcano. Scientists also wanted to learn about the permanent lava lake that bubbles and boils on the crater's floor. NASA, along with the National Science Foundation, was funding the $2 million project. (The Sun, Nov 29/92; W Post, Nov 29/92; P Inq, Nov 18/92)
Arthur C. Clark, the legendary science-fiction writer, whose accomplishments include numerous literary awards, academic honors, and more than 70 written works, including "2001: A Space Odyssey," declared that his latest personal odyssey was contemplating the feastability of "colonizing" and "farming" on Mars. "Mars is the next frontier, what the Wild West was, what America was 500 years ago...Mars is where the action is going to be in the next thousand years," declared Clark. (LA Times, Jan 24/92)
NASA sent its remote-controlled robot named "Dante" to Antarctica, where it was scheduled to explore the active volcano Erebus. The $2 million mission was intended to use Antarctica to test possible Mars-bound technology because the harsh climate is as close to that of Mars as occurs naturally on Earth. Upcoming U.S. missions to Mars were expected to land small robots programmed to look around, take samples, and perhaps begin mapping the planet, all tasks "Dante" would test in Antarctica.  (WSJ, Dec 8/92; NY Times, Dec 8/92)
David A. Paige of the University of California at Los Angeles reexamined the thermodynamics of ice under Martian conditions and concluded that there could be some ground-ice deposits just a few feet below the surface and that "these deposits could be valuable resource for human exploration." (W Post, Mar 9/92)
The launch date of Mars Observer was rescheduled from September 16 to 25 in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew. Although the hurricane passed well south of Cape Canaveral, the craft was nonetheless removed from the launch pad for protection. It required cleaning before it could be repositioned for launch, necessitating launch postponement. (NASA Release Launch Advisory, Sept 2/92; W Post, Sept 4/92; AP Sept 3/92)
