NASA said that the Mars Observer spacecraft fired four of its 24 thrusters as a means of adjusting its course so it could begin orbiting Mars on August 24. This was the third correction maneuver since the spacecraft was launched September 25 from Cape Canaveral, Florida. (APn, Mar 18/93)
Several articles in the media discussed the planet Mars. An article in the Christian Science Monitor discussed Mars exploration, noting that the arrival of the Mars Observer spacecraft on Mars was just the beginning of a new saga of planetary exploration.
NASA announced that the Mars Observer spacecraft had returned to normal operations after its main antenna failed to point at Earth for the third time in about four months. Engineers were fairly certain that the glitch had been caused by a computer-programming problem. (AP, May 3/93; W Times, May 4/93)
According to an article in the Washington Times, scientists from NASA and the National Science Foundation were using the Antarctica as a model for Mars in the Antarctic Space Analog Program. The program used the harsh Antarctica terrain to test technology and techniques that might work on Mars. Sophisticated robots, already being used in Antarctica, would pave the way for human exploration of Mars. A spaceflight may carry a small robot to Mars as early as 1997. (W Times, Apr 4/93)
Mars Observer was scheduled to zoom into orbit around Mars next week, as the United States returned to Martian skies for the first time in 17 years. Mars Observer, which was launched from Florida on September 25, was scheduled to reach Mars on August 24. After maneuvering a near-polar orbit, it was scheduled to turn on its instruments and make one complete photographic map of the planet during a month-long test. It was scheduled to formally start its exploration on December 16. (P Inq, Aug 19/93)
NASA's Mars Observer spacecraft returned its first image of Mars taken last week when the spacecraft was 3.6 million miles from the red planet.  Mars Observer was to orbit Mars on August 24, and global mapping operations were scheduled to begin December 16. (NASA Note to Editors N93-43)
A NASA spokesman announced that the Mars observer spacecraft had spent eight days pointing the wrong direction but engineers thought that they now had the problem under control. It was the Observer's fourth such malfunction. Mars Observer was scheduled to go into elliptical orbit around Mars on August 24. (AP, May 18/93)
UPI reported that a solar-powered drill used to bore into icecaps on Earth could be used on a mission to Mars to collect ice samples from Mar's north pole. The drill would sample a core about three feet deep. The drill was scheduled to be used this summer to sample two ice caps in the Peruvian Andes. (UPI, June 6/93)
NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) were cooperating on an experiment that involved three spaceships "listening" for passing gravitational waves. The spacecraft, now travelling to separate destinations in the solar system, were  NASA's Mars Observer, Galileo, and the ERS's Ulysses spacecraft.
