Eric Glomboske, an 11th grader at Highland High School, was one of 10 regional winners in the NASA-sponsored Space Science Student Involvement Program. To compete, Eric designed, planned, and mapped out a human journey to Mars. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 25/94)
A flight plan change seven months before the Mars Observer launch may have caused the craft's failure. Its propellant tanks were pressurized not five days after launch but eleven months into the flight as it reached Mars, thereby apparently causing a catastrophic rupture in a fuel line that spun the craft out of control. Pressuration, needed to fire the braking rockets to put the craft into orbit around Mars, involves opening previously closed valves and releasing high-pressure helium to squeeze the hydrazine fuel and nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer from separate tanks to mix and ignite. Minute amounts of condensed oxidizer possibly reached the hydrazine fuel, ignited, and ruptured the pipes, which released propellant into space and caused the uncontrolled spin. Peter G. Wilhelm, Director of the Naval Center for Space Technology, a panel member who focused on the propulsion system, said that the team debated the change extensively, and JPL project manager Glenn E. Cunningham stated that the team considered and rejected an option to change valves as too costly and slow, and a procedure that might have meant missing the 1992 launch window, thus requiring a two-year launch delay. (W Post, Jan 10/94)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced it would not claim a $21.3 million on-orbit performance fee and would return $17 million already received because of the failure of the Mars Observer craft. The total cost of the craft and its instrument cargo was $1 billion. Referring to the presumed explosion caused by a change in the flight plan with an eleven-month delay in pressurizing a system, discussed in the four-volume report but omitted in news media interviews, Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory and leader of the panel investigating the failure, said that "had J.P.L. been more closely involved with Martin Marietta in the development of the spacecraft, it is conceivable this issue would have been identified earlier." (NY Times, Jan 11/94; W Post, Jan 11/94)
NASA announced the selection of an ancient flood plain on Mars as the landing site for the 1997 mission of Mars Pathfinder, one of the first in a new generation of small, low-cost aircraft. The Pathfinder was scheduled to arrive at Mars on July 4, 1997. (NASA Release 94-149)
