After exceeding even the most optimistic predictions made during its primary mission, the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft concluded its initial research maneuvers and began extended operations. The initial mission had returned to Earth 1.2 gigabits of data and more than 9,000 images of the Martian landscape. Project Manager of the Mars Pathfinder Mission Brian Muirhead said that the mission had not only had gathered an impressive amount of data, but also validated NASA’s new approach to exploring space. “This mission demonstrated a reliable and low-cost system for placing science payloads on the surface of Mars,” he stated. “We’ve validated NASA’s commitment to low-cost planetary exploration.” After completing the planned 30-day mission and traveling 171 feet (52 meters) across Mars’s landscape, the rover Sojourner remained in excellent condition. Operators gave Sojourner a two-day rest period to recharge its battery, before it began an extended exploration of the planet.(NASA, “Mars Pathfinder Results Generating New Picture of Mars as Mission Moves into Extended Operation,” news release 97-174, 8 August 1997; Los Angeles Times, “Mars Mission ‘100 Percent Success’, NASA Says,” Los Angeles Times, 9 August 1997.)
Two Yemeni men filed a lawsuit against NASA, claiming that NASA had committed trespassing violations when it landed Pathfinder on Mars. The men claimed that their ancient ancestors had deeded the planet to them as an inheritance, requesting that Yemen’s prosecutor-general bring U.S. Ambassador David G. Newton to court to stop the violation. Although no legal restitution was expected, the lawsuit highlighted the excitement surrounding NASA’s Mars mission and the widespread interest in the Red Planet’s exploration.(Reuters, “Get Off Our Planet, Yemeni Men Tell U.S.,” 25 July 1997.)
Mars Global Surveyor fired its engine enabling Mars’s gravitational pull to capture it. Researchers from NASA’s JPL declared that the spacecraft had behaved exactly as planned during the crucial entry to Mars’s gravitational field. Experts predicted that the mission would produce 700 million bits of data, more than the amount acquired in all previous Mars missions combined. The mapping mission continued a new era of Mars exploration for NASA, involving dozens of probes surveying the planet’s surface and atmosphere.(Kathy Sawyer, “New Visitor from Earth Poised for Mars Orbit,” Washington Post, 11 September 1997; Associated Press, “Everything ‘Perfect’ as Surveyor Craft in Countdown to Mars Orbit,” 11 September 1997; Associated Press, “Mars Global Surveyor,” 12 September 1997.)
NASA successfully landed the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft on Mars, exactly seven months after its launch from Earth. Project managers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) called the landing “near perfect,” celebrating the beginning of the “second era in the exploration of Mars.” The Mars Pathfinder Mission was the first to attempt a planetary landing on initial orbit, and Pathfinder’s safe landing followed a journey in which the spacecraft traveled at speeds of up to 16,600 miles (26,800 kilometers) per hour. Although NASA made its first successful flyby of Mars in 1965, in recent years it had taken a new approach to exploring the Red Planet. NASA achieved the development and deployment of Mars Pathfinder for US$266 million, a bargain compared to the US$1 billion cost of the failed Mars Observer. Because of its tightening budget, NASA had adopted a course of planning several simple, but targeted excursions, using low-cost spacecraft, rather than mounting a few complex and expensive missions. Pathfinder landed almost exactly at the point aimed for and immediately transmitted signals back to Earth announcing its safe landing. Officials at JPL noticed a slight complication, when early images revealed that some of the airbags used to cushion the craft’s landing had bunched up around the door that Sojourner⎯the rover set to explore the planet⎯would use to exit Pathfinder. NASA’s engineers clarified, however, that the temporary problem would not compromise the rover’s planned exploration.(John Noble Wilford, “Landing Called Near Perfect by NASA,” New York Times, 5 July 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Spacecraft Lands Today on the Planet of Dreams,” New York Times, 4 July 1997; Tony Knight, “Pathfinder Zeroes in on Red Planet,” Los Angeles Daily News, 4 July 1997; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 3.)
As Mars Pathfinder and its surveyor Sojourner triumphantly explored the surface of Mars, NASA named as Software of the Year the Dynamics Algorithms for Real-Time Simulation (DARTS) software⎯a program used on the Pathfinder mission. Abhinandan Jain, Guillermo Rodriguez, and Guy K. Man of JPL had created the software to provide real-time simulations to test other software and hardware. DARTS allowed NASA mission managers to test procedures in a cost-effective manner.(NASA, “Software Used on Mars Pathfinder Wins NASA’s Software of the Year Award,” news release 97-154, 16 July 1997.)
NASA’s AeroVironment Pathfinder, a remote-controlled, ultra-lightweight aircraft, set a new world record for highest altitude for a solar-powered aircraft. AeroVironment Pathfinder reached an altitude of 67,350 feet (20,500 meters), shattering the previous record of 50,500 feet (15,400 meters). The experiment took place at the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility in Kauai, Hawaii. Engineers had designed Pathfinder to fly at extremely high altitudes, to supply researchers with atmospheric and environmental data that other planes could not gather. In traveling to such heights, Pathfinder experienced temperatures as low as -100°F (-73°C). After climbing for about 6 hours, the aircraft ascended into record-breaking territory, flying for more than 90 minutes at an altitude above 60,000 feet (18,300 meters). A partnership formed under the Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology Alliance, involving NASA, aerospace companies, and members of the scientific community, was responsible for developing AeroVironment Pathfinder.(Michael A. Dornheim, “Pathfinder Surpasses Propeller Altitude Record,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 146, no. 25 (16 June 1997): 53; NASA, “Pathfinder Sets New World Record,” news release 97-132, 12 June 1997. 267 NASA, “Hubble Is First To Spot Colliding Supernovas,” news release 97-129, 10 June 1997.)
After more than nine days without sending a signal, Mars Pathfinder’s main transmitter resiliently delivered a message to Earth. To anxious project managers, the message was a welcome relief. The breakdown in the spacecraft’s communication to NASA controllers had necessitated NASA’s activating a contingency plan for Sojourner. The rover had stopped gathering data and reverted to slowly circling its parent spacecraft, waiting to receive directions, a pattern that some scientists feared would be the long-term fate of the rover. The spacecraft’s aging batteries had caused the breakdown in communication of data. However, in spite of the malfunction, NASA officials reiterated that the mission had fulfilled its objectives, emphasizing that solving the problem of communicating with the craft while it was resting on the Red Planet would benefit future explorations of Mars.(Associated Press, “Lacking Signal, Mars Vehicle Is Left To Be Roving in Circles,” 7 October 1997; Associated Press, “Pathfinder Checks in After Weeks of Silence,” 8 October 1997.)
