A six-member team of Brown University scientists used data from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor to examine six categories of evidence supporting the hypothesis that oceans once existed on Mars. The team, led by planetary geologist James W. Head III, published their findings in the journal Science. Primarily using altimetry data and images captured by Surveyor, the researchers had found that the border between two geologically dissimilar areas was nearly level in elevation, suggesting an ancient coastline. Furthermore, they found that the topography below the possible coastline was consistent with the effects of sedimentation and the volume of the hypothetical sea was within range of previous estimates of Martian water. A series of terraces running parallel to the supposed shoreline gave credence to the idea of receding water; low areas contained the appearance of possible mud cracks; and scars from impact craters suggested groundwater or ice near the surface.(James W. Head III et al., “Possible Ancient Oceans on Mars: Evidence from Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter Data,” Science 286, no. 5447 (10 December 1999): 2134–2137; William J. Broad, “Tantalizing Signs of Ancient Martian Ocean,” New York Times, 10 December 1999.)
The Mars Climate Orbiter Mission Failure Investigation Board released its first report, identifying eight contributing factors that had led to the 23 September loss of Orbiter as it entered its Martian orbit. Arthur Stephenson, chairperson of the board investigating the failure, agreed with NASA on the causes of the mission’s failure. The board reported that “the failed translation of English units into metric units in a segment of ground-based, navigation-related mission software” was the primary cause of the loss, but that other significant factors had set the stage for the mission’s failure. Moreover, the team had failed to identify and correct multiple mistakes, leading to “a major error in our understanding of the spacecraft’s path as it approached Mars.” The failure board faulted the Mars Climate Orbiter team with “inadequate consideration of the entire mission and its postlaunch operation as a total system, inconsistent communications and training within the project, and lack of complete end-to-end verification of navigation software.” Although engineers working with Lockheed Martin Astronautics’ mission operations team had failed to convert English units into metric for entering data into ground-based navigation software, the investigating board focused most of its attention on the navigation team at NASA’s JPL, which had overall management authority for the mission. The board remarked that, because it had navigated interplanetary spacecraft successfully for 30 years, JPL had developed a “widespread perception that ‘Orbiting Mars is routine’,” leading it to pay inadequate attention to the risk of faulty navigation.(NASA, “Mars Climate Orbiter Failure Board Releases Report, Numerous NASA Actions Underway in Response,” news release 99-134, 10 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-134.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Earl Lane, “Report Details NASA Failings: Assigns Blame for Orbiter’s Loss,” Newsday (Long Island, NY), 11 November 1999.)
NASA released its first three-dimensional global map of Mars. The Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA), an instrument aboard NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor, had generated the data for the high-resolution map, created from measurements gathered in 1998 and 1999. David E. Smith of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, Principal Investigator for MOLA and the lead author of a study published in the journal Science, said that, according to the new topographic map, Mars is slightly lopsided⎯the northern hemisphere is low and smooth, but the southern hemisphere had many craters and an elevation of about 5 kilometers (3.1 miles) higher than that in the north. Additionally, Smith noted that the depression in Mars’s northern hemisphere is “distinctly not circular,” indicating that it formed from internal geologic processes rather than an external impact. Carl B. Pilcher, NASA’s Science Director for Solar System Exploration, commented that the data MOLA had collected enabled scientists to know “the topography of Mars better than many continental regions on Earth.” Pilcher said that the data would “serve as a basic reference book for Mars scientists for many years,” inspiring “new insights about the planet’s geologic history.”(NASA, “First Global 3-D View of Mars Reveals Deep Basin and Pathways for Water Flow,” news release 99-66, 27 May 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-066.txt (accessed 7 February 2008); David E. Smith et al., “The Global Topography of Mars and Implications for Surface Evolution,” Science 284, no. 5419 (28 May 1999): 1495–1503.)
The ESA signed a 60 million Euro contract with Matra Marconi Space, to design and build the Mars Express spacecraft, with a planned launch date of June 2003. The agency chose that target date because the planets would be in optimal alignment, allowing for minimum travel time to Mars with maximum payload capacity. Major space missions can require upwards of 11 years from concept to launch, and only six years remained before the 2003 date, so the ESA selected a contractor with the means to develop missions quickly and inexpensively. Matra Marconi demonstrated that it would be able to streamline the development of Mars Express, building and launching the mission for about half the budget required for similar efforts.
NASA announced that the magnetometer on board Mars Global Surveyor had revealed “banded patterns of magnetic fields on the Martian surface,” bearing a “striking similarity to patterns seen in the crust of the Earth’s sea floors.” Scientists interpreted the patterns as evidence that the Martian crust had shifted in the past. The discovery of banded patterns on the floor of Earth’s oceans had provided a record of Earth’s magnetic history, validating the theory of plate tectonics. Jack Connerney of NASA’s GSFC, a member of Global Surveyor’s magnetometer team, explained, “if the bands on Mars are an imprint of crustal spreading, they are a relic of an early era of plate tectonics on Mars.” He added that such tectonic activity on Mars is likely extinct, unlike on Earth. The spacecraft’s magnetometer had been able to capture the magnetic field observations because of the extended aerobraking phase, devised to protect against further damage to one of the spacecraft’s solar panels. The period of aerobraking had permitted the magnetometer to “obtain better-than-planned regional measurements of Mars.” Each time it reached the lowest point of its elliptically shaped orbit, below the planet’s ionosphere, the probe encountered minimal magnetic interference and enabling it to obtain additional data.(NASA, “Magnetic Stripes Preserve Record of Ancient Mars,” news release 99-56, 29 April 1999.)
Scientists studying images obtained by NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor published two reports in the journal Nature about Martian volcanic activity. One study reported that the images contained evidence that “ten times more lava” than previously thought had erupted onto Mars’s surface. The other study suggested that at least one of Mars’s volcanoes was still active.(William Hartmann et al., “Evidence for Recent Volcanism on Mars from Crater Counts,” Nature 397, no. 6720 (18 February 1999): 586; Alfred S. McEwen et al., “Voluminous Volcanism on Early Mars Revealed in Valles Marineris,” Nature 397, no. 6720 (18 February 1999): 584; Rick Callahan, “Mars Was Truly Red Planet⎯as in Red- Hot Molten Lava⎯Scientists Say One Volcano Would Have Coated U.S. 4 Miles Deep,” Seattle Times (WA), 17 February 1999.)
Engineers discovered that exposure to 11 months of cold temperatures in outer space could cause the descent engine on Mars Polar Lander to malfunction. NASA had scheduled Mars Polar Lander to land on Mars on 3 December. Lander’s companion craft, Mars Climate Orbiter had burned up as it entered its Martian orbit on 23 September. The investigative panel studying the cause of Orbiter’s loss had uncovered the potential problem with Lander’s engines. Because of the discovery, scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) altered their plans, deciding to turn on the craft’s descent engine heaters earlier than originally scheduled, to warm the engines to 46.4°F (8°C) before Lander’s descent.(Larry Wheeler, “NASA Finds Flaw in Mars Lander Engine Turning On Descent Heaters Earlier Should Prevent Failure of Mission,” Florida Today, 9 November 1999; Mark Carreau, “Mars Probe To Get Brake Check: NASA Engineers To Warm Descent Rockets of Polar Lander,” Houston Chronicle, 9 November 1999.)
JPL appointed Glenn E. Cunningham, Manager of NASA’s Mars Surveyor Operations Project, as the new Deputy Director of JPL’s Mars Exploration Directorate. In the newly created position, JPL tasked Cunningham with overseeing the implementation and operations of all Mars missions through 2013. As Cunningham’s successor, JPL appointed Richard A. Cook, former Flight Operations Manager for the 1997 Mars Pathfinder Lander and Rover Mission, to manage the Mars Surveyor Operations Project.
NASA announced that scientists studying high-resolution images from Mars Global Surveyor had detected no evidence that ocean shorelines once existed on Mars. Previously, researchers had interpreted features in images from NASA’s Viking missions of the 1970s as remnants of ancient coastlines. However, Surveyor images taken in 1998, with a resolution 5 to 10 times sharper than images that Viking had produced had not provided evidence that water in a coastal environment had formed those features. Michael C. Malin of Malin Space Science Systems, Principal Investigator for the Mars Orbiter Camera aboard Surveyor, remarked that although scientists could not rule out the presence of oceans on Mars at one time, the evidence in the new images appeared to undermine the “foundation for the ‘ocean hypothesis’ developed in the 1980s on the basis of suspected shorelines.” Nevertheless, Malin acknowledged “significant other evidence of water on Mars in the past,” suggesting that as the Mars Orbiter Camera continued to acquire new high-resolution images, scientists might have new clues to the role of water in the evolution of Mars.(NASA, “New Mars Images: No Evidence of Ancient Ocean Shorelines,” news release 99-114, 1 October 1999.)
NASA announced the winner of an essay contest to name the Deep Space 2 microprobes, which the Mars Polar Lander spacecraft was carrying to Mars. NASA had scheduled the two probes to crash into Mars’s south pole on 3 December. Paul Withers, a graduate student at the University of Arizona in Tucson, studying the thin upper atmosphere of Mars, had suggested naming the pair Amundsen and Scott, in honor of Roald Amundsen and Robert F. Scott, the first explorers to reach Earth’s South Pole. In his winning essay, Withers recalled that one century ago, Antarctica was Earth’s only unexplored continent. Withers wrote, “Scott perished in Antarctica. His memorial’s inscription reads: ‘To strive, to seek, to find, not to yield.’ These are the aims of the Deep Space 2.” NASA had designed the two probes with a dual purpose: to test advanced technology for future planetary-surface microlanders and to search for water ice 3 feet (0.9 meters) below the Martian surface. Deep Space 2 Project Manager Sarah A. Gavit remarked that the names of the Antarctic explorers were appropriate for the probes, because “like Amundsen and Scott, Deep Space 2 will have to survive great odds, including not only braving the elements but also crashing into the terrain with unbelievable force.”(NASA, “Mars Penetrator Probes Named for Pioneering Polar Explorers,” news release 99-135, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-135.txt (accessed 12 March 2008).)
