NASA announced that it planned to implement a new Mars Exploration Program over the following two decades. NASA planned six major missions during the next 10 years, launching the Mars Odyssey orbiter mission in 2001, twin Mars Exploration Rovers in 2003, and Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter⎯a powerful scientific orbiter⎯in 2005. Additional plans included the development and launch, possibly as early as 2007, of a “long-range, long-duration mobile science laboratory,” which would “pave the way for a future sample return mission.” NASA also proposed to create a new line of small missions called Scout missions, involving airborne vehicles or small landers. NASA would select designs for the Scout spacecraft from proposals submitted by the scientific community. Besides sending additional scientific orbiters, rovers, and landers to Mars during the second decade of the program, NASA announced its plans to launch its first sample-return mission in 2014, with a second mission in 2016. The new program incorporated “lessons learned from previous mission successes and failures” and built on recent scientific discoveries. Although NASA led the revamped program, the Mars missions also included international participants, particularly France and Italy, whose space agencies had agreed to conduct collaborative scientific orbital and surface investigations, as well as to contribute sample collection-and-return systems, telecommunications assets, and launch services.(NASA, “NASA Outlines Mars Exploration Program for Next Two Decades,” news release 00-171, 26 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-171.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
Nearly one year after the highly publicized failure of a probe to reach the surface of Mars, NASA announced plans for at least one, possibly two, robotic rovers to explore Mars by 2003. The new design plan, the outcome of an overhaul of NASA’s Mars Program in the aftermath of the unsuccessful mission, called for a rover larger than Mars Sojourner, which had successfully navigated the Martian surface in 1997. NASA planned for the new probe to continue the search for water on the surface of the Red Planet.(Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Moves To Send Robot Rovers To Explore Mars Surface,” Washington Post, 28 July 2000; Peter N. Spotts, “New Rover To Look for Signs of Water on Mars,” Christian Science Monitor, 31 July 2000; Tribune News Services, “NASA Unveils Plans for 2003 Mission to Mars,” 28 July 2000.)
