NASA’s Mars Odyssey provided its first image from its orbit around the Red Planet. Odyssey took the image as part of a calibration process for the spacecraft’s thermal-emission imaging system, which NASA had designed to observe the surface of Mars in both light and darkness. The initial image, a thermal infrared image of the planet’s southern polar carbon-dioxide ice cap, covered an area greater than 6,500 kilometers (3,900 miles) at a resolution of approximately 5.5 kilometers (3.4 miles) per pixel.(NASA, “Mars Odyssey’s First Look at Mars Is All Treat, No Trick,” news release 01-214, 31 October 2001.)
Herbert V. Frey of NASA’s GSFC revealed a fundamental new finding about the complexion of Mars’s surface. According to Frey and his team of researchers, data gathered by Mars Global Surveyor had corrected a commonly held belief about the topography of the Red Planet and the age of its crust. Most scientists had believed that the crust covering the relatively smooth northern lowlands of the planet was much younger than that of the rest of the planet. However, Frey’s research using Surveyor’s pathbreaking instruments had shown that the lowlands are not actually smooth at all. Using the measurements obtained by the spacecraft’s laser altimeter, Frey and his team had documented more than 600 ancient craters lying just beneath a layer of dust on the lowlands, many of the craters larger than 30 miles (48 kilometers) in diameter. From this finding, the team had concluded that the crust of the northern lowlands is older than scientists had expected. According to James W. Head of Brown University, who was not a member of Frey’s research contingent, the findings would “push the reset button” on ideas about how Mars had evolved as a planet.(Robert C. Cowen, “Red Planet Still a Mystery, but Mars Global Surveyor Makes It Less So,” Christian Science Monitor, 14 June 2001.)
NASA revealed time-lapse images of the biggest dust storm on Mars to occur in nearly 30 years. The HST and Mars Global Surveyor had captured the images, which showed that the storms had begun as a local event in the Hellas region of Mars and had rapidly propagated throughout the planet. The storms had obscured the surface of Mars and dramatically affected temperatures in the planet’s atmosphere, including heating the upper portions of its atmosphere to as much as 80°F (26.7°C). NASA scientists hoped that data about the storms would help them learn more about sediments on Mars, as well as helping them plan future missions to the Red Planet.(William Harwood, “Mars Wearing Veil of Dust; Biggest Storm in Three Decades Obscures Surface, Alters Temperatures,” Washington Post, 12 October 2001; NASA, “Scientists Track ‘Perfect Storm’ on Mars,” news release 01-193, 11 October 2001.)
NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft completed its primary mission, having collected more information about Mars than all of the previous missions combined had acquired. “By any conceivable measure the scientific impact of Mars Global Surveyor has been extraordinary,” said Global Surveyor Project Scientist Arden L. Albee. Since reaching the Red Planet in 1998, Global Surveyor had gathered data on Mars’s climate, topography, and geology, as well as mapping the entire planet. The orbiter, which launched in November 1996, had provided a steady stream of invaluable data. Among the most significant findings of the primary mission had been the detection of significant evidence of liquid water, the detection of a magnetized crust on the planet’s southern hemisphere, and the discovery of new information about seasonal changes on the planet. The spacecraft had gathered the data in the course of more than 8,500 orbits of the planet, during which it had collected 58,000 images. With Mars Global Surveyor still functioning effectively, NASA planned to extend its mission and continue its research.(NASA, “New Era Begins as Mars Global Surveyor Completes Prime Mission,” news release 01-14, 31 January 2001.)
