JAXA spokesperson, Junichi Moriuma, announced that JAXA had failed in its final effort to return the Nozomi craft to the correct trajectory for orbiting Mars. Insufficient fuel supplies had prevented the craft’s engines from firing. Nozomi―Hope―had been traveling toward Mars for five years and was schedule to arrive in one week. JAXA had planned for Nozomi to examine the Martian atmosphere’s interaction with the solar wind, to determine whether the planet has a magnetic field. During its journey from Earth to Mars, Nozomi had experienced several malfunctions that had altered its trajectory, placing it on a course that was too low and causing concern that the spacecraft would crash into Mars, possibly contaminating the surface. JAXA officials stated that, although they had failed to place the craft on the correct trajectory, they had greatly reduced the probability of the craft’s colliding with Mars. Instead, the craft would escape Mars’s gravitational field and enter a long-term orbit of the solar system. Moriuma remarked that Japanese scientists would continue to modify Nozomi, allowing it to carry out alternative missions, such as monitoring solar activity.(Kenji Hall for the Associated Press, “Japan Quits Mars Mission as Probe Strays,” 10 December 2003; Jason Testar for Canadian Press, “Japanese Fail To Salvage Mars Mission Carrying Canadian Research Instrument,” 10 December 2003.)
ESA formally opened its first deep space ground station in New Norcia, Australia. Construction on the US$47 million (EUR 28 million) facility had begun in April 2000. The key component of the station was a massive antenna, 40 meters (125 feet) high and weighing 600 tonnes (661.4 tons or 600,000 kilograms), with a 35-meter (110-foot) dish. ESA had selected the New Norcia site because its distance from urban areas protected it from interference from other transmission devices, its latitude was perfect for deep space operations, and its weather was excellent. ESA had built and opened the station in time for it to play a key role in ESA’s Mars Express mission, scheduled for launch in June. The Mars Express craft would carry a lander dubbed Beagle 2―named in honor of the ship that Charles Darwin sailed on during his search for the origins of life―which would map the surface, subsurface, atmosphere, and ionosphere of Mars.(ESA, “ESA’s First Deep Space Ground Station Opens in Western Australia,” ESA news release 14-2003, 5 March 2003, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_14_2003_p_EN.html (accessed 28 August 2008); Agence France-Presse, “Australian Town Host to European Space Quest,” 6 March 2003.)
ESA announced that the Beagle 2, ESA’s Mars Lander, had separated from the Mars Express orbiting spacecraft. ESA had scheduled the Beagle 2 to land on Mars early on 24 December (EST), while, at approximately the same time, Mars Express would enter Martian orbit.
