NASA approved a five-month extension of the Mars Exploration Rovers’ mission nearly two weeks before its originally scheduled end on 26 April 2004. NASA had originally planned for the mission to last three months but had decided to extend it because the robotic rovers―Opportunity and Spirit―had satisfied all of their primary mission criteria, achieving several successes, such as discovering evidence that Mars had once had water. According to officials, NASA planned to provide US$15 million to continue the rovers’ operations, doubling the mission’s duration at less than 2 percent of the overall mission’s cost.(NASA, “NASA Extends Mars Rovers’ Mission,” news release 04-122, 8 March 2004.)
A commission composed of officials from ESA and the British National Space Centre released the results of their investigation into the loss of the Beagle 2 spacecraft, the first European spacecraft designed to explore the surface of Mars. On 19 December 2003, the Beagle 2 had successfully separated from ESA’s Mars Express, the spacecraft that had carried the Beagle 2 to its orbit of Mars. However, subsequently, Beagle 2 had failed to send any signals to mission engineers, and its eventual fate remained unknown. Although its report did not identify any single technical issue that had caused the mission loss, the investigating panel did provide 19 recommendations for future missions. These recommendations, implicitly critical of the Beagle 2 mission, suggested that future missions should have adequate funding and adequate testing, and that an agency with appropriate capabilities and resources should manage the missions.
ESA reported that Mars Express had discovered the first direct evidence of water on Mars. Whereas some previous research had suggested that water might be present on Mars, Mars Express had detected the presence of actual water ice covered by a layer of frozen carbon dioxide at the planet’s south pole. The spacecraft had also found that the amount of carbon dioxide in Mars’s atmosphere was inadequate to have warmed the planet sufficiently for the formation of liquid water and the support of life on the planet’s surface. Scientists regarded the findings as crucial in determining whether Mars could have supported life in the past.(ESA, “Mars Express Sees Its First WaterScientific Results,” ESA news release 6-2004, 23 January 2004; Jean- Pierre Bibring, “Perennial Water Ice Identified in the South Polar Cap of Mars,” Nature 428, no. 6983 (8 April 2004): 627–630.)
NASA reported that its Mars Exploration Rovers had discovered geological evidence indicating that Mars had once had water. The rover Spirit had found a volcanic rock containing fissures filled with material that could have crystallized from water. A few days earlier, on 2 March 2004, the rover Opportunity, operating nearly 6,600 miles (10,622 kilometers) from Spirit, had found minerals and geological features that appeared to have been leached by groundwater or to have been formed by sediment in what was previously a body of water. However, scientists were unable to conclude from the two rovers’ findings when Mars had actually had water in the past or whether the water had been located above or below the planet’s surface.(Guy Gugliotta, “Mars Rover Finds Signs of Water,” Washington Post, 7 March 2004; NASA, “Opportunity Rover Finds Strong Evidence Meridiani Planam Was Wet,” news release 04-077, 2 March 2004.)
a comet’s nucleus and to place a probe on a comet’s surfaceto study the comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko. Rosetta, equipped with solar arrays spanning 105 feet (32 meters) and relying on solar cells for its power supply, was also the first probe designed to travel past Mars. Scientists hoped that, in studying comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenkoa remnant of a primitive nebula from which Earth’s solar system emergedRosetta would help them understand more about the role of comets in forming the solar system and contributing to the development of life on Earth.(ESA, “Rosetta Begins Its 10-Year Journey to the Origins of the Solar System,” ESA news release 14-2004, 2 March 2004; Warren E. Leary, “Intricate European Mission Goes Hunting for a Comet,” New York Times, 24 February 2004.)
ESA and UK Science Minister Lord David Sainsbury announced that ESA and the United Kingdom would conduct a joint inquiry into the failure of the Beagle 2 Mars lander. ESA Inspector-General René Bonnefoy would oversee the inquiry, which would investigate the reasons for the mission’s failure and establish lessons that ESA could apply in future missions. Beagle 2, a component of ESA’s Mars Express mission, had failed to communicate with ESA after the time of its scheduled landing on Mars on 25 December 2003. The Beagle 2 Management Board had declared the spacecraft lost on 6 February 2004.(ESA, “UK and ESA Announce Beagle 2 Inquiry―Investigation To Learn Lessons from Mars Lander,” ESA news release 9-2004, 11 February 2004.)
NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity landed on Mars nearly three weeks after its twin rover Spirit had landed on the planet. NASA had created the two mobile robotic rovers to explore rocks and soils on Mars to determine whether the planet had previously possessed water and the ability to sustain life. NASA had designed the mission so that the rovers would explore Mars simultaneously, on nearly opposite sides of the planet.(NASA, “NASA Hears from Opportunity Rover on Mars,” news release 04-037, 25 January 2004.)
