NASA’s JPL announced that the Phoenix Mars Lander flight-operations team had successfully tested the craft’s descent-monitoring radar and UHF radio on 24 August. During its flight to Mars, Phoenix had communicated with Earth via an X-band radio unit, but the craft would switch to UHF radio after landing on Mars. Because the X-band radio unit was mounted on a part of the craft that would jettison shortly before Phoenix reached the Martian atmosphere, the UHF radio would become critical to communications once the craft reached Mars.(NASA JPL, “Phoenix Mars Lander Status Report: Radar and Other Gear Pass Checkouts,” news release 2007- 094a, 4 September 2007, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2007-094a (accessed 9 August 2010); Dave Mosher, “Phoenix Spacecraft Passes In-Flight Tests,” Space.com, 5 September 2007, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/070905_phoenix_update.html (added 9 August 2010).)
The journal Science published a special issue about water on Mars. The issue included five reports that had used the scientific results derived from the detailed images that NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) had captured during the first 100 days of its mission. MRO’s primary mission was to study Mars’s hydrologic history, using six scientific instruments, including the High-Resolution Imaging Science Experiment camera (HiRISE), which provided 10 times the resolution of any previous Mars imager. The papers published in this special issue of Science indicated that evidence for liquid water on Mars was rare and difficult to discern. NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor (MGS), which had visited Mars in 1999, had raised researchers’ hopes that the probe had detected modern flows of liquid water on Mars. However, MRO’s observations suggested otherwise—that landslides of loose, dry materials had created the deposits that scientists had interpreted as evidence of liquid water. In addition, MRO had captured images suggesting that flowing lava, rather than water, had shaped some Martian landforms, such as branched channels and fan-like deposits. Moreover, MRO images indicated that, although certain gullies and rims of craters did indeed contain liquid water, the presence of water at these locations did not reveal the presence of a water table. Rather, the images suggested that objects impacting Mars had triggered trickles of water at these sites. Radar and gravity data indicated that the cap on Mars’s south pole held the largest reservoir of water ice on the planet.(NASA, “NASA Orbiter Provides Insights About Mars Water and Climate,” news release 07-206, 20 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07206_Mars_Water.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Joanne Baker, “Introduction to Special Issue: Water, Water, Not Everywhere?” Science 317, no. 5845 (21 September 2007): 1705, http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/summary/sci;317/5845/1705?maxtoshow=&hits=10&RESULT FORMAT=&fulltext=Mars+Reconnaissance+Orbiter&searchid=1&FIRSTINDEX=0&resourcetype=HWCIT (DOI: 10.1126/science.317.5845.1705; accessed 10 August 2010); Jeanna Bryner, “Hope for Water on Mars Dims with Sharp New Images,” Space.com, 20 September 2007, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/070920_mars_tale. html (accessed 10 August 2010).)
NASA awarded Scripps Institution of Oceanography a grant valued at US$750,000, to develop an instrument to detect signs of biological compounds on Mars. European Space Agency (ESA) selected the Urey Mars Organic and Oxidant Detector (Urey), named for the late Nobel Laureate, Harold C. Urey, to fly aboard its ExoMars rover mission in 2013. Jeffrey L. Bada, Lead Investigator on the Urey team and Director of the NASA Specialized Center of Research and Training in Exobiology at Scripps, explained that Urey would be the first instrument with the capacity to detect amino acids, as well as other possible biomolecules. To search for trace levels of amino acids and for some components of DNA and RNA, Urey would heat and analyze spoon-sized amounts of Martian soil, collected from 2 meters (6.6 feet) beneath Mars’s surface. Urey would then trap and condense any molecules released from the heated soil and probe them with a laser. If the laser detected amino acids in the soil, another instrument, developed at the University of California at Berkeley, would examine the amino-acid composition to determine whether the molecules came from biological or nonbiological sources.(Scripps Institution of Oceanography, “NASA Funds Scripps Instrument for Probing for Life on Mars: Detector To Hunt for Organic Molecules During Proposed 2013 Mission,” Scripps News, 9 January 2007, http://scrippsnews. ucsd.edu/Releases/?releaseID=768 (accessed 9 November 2009).)
NASA announced that its solar-powered Mars rover duo, Spirit and Opportunity, had survived severe dust storms and were ready to continue their mission. Spirit had awakened and, on 5 September, had climbed onto a plateau of layered bedrock, its long-term destination. On the plateau, known as Home Plate, Spirit would examine clues about an explosive mixture of lava and water. Meanwhile, Opportunity had begun preparing for its descent into Victoria Crater, where it would examine an exposed layer of bright rocks. The rocks might provide preserved evidence of an ancient interaction between the Martian atmosphere and surface. Dust storms in July had delayed Opportunity’s scheduled descent into the crater, blocking significant amounts of sunlight and causing researchers to become concerned that the rovers’ daily energy supplies might plunge too low for recovery.(NASA, “Mars Rovers Survive Severe Dust Storms, Ready for Next Objectives,” news release 07-187, 7 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07187_Mars_Rovers.html (accessed 4 August 2010).)
NASA announced that the chemical analyzer at the end of the arm of the Mars rover Spirit had measured a concentration of pure silica in a soil sample at Gusev Crater, providing the strongest evidence to date that Mars was much wetter in the ancient past than at present. At 90 percent, the concentrated deposit of silica could only have formed in the presence of water. Spirit’s discovery had been the result of a mechanical failure. One of the rover’s six wheels, which had become incapable of rotating, had gouged a deep impression as it moved through the soil. The scraping had exposed patches of bright soil, leading to the discovery of the silica. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, Principal Investigator for the Mars rovers’ scientific instruments, underscored the significance of the discovery, stating, “the fact that we found something this new and different after nearly 1,200 days on Mars makes it even more remarkable.” J. Douglas McCuistion, Director of NASA’s Mars Exploration Program, added that the unexpected discovery was a reminder that Spirit and Opportunity were still conducting cutting-edge exploration more than three years into their extended mission.
