Based on data that NASA’s rover Opportunity had collected in the Victoria impact crater, researchers reported new findings in the journal Science, providing further evidence that water had once existed on Mars. Before arriving at Victoria, Opportunity had explored the Eagle and Endurance craters, revealing distinctive sediment layers in Endurance, along with evidence that water had been a factor in actively shaping those layers. Scientists had decided to send Opportunity to Victoria because of the crater’s 400-foot (122-meter) depth. They hoped that exploration of Victoria would shed more light on the Meridiani Planum region. Opportunity had spent two years driving along the crater’s edge and then had traveled down into the crater. The rover had found layers of sulfate-rich sandstone like that of the Endurance crater, “with evidence that water had weathered away minerals in the rocks, then evaporated, leaving behind salts that eventually solidified into rocks again.” The findings indicated that water had acted at both the Endurance and the Victoria sites, suggesting that water had acted across the entire Meridiani region. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University, Lead Scientist for the Mars Exploration Rover Project, remarked that this evidence was probably the most significant finding of the Victoria expedition.(Andrea Thompson, “Entire Region of Mars Likely Shaped by Water,” Space.com, 21 May 2009, http://www. space.com/6739-entire-region-mars-shaped-water.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Jessica Berman, “NASA Scientists Find More Evidence of Water on Mars,” Voice of America, 22 May 2009.)
NASA announced that it had selected the two scientific investigations that NASA would undertake in partnership with ESA. NASA and ESA planned to use NASA’s Deep Space Network (DSN) of radio telescopes to track part of ESA’s ExoMars mission, scheduled to launch in 2016. ESA’s ExoMars mission consisted of a fixed lander and a rover that would collect soil samples on Mars for detailed analysis. The Lander Radio-Science on ExoMars (LaRa) would relay data from the lander back to the DSN, enabling scientists to measure and to analyze variations in the length of the day and in the location of the planet’s rotational axis. The ExoMars mission data would help researchers further dissect the structure of the Martian interior, including the size of Mars’s core. For the second investigation, named Strofio, ESA and NASA would use a unique mass spectrometer. Part of ESA’s BepiColombo mission, scheduled for launch in 2013, Strofio would determine the mass of atoms and molecules, helping to reveal the composition of Mercury’s atmosphere. NASA had selected LaRa and Strofio from among eight proposals that researchers had submitted in December 2008, in response to NASA’s new Stand Alone Mission of Opportunity (Salmon). NASA had required Salmon proposals to address planetary scientific research objectives for nonagency missions and to accomplish scientific research goals, including data archiving and analysis, for less than US$35 million. Scientists expected LaRa to cost US$6.6 million and Strofio, US$31.8 million.(NASA, “NASA Selects Future Projects To Study Mars and Mercury,” contract release C09-020, 4 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_C09_020_NASA_Salmon_Awards.html (accessed 20 June 2011).)
Global Aerospace Corporation announced that it had received funding through NASA’s Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program to develop a Hypersonic Control Modeling and Simulation Tool (HyperCMST) focusing on a type of ballute (balloon plus parachute). Goodyear Aerospace had invented the large, inflatable devices in 1958, to enable the use of atmospheric drag to decelerate spacecraft. However, unlike most ballute concepts, HyperCMST would encompass more than a drag-only device with no steering capability. Global Aerospace intended to use the HyperCMST to develop a new type of ballute, called a lifting-towed-toroidal ballute. A spacecraft could be able to steer the toroidal ballute using tethers between the spacecraft and the ballute. For example, a ballute-assisted orbit capture of a lander vehicle above the surface of Mars would use a toroidal ballute and inflation tubes connected to the lander via multiple tethers. The spacecraft would tow the ballute using tethers, rather than using some form of rigid attachment device. The spacecraft would jettison the ballute once it had achieved the desired capture orbit. The tethers, which the spacecraft could manipulate, would create aerodynamic lift, making control of the ballute system possible.(Global Aerospace Corporation, “Control of Hypersonic Vehicles for Planetary Capture and Entry Missions,” news release 15 April 2009, http://www.gaerospace.com/press-releases/apr2009.html (accessed 23 May 2011); Bill Christensen, “Ballutes Studied for Hypersonic Space Vehicles,” Space.com, 21 April 2009, http://www.space.com/ 6602-ballutes-studied-hypersonic-space-vehicles.html (accessed 24 May 2011).)
NASA and Google announced the release of the new Mars mode in Google Earth, the latest benefit to result from a Space Act Agreement that NASA’s ARC had signed with Google in November 2006. The Agreement established a collaborative effort intended to make NASA data sets available to the world. The Mars mode provided a rich, immersive three-dimensional view of Mars, to help the public understand Mars science while simultaneously providing researchers with a platform for sharing data, much as Google Earth did for Earth scientists. NASA and its partners—Google, Carnegie Mellon University, Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI), and other institutions—had produced the data to make the Mars mode in Google Earth possible.(NASA, “NASA and Google Launch Virtual Exploration of Mars,” news release 09-024, 2 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-024_Google_Mars_map.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
