In speech before the Woman’s National Press Club, Adlai Stevenson, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, said that the U.S., U.S.S.R., and other qualified nations should pool their space efforts under the auspices of the United Nations. “Perhaps their children,” he said, “will sail to Mars together.”
Soviet interplanetary probe mars i was 2,725,337.592 mi. away from earth at 4 AM est, Tass reported.
Soviet press agency Tass reported the planet Mars has “experienced the effects of meteorites to a much greater degree than the earth.” Emblen Sobotovich, senior scientist at Leningrad Radium Institute, said meteorites were preserved on Mars for long periods of time because Martian atmosphere contained almost no moisture, Tass reported.
Soviet news agency Tass distributed announcement by U.S.S.R. Academy of Science giving new details on mars i interplanetary probe. Announcement said scientists had held 37 radio communications with mars i during first month of the probe’s journey and that more than 600 orders had been transmitted to it. Command, measuring, and computing centers onboard the spacecraft were reported working properly. Announcement said mars i would pass planet Mars at distance of about 119,000 mi. (193,000 km) and added that its trajectory would have to be corrected sometime during the flight. Data from probe indicated space radiation had increased about 50 to 70% since 1959 Soviet lunar probes made measurements; other data indicated extremely low density of meteor matter at great distances from earth. Announcement said mars i onboard equipment included television to photograph Martian surface; spectrograph to study ozone absorptions in Martian atmosphere; equipment to measure magnetic fields and radiation in space and around Mars; and radiotelescope to register streams of low-energy protons and electrons.
Soviet space probe mars i was 1,677,704 mi. from earth and “continuing satisfactorily” on its flight to Mars, Prof. Vsevoldod Fedynsky of Moscow Univ. said in Tass interview.
aec Chairman Glenn T. Seaborg told panel discussion of International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna that a U.S. nuclear-powered spacecraft now in the initial-test phase could take two men on a round trip to Mars in the 1970’s. He said that the round trip, including one-month visit on Mars, would take about a year.
Reported that the U.S. would send a Mariner B spacecraft to Mars in late 1964, to land on the red planet in early 1965. The launching of this heavily instrumented probe would mark the beginning of the scientific search for extraterrestrial life.
U.S. News and World Report carried article on “Red Space Failures,” pointing to official U.S. policy with regard to Soviet launchings: “No Soviet feat [in space] has ever been publicly challenged in Washington and no failure publicly announced.” It reported that while Premier Khrushchev was at the United Nations in September 1960, “a Soviet cosmonaut was sent more than a hundred miles into space and killed”; that in a five-month period in 1960-61, four Soviet space probes were fired toward Mars and Venus, but failed; and that during the same period “a dozen other Soviet space shots went awry . . .”
Tass reported interplanetary probe mars i began broadcasting scientific data on command from earth. The Mars probe, about two mlliion mi. away from earth, was reported functioning normally.
In Voice of America broadcast, Alan H. Shapley of the National Bureau of Standards’ Central Radio Propagation Laboratory, reviewed the “new dimension to research in ionospheric science” added by space vehicles. He pointed out that “scientific expeditions landing on the surface of Mars or Venus, whether manned or unmanned, will have to communicate by radio with terrestrial headquarters. We must know which frequencies wlli get through the planetary ionosphere, and which can be used with the radiomirror effect to talk from one part of the planet to another. So far we have had only [the earth’s] ionosphere to study, but this is like the doctor with only a single case. To understand a disease he needs many cases.”
Soviet academician M. Sissakian, Presidium member of Soviet Academy of Sciences, was quoted as saying U.S.S.R. hoped to bring mars i back to earth.
Soviet news agency Tass announced mars i interplanetary probe was now more than 7 million mi. from earth; all onboard equipment was working normally and the spacecraft was sending back radio reports to earth, mars i was expected to pass within 120,000	mi. of Mars in June 1963.
Difficulties in Centaur launch vehicle development were forcing nasa to program 1964 Mars probe for Atlas-Agena vehicle, New York Times reported. Use of Atlas-Agena would mean smaller payload, with about 60 lbs. of instruments instead of 200 lbs.	_
Rocket-powered instruments wlli be traveling as far as Jupiter by 1975, Robert J. Parks, director of jpl Planetary Programs, said in interview. Parks said by 1975 the planets Mars and Venus probably would have been studied “quite closely” by instruments.
At aas meeting in Washington, S. Karrer and C. C. Kiess reported new evidence suggesting planet Mars has toxic clouds of oxygen and nitrogen compounds, probably nitrogen dioxide gas. Bv spectroscopic techniques splitting the light from the planet’s telescopic image, they found the pattern yielded by nitrogen dioxide gas. Kiess said that phenomena of the Martian appearance through earth telescopes can be explained by changes in the nature and color of nitrogen and oxygen compounds under changing Martian temperatures. (Barbour, Wash. Post, 12/28/63, B2)
Reporting under a nasa contract to study requirements for a manned mission to Mars in “the unfavorable (1975-1985) time period,” Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div. proposed a nuclear-chemical four-stage vehicle carrying a seven-man crew on a 400-day trip. Mission would begin out of 300-mile earth orbit: first stage would boost vehicle into Mars trajectory; 140 days later, second stage would put vehicle into 300-mile orbit of Mars, where for 20 days the crew would study the planet; third stage would provide escape from Mars and 240-day trip back to earth; fourth stage would provide retrothrust for re-entry. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/4/63,27) The most controversial point raised during the conference was statement on the large amount of faulty or careless manufacture and assembly of Mercury spacecraft. On the MA-9 backup spacecraft, for example, some 720 discrepancies were recorded, of which 526 were attributable to unsatisfactory workmanship and 444 of these required specially scheduled time to correct. (msc Releases 63-153-158; Project Mercury Summary)
According to Soviet press agency Tass, mars i spacecraft was 59,460,000 km. from Earth at 9:00 a.m. Moscow time, traveling at 12.7 km/sec as it moved away from Earth. Routine interrogations had been conducted during the past week and scientific information from mars i had been obtained, (eos Translation, 3/6/63, of Tass, Pravda, 2/13/63)
Results of nasa research project reported: 18 species of earth bacteria survived in “Mars jars” in which atmospheric conditions of Mars were simulated. One type enlarged itself by four or five times in the Martian environment. {M&R, 9/2/63)
Cathode of experimental ion engine set endurance record of 1660 hours operation. Electric propulsion engineers at lrc estimate they reached 16 per cent of the cathode life required for a round-trip Mars mission. (Lewis Chronology, 7)
Izvestia reported about 400 spectrograms of Mars had been taken this year at observatoiy of Astrophysics Institute, Kazakhstan Academy of Sciences, in project to investigate properties of blue haze concealing details of Martian surface. (Izvestia, 5/12/63, 6, afss-t Trans.)
Water vapor and carbon dioxide on Mars were detected by Stratoscope II, project scientists announced at Palestine, Tex., press conference. Results of data gathered by balloon-mounted telescope, which observed Mars from vantage point above 98 per cent of earth’s atmosphere March 1-2, were based on preliminary analysis of taped infrared-bolometer data; further analysis was expected to provide information on presence of other life-related compounds and on amount of the compounds present in Martian atmosphere. (AP, Chicago Trib., 3/5/63; Wall Street Journal, 3/5/63)	,	.
Flight of balloon carrying 36-in. telescope to 80,000-ft. altitude for study of planet Mars was postponed at Palestine, Tex., after balloon developed a leak while being inflated. This was 13th time the launching had been postponed. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/23/63)
Report by three-man nasa advisory committee concluded that “shielding [against radiation] of the crew for Project Apollo is not possible within the time and weight limitations of the project.” The crew “will simply have to accept the relatively low probability of encountering a major solar flare during their relatively brief excursion to the moon.” Report estimated 10,000 lbs. of polyethylene shielding would be required to protect men in 10-ft.-diameter spacecraft for a week. For flights to Mars or Venus, more than 20,000 lbs. of polyethylene would be required. “The accomplishment of manned flights to the vicinity of Mars and Venus may have to be delayed until some means are found for reducing these shielding weights,” report stated. (AP, NYT, 12/10/63,24; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/9/63)
A Mars Excursion Module (mem) would be the best means of landing men on Mars, according to Temple Neuman of Philco Corp.’s Aeronutronic Div., which had just completed a study of the subject under nasa contract. The mem would carry two men, house and feed them for 40 days, and enable them to bring back 800 lbs. of equipment and samples, for a gross vehicle weight of about 55,000 lbs. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/2/63, 12)
U.S.S.R. mars i probe lost contact with tracking stations when 65 million miles out because of malfunction in the spacecraft attitude control system, according to Alexandre A. Mironov, Soviet Embassy scientific adviser in Washington. (Av. Wk., 10/21/63, 28) During October: H. H. Koelle, Director of Future Projects Office, msfc, in “Trends in Earth-to-Orbit Transportation Systems,” in Aeronautics and Aerospace Engineering, noted that the next year would be interesting in that both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. were expected to come up with big increase in payload in orbit. The U.S. Saturn I was expected to put 10 tons in orbit. “Also, I would not be a bit surprised if the U.S.S.R. launched a payload in the 40- to 50-ton class before this [next] year is over. The next step increase will be provided by the Saturn V in about 1967, when a 100-ton capability will be reached by the U.S. Many people hope that at least by that time the U.S.S.R. single-flight capabilities will have been equalled or exceeded.” Space transportation was developing fast, Koelle concluded: “While air transportation needed two generations to improve the efficiency of passenger transport by three orders of magnitude, we expect to improve the economy of Earth-to-orbit cargo transportation by four orders of magnitude in one generation.” {A&AE, Nov. 63,25-30)
Soviet Cosmonaut Major Andrian Nikolayev, touring India with his bride, Cosmonaut Valentina Nikolavev, said in New Dellii that U.S.S.R. was planning a spacecraft capable of sustaining the life of a crew for three years. This was the estimated time for a manned flight to Mars or Venus and return, with some 14 months of this actual roundtrip flight time and the other two years waiting on the planet for the proper orbital relationship for the return flight. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/12/63)
jpl awarded Avco Corp. Research and Advanced Development Div. an $83,000 contract for study of entry and landing of ballistic capsules on Mars and Venus. (M&R, 9/2/63,12)
U.S.S.R. mars i passed planet Mars, but with its communications systems dead as they had been since March 21. All subsequent attempts to restore communication had failed. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/26/63)
nasa devices for detecting life on Mars, to be ejected from Mariner interplanetary probes and soft-landed onto planet’s surface, were discussed in article in The National Observer. Gulliver, first in series, would be 1.5-lb. dome-shaped device equipped with two 23ft. sticky strings; upon landing, strings would shoot out of dome and then reel back inside, gamering up samples of whatever is on surface to be deposited m solution of distilled water, sterile beef broth, malt extract, vitamins, other nutrients, and radioactive carbon. If adhesive gathers microbes similar to those on earth, microbes would multiply in the solution and produce radioactive carbon dioxide which would be detected by Geiger counter in dome and radioed back to earth. Another device, known as Multivator, designed by Dr. Joshua Lederberg of Stanford Univ. and still under development, was designed to make 24 different biological and chemical tests of micro-organisms. Third life-detecting device is Wolf Trap, named after its designer, Dr. Wolf Vishniac of Univ. of Rochester; it would suck in samples of planetary soil or air and introduce them to broth somewhat like that of Gulliver. (National Observer, 2/11/63)
Routine radio contact with mars i interplanetary probe was made over distance of 98,863,000 km. (61,430,502 mi.), about 12,000,000 km. (7,364,400 mi.) farther than last U.S. radio contact with mariner ii Venus probe, according to Tass. (mariner ii’s last contact was at 54.3 million mi.) (Pravda, 3/17/63, 1, afss-t Trans.)
Soviet press agency Tass reported in Krasnaya Zvezda that routine radio communications with mars i interplanetary probe were conducted Feb. 13-19 and that telemetry information was received from the probe. Tass said that at 9:00 a.m. Moscow time mars i was 67,432,000 km. from earth. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/20/63,1, afss-t trans.)
mars i interplanetary probe was 78,843,000 km. (48,980,675 mi.) from earth, Soviet newspaper Izvestia reported. From Feb. 20 to March 1, scheduled radio contacts were made; “a series of control commands were transmitted to the station.” Tass said that on March 1 “a number of corrective guidance commands were transmitted to the spacecraft. The strength of radio signals, which are being received from the interplanetary station, decreased somewhat . . . .” (Izvestia,, 3/3/63, 5, afss-t Trans.; Pravda, 2/2/63, eos Trans.)
Tass reported Soviet scientists had lost contact with mars i interplanetary probe on March 21, when it was about 66,000,000 mi. from earth. Probe was continuing on its flight toward vicinity of Mars but telemetry data indicated difficulty in orientation system had misaligned its radio antennas. Tass said mars i had recorded considerable change in boundaries of radiation belts around earth; “sphere of maximum intensity” in innermost belt was farther out than previously noted. Intensity of cosmic rays had almost doubled m last four years, Tass said. Important findings were made concerning stability and energy of interplanetary and solar plasma, and mars i made possible first scientific observation of junction of earth’s ionized gas envelope with outermost belt of charged particles. Other data on intensity of magnetic fields in space and distribution of meteoric particles were /B.U	K/’I'7/CQ. A „. lFl S /Ol /K9 OA \ A UW1 UUU. \ A/Ull. AJ to/U / i.1 / y XA (/. rr Iv.y KJ J LJ % / \J*Jy y
Soviet newspaper Pravda said mass i space probe was more than 26-million mi. from earth and successfully continuing its flight toward planet Mars. There was no mention of mid-course correction maneuver to bring the probe closer than its estimated 120,000-mi. distance from Mars in June. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/31/63)	... During January: Series of Gemini parachute design qualification tests was successfully completed at El Centro, Calif., for nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Parachute system would undergo two more test series before qualification; system would be backup mechanism for two-man Gemini spacecraft recovery in case of water landings. ( msc Roundup, 1/23/63,1)
“First conclusive detection” of water vapor on Mars was announced by Cal Tech. Mars’ water supply was found to be minimal—perhaps as little as half a cu. mi. compared with millions of cu. mi. on earth. Finding was made by analysis of spectrum of light from Mars gathered by Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar Observatories in California. (Hill, NYT, 6/5/63,17)
Soviet astronomer G. A. Tikhov concluded that Martian vegetation, if it exists, is blue rather than green, because of light and temperature conditions on Mars. In translation/abstract of Tikhov’s report, issued by Dept, of Commerce, he reported that “plants in the Far North on earth should have entirely different optical properties than in temperate latitudes and on mountains. Martian plants should be closest to the Arctic and mountain species, whose spectra have quite inconspicuous chlorophyll bands.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/14/63)
National Geographic Society announced two scientists with astronomical instruments were recently lofted by plastic-skinned balloon to 15-mi. altitude in experiment to record radio sounds from stars. National Geographic Society outlined other recent scientific contributions by man’s oldest means of flight, including balloon-lifted telescop e camera which made unprecedented photographs of sunspots and another instrumented payload which obtained man’s clearest observations of planet Mars. Balloon-carried instrumentation now probing upper atmosphere is obtaining valuable data on astrophysics, meteorology, and aeromedicine. {Chic. Trib., 8/20/63)
nasa announced mariner ii Venus probe had been so successful that repeat flight scheduled for 1964 had been canceled. Interplanetary efforts would be concentrated instead on such projects as sending probe toward Mars in 1964 and later flight to Venus with advanced Mariner probe in 1965. (nasa Release 63-3; jpl Release)
Soviet interplanetary probe mars i was nearing halfway mark on its flight to vicinity of Mars, news agency Tass announced. Tass quoted Mstislav Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, as saying mars i was about 30 million mi. from earth. ( upi, Wash. Daily News, 2/5/63)
Instruments onboard mars i interplanetary probe confirmed existence of a third radiation belt, Soviet news agency Tass announced. Third radiation belt had been discovered in 1959 by Soviet rockets which had gathered particles at 50,000-mi. altitude, Tass said, and its existence was verified when mars i recorded stream of charged particles far beyond the second radiation belt. Number of particles in this outermost belt greatly exceeded that in first two belts, according to Tass. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/17/63)
At aaas meeting in Cleveland, Dr. Allan Brown, biology prof. at Univ. of Pennsylvania, urged that U.S. initiate a program to land a scientific probe on Mars in 1969, because the Martian “surface could be sampled during spring and summer when there would be the best chance of detecting plantlife organisms.” He recommended adapting Saturn IB booster to carry a several-hundred -pound instrumented payload. Dr. Brown estimated significant scientific probe of Mars could be achieved in 1969 at cost of $2.9 billion over six years. He suggested international cooperation on the project “should be more easily achieved than in any other area of space research or exploration in which both U.S. and Soviet programs are involved.” {M&R, 1/6/64, 14)
nasa was examining the nuclear-pulse propulsion concept (Orion) which had been studied under usaf contracts for some live years. Nuclear-pulse—a series of controlled nuclear explosions—was considered a possible means of propulsion for fast manned trips to Venus, Mars, and Jupiter in the 1975-1995 time period. The fast trip would be desirable because component lifetimes would run around 10,000 hrs., somewhat over one year. It would therefore be highly desirable that the round-trip be possible in one year’s time. If Orion were chosen as the propulsion system, some amendment to the nuclear test-ban treaty might be necessary to legalize its use. nasa was studying the Orion potential through a contract issued in June 1963 to the General Atomics Div. of General Dynamics.	11/4/63, 34)
nasa issued procedures on decontamination of lunar-landing spacecraft and planetary-landing spacecraft, based on recommendations ' by nas-nrc Space Science Board made public this date. Because sterilization procedures employed on previous Ranger lunar spacecraft—particularly heat cycle—were suspected of directly contributing to Ranger mission failures, nasa lowered decontamination requirements for current Ranger spacecraft. It was now only required that microbes on Rangers be “reduced to a minimum.” Regarding lunar probes, Space Science Board said: “. . . The lunar surface with its high temperatures, intense ultra-violet radiation, paucity of moisture, and high vacuum is a most unfavorable environment for proliferation of terrestrial organisms . . . .” It recommended U.S. “. . . minimize contamination to the extent technically feasible . . . [and develop] a sterile drilling system to accompany an early Apollo mission to return an uncontaminated sample of the lunar subsoil . . . .” n\sa procedures ^or M*rs I2.nd.1r* " missions required. th»t sjpEics-craft be sterilized and that this decontamination be effectively achieved without jeopardizing spacecraft reliability. Regarding Mars probes, Space Science Board said: “. . . The contamination of Mars through the impacting of nonsterile probes from the Earth could destroy an opportunity to carry out a meaningful search for life forms on Mars with remote detectors. This opportunity is unique and its loss would be a catastrophe . . . .” It recommended U.S. “. . . accord the highest priority to the prevention of the biological contamination of Mars until sufficient information has been obtained about possible life forms there so that further scientific studies will not be jeopardized . . . .” (nasa Release 63-200; nas-nrc Release; nas-nrc Space Probe Sterilization)
Soviet scientists lost contact with mars i interplanetary probe when it was about 66,000,000 mi. from earth; however, no mention was made of this fact by the Russians until May 16 (see May 16). (Balt. Sun, 5/17/63; Av. Wk., 5/27/63,24)
jpl had recommended use of a steerable entry vehicle or steerable parachute system for 1969 Mars probe, Missiles and Rockets reported, jpl wanted to land the complete vehicle and achieve telemetry from the Martian surface, notably on whether or not signs of life existed. Chief area of interest was Syrtis Major, prominent green area on Martian equator that might be one of the more likely spots to support life. (M&R, 4/20/64,11)
Resolution approved at final session of cospar recommended that no spacecraft be landed on Mars if there were more than one chance in 10,000 that it was carrying earthly micro-organisms that could contaminate Mars. Resolution also said no nation should attempt an “unsterilized fly-by” of Mars if there were more than three chances in 100,000	of its accidentally hitting the planet. (AP, Tulsa Daily World, 5/21/64)
mariner iv lost its lock on Canopus. “Current analysis supports the theory that a dust particle reflecting the light of the sun passed through the field of view of the Canopus tracker,” NASA said. Loss of lock on the star would not alter the spacecraft’s course, would merely affect its attitude, which would be of importance only when the spacecraft neared Mars and attempted to photograph the planet. NASA planned to command the spacecraft to reacquire Canopus soon. jpl, manager of the Mariner program for NASA, reported that a solar plasma probe experiment, which had functioned perfectly for eight days, had ceased to transmit useful information. (AP, Houston Post, 12/8/64)
MARINER IV passed the 50-million-mi. mark on its 325-million-mi. flight to Mars. The spacecraft was operating normally and transmitting items of information at a rate of 33%/sec. Nearly 10 million scientific and engineering measurements in space and outside the earth’s orbit had been transmitted in its first 29 days of flight, (nasa Release 64-326)
FY 1965 Independent Offices Appropriation Bill containing $5,250 billion NASA appropriation, was signed into law by President Johnson. NASA Administrator James E. Webb issued statement on the effect of the appropriation, saying that nasa would “maintain the basic momentum and direction of the program as presented to Congress but will make a number of adjustments to meet the Congressional reduction of $195 million, to effect those specific changes directed by Congress, and to take advantage of experience gained from operations conducted during the nine months since the budget was submitted. “Although these adjustments will affect launch schedules and program milestones, Dr. Dryden, Dr. Seamans, and I are convinced that it is best to make a maximum effort to gain operational leadership in manned space flight and that the manned lunar landing should continue to be targeted within this decade. This will stretch NASA and its contractors to the limit, but we have advised the President that we are not at this time willing to give up this goal which is so challenging- and which is so important as a focus for the efforts we must continue to make in all our programs. . . . “The target date is only five years away. Our assurance that it can be met is less than under President Johnson’s budget, but we still hope that with hard work, dedication, continued successes, and continued support we can meet it. We are going to make a hard try. “This decision does not involve the transfer to manned flight of funds from space science and applications programs or advanced research and technology programs. These programs will require some adjustments, but will not be drastically reduced as would be necessary if funds were reprogrammed to benefit manned space flight. “In the program for unmanned planetary exploration, the combination of a heavy workload at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the short lead time available, and the importance of applying our resources to a major advance beyond the limited Mariner make it unwise to undertake a Mars mission in 1966 with the current Mariner-type spacecraft. The development of a spacecraft with much greater scientific promise for launch to Mars in 1969 is being initiated. . . .” (NASA Release 64-221)
At cospar, Harvard Univ. scientist Dr. Carl Sagan said acetaldehyde gas, believed to exist in atmosphere of Mars, turns to sugar on contact with ultraviolet sunlight. Martian life, which probably is microorganic, possibly gives off the acetaldehyde gas and then feeds on the sugar that falls from the atmosphere, Dr. Sagan said. (AP, Houston Post, 5/18/64)
Dr. Harrison Brown, Cal Tech geochemist, said in Science article that as many as 2,000 earth-like planets capable of supporting life may exist in the nearest corner of the Milky Way Galaxy. Based on studies of this portion of the universe—volume of 10,000 cubic parsecs—Dr. Brown theorized: “Virtually every main sequence star should have a planetary system associated with it.” He calculated there were approximately 1,000	such stars in the region and 60,000 dark bodies of Mars’ size or bigger, or an average 60 “dark companions” to each of the stars. He determined a typical star should have four such planets, and of these “on the average some two planets per visible star might provide suitable environment for the emergence of life- processes which are based upon chemical systems similar to those on earth.” Dr. Brown’s paper propounded higher probability of life in the universe than previously theorized. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/11/64)
NASA selected Philco Corp. for negotiation of contract for feasibility and preliminary design studies for automated biological laboratory (abl) to detect and describe indigenous life on the planet Mars. The one-year study would define life-detection payloads for Voyager-class missions, which were under study bv NASA Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release 64-182)
Washington Evening Star editorialized about recent discovery that “Mars is covered by great yellow clouds of gaseous compounds of nitrogen and oxygen, or smog” and about scientists’ conclusion that the clouds preclude any chance of man’s finding life on Mars: “Quite the contrary. This clearly indicates that Martian life exists and the Martians are one, hopefully two, generations ahead of us in smogging up the atmosphere. As for landing there, all we need are spacemen from Los Angeles.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/8/64)
Preliminary design for re-entry spacecraft for manned Mars missions during 1971—75 period was submitted to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center after six-month study by Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Msc announced. The earth re-entry module would travel to Mars and 'back attached to 4- to 6-man Mars spacecraft, then would be detached and used for last eight hours. It is designed to withstand re-entry heating of about 35,000° F. at speeds up to 44,000 mph, protecting crew with ablative heat shield about 3^ in. thick, (msc Release 64-6; MSC Roundup, 1/22/64, 1, 3)
Martin Marietta recently completed NASA-funded, DOD-concurred-upon study of Centaur upper stage mated with various Titans. Most promising configuration—particularly for heavy Surveyor spacecraft and for advanced Mars missions—was using Centaur as trans-stage for Titan III-A (without the strap-on solids). (SBD, 5/7/64, 34)
Paul G. Johnson of aec—nasa SNPO said at aiaa meetings that early explorers of Mars may pass by planet Venus on way back to earth, to slow down spacecraft to safe re-entry speed. Side trip would lengthen voyage by a few months. Johnson also said that nuclear rockets might make Mars trip possible in 1980’s. Mission could involve six to eight crewmen and take from 400 to 500 days, (nasa Release 64-165)
mariner IV, bound for Mars, began passing through a second stream of meteoroids. In its first 23 days of flight, the craft had made 7Y2 million scientific and engineering measurements in interplanetary space and was 3,748,352 mi. from earth, traveling at 6,970 mph relative to earth. Its velocity relative to the sun was 72,902 mph. The straightline distance from the spacecraft to Mars was 107,592,980 mi. (NASA Release 64-323)
NASA announced industry design competition for Automated Biological Laboratory (abl) for detecting possible life on Mars. An abl would be landed by Voyager spacecraft to be flown in 1970’s. Proposals resulting from preliminary studies would lead to contract for a one-year effort to review scientific objectives, define an experimental payload suitable for landing and operation on Mars, and establish spacecraft and launch vehicle requirements, abl would incorporate several life-detection devices still in developmental stages and would be equipped to analyze and describe any organisms discovered by such devices. (nasa Release 64-134)
Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Director of NASA Biosciences Div., told Missiles and Rockets that it probably would be 1971 or 1973 before U.S. landed Automated Biological Laboratory (abl) on Mars: “I think it would be awfully optimistic to think that we could fly a fully integrated laboratory system to the Martian surface in 1969. I would like to hope such a mission would be feasible in 1971, and the 1973 launch window would also provide a good opportunity.” Other unnamed NASA officials were said to have considered launch of abl with Saturn V booster in 1971 as improbable, citing the high cost and “problems with sterilization methods which have to be solved.” abl missions would be part of the Voyager planetary program. (Mc&R, 8/24/64,15)
NASA’s mariner iv, en route to Mars, passed the 20-million-mile mark in its distance from earth. The spacecraft was functioning normally and was transmitting data on scientific measurements taken in interplanetary space, (nasa Release 65-58)
NASA announced it would request preliminary design proposals from private industry for the unmanned Voyager spacecraft that would land scientific instruments on Mars in 1971. From these proposals, several contractors would be chosen to perform a 3-mo. program design definition. Previous NASA studies had indicated the system might consist of a spacecraft “bus” or main body, a propulsion and braking system, and a landing capsule. (NASA Release 65-15)
The impact of a meteorite might have begun life on earth, Dr. Brian Mason, U.S. National Museum, told the annual meeting of the Geochemical Society of America in Kansas City. Scientists had speculated that the presence of organic compounds—substances containing carbon and nitrogen—in meteorites indicated that life exists, or had once existed, elsewhere in the universe. Mason noted that such compounds could be made without life, but added: “I believe . . . they may be a forerunner of life. A falling meteorite may be the way life got started.” Mason said that most meteorites appeared to come from the asteroid belt which orbits the sun between Mars and Jupiter. This belt might be a planet that never collected to become a single body, he suggested. Dr. Mason was conducting research on the chemical differences a man-earth environment had imposed on meteorites. (Houston Chron., 12/5/65)
Discussing the need for sustaining engineering funds for Centaur starting in fy 1966, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications: “A preliminary study and design phase is being initiated by NASA this Fiscal Year [for adaptation of the Centaur to the Saturn ib] . The primary mission for this vehicle is the Voyager. Initial studies indicate this vehicle is capable of launching a payload to Mars in excess of 8000 pounds during all of the opportunities in the 1970’s. Generally, the modifications necessary to create this stage combination are not particularly difficult. They do represent a large engineering effort, but there is nothing apparent at this time which indicates that new technologies will be required. The Centaur will be mounted, along with the Voyager, inside a fairing the size of the Saturn (260-inch diameter). By constructing this size fairing the technical problems associated with adaptation of the Centaur to this new booster are significantly reduced and the diameter required for all of the Voyager missions is obtained.” Dr. Newell described NASA’s sustaining university program as an effort “to broaden the national research base in areas of importance to the national space effort and increase our capability to replenish continually the reservoir of basic knowledge. . . . “In response to the continuing manpower requirements, NASA conducts a predoctoral training program, under which grants are made to universities to select and train outstanding students in space-related fields. Specialized training for selected students offers them identification with the national space effort, and involves them directly in the new programs of the space age. . . . “At the present time, about 1,957 students are in training at 131 institutions. The disciplines represented by these 1,957 students are distributed as follows: physical sciences, 51 percent; engineering, 37 percent; life sciences, 8 percent; behavioral sciences, 4 percent ... In September 1965, about 1,275 new students will begin their three years of study and research as NASA predoctoral trainees. At that time, 142 institutions, located in every state in the union, will be participating. With the proposed budget of $25 million for fiscal year 1966, about 1,300 new students would enter the program. Consequently, the NASA goal of an output of 1,000 Ph.D.’s per year will not be reached before fiscal year 1968 or fiscal year 1969 ... Of the students participating to date, 40 trainees have received their Ph.D. degrees. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 634—35)
Smithsonian Institution’s National Air Museum placed on display a quarter-scale model of the gt-3 spacecraft, a full-scale model of ranger IX along with some of the photos it took, and a model of mariner IV Mars probe. The spacecraft were part of an exhibit depicting NASA’s broad program of space research. (NASA Release
mariner iv, nasa’s Mars flyby and photographic probe, reached the distance of one AU (Astronomical Unit) from earth at 9 p.m. EST. An Astronomical Unit is the mean distance of the earth from the sun that had been established, partially from data received from mariner ii, as 92,956,000 mi. The probe had traveled over 271 million mi. in its orbit; its velocity relative to the earth was 51,442 mph. (nasa Release 65-171)
mariner iv, 49,373,799 mi. from earth and traveling 34,738 mph relative to earth, had covered 206,868,340 mi. in its journey toward Mars at 9:00 a.m. est. (nasa Release 65-111)
mariner iv spacecraft took and recorded IOV2 photographs of black space on command from the Goldstone Tracking Station in California. Playback of five of the black-space pictures began on command, mariner iv now was more than 171 million miles from earth, 11 million miles from Mars, (jpl Release)
NASA announced it had determined the areas of Mars to be photographed by mariner iv’s tv camera during the July 14 fly-by. Recording of the first picture would occur when the spacecraft was approximately 8,400 miles above the Martian surface, mariner’s camera would be pointing at the northern Martian desert, Amazonis. The camera would then sweep southeast below the Martian equator covering the Mare Sirenum, the southern desert Phaethontis, Aonius Sinus, and into the terminator or shadow line. The spacecraft would be about 6,300 mi. above Mars for the final picture, (nasa Release 65—42)
NASA announced that mariner iv, scheduled to reach the vicinity of Mars July 14, had traveled over 168 million mi.—more than half way. (NASA Release 65-80)
Saturn V launch vehicle was under consideration by NASA for its Voyager program of unmanned planetary exploration, beginning with a 1971 Mars mission. NASA had considered developing a Saturn IB/Centaur launch vehicle, but the greater thrust of the three-stage 7.5-million-lb. thrust Saturn V would give more flexibility to planning early Voyager missions and would also provide the launch vehicle capability at the beginning of the Voyager program necessary for future missions. Saturn V, being developed by MSFC, would undergo its first flight test in 1967. (nasa Release 65-328)
mariner iv, launched two months ago, was 11,873,789 mi. from earth and moving toward Mars at a speed of 12,291 mph relative to the earth at 9 a.m. est. Velocity relative to the sun was 67,086 mph. (nasa Release 65-21)
$12 million, 210-ft.-dia. antenna at jpl’s Goldstone Tracking Station, Calif., was being readied to permit the tracking of very distant space vehicles sending faint signals to earth, including mariner iv, now in solar orbit. Called the Mars station, the antenna would be able to track a signal with a strength of only one-thousandth of one-billionth of one watt. (Wash. Post, 10/8/65, A3)
mariner iv successfully performed a final .tracking correction before its encounter with Mars on July 14. A preprogramed command electronically altered the look-angle of the star sensor to compensate for the changing relationship between the spacecraft, the sun, and Canopus. The star sensor must be pointed at Canopus so that the Mars probe would be properly aligned and stabilized in attitude. (nasa Release 65-198)
Dr. N. M. Sissakian of the Soviet Academy of Sciences said in an article in Krasnaya Zvezda that the attention of Soviet biomedical researchers had been increasingly drawn to the complex effects of combinations of spaceflight factors. They were interested in the stability of cells and organisms to very low temperatures, and the effect of artificial cooling of animals on their ability to withstand oxygen deprivation, acceleration, radiation, and other factors. The ability of algae and lower animals to survive a vacuum was of interest to exobiologists, as was the ability of certain chemical compounds to screen out harmful effects of ultraviolet irradiation. As part of the continuing effort to simulate conditions existing on other planets and study their effects, soil infusoria were found able to adapt to the wide temperature range in a chamber simulating Martian atmosphere. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/3/65, 6)
Pictures of Mars relayed to earth by mariner iv would be released to the public within 36 to 48 hrs. after they were taken July 14, NASA announced, mariner iv was expected to take more than 20 photographs in about 21 min. and radio them back to earth in digital form; while not as detailed as the Ranger photographs, they were expected to make a valuable contribution to space exploration. mariner iv would pass within 5,600 mi. of the planet. The pictures would be taken at somewhat greater distances while Mars was in sunlight relative to the spacecraft, fNASA Release 65-210; upi, NYT, 6/29/65)
mariner IV had functioned in space for more than 1,100 hr. on its 6,000-hr. flight to Mars, and had flown 81.3 million mi., leaving some 245 million mi. to be travelled before the spacecraft would encounter Mars next July. The earth-MARiNER distance was 8,342,946 mi. at 9 a.m. EST with the spacecraft travelling 9,276 mph relative to the earth and 69,462 mph relative to the sun. (nasa Release 65-12, 1/14/65)
mariner iv changed the rate of sending scientific data from 33^3 to 8U; bits of information per second by an automatic switching operation. This was the first command initiated by the spacecraft itself since it performed its mid-course maneuver Dec. 5. mariner iv had traveled nearly 63 million miles in its 325-million-mile flight to Mars; the straight-line distance between earth and the spacecraft was 6,156,704 miles. Systems were operating normally after 36 days in space. (nasa Release 65-4)
Plans for the exploration of Mars called for an engineering test shot in 1969 and an unmanned landing in 1971, Robert F. Fellows, NASA program chief for planetary atmospheres, said at Fifth Annual Space Conference at VPI. Additional unmanned Mars landings were scheduled for 1973 and 1975: larger capsules—up to three tons— were expected to' land in the early 1980’s. Fellows said that the 1971 mission would require two pieces of hardware: an orbiter that would circle Mars for up to 50 yrs. and a capsule that would be lowered to the surface of the planet. The orbiter would have a scientific payload up to 300 lbs. to relay information to earth for about a year. The capsule would penetrate the thin Martian atmosphere protected by a heat shield and, after landing, deploy its instruments, take soil samples, and relay the data to earth. Fellows confirmed that the interplanetary mission after Mars would be to Venus, with Jupiter next, (ap, Wash. Post, 8/26/65, A10)
NASA requested that final proposals for scientific experiments for the 1971 Voyager missions to Mars be submitted by Nov. 19. Selection would be made by July 1, 1966. All 1971 Voyager experiments on the landing craft would be subject to strict sterilization requirements. (nasa Release 65-297)
At aiaa/aflc/asd Support for Manned Flight Conference in Dayton, Ohio, Temple W. Neumann of Philco Corp. reviewed studies of manned Mars missions and discussed the importance of “early biological precursor missions” to Mars. He concluded: “It has been shown that the lack of biological, as well as critical environmental, data about Mars can have important ramifications in not only the cost, but possibly even in the feasibility of performing early manned missions to Mars. The importance of preliminary knowledge about the interaction of possible Martian organisms with man and his equipment has been shown to significantly affect surface operations, decontamination requirements, and equipment reliability. Further, the need for some preliminary data about the nature of Martian organisms is necessary in order to intelligently design an experimental program for use by the first manned landing expedition. The conclusion can therefore be supported that a precursor biological mission, such as that represented by the current ABL studies, is mandatory in the early 1970 time period if manned missions are to make effective use of the mid-1980 launch opportunities.” (Text, aiaa Paper 65-249)
mariner iv, speeding toward Mars for a rendezvous in July, has knocked out the romantic notion that the ruddy planet is the site of a dying civilization millions of years older than ours and far wiser,” wrote David Dietz in the Knoxville News-Sentinel. Continuing: “This theory holds that the planet is drying out, losing its atmosphere and its water supply and that the inhabitants have taken refuge in underground cities. “Well, if this is the case, one thing is certain. The Martians forgot to take their radios with them. For the past five months, Mariner 4 has been sending a steady stream of radio chatter back to earth ... If little Mariner 4 can do that, there is no apparent reason why the Martians couldn’t do the same, providing, of course, that there are Martians of superior intelligence.” (Dietz, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 5/21/65)
mariner iv was 70 million mi. on its 325-million-mi. flight to Mars after 40 days in space. All systems were operating normally (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/7/65)
A full-scale model of NASA’s mariner iv Mars probe went on display at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air Museum. Panels explaining the Mariner program would also be displayed; photographs of the Martian surface would be added to the exhibit as they were received. (NASA Release 65-231)
Experts had observed that some plants had an unusual ability to adapt to the most severe physical conditions, reported Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. Plants had been deprived of oxygen or supplied with very small amounts of it, had been exposed to argon or nitrogen atmospheres, and had been exposed to extreme cold in experiments which tested the effects of a simulated Martian climate on plant growth. It had been found that the cucumber, a heat-sensitive variety of plant, could withstand an argon atmosphere and frost; lettuce, tomatoes, beans, turnips, and other plants had been grown in compartments supplied with extremely small amounts of oxygen. This led to the speculation that not only lichens but small shrubs might be indigenous to Mars and that there may in fact be a rich and varied Martian flora. (Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika, 8/65, 96)
mariner iv finished transmitting its 21 photographs of Mars and sent about 10 percent of a 22nd picture before its tape ran out. The later pictures were eagerly awaited by JPL scientists because they should show the dark regions of Mars that some people believed harbor life. The photos were scheduled to be released later this week. (Wash. Post, 7/25/65, A7)
British scientist Dr. J. E. Lovelock told the Third International Symposium on Advances in Gas Chromatography in Houston that although pictures taken from space probes indicated no sign of life on Mars as we know it, life may be there. Dr. Lovelock said it was urgent that the unmanned spacecraft that would land on Mars be designed “so they would not rule out the possibility that life may take different forms and be of some entirely different nature on planets beyond our own.” {Houston Post, 10/19/65)
Photographs of Mars returned by NASA mariner iv showed surface features which could be interpreted as possible Martian canals, wrote Eric Burgess, a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in London in a letter to the Society. Burgess interpreted a dark, 30-mi.-wide streak shown on photograph No. 11 as a rift valley. This surface feature occurred at the same location on Mars where some astronomers claimed to have seen canals. Burgess said the photograph revealed that the escarpments passed through the rim of a large lOO-mi.-wide Martian crater, indicating that this particular rift valley appeared after the formation of the crater. (L.A. Times, 8/16/65)
nasa mariner iv was 85 million miles from earth and traveling faster than 48,000 mph, nasa announced. A radio signal from the spacecraft, traveling at the speed of light, would take more than 7% min. to reach a ground station. The Mars probe was returning scientific measurements and engineering data continuously and daily setting a new record for distance of communications, (nasa Release 65-167)
U.S.S.R.’s zond ii would pass within 900 mi. of Mars on Aug. 6, according to Soviet space scientist Prof. Mstislav Keldysh. This announcement was relayed by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, who quoted Keldysh as saying ZOND II weighed about 2,000 lbs. Dr. Sheldon speculated that the probe’s considerable weight—four times more than mariner iv—could mean “it may be doing something more than a simple fly-by” of Mars, (upi, Denver, Post 3/10/65; upi, NYT, 3/11/65, 42)
mariner iv received 12 commands from JPL to check out spacecraft equipment that would be used if the spacecraft was still operating normally when it reached Mars next July 14. These commands dropped a lens cover off the television camera, turned on a scanning platform that carried the camera and two Mars sensors, turned on portions of television system and checked out the capability of mariner iv to perform the encounter sequence. It was not planned to take television pictures during this sequence. The lens cover was dropped at this time rather than at planet encounter to shake loose any possible dust particles that might interfere with the Canopus sensor, a light sensing device that locked on the star Canopus to prevent the spacecraft from rolling. (NASA Release 65—43)
MARINER IV was nearly 40 million mi. from earth, traveling 30,000 mph relative to the sun. It had covered 188 million mi. in its orbit around the sun. The Mars probe had transmitted to earth more than 160 million bits of engineering and scientific information about planetary space, (nasa Release 65-95)
A warning that “In looking for life on Mars we could establish for ourselves the reputation of being the greatest Simple Simons of all time” came from Dr. Philip H. Abelson in an editorial in Science. Dr. Abelson was editor of the magazine and director of the Carnegie Institution’s Geophysical Laboratory. He said he did not believe that life, particularly life resembling that on earth, would be found on Mars and proposed “a few inexpensive experiments” on earth to save years, billions of dollars, and the possibility of “considerable eventual disappointment” if the search for life on Mars should prove fruitless. Attempts to sterilize spacecraft to prevent them from carrying earth organisms to Mars might add “many years and billions of dollars” to the cost, the editorial said. It suggested, instead, careful selection of experiments to be sent to Mars and “relatively inexpensive studies here on earth” to determine whether sterilization were really necessary. (Clark, NYT, 2/13/65; Wash. Post, 2/13/65) During February: Dr. Leo Steg, manager of General Electric Co.’s Space Sciences Laboratory, Missile and Space Div., was named Engineer of the Year—1964. He was cited for outstanding contributions to the advancement of space science and the engineering profession. The award was presented by an amalgamation of 41 societies during the 1965 National Engineers’ Week in Philadelphia. (Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 13)
NASA awarded $100,000 in initial funds to General Dynamics Corp.’s Convair Div. to determine vehicle design modifications and ground support requirements for combining the Centaur as a third stage with the two-stage Saturn ib launch vehicle. The combination was being proposed to launch unmanned Voyager spacecraft to Mars in 1971. Study would be under direction of lrc. (nasa Centaur Proj. Off.; Gen. Dyn. Corp. Release)
Soviet astronomer Sofia Kozlovskaya reported at the All-Union Conference on Planetary Cosmogony in Moscow that the density of matter on Mars and Venus was greater than that on earth: matter of Venus had approximately two per cent more iron; Mars had approximately six to eight per cent more iron than earth. In making these calculations, Sofia Kozlovskaya used a new “more exact model of the earth” which she had built with the data from recent seismic observations. (Tass, 7/20/65)
NASA’s mariner IV began feeling the gravitational pull of Mars a week before it was scheduled to take the first close-up pictures of the planet. The tug was noticed at 5 p.m. edt in a slight change in speed as the 575-lb. spacecraft, 128,054,720 mi. from earth and 1,721,770 mi. from Mars, neared the end of its 228-day trip. At noon, the speed relative to Mars was 9,879 mph. Tracking engineers said the speed, which had been dropping two mph every six hours, would lessen because of Mars’ gravity at a rate of one mph every six hours through July 10 when the speed would begin to increase. No further sensing of the planet’s presence in space was expected until July 14 when instruments aboard mariner iv might detect an increase in radiation, (ap, NYT, 7/8/65, 13; ap, Orl. Sent., 7/7/65)
mariner iv set world space communications distance record shortly after 3:00 a.m. EST when it reached a straight-line distance from earth of 66 million mi. Soviet scientists reported two years ago that they lost radio contact with their MARS I spacecraft March 21, 1963, after 149 days of flight at more than 65 million mi. (nasa Release 65141)
NASA’s mariner iv spacecraft, at 8:02 a.m., EST, automatically switched from its omnidirectional antenna to fixed narrow beam antenna to communicate with earth, thereby becoming radio-ready for the remaining 130 days of its Mars flight. JPL received report from tracking station at Canberra, Australia, of a prompt increase in signal strength. (NASA Release 65-78)
JPL scientists had sent notices to professional and amateur astronomers asking them to keep the strip of Mars over which mariner IV would fly next July 14 under surveillance from now on, with special emphasis on photography in March. “We don’t know what we may learn through this procedure,” a JPL spokesman said, “but we want all the information we can get. Suppose, for example, mariner photographs what looks like a dust storm. We’ll have a better chance of determining that fact if we have pictures of the same phenomenon taken through earth telescopes, even though it’s a different storm months earlier.” (ap, Seattle Post-Intelligencer, 2/15/65)
United Press International (upi) reported that nasa had postponed until next week an attempt to have mariner iv photographic probe take pictures of the blackness of space. The pictures would provide scientists with a means of editing mariner iv’s photos of Mars. Communication problems forced the delay. (UPI, NYT, 8/27/65, 19)
Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of the National Aeronautics and Space Council staff told mit students:	“The Russians are pretty cautious about disclosing much about their launch vehicles, but we know pretty well what vehicles they’re using.” Dr. Sheldon noted that ZOND II, the Soviet Mars probe, would pass near the planet perhaps one month after mariner iv. The U.S. Mars probe was due to come within 5,400 mi. of the planet on July 14.	(Boston Globe, 2/17/65)
The rash of reports on strange visitations to earth received comment from Walter Sullivan in the New York Times: “Whether or not [flying saucer enthusiasts] are aware of it, this is the time when space probes would be arriving from Mars, if inhabitants of-that planet were engaged in a similar effort [to the mariner iv Mars flyby]. The earth overtakes Mars every two years and two months, coming within a few dozen million miles of it. There was such an approach this spring. The United States and the Soviet Union anticipated it by firing vehicles toward Mars last November. If there were any Martians equipped to do so, they would have fired their vehicles toward earth at about the same time,” (Sullivan. ATT, 7/13/651
Checks of distributions of Martian and lunar crater diameters indicated that the visible surface of Mars was 2.2-to-3 X 109 years old, Alan B. Binder, Univ. of Arizona, reported in Science. This result implied that in the early history of Mars large-scale subaerial erosion occurred. Of 69 Martian craters with diameters greater than 10 km., 13% had central peaks. This compared favorably with the frequency (11.7%) of central peaks among lunar craters and may indicate the peaks resulted from the impact mechanism rather than post-impact volcanism. Well-defined system of lineaments shown in mariner iv photographs may indicate that Mars had lost appreciable angular momentum during its history. (Binder, Science, 5/20/66, 1053-5)
Team of jpl scientists left Cal Tech on first NASA-sponsored investigation of Antarctica. Scientists would spend 2lA mos. in Wright, Victoria, Taylor, and Beacon Valleys taking samples and conducting tests that might prove valuable in future unmanned exploration of Mars. (jpl Release, 11/13/66)
Six-week NASA-sponsored exploration trip to search for plant life in Chile’s Atacama Desert—area resembling Martian terrain because of its extreme aridity—was begun by Richard W. Davies, jpl Advanced Studies Section, and two other jpl scientists. Explorers, who planned to send back 1,000	lbs. of sandy soil for analysis, would concentrate on high plateau near Calama, 80 mi. inland and 5,000 to 8,000 ft. above sea level. Similar trip last year had yielded a microflora in top four inches of sand. (jpl Release)
Comparing U.S. and U.S.S.R. Mars exploration efforts in Science, Bruce C. Murray, Cal Tech Associate Professor of Planetary Science, and Merton E.	Davies, rand Corp., said of nasa’s mariner iv July 14, 1965, flyby: "The American scientific community should, and evidently does, feel proud and gratified that the Mariner mission to Mars, through successful utilization of national resources, not only accomplished a remarkable technological feat but also discovered extraordinary new facts ... beyond the reach of earth-based instruments.” Authors termed "disappointing” U.S. decisions to terminate Mariner program, fly extra Mariner C spacecraft to Venus in 1967, drop plans for 1971 Voyager launch, and "fill the gap” with an abbreviated 1969 Atlas-Centaur program. U.S.S.R., they noted, had spent "between five and ten times as much on flight programs for planetary exploration” as U.S. and, in spite of "six consecutive failures in their efforts to explore Mars,” may have developed a reliable 2,000-lb. spacecraft for Mars flyby. Authors predicted U.S.S.R. would launch two Zond spacecraft in December 1966: "It will be surprising to us if at least one . . . does not reach the planet and return new facts about it.” They suggested 1971 as earliest likely date for Soviet landing of survivable payload on Martian surface and concluded that by 1967 "the U.S. will be ready to make an enduring national commitment to the exploration of the planets, and be ready to demonstrate intellectual appreciation of discovery as well as enthusiasm for technological achievement.” (Science, 2/25/66, 945-54) Week of February 28: NASA delegation extended President Johnson’s invitation for European participation in U.S. manned and unmanned space programs in discussions with officials of West Germany, France, U.K., and Italy. Delegation had been instructed not to make any offers or commitments but to express potential opportunities of participation in future U.S. space flights on equal basis with U.S. scientists. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 2/28/66, 23) During February: Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of msfc Research Projects Laboratory, summarized progress in development of electric propulsion in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "The first laboratory experiments with electrostatic thrustors began in 1958. In the early thrustor models, power efliciencies and propellant-utilization efficiencies were 20-30%; lifetimes did not exceed a few hours; ion-current densities were less than 1 milliamp/cm2; the problem of beam neutralization was unsolved— was not even well understood. Mission applications seemed far in the future. Today, only seven years later, electrostatic thrustors are very close to flight readiness. Two systems, the ion-bombardment system and the surface-ionization system, have reached power efficiencies and propellant efficiencies above 90%; they produce ion currents of about 20 milliamp/cm2. Beam neutralization has proven in the laboratory as well as in actual space tests, and engine lifetimes of several-thousand hours have been demonstrated. With a few more years of refinement and quality engineering, these ion thrustors will be ready for extended missions into interplanetary space. . . .” (A&A, 2/66, 71-2) During February: Arnold Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, noted two viewpoints on achieving Soviet cooperation in space research in Astronautics & Aeronautics:	. . the one holds that the answer . . . lies in finding a suitable device, either bilateral or international—a new idea, an imaginative approach, a twist ... for example, a proposal for an international space laboratory. . . . "The other view is that the device is substantially irrelevant and that it is the basic relationship between the two countries, the basic political and military realities, which will determine at any given time whether cooperation is feasible or not.” (A&A, 2/66, 20)
jpl selected Litton Industries, Inc., Guidance and Control Systems Div., for negotiation of a $3-million contract to design, fabricate, and check out data automatic subsystem (Das) for 1969 Mariner (unmanned) flights to Mars, jpl had management responsibility to NASA for Mariner/ Mars project, (nasa Release 66-289)
Threat of contamination of Mars made search for that planet’s indigenous life, at any stage of evolution from prebiotic to extinct, an urgent undertaking, according to Biology Working Group’s section on exobiology in third and final report of nas Space Science Board Summer Study (June-July 1965) at Woods Hole, Mass. Report, Space Research: Directions for the Future, Part Three, said: ". . . the exploration of Mars, with initial emphasis on the detection and characterization of possible Martian life, should constitute the major scientific goal of the United States space program in the period following the manned lunar landing.” High priority in field of environmental biology was given to study effects of weightlessness, with particular attention to "synergistic or antagonistic effects from simultaneously imposed stresses of radiation and weightlessness.” Orbiting research facilities with six- to eight-man crews to study effects of prolonged space flight preceding extended manned missions were recommended by Medicine and Physiology Working Group. Report urged series of manned flights, ground-based studies, and biosatellite experiments to yield data for planetary exploration. Group examining NASA-university relations urged increases in training budget and facilities and research grants, plus a program providing graduate students'with flight opportunities. (Text)
NASA had tentatively selected six experiments to be carried on two Mariner Mars spacecraft scheduled for launch by Atlas-Centaur boosters between early February and mid-April 1S69: two television cameras, infrared spectrometer, infrared radiometer, ultraviolet spectrometer, celestial mechanics experiment, and S-band occultation experiment. Experiments were selected to extend knowledge of Martian atmosphere and visible features of Martian terrain and to gather additional data to continue planning for landing instrumented capsules on the planet, jpl had project management responsibility for Mariner Mars 1969 missions. (nasa Release 66-174)
Analysis of available evidence concerning possibility of an advanced form of life on Mars by Univ. of Maryland astronomy professor Dr. Ernst J. Opik appeared in Science. Dr. Opik said the most heavily eroded craters visible in photos taken by mariner iv during the July 14, 1965, flyby dated from the earliest period of the planet’s history, implying that Mars had never had a dense, moist, earth-like atmosphere for any extended period and would therefore be a poor prospect for life. Dr. Opik argued strongly for at least a primitive form of vegetation, citing in particular a region of 1.2 million sq. km. that had darkened rapidly from 1946 to 1954. He likened this to the change a distant observer would have seen on earth as a consequence of the virgin lands development program in U.S.S.R. Vegetation was the best explanation for such changes; however, if it were not vegetation, "it must be something specifically Martian.” The planet, he added, "may become a source of great surprises in the future.” (Science, 7/15/66, 255-65)
mariner iv spacecraft, which took the world’s first close-up pictures of Mars July 14, 1965, was again in contact with earth, reporting on the space environment and its own operating performance after 18 mos. of flight. NASA said telemetry from mariner iv, received over a 197.5-million-mi. radio link with the Deep Space Network’s Goldstone Tracking Station, indicated that all spacecraft systems were operating properly. Launched Nov. 28, 1964, mariner iv had exceeded its design life by more than 100% and gave indications it might function until 1968. (nasa Release 66-135; jpl Release)
jpl had awarded $200,000 contract to Avco Corp.’s Space Div. for task work in jpl’s new $1.5 million Sterilization Assembly Development Laboratory (sadl). Starting in mid-1967, SADL would be sterilization testing headquarters for Voyager spacecraft, scheduled for Mars landing in the 1970s. (jpl Release)
LaRC would test parachutes for possible landing of instrumented unmanned capsules on Mars beginning in summer 1966, in support of NASA’s Voyager planetary exploration project. Parachutes would be carried by balloons and sounding rockets to 130,000-ft. altitude—where thin earth atmosphere simulates Martian atmosphere—and would then be deployed behind test units accelerated to mach 1.2 in level flight [see Aug. 30]. (nasa Release 66-90; LaRC Release)
First anniversary of first close-up photos of Mars taken by nasa’s mariner iv from distance of 134 million mi. Spacecraft was launched Nov. 28, 1964. (NYT, 7/26/66, 49)
nasa selected Northrop Corp. for final negotiations on $5-million contract for design, development, fabrication, and testing of "engineering mechanics subsystems for Mariner Mars ’69 spacecraft.” Contract would be managed by JPL. (nasa Release 66-170)
nasa selected Martin Co. for negotiation of $3-million, incentive-fee contract to build 11 experimental spacecraft equipped with parachute payloads "to investigate parachute designs and techniques for landing instrumented capsules on Mars.” Four would be launched by high-altitude balloon systems and seven by Honest John-Nike rockets under ' LaRc’s Planetary Reentry Parachute Program, (nasa Release 66-229)
NASA mariner iv, launched from etr Nov. 28, 1964, for Mars flyby July 14, 1965, was 216 million miles from earth—greatest distance it would reach before gradually returning to within 30 million miles in 1967—and still operating. Goldstone Tracking Station of NASA’s Deep Space Network (dsn) tracked a signal from the spacecraft, but no attempt was made to receive data because of the extreme distance, dsn would continue attempting to contact mariner iv once a month to see if it was still operating. Daily engineering and scientific data from the spacecraft had been suspended Oct. 1, 1965, by ground command that set new space communications record of 191,059,922 mi.—more than twice the distance from earth to the sun. {nasa Release 66-7)
Evidence for volcanic origin of lunar craters was presented in a letter to Nature by Univ. of Western Australia geologist G. J. H. McCall. Eleventh frame of photographs by nasa’s mariner iv spacecraft revealed scalloping in walls of Martian craters comparable to scalloping in terrestrial calderas—such as Krakatau, Indonesia, Aso, Japan, and Crater Lake, Ore. McCall had also detected scalloping in lunar craters, which he believed "closely resemble terrestrial volcano-tectonic craters.” Taking "pronounced scalloping ... to be a valid indication of volcano-tectonic subsidence,” McCall questioned whether lunar craters could be explained by hypervelocity impact. (McCall, Nature, 9/24/66, 1384-5)
First of series of high-altitude experiments to investigate parachute designs and techniques that might be incorporated into Voyager spacecraft scheduled for unmanned soft landing on Mars in 1973 was conducted by nasa from Walker afb. The 15-ft.-diameter, 1,600-lb. disc-shaped flight unit containing packaged test parachute, instruments to record loads and parachute deployment, and ring of 12 small rockets for acceleration was carried by balloon to 120,000- to 125,000-ft. altitude then released on ground command. Acceleration rockets apparently ignited as planned, propelling unit upward at about 850 mph into arching trajectory. Parachute deployed; system descended in planned recovery area at wsmr. Test was apparent success; extensive performance analyses were being made. Balloon system had been tested July 18. Parachute project was managed by LaRC and coordinated with jpl, which managed Voyager program, (nasa Release 66-225; AP, Balt. Sun, 8/31/66)
Mars polar caps are white with dry ice, not frozen water in the form of frost, wrote Dr. Robert B. Leighton and Dr. Bruce C. Murray of Cal Tech in Science. Their argument was based on mariner iv’s July 14, 1965, flyby which indicated that planet’s atmosphere is very thin and largely composed of carbon dioxide which, in frozen form, is dry ice. Theory that white on Mars polar caps is ordinary frost was based on observations of its reflectivity in the infrared and on manner in which it affected orientation of light waves. Authors believed there might be frozen water on Mars, but suggested it is all underground in the form of permafrost. (Science, 7/8/66, 136-44)
Six years of exploratory work at jpl and nasa centers on practical problems of landing on Mars was summarized by R. P. Thompson of jpl in Astronautics & Aeronautics. He concluded that: (1) design of first lander should be simple and conservative, and capable of thorough testing so that no single failure mode would cause "catastrophic failure of mission”; (2) independent backup should be provided for every critical event in landing sequence with "selective” redundance to achieve high reliability; and (3) capsule should be instrumented to allow diagnosis of failures. (A&A, 7/66, 66-73) During July: David H. Stoddard, M.D., Director of NASA Occupational Medical Division, cited in Hospital Topics two "ideal” physiological monitors developed in space medicine—biotelemetry, which permitted immediate observation of data, although subject was aware he was being monitored; and electrocardiocording, which did not allow immediate observation but "permits the subject to go where he pleases, do what he pleases and to almost forget that he is being monitored.” (Hospital Topics, 7/66, 39)
Computer technique developed by JPL scientist Dr. Robert Nathan and applied to 12 photos of the lunar surface transmitted by NASA’s surveyor i spacecraft revealed details as small as 1/50 of an inch and, in some cases, apparently doubled observable characteristics. Enhancement process had been used successfully to intensify photos transmitted by NASA’s three Ranger spacecraft and mariner iv Mars probe. (nasa Release 66-206; jpl Release)
nasa would negotiate $1.25-million contract with Texas Instruments, Inc., for design, fabrication, and testing of telemetry subsystem for 1969 Mariner missions to Mars. Motorola, Inc., was selected for design, fabrication, and testing of command subsystem for Mariner spacecraft under $2-million contract. Both contracts would be managed by jpl. (nasa Release 66-186)
System of two interconnected balloons 815-ft. long designed to test parachute deceleration system of nasa’s Voyager spacecraft—scheduled to land on Mars in 1973—was lofted by usaf from Holloman afb. Helium in small upper balloon inflated main balloon—largest ever launched— to 26-million-cu.-ft. capacity as both rose to 130,000-ft. altitude where atmosphere was believed to be as thin as that on Mars. 1,800-lb. simulated Voyager spacecraft payload was jettisoned by radio command seven hours after launch, successfully parachuted to earth, and was later recovered near Phoenix, Ariz. Main balloon rose to higher altitude and ruptured as expected. Parachute program was managed by LaRc; Voyager program by JPL. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/19/66; Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 34)
NASA had invited 33 firms to submit proposals on a 12-mo. study of Mars and Venus flyby missions in 1975-1982 period using Saturn/Apollo hardware with minimum modifications. Study would emphasize earth escape stages based on modifications of the upper stages of Saturn V launch vehicle (S-II and S-IVB), orbital tanking and assembly operations, launch windows, spacecraft, and probes to be launched from spacecraft to planet’s surface, (msfc Release 66-73)
msfc had awarded General Electric Co. a $147,884, 12-mo. contract to study design and systems requirements of an electrically propelled space vehicle for manned Mars landing missions and to identify areas of technology in which concentrated research would produce maximum benefit to manned planetary program, (msfc Release 66-271)
NASA’s mahiner iv had completed two years in space, flown 1,025,082,830 mi., and continued to operate properly, reporting its condition to earth three times a week. Launched Nov. 28, 1964, spacecraft had completed primary mission Aug. 2, 1965, after transmitting to earth 22 pictures of Martian surface. Photos were made when it flew within 6,118 mi. of planet July 14, 1965. (nasa Release 66-304; jpl Release)
New absorption bands, probably caused in part by reduced gases in the Martian atmosphere, had been found in near-infrared spectrum of Mars by Fourier spectroscopy, Lewis D. Kaplan, jpl, and Janine and Pierre Connes, Observatoire de Meudon and Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France, reported in Science. The authors believed the presence of such constituents might have "important implications for the possibility and nature of life on Mars.” (Science, 8/12/66, 739-40)
Sixty-day Sealab III experiment would be conducted 430 ft below the Pacific off San Clemente Island in winter 1967 as part of usn’s “Man-in-the-Sea” program. Underwater laboratory would be staffed by five eight-man diving teams rotating on 12-day shifts. Aquanauts would conduct experimental salvage techniques and oceanographic and marine biology research; and undergo series of physiological and human performance tests. Sealab Ill’s long-range goal was to develop capability for rescue and salvage operations under ocean’s surface and to determine how submerged continental shelf could be used militarily. In Sealab I experiment, conducted July 20-30, 1964, four divers were submerged 192 ft beneath the Atlantic; in Sealab II, Aug. 28-Oct. 10, 1965, three teams of 10 divers alternated in spending two-week periods 205 ft beneath the Pacific off La Jolla, Calif, (dod Release 72-67) performing photosynthesis. Sullivan concluded: “Despite the perceptible swing of the pendulum toward the possibility of life on Mars, a wide disparity of views on the nature of the Martian environment was presented at the meeting. It was evident that the information is still insufficient to assess the likelihood of life on Mars or even to design experiments for landings there that would most effectively test for the existence of life. . . .” (Sullivan, NYT, 2/12/67, 12E)
Communications with NASA’s Mariner IV Mars probe, launched Nov. 28, 1964, were terminated because of greatly reduced telemetry availability. Spacecraft had responded to series of commands Oct. 25-27 and had continued operating satisfactorily until it exhausted its gas supply in the attitude control system Dec. 7 and began to pitch, roll, and yaw. On Dec. 10 and 11 Mariner IV recorded 83 micrometeoroid hits which apparently induced severe perturbations in pitch and yaw causing degraded signal strength. During its 3.06-yr lifetime, Mariner IV had traveled more than 1.5 billion mi in heliocentric orbit, taken world’s first closeup photos of Mars from 5,500-mi altitude, and returned excellent data, (nasa Proj Off; AP, B Sun, 12/23/67; W Post, 12/23/67, A5)	_
Conclusion in Mar. 24 Science article by Bruce C. Murray of Cal Tech and his associates about probable contamination of Mars and Venus by U.S.S.R.’s Zond 11 and Venus III received comment from Dr. Richard W. Porter, member of International Relations Committee of NRc’s Space Science Board, and from Britain’s leading radio astronomer, Sir Bernard Lovell. Murray and associates had presented information: tracking data from Jodrell Bank Experimental Station had indicated that Zond II, launched Nov. 30, 1964, had been on collision course with Mars, terminating Aug. 6, 1965; Mstislav Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, had said Zond II would pass within 1,448 km (900 mi) of Mars; Venus III, launched Nov. 12, 1965, may have crashlanded on Venus’ surface Mar. 1, 1966; radio communications had been maintained with Venus III throughout the flight hut were lost as the probe approached Venus; no telemetric data were received in final moments before impact. In a letter to editor of Science, Porter wrote: “Their conclusion with respect to Venus is based largely on what was not said by the Soviets about sterilization of the flyby bus and on the authors’ assumption that the capsule separation and bus deflection maneuvers were not made automatically, even after loss of radio contact.” Porter said authors’ conclusion about Mars was also based on insufficient evidence and noted that in discussions with “highly placed” Soviet scientists during spring 1965, he had received impression that Zond II’s miss distance was likely to be much greater than 900 mi. In his letter to editor of Science regarding Murray and associates’ statements on probable contamination of Mars and Venus, Sir Bernard Lovell noted that Zond II’s signals were so strong that there should have been no difficulty in tracking the probe at Mars encounter; also, miss distance of 1,500 km (932 mi) was within the accuracy of Jodrell Bank calculations. Sir Bernard Lovell would “prefer to accept the statement of the President of the [Soviet] Academy [of Sciences (Keldysh) ] about the miss distance. . . .” (Science, 3/24/67, 1505-11; 8/4/67, 487-8)
Cosmos, Minn.—a community of 560—had given all its streets astronomical names such as Mars, Jupiter, Pegasus, and Comet. (AP, NYT, 5/22/67)
A 2,000-mph usaf SR—71 reconnaissance aircraft on routine training flight from Beale afb, Calif., crashed near Lovelock, Nev. Its two crew members ejected safely. Aircraft, built for usaf by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. as successor to the TJ—2, was third SR-71 to crash on routine flight; others had crashed Jan. 25, 1966, and April 13, 1967. (AP, NYT, 10/27/67, 41)	_ JPL scientists were “delighted” with the firing of midcourse guidance engine, and with transmission of pictures of Mars taken by Mariner IV more than two years ago. Scientists reported “a flawless burn . . . [which] proved we can restart engines in space years after we’ve put them there.” Future spacecraft, exploiting this success, could be launched to distant planets where they could take close-up photographs, swing back toward earth, and, on command, transmit pictures. Mariner IV had taken pictures of Mars from an altitude of 5,500 mi; 21 frames had been exposed and recorded on magnetic tape to be telemetered to earth over a 10-day period. As of 8:00 pm edt Oct. 27, Mariner IV was in its 1,062nd day of flight, 35,604,255 mi (57,299,604 km) from earth, and traveling at 3.91 mps (6.29 kps) relative to earth. (NASA Proj Off; O’Toole, W Post, 10/27/67, A3)
St. Louis Univ. scientists Drs. F. C. Bates and Albert Pallman were studying structure and circulation of the lower Martian atmosphere to aid nasa in deciding whether to use a hard- or soft-landing spacecraft on first Mars mission, (upi, NYT, 8/17/67,24)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell wrote to the Editor of Aerospace Technology: “In 1973, NASA proposes to conduct the first of the Voyager series of missions to Mars, using the Saturn launch vehicle. We wish to call the attention of the scientific community to the opportunity of proposing experiments for this initial flight_ “. . . Regardless of the level of funding support obtained for Voyager this fiscal year, it is our plan to begin evaluating scientific proposals on Nov. 1, 1967, and to select scientists for participation in the planning and development steps by Feb. 1968....” (Aero Tech, 8/28/67, 8)
NASA had awarded Electro Optical Systems, Inc., a $2-million contract for design, fabrication, and testing of the power subsystem for the 1969 Mariner Mars mission, (nasa Release 67—17)
jpl scientists Robert J. Parks and Jack N. James were awarded Franklin Institute’s Stuart Ballantine Medal for 1967 by Institute President Wynn L.	LePage. Parks and James were cited for excellence in systems engineering and extraordinary skill in applying techniques of electromagnetic communications to first successful reconnaissance on Mars by Mariner IV. The Ballantine Medal was awarded for outstanding achievement in the fields of communication and reconnaissance which employed electromagnetic radiation, (jpl Lab-Oratory, 11/67, 3)
Mariner IV, launched Nov. 28, 1964, survived apparent micrometeoroid shower. Spacecraft’s cosmic dust detector registered 17 hits within 15 min, while Mariner IV traveled between orbits of earth and Mars. Spacecraft was 29.6 million miles from earth and had traveled about 1.4 billion miles in its 1,020 days of flight. Micrometeoroid shower had caused temporary change in spacecraft’s attitude but no loss of power. Scientists concluded, from one-degree temperature drop inside spacecraft, that only the thermal shield was damaged. Within about a week, spacecraft was operating without any apparent effect from incident. Since photographing Mars in July 1965, Mariner IV had been used for engineering experiments and acquisition of scientific data. (O’Toole, W Post, 9/16/67, A7; NASA Proj Off)
JPL announced development of double vacuum chamber, designed by jpl’s James B. Stephens, to simulate extreme effects of interplanetary space on spacecraft. Called Molsink (molecular sink of outer space), chamber was expected to determine what happened to paint, components, and even microorganisms on spacecraft. The eight-foot-dia chamber would be capable of capturing 99.97% of all condensable molecules emanating from test item by freezing the molecules to the walls at — 400° F with super-cold helium gas. Conventional vacuum chambers had not been able to pump, or capture, more than half of gas molecules flying off test item. Space scientists believed Molsink chamber would provide reliable tool to measure and counteract problem of spacecraft out-gassing. In testing, long periods would simulate actual flight time of spacecraft to planets—four months to Venus, seven months to Mars, for example. The chamber was expected to be fully operational early in 1968, when testing would be stepped up for nasa’s Mariner Mars 1969 exploration program. ( jpl Release 459) Local sunset for second lunar day occurred on Oct. 23. Spacecraft operating time from turn-on command until second sunset was 232 hrs. Total of 1,043 TV pictures were obtained. By sunset Surveyor V had been configured for hibernating through second lunar night. Estimates were that engineering interrogations and compartment heating would be discontinued Oct. 31. (NASA Proj Off; upi, W Post, 10/16/67, A3; AP, NYT, 10/17/67, 9)
oar’s afcrl would launch four 812-ft-long balloon systems from Walker afb in summer 1967 to complete series of five launches conducted by nasa to investigate possible parachute landing systems for Voyager program [see May 9], oar Commander m/g Ernest A. Pinson announced. Scheduled for June 27, July 20, Aug. 9 and 24, flights would evaluate performance of different types of parachutes at pressures and velocities equivalent to a descent through the Martian atmosphere. Each balloon would carry, for release at high altitude, a simulated Voyager capsule and a parachute designed to softland the capsule on Mars. Five cameras—two on the capsule and three on the parachute—would be used to evaluate each test. First flight in the series was conducted Aug. 30, 1966.	(oar Release 67-17; AP, NYT, 6/8/67, 3)
Senate Appropriations Committee ordered favorably reported, with amendments, nasa FY 1968 appropriation bill (H.R. 12474). Action restored $96 million of $516 million cut by House [see Aug. 22]. Two projects— Voyager Mars and nerva ii—were restored by increased funding in Senate move; as approved, bill totaled $4.7 billion. Bill moved to floor of Senate, (nasa lar VI/104; O’Toole, W Post, 10/4/67, A2)
jpl had selected TRW Systems, Inc., for negotiations on a $1-million contract for design, modification, fabrication, and testing of the propulsion subsystem for the 1969 Mariner Mars mission, (nasa Release 67—4)
NASA successfully conducted at WSMR second of five balloon-launched parachute tests to determine effectiveness of parachutes as decelerators in soft-landing unmanned instrumented capsules on Mars. On ground command, 815-ft-long balloon released disc-shaped flight unit containing parachute, eight acceleration rockets, and 500-lb payload at 129,000ft altitude, where earth atmosphere is as thin as that of Mars. Rockets then propelled unit to 140,000-ft altitude; parachute deployed and descended with payload into planned recovery area. Test was part of LaRC’s Planetary Entry Parachute Program to investigate parachute landing systems for Voyager program, (nasa Release 67-170; Roswell Daily Record, 7/28/67; AP, NYT, 7/29/67, 7)
NASA announced plans to use Titan III—D/Centaur in dual launches of 6,000-lb spacecraft consisting of Surveyor-type soft landers mated to Mariner 1971 class Mars orbiters in mid-1973, in Project Viking, to obtain scientific information on life on Mars. Launched 10 days apart, spacecraft would arrive about seven months later, when orbiter propulsion systems would place orbiters and landers in Mars orbit. After reconnaissance, landers would be detached and softland on Mars. (NASA Release 68—207; Pasadena Independent, 12/6/68)
Preliminary “pathfinder” flights could delay U.S.S.R.’s first manned lunar and planetary flights, according to Soviet scientist Vasili Parin in Sovetskaya Rossiya. “Experiments with animals,” preceding interplanetary flight, he said, “will take many months and perhaps many years.” (upi, NYT, 5/4/68, 66)
NASA announced it had authorized JPL to proceed with construction of two Mariner spacecraft for 1971 Mars orbit with funds allocated under approved FY 1969 NASA appropriations bill. In combined mission to assist in establishing touchdown sites for 1973 Mars lander mission, spacecraft would be launched by Adas-Centaur boosters into orbit around Mars to examine Mars polar cap, provide high-resolution coverage of selected areas, and permit oblique views of broad areas of Mars’ surface and, possibly, its moons, Phobos and Deimos. Each spacecraft would complete trip from earth to Mars in six months, with May 1971 launch and November 1971 arrival, and would orbit Mars for three months or more, (nasa Release 68—196; B Sun, 11/14/68, A10; W Post, 11/14/68, D16)
May 28: In second Mars lander experiment [see April 23] NASA concluded JPL B&D program demonstrating feasibility of sending lightweight scientific capsules to Mars by successful 250-ft free-fall drop of 63-lb heat-sterilized planetary landing craft from hovering helicopter onto asphalt pavement at Goldstone Tracking Station. Capsule, which struck at 80 mph, or impact of 2,500 g, was powered by 12-cell silver-zinc battery which produced sufficient electricity after impact to extend wind gauge and to operate radio transmitter and timer aboard Mars lander. Battery was believed to be toughest yet developed, (nasa Release 68— 152; W Star, 9/8/68, A17; Pasadena Independent Star-News, 9/8/68; NYT, 10/15/68, 34; jpl Lab-Oratory 7/68, 8)
JPL soil sciences group, headed by Dr. Roy E. Cameron, reported tests and cultures of Antarctic soil samples in JPL’s walk-in freezer laboratory to determine what micro-organisms lived in extreme cold and to help determine whether life existed on Mars. Samples had come from high, dry valleys in Victorialand near U.S. base at McMurdo, Antarctica. Scientists discovered bacteria, yeasts, molds, and algae, which began to grow within two weeks when Antarctic soil kept laboratory-frozen for over one year was subjected to temperature 68° F or above. Studies were sponsored by nasa and nsf. (nasa Release 68—73)
nasa announced it would launch two Mariner spacecraft, F and G, on flyby missions to Mars in 1969. Project responsibility was assigned to JPL; LeRC would be responsible for launch vehicle. Deep Space Network stations would provide tracking and communications during launch period scheduled between mid-February and mid-April. Spacecraft would reach Mars between end of July and mid-August. Arrival dates of two spacecraft would not be less than five days apart. Atlas-Centaur combination would for first time be used as launch vehicle for planetary exploration. Spacecraft would weigh approximately 900 lb. Mariner III (Nov. 5, 1964) weighed 575 lb. (nasa Special Release)
First recording of pulsar signals at short wavelengths, 2293 me, was made by Drs. Alan MofEet, Ronald D. Ekers, and Richard M. Goldstein of Cal Tech, using 210-ft Mars dish antenna at Goldstone Tracking Station operated by JPX. for NASA. Signals’ energy indicated origin from natural source such as white dwarf stars or neutron stars. CP—1919, one of three pulsars observed, was weakest source ever recorded. At 2293 me, signal was one-hundredth that of other two, though at longer wavelengths signal was one of two strongest of four known pulsars. (“CP” referred to Cambridge pulsar list; number indicated location.) Dr. Moffet placed pulsars 100 to 10,000 light years from earth, in Milky Way Galaxy. Although signal strengths varied, periods remained constant. (Cal Tech Release; Pasadena Independent, 5/15/68)
Tass reported Moscow scientist had compared “spectrometric analysis” of cactus growing in cold areas with spectrographs of “dark areas” of Mars and concluded areas on Mars were covered with cactus-like vegetation. Other tests on cactus, scientists said, proved it could stand extremes of temperature and other conditions similar to those on Mars. (upi, W Star, 4/28/68, A3)
Results of preliminary qualitative study of Mariner VI photos were summarized in Science by Dr. Robert B. Leighton, Dr. Norman H. Horowitz, Dr. Bruce C. Murray, and Dr. Robert P. Sharp of Cal Tech; Alan G. Herriman and Dr. Andrew T. Young of JPL; Bradford A. Smith of New Mexico State Univ.; Merton E. Davies of rand Corp.; and Conway B. Leovy of Univ. of Washington: Surface of Mars “appears similar to that of the Moon, but there are significant differences; some features seen from Earth are characterized; the ‘blue haze’ hypothesis is disproved; and new phenomena associated with the polar cap aTe discovered.” Mars resembled moon in abundance, form, arrangement, and size of craters, but there appeared to be break in size-distribution curve of craters in some parts of Mars not characteristic of moon—apparently because Mars had more effective weathering and transportation process than moon. Similarities between Martian and lunar surfaces included craters with slump blocks, terrace, and radial dry-debris avalanche chutes on steep inner surfaces; central peaks, polygonal outlines, blocky ejecta rims, and irregular ejecta; and irregularly sinuous ridges. Differences included more subdued relief of many Martian craters, flatter floors, fewer central peaks, more subdued debris blankets, absence of obvious secondary craters and rays, and greater abundance of “ghost” craters. Photos showed no sinuous rifles and no distinctive earth-like phenomena such as mountain ranges, tectonic basins, stream-cut topographs, dune fields, playa flats, or other arid-region features. (Science, 8/15/69, 685—90)
jpl radar readings which showed 8.3-mi altitude variation in Mars’ north equatorial zone and included corrected figures for Mars’ ephem-eris, or orbital path, were expected to ensure accuracy of TV cameras aboard Mariners VI and VII, NASA said. Experimenters hoped to obtain photos identifying objects 900 ft across at close approach and pictures were expected to be 500 times better than those taken to date by earth-based telescope cameras. Readings were obtained at NASA’s Goldstone Tracking Station in California by team directed by Dr. Richard M. Goldstein during planet’s closest approach to earth (Mars had been within 45 million mi of earth June 9). They would be of great interest to astronomers because they showed that areas which appeared light to telescopes might be either high or low in elevation. Optically dark areas appeared to be of medium elevation to radar-scanners. (nasa Release 69—111; jpl Release 530)
Results of four radio occultation measurements of Mars’ atmosphere, ionosphere, and surface configuration by Mariner VI and VII were reported in Science by jpl’s Dr. Arvydas J. Kliore, Dr. Gunnar Fjeldbo, and Boris L. Seidel and Goddard Institute for Space Studies’ Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool. Measurements had provided refractivity data in Mars atmosphere at four points above its surface. For atmosphere consisting predominantly of carbon dioxide, surface pressures between 6 and 7 millibars at three points of measurement and 3.8 at fourth, indicated elevation of 3.1—3.7 mi (5—6 km). Temperature profile measured by Mariner VI near equator in daytime indicated temperatures in stratosphere about 100°K warmer than those predicted by theory. Measurements by Mariner VI taken at 79°N at beginning of polar night indicated conditions were favorable for condensation of carbon dioxide at almost all altitudes. Mariner VII measurements taken at 58°S in daytime and 38°N at night also showed carbon dioxide condensation was possible at altitudes above about 15.5 mi (25 km). Measurements of electron density in ionosphere showed upper atmosphere was substantially warmer than in 1965, possibly because of increased solar activity and proximity to sun. (Science, 12/12/69, 1393—7)
Press conference on Mariner VI preliminary results was held at JPL. Scientists reported experiments had revealed that recurring white blob seen in previous Mars pictures was 300-mi wide crater with peak in center; linear features known as canals were actually large, irregular, low-contrast splotches without specific detail; temperature in equatorial area ranged from 75°F to —100°F; atmosphere was almost nonexistent; Mars had no sharply defined borders separating light and dark areas; and Martian surface was more heavily cratered than previously believed. Dr. Charles A. Barth of Univ. of Colorado said any life on Mars would be very different from life on earth, perhaps form that used carbon dioxide. He said uv spectrometer had found atomic carbon and carbon monoxide, but no traces of nitrogen—essential to life on earth. Dr. George C. Pimentel of Univ. of California at Berkeley said infrared spectrometer had detected presence of unknown compound related to methane, building block of life on earth. He also reported detection of super-thin layer of water ice hanging in atmosphere above Mars equator. (Auerbach, W Post, 8/3/69, A3; Lannan, W Star, 8/3/69, A5)
NASA’s Mariner VI spacecraft (launched Feb. 24) was 21,731,091 mi from earth and would fly past Mars July 30. Mariner VII (launched March 27) was 19,526,893 mi from earth and would fly past Mars Aug. 4. Both spacecraft were operating normally. (JPL Release 521)
Selection of investigators and investigation areas for .1973 Viking mission to Mars was announced by NASA. LaRC would manage overall project and be responsible for lander portion of spacecraft. jpl would manage orbiter portion and be responsible for tracking and data acquisition. Viking, follow-on to 1964—1965, 1969, and 1971 Mariner Mars flights, would consist of two instrumented spacecraft in Mars orbit, each of which would detach landing capsule for softlanding on Mars. Mission objectives included detection of life if it existed. (nasa Release 69—166)
LaRC announced award of $313,620,000 cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Corp. for construction of lander portions of two Viking spacecraft scheduled to softland on Mars in summer 1973 and for project integration services. (LaRC Release)
LaRC issued Rfps for design and financial proposals for planetary lander and project integration portions of NASA’s Viking project. Viking spacecraft—consisting of lander and orbiter—were to be procured for two planned flights to Mars to search for scientific data in 1973. (nasa Release 69-36)
Scientific data provided by two spacecraft included more than 2,000 uv spectra and more than 400 infrared spectra of atmosphere and surface. Infrared radiometer returned more than 800 near-encounter and 100,000 far-encounter surface and atmospheric measurements. TV cameras produced 198 high-quality analog pictures of Martian surface. Tracking data provided measurements of mass and ephemeris of Mars, but degree of success of celestial mechanics experiment was yet to be determined. S-band occultation experiment determined electron and temperature profile of-ionosphere and temperature and pressure profile of lower atmosphere. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA’s Mariner VII, launched from ETR March 27, successfully executed midcourse maneuver in response to radio commands from Woo-mera, Australia, tracking station. Spacecraft, more than 2.5-million mi from earth, would fly within 2,000 mi of Mars Aug. 5. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/9/69, A5; Reuters, W Post, 4/9/69, A7)
NASA announced selection of 38 scientists organized into eight teams to assist in design and development of Martian softlander for 1973 Viking missions. Teams would participate in early instrument development, designing softlander, and planning missions. Final selection of investigations and participating scientists for both landers and orbiters making up 1973 Viking missions would be made December 1969, when initial results of Mariner flybys of Mars in summer 1969 would be available. Planetary Programs Directorate would have management responsibility for Viking Mars 1973 mission; LaRC had been assigned overall project management and direct responsibility for managing planetary iander portion; jpl had management responsibility for orbiter spacecraft, (nasa Release 69—31)
First pictures of Mars taken by NASA’s Mariner VI, launched Feb. 24 to fly by Mars equator, were received at JPL. Full-disc photos, taken between 771,500 and 450,000 mi from Mars, were flashed on screen every five minutes. They showed Mars as dull, gray, egg-shaped body with crack in surface and bright spot—southern polar cap—with ragged edge. Better pictures were expected as spacecraft traveled closer to Mars. (AP, B Sun, 7/30/69, Al; Lannan, W Star, 7/30/69, A3)
NASA announced release of The Book of Mars, one-volume digest of facts and theories about Mars by Dr. Samuel Glasstone, illustrated with photos taken during Mariner IV mission 1964—65, when spacecraft flew within 6,000 mi of Mars surface. Book traced history of man’s acquisition of Mars data and compared Mars with other planets. (nasa Special Release)
Washington Daily Neivs editorial commented on Condon Report on UFOs: “Dedicated disciples of the little green men from Mars school no doubt will find the Condon report represents another diabolical plot to suppress truth. But most Americans will find the report something less than a surprise. Apart from wasting time, continuing study would waste taxpayer money.” (W News, 1/18/69)
NASA’s Mariner VII televised two good test pictures before start of its first series of 34 approach shots more than 1 million mi from Mars. (AP, W Star, 8/2/69, A3; NASA News Release, 9/11/69)
jpl engineers sent signals to Mariner VI to turn on TV camera and scientific experiments that would measure Mars surface characteristics and atmosphere. Spacecraft (launched Feb. 24) began tracking Mars and would begin taking first of 33 far-encounter pictures 771,500 mi from Mars early July 29. Full-disc photos would be received at jpl July 29. (AP, B Sun, 7/29/69, A5)
First measurement of Mars uv dayglow, made during Mariner VI Mars flyby July 31, was reported in Science by Univ. of Colorado astrogeophysicists C. A. Barth, C. W. Hord, J. B. Pearce, K. K. Kelly, A. I. Stewart, G. E. Thomas, and G. P. Anderson; Johns Hopkins physicist W. G. Fastie; and JPL’s 0. F. Raper. Emission features from ionized carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide were measured in 1,900 A to 4,300 A spectral region. Lyman alpha 1,216 A line of atomic hydrogen and 1,304 A, 1,356 A, and 2,972 A lines of atomic oxygen were observed. Prime objective of experiment was to search for nitrogen in Martian atmosphere. First analysis had shown no evidence of nitrogen emissions in uv spectrum of upper atmosphere (Science, 9/5/69, 1004-5)
JPL engineers reported Mariner VII, en route to Mars, had suffered sudden change in velocity—possibly because of gas leak from pressure can in infrared spectrometer—that could throw off its approach to Mars. Also, 20 of 92 telemetry channels, including one that aimed TV camera platform toward Mars, had not operated properly after controllers lost contact with spacecraft July 30. When engineers turned on TV cameras, however, they began taking pictures that appeared to be of Mars. (Auerbach, W Post, 8/2/69, A4; NASA News Release, 9/11/69)
NASA selected Martin Marietta Corp. for $280,000,000 costplusincentivefee/ award-fee contract for Viking lander system and technical integration of project to send two instrumented spacecraft to Mars during summer of 1973. (nasa Release 69—82)
jpl press conference reported new information on Mars from the Mariner VI flyby. The far-encounter photo above, taken 463f2S0 miles from Mars July 29, showed Meridiani Sinus and Sabacus Sinus as a dark feature near the equator. The bright area at the top was Cydonia. The south polar cap showed at the bottom of the planet. i UVS'. NARROW-ANGIE TV use compatible with airport locations, and to analyze feasibility of compatible land development in high-noise areas, (dot Release 18369) ■ Apollo 8 commemorative medallions containing metal carried on mission were being distributed to NASA employees “as a token of appreciation for each individual’s efforts in making the United States lunar program possible,” NASA Hq. Weekly Bulletin said, (NASA Hq WB, 8/4/69, 1) August 4—5: NASA’s Mariner VII transmitted first closeup photos of Mars south pole as it flew within 2,100 mi of planet. Dr. Robert P, Sharp, geologist at Cal Tech, said 31 photos might look like “baby pictures of Earth. This is what the Earth might have looked like some four billion years ago before it developed an atmosphere and oceans to weather its surface and nurture life.” Photos taken on pass Aug. 4 were transmitted to JPL Aug. 5. Polar cap, which had appeared gleaming white in more distant photos, looked dull gray in closeups. Pictures showed south polar cap with snow-like substance-—possibly frozen carbon dioxide—piled up in vast dunes; pocked with deep, steeply walled craters; and much darker than desert to north. Floor of bright circular Hellas desert area, believed to be shallow crater or collapsed area, was strangely free of meteorite impact craters. Mariner VII (launched March 27) with Mariner VI (launched Feb. 24) had provided most detailed information to date on Mars, including 198 photos covering 20% of planet and detailed scientific data from onboard experiments. Data indicated: thin Martian atmosphere had no detectable nitrogen; south polar cap, which appeared white and smoothly circular in telescope pictures, was ragged with dark splotch in center; surface temperatures ranged from 75°F to —100°F; some of narrower thin dark lines called canals might be segments of rubbled rims of craters up to 300 mi across; and Martian surface, though heavily pocked, was not as rugged as lunar surface. (AP, B Sun, 8/6/69, Al; AP, W Star, 8/6/69, A7; Auerbach, W Post, 8/6/69, A3)
Washington Post published results of July 26—28 Gallup survey, which found public lukewarm about Government funding of manned Mars landing. While majority of young adults favored idea, majority of those 30 or over opposed it. Generally, 39% of those polled favored attempt to land man on Mars, 53% opposed, and 8% had no opinion. Blacks opposed by 3-to-l ratio. (W Post, 8/7/69, F4)
New determination of abundance of water in Mars atmosphere was reported in Science by Illinois Institute of Technology astronomers Tobias Owen and Harold P. Mason. New spectrograms of planet had been obtained in region of water-vapor band at 8,200 A during February and March 1969. Amount of precipitable water was found to be about 15 /x. Abundance reaffirmed that some water was present at current epoch but otherwise had little bearing on evolution of Martian atmosphere. Water vapor did not imply liquid water existed on Martian surface. (Science, 8/29/69, 893—5)
nasa selected General Electric Co. to receive three-year, $4-million, costplus-award-fee contract with two-year option to provide engineering and mission-related support to LaRC for Viking Project—series of planetary probes which would begin softlanding on Mars in 1973. (nasa Release 69—128)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser, addressed Independence Day celebration at Dearborn, Mich.: “For untold millions of years the human animal was chained to the earth. Sixty years ago he found a way of soaring into its atmosphere. Ten years ago he learned to break the chains of gravity and to soar out into space. This month the first man will set foot on another world. Later this month two spacecraft will reach Mars and send back new information about that Planet. Americans will have no reason to be ashamed of their nation on those days. Is it worth while? Is it worth while to lift the spirits of millions of human beings? If not, what else is worth while?” . Developing lunar landing technology was relatively easy. “The laws of nature which made it possible have been well known for a long time. The engineering skills required . . . were available and were brilliantly organized. Hundreds of thousands of Americans worked together to make this dream come true. They had faith and they had hope. “The problems of our cities and the other social problems which beset us are not all that easy. In this area human beings are not working together but are in conflict. We find that we do not yet know the cause • of these troubles nor do we yet have the mechanisms for curing them. Hence we must study, we must experiment, we must try and we will often fail. . . . And we shall learn from our failures.” (Text; CR, 1/29/69, E6415-7)
NASA’s Mariner VII Mars probe (launched March 27) obeyed radio command to lock its sensors on star Canopus. Spacecraft would fly past Mars night of Aug. 4. Command was radioed from NASA tracking station in Woomera, Australia. (AP, W Post, 4/2/69; UPl, C Trib, 4/3/69)
In Washington Post Thomas O’Toole traced NASA plans for planetary exploration from May 1971 launch of two Mariner spacecraft for Mars to Grand Tours of planets beginning in 1977 and 1979. “What comes after the two Grand Tours? Nobody really knows, but the space agency’s dreamers about unmanned missions have a plot already written and it reads a little better than most science fiction does.” Spacecraft would circulate through asteroid belt for year, making asteroid counts and photographing larger asteroids. Beyond that, scientists would like to rendezvous with a comet and investigate Saturn’s rings. (W Post, 11/2/69, B3)
At NASA Hq. news conference on future NASA plans Julian Scheer, Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, announced that 10-kg (22-lb) meteorite recovered Jan. 9 near Lost City, Okla., had come from orbit which took it outside Mars’ orbit at planet’s farthest point from sun. (Transcript)
The Wartime Journals of Charles A. Lindbergh were reviewed by Eric F.	Goldman in New York Times Book Review: Journals covered 1937-1945, “when the celebrated flyer was in Europe surveying military aviation; the battle between President Franklin Roosevelt and the isolationists, during which Lindbergh stumped the United States as the star speaker of the anti-interventionists. . .; war years when, denied an Air Corps commission, he served as a civilian aeronautical expert in private industry and in the Pacific, also managing to work in 50 combat missions; and the weeks just after the Nazi surrender, which found him again in Europe, attached to a Naval Mission studying wartime developments in plane design and missiles.” Journals snowed Lindbergh as “a first-rate mind who was widely informed yet retained certain key areas of na'ivet6, an instinctive tinkerer with a passion for science as an idea and a gifted scientist who worried over the ‘narrow-mindedness’ of the pursuit, a man who read Plato the night before inspecting aviation factories and Dostoevsky in between speeches before roaring crowds, a hard-hitting bombadier screeching down over Japanese installations while he contemplated the beauty of God’s nature and the dignity of man.” (NYT Book Review, 9/20/70,1,42) Owen S. Merrill of JPL Nuclear Power Sources Group outlined progress of radioisotopic thermoelectric generator (rtg)being developed by aec for NASA and jpl. RTG was only known source considered capable of producing 500 w of power over 9- to 12-yr period required for NASA Grand Tour missions to outer planets. Melvin Swerdling, jpl spacecraft power systems specialist, described improved nickel-cadmium batteries with increased discharge-charge cycle capability, designed by jpl for nasa Mariner Mars 1971 spacecraft, (jpl Release 563)
Results of study of infrared spectra recorded by Mariner VI and VII were reported in Science by Univ. of California at Berkeley chemists Kenneth C. Herr and Dr. George C. Pimentel. Reflections at 4.3/x suggested presence of solid carbon dioxide in upper atmosphere of Mars. (Science, 1/2/70,47-9)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Institute for Space Studies, discussed eventual colonization of outer planets in New York Times Magazine: While most Homo sapiens would remain on earth in world of future, small percentage—“restless, inquisitive, innovative, continually seeking out challenges and testing the limits of the environment”—would “move out to become a small, hardy population on Mars. Within a few decades of the year 2000, a pioneering band of men—and women—will be living on Mars. ... Children will be born on Mars. Later, the spacefarers will go beyond Mars and beyond the solar system. Some day they will find the earth and its debilitating gravitational pull as difficult a place in which to survive as today’s land-adapted men find the water out of which the ancestral fishes emerged 300 million years ago. Eventually they will constitute a new species, evolved out of Homo sapiens, but linked to the ancestral planet only by sentiment.” (NYT Magazine, 5/10/70, 30)	.
Mariner-Mars missions in 1971 were described by team of jpl scientists headed by Dan Schneiderman in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “The first of these voyages of exploration begins. . .when, between May 6 and June 3, two Mariner-type spacecraft will rise from launch pads at Cape Kennedy on the way to Mars to become the first spacecraft to orbit that planet.” To obtain maximum scientific information, two identical spacecraft would perform separate missions, A and B. Each spacecraft would orbit Mars for 90 days in differing inclinations and periods. “Together they will cover 70% of the surface, permitting the study of seasonal effects. The information gained will help in selecting suitable landing zones for the unmanned Viking project which will land an instrument package on Mars.” Missions would carry six science experiments including TV experiment. TV pictures would enlarge understanding of dynamic characteristics, history, environment, and surface physiography of Mars and improve maps of surface. They were not expected to provide direct evidence of possibility of life, but to furnish indirect evidence of Mars’ suitability as habitat for life. (A&A, 8/70, 64-77)
Supersonic Planetary Entry Decelerator (sped) experiment, launched from Wallops Station, simulated Mars reentry spacecraft speeding through thin atmosphere. A June photograph shows the parasol for sped deployed in systems check-out before mating to a single-stage Castor rochet motor. The flight experiment aided study of deployment characteristics required fora parachute to land instruments on Mars.
Quincy (Mass.) Patriot Ledger editorial noted President’s space goal message had not included Mars mission as major goal at this point. “More important is the consolidation and mastery of the space environment closer to earth, as well as greater application of space research to human problems. Fortunately, this is the emphasis of Mr. Nixon’s new program.” (Q Patriot Ledger, 3/10/70)
An 85-g (3-oz) palladium generator-separator developed for use in space could be used for air-pollution detection on earth, jpl announced. Unit was heart of gas cnromatograph system developed by NASA and jpl for use by Viking Molecular Analysis Science Team in analyzing Martian soil and atmosphere in mid-1970s. It was particularly sensitive to major U.S. air pollutants like sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, and oxides of nitrogen, (jpl Release 558)
Scientists at Smithsonian Institution’s Astrophysical Laboratory said studies of 10-kg (22-lb) meteorite that fell near Lost City, Okla., Jan. 9 had provided firmest evidence to date of intensity of cosmic rays beyond sun. Data obtained had raised possibility that manned spacecraft venturing to planets beyond Mars might have to be armored against swarms of high-energy “space bullets.” Meteorite was estimated to have weighed 227 kg (500 lbs) originally and was assumed to be fragment of explosive collision between two huge objects 6 million yrs ago. (AP, B Sun, 4/24/70, A3; Smithsonian PAO)
Baltimore Sun editorial commented on quantity of new scientific data to be expected from U.S. Mariner 9 and U.S.S.R. Mars 2 and 3 probes of Mars—data “certain to be gathered later if not now.” Whatever was learned, “the store of mystery held by the skies and even their nearest objects will remain enormous. . . . The admiration for man’s persistence in pitting his intelligence, skill, courage and inventiveness against the solar system’s magnificent teases is equaled by the folly of supposing we shall ever read any but a few of their overpowering riddles.” (B Sun, 11/17/71)
New mission plan had been adopted for Mariner-I (Mariner 9) Mars probe scheduled for launch no earlier than May 29, NASA announced. New plan—which would provide high-quality data return for all of original experiments but less data than planned for original two-spacecraft mission—assigned 65° inclination, 12-hr period, and 1200-km (750-mi) periapsis (low point in orbit around Mars) to Mariner-I, with Nov. 14, 1971, arrival date. New inclination would yield map covering almost 70% of Mars and period would ensure two-tape-load-per-day data return. (NASA Release 71-94)
jpl announced selection of Motorola, Inc., Government Electronics Div. for negotiations on $2 179 000 contract with award fee to design, fabricate, and test flight-data subsystem for NASA Mariner Venus-Mercury spacecraft for 1973 mission. JPL also had selected Litton Industries Guidance and Control Systems Div. for negotiations on $10.4-million contract for development, fabrication, and testing of gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer (to be carried on Viking lander) to analyze Mars surface, (jpl Releases 581, 582)
Baltimore Sun editorial commented on softlanding on Mars of instrumented capsule by Soviet Mars 3: “For the first time man has been able to reach Mars with implements that have proved capable both of surviving a landing and of working, for a time at least, after they have been landed. This of course is only one approach to the new studies of brother objects in space. The United States Mariner 9 may by photographic means add valuable pictorial knowledge to that which Mars 3 has reported by signal. And even if neither of these latest raids on the unknown returns as much information as men want, they have together shown that the means by which more and more can be learned are now in our hands, even if in only a primitive and imperfect state so far.” (B Sun, 12/8/71, A18)
NASA sent message to Dr. I. A. Zhulin in Moscow via telex communication system established for exchange of information on Manner 9 and Mars 2 and Mars 3 missions to Mars. Message congratulated U.S.S.R. on success of Mars 2; requested Mars 2 coordinates, orbital parameters, doppler data, and data from uv spectrometer; and provided information on U.S. Mariner 9 photos of Mars and moons, doppler data, and uv spectrometer data, (nasa Release 71-240)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 3 probe (launched May 29) reached vicinity of Mars and ejected capsule which softlanded on planet. U.S.S.R. did not announce landing until Dec. 7 and did not release details until Dec. 19. After separation, capsule bearing Soviet coat of arms entered Mars atmosphere and parachuted to softlanding in Mars southern hemisphere between Electris and Phaetonis in area 45° south latitude and 158° west longitude. Mars 3 continued flight into orbit with 1500-km (930-mi) periapsis and 11-day period. Tass said signals from landing capsule “were received and recorded on board . . . Mars 3 and later . . . transmitted to the earth on December 2-5. The videosignals received from the surface of Mars were brief and suddenly discontinued.” (fbis-Sov-71-236, 12/8/71, LI)
NASA conducted second successful test of Viking Mars lander free-flight, development parachute system at dot Joint Parachute Test Facility at El Centro, Calif. First test had been conducted Sept. 3. (frc pio)
Flight path of Mariner 9, en route to Mars, was reported sufficiently precise for orbital insertion without scheduled second midcourse correction. Next critical event for Mariner 9 would be Mars orbit insertion Nov. 13, when spacecraft would begin to collect atmospheric and surface data and map 70% of Martian surface during 90 days in orbit. At 9:00 am edt, after 142.4 days in flight, Mariner 9 was 88 847 850 km (55 207 500 mi) from earth. Spacecraft was traveling at 59 220 km per hr (36 800 mph) relative to earth and had traveled total distance of more than 349 452 100 km (217 139 500 mi) since May 30 launch. (nasa Proj Off)
Tass announced that French equipment on Mars 3 (launched May 28) for investigating solar radio emission in one-meter-waveband experiment was functioning successfully. French instrumentation was manufactured by French specialists under French-Soviet cooperative program. (fbis-Sov-71-228-3, 11/26/71, Ll)
Production of formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, and glycolic acid in uv tests under simulated Martian conditions indicated organic material was probably being produced by sunlight on Mars’ surface, jpl scientists Dr. Norman H. Horowitz, Dr. Jerry S. Hubbard, and Dr. James P. Hardy reported in Proceedings of National Academy of Science of USA. Same organic compounds were believed to have been precursors to biological molecules on primitive earth. Dr. Horowitz said findings, obtained from irradiation of fine soil and powdered glass samples by high-pressure xenon lamp and low-pressure mercury lamp, provided “most favorable indication for a possible Martian biological evolution that we have had in the last five years.” There were “still many uncertainties, however, which won’t be resolved until we land on the planet.” (Proceedings of NAS, 3/71, 574-8)
Mars orbit of Mariner 9 was changed by 17-sec engine firing to compensate for effects of dust storm on mission objectives. Periapsis was raised from 1388 km (862 mi) to 1650 km (1025 mi) to expand area covered in mapping photos and to provide required overlapping of pictures. Mapping would be completed in three 20-day cycles with fourth cycle available to fill in open areas where photos did not overlap. Period was increased by 1 min 19 sec to place periapsis in middle of Goldstone viewing period for maximum data return, (nasa Release 71—252; Pasadena Star-News, 12/31/71)
Mariner 9, launched by NASA May 30, had covered 142 600 000 km (88 600 000 mi) in 167-day journey to Mars. Spacecraft was 15 300 000 km (9 500 000 mi) from earth and had received more than 600 commands, (nasa Release 71—136)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 had discovered presence of oxygen and atomic hydrogen in Mars’ upper atmosphere, Tass announced. Hydrogen corona was located at altitude of 10 000-20 000 km (6200-12 400 mi) above surface, and oxygen at 700-1000 km (435-620 mi). Spacecraft also measured temperature changes on Martian surface. Individual areas on diurnal side did not exceed 258 K (—15°C, or 5°F). On nocturnal side, temperature in some regions exceeded that of environment by 20-25 K (20-25°C, or 68-77°F). (fbis-Sov-71-249, 12/28/71, L2)
The US.SJl.’s Mars 3 probe softlanded a capsule art the planet Mars. The capsule transmitted signals 20 seconds before falling silent. In the Toss news service photo the descent apparatus—shown here in descent position—carried a braking cane that also served as a heat shield for the capsule. The cone fell away as the main parachute, stored in the container immediately above the capsule, opened to slow the fall. (Photo courtesy of United Press International) cameras have been frustrated by a storm that has covered almost all of Mars with dust for more than two months. It’s almost impossible to imagine a global dust storm, and when one thinks of a global storm lasting for two months, it’s even harder to imagine life surviving such cataclysmic weather conditions. . . . now the dust has begun to settle on the planet, revealing striking features that man has never seen before. Nevertheless, the idea that there might be life among those features is one that seems to be a dying one.” (W Post, 12/2/71, A19)
NASA held Mariner 9 press conference at JPL. Discussion centered on dust storm that had covered planet since mission began and on origin of Martian craters. Dr. Bradford A. Smith of New Mexico State Univ. said storm had begun 10 wks earlier, had reached peak of intensity in 5th wk, and was gradually but continuously clearing. Project scientists disagreed, however, how long dust would obscure Mars; predictions ranged from a few weeks to months. If storm continued throughout mission, primary objective might have to be changed. Dr. Smith explained prime objective “was to map 70 percent of the planet in high resolution. If the storm does not clear up immediately, it will not be possible to do that within the nominal mission. An alternative might be to focus on the phenomenon that we have on our hands; that is, the dust storm. And instead of studying it in bits and pieces and waiting for the planet to clear up ... to rearrange our sequences to make an all out study of this atmospheric phenomenon.” Failure to complete mapping as planned would not significantly affect Viking Mars landing mission because, with only slight degradation, Viking zone could be mapped in last half or last third of Mariner 9 mission. “Also Viking has the capability to keep its landers in orbit for as long as two months while it does the mapping . . . [and] the capability to do some photographic site selection even if there were no usable pictures returned from ’71.” Dr. Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey described four high points on Mars, all with large summit craters, suggesting that they might be volcanic calderas. Great alignment of relatively young topographic highs with summit craters suggested that Mars was geochemically active—that in not too distant past there had been extensive volcanic activity. Similar features might be found at lower elevations; they would be of interest because they had been, and still might be, hot. Such volcanic sources had, according to most opinions, produced terrestrial atmosphere; that is, carbon dioxide and water had come from such volcanic vents. Dr. Masursky emphasized that volcanic theory was not agreed on; project scientists’ views ranged from “agreement, to skepticism, to outright disbelief.” Data on Mars moons Deimos and Phobos were described by Dr. James B. Pollack of ARC. Deimos was 12 by 13km (7% by 8% mi) and Phobos was 21 by 26 km (13 by 16 mi). Moons were “among the darkest objects in the solar system,” reflecting only about 5% of sunlight that fell on them. Moons’ darkness could be attributed to basalts or carbonaceous chondrites in soil. If scientists could determine reason for darkness, they would soon be able to determine whether moons were captured asteroids or remnants of material from which Mars was formed. (Transcript)
Hanna Reitsch, described by Washington Evening Star as “Nazi Germany’s famous daredevil woman test pilot and the only woman in German history ever to be given two Iron Crosses for her exploits,” told of her glider research during Star interview. “I am searching for the right currents over the Alps. I don’t have to worry about . . . borders in the air. ... As we enter space work more, we will realize how small mankind is and how necessary it is to come together in peace.” (Dean, W Star, 11/16/71, B7) nauts to Mars and return them safely to Earth in a total round-trip time of 60 days.” (A&A, 11/71, 6) Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in keynote address said tools and techniques originating from space exploration had arrived just in time to aid ecologists in saving planet earth. “Many benefits are now being realized, but we can expect far greater returns as increasingly sophisticated devices go into service.” (Program; Birmingham Post-Herald, 11/17/71) Mariner scientists reported in news conference at JPL Nov. 19 that instruments had shown planet was flattened at poles and bulging at equator and had more irregularities in its gravitational field than moon had. Bulge was discovered in area called Tharsis, on equator, making planet’s diameter 39 km (24 mi) greater at equator than through poles. Infrared spectrometer had measured reflected radiations that suggested wide range of rock compositions on Mars surface, varying from high in silicon and oxygen to low. Spectrometer had also detected small amounts of water vapor at south pole, as had been observed on previous Mariner flights. On Nov. 23 Mariner 9’s infrared interferometer spectrometer (iris) detected pocket of warm air above south polar cap in same region as water vapor traces had been found earlier. Air pocket was about 240 K (—30°C). (Wilford, NYT, 11/20/71, 51; O’Toole, W Post, 11/20, 23, 24/71; Miles, LA Times, 11/24/71; jpl Hist Off)
Thomas O’Toole described in Washington Post effects of Mariner 9 data on idea that life existed on Mars: “In the three weeks that it has spent in Martian orbit so far, Mariner 9 has found that the planet’s atmosphere is even thinner than it was thought to be—about 260 times as thin as Earth’s atmosphere. It also found Martian surface temperatures to be no higher than 80 degrees below zero. To date, Mariner 9’s
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 3, launched May 28, was continuing its flight toward Mars. At 9:00 pm Moscow time (1:00 pm est) spacecraft was 138.8-million-km (86.3-million-mi) from Mars, having traveled approximately 472 million km (293 million mi). (NYT, 12/1/71, 20; fbis-Sov-71-231-3, 12/1/71, LI)
Mariner 9 and Soviet Mars 2 and 3 race to Mars was “exciting race for knowledge and the fame of exploration, exemplifying the kind of peaceful competition the world needs,” Washington Evening Star editorial commented. “If Mariner 9 reveals half of what it was sent out to find, it will be worth much more than the $150 million it is costing.” (W Star, 11/24/71)
Countdown for launch of nasa’s Mariner-I spacecraft toward Mars orbit was interrupted by hold at 4:59 pm edt 72 min from launch. Hold was caused by difficulty in interpreting data from Centaur stage guidance package. Difficulty was not resolved by 6 pm and launch was postponed to next day. (NASA Proj Off)
Mariner 9, en route to Mars, was 7 900 000 km (4 909 000 mi) from earth at 9:00 am edt after traveling 82 500 000 km (51 263 000 mi) and receiving over 500 commands since launch May 30. Spacecraft was expected to accomplish its basic 90-day scientific mission objectives, but was using more nitrogen gas than predicted for maintaining attitude stabilization. Current predictions indicated nitrogen gas supply would be depleted in early August 1972, nine months after spacecraft went into orbit around Mars. Increased rate of consumption was due to circuit design error in attitude-control-system electronics. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 71-120)
Detailed Tass description of Mars 2 and 3 missions with diagrams of spacecraft and landing procedures appeared in Soviet newspapers. Enroute to Mars, spacecraft had measured solar wind particle streams, measured parameters of interplanetary magnetic fields, determined electron concentrations in interplanetary medium, studied solar radio emissions with Soviet-French Stereo-1 experiment, and studied spacial structure, directivity, and mechanism of radiation processes. In Mars orbit spacecraft had investigated Mars solar wind flow and its interaction with Mars ionosphere, recorded spectrum of charged particles and variations in magnetic field, and measured refraction of radiowaves. Mars 3 descent package had transmitted pictures only briefly after landing on Mars surface Dec. 2, Tass said: “At the computed time, the transmission of video pictures was begun and continued for about 20 sec. During that period a small part of a panorama was transmitted in which no discernible details were detected because of [the lack of] contrast. Now, it is still difficult to say what caused the termination of the transmission. It is possible that it was associated with the local peculiarities in the landing area, which are completely unknown, or with the dust storm raging at the time. Apparently the dust storm acted as a ‘veil’ covering the surface details during the panoramic exposure. The sudden cessation of signals made it impossible to obtain information from the scientific equipment.” Orbiting vehicle carried infrared radiometer, two TV cameras, photometer, and instruments to measure CO2 and determine water vapor content, surface radio-brightness temperature, and atmospheric density. (Sov Rpt, 12/31/71, 1-14)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Administration’s New Technologies Opportunities Program [see Oct. 31]: Much was worthwhile, “especially the attempt to mount a genuine program of conversion from defense and space-related to socially useful technological emphasis.” But “purely economic objectives of the program are murkier, at least at present. Granted that this nation may be on its way, in a number of industrial fields, to losing the technological lead that for so long has been a mainstay of our economic strength. Does it follow that the answer, in high-technology fields like electronics and commercial aviation, is what one Presidential adviser has called ‘an unaccustomed set’ of supports and subsidies to industry?” Question contained “all the elements of explosive controversy, and the administration will be hard-pressed to make a convincing case.” (W Star, 12/6/71, A10) Scientist Steve Korn of TRW Inc. Viking biological instrument team described instruments being developed for $11-million experiments to be conducted by two Viking landers scheduled for 1976 Mars landing. Sophisticated units for four experiments to search for microscopic life on Mars would be among most complex systems ever flown aboard unmanned spacecraft. Experiments included heat release experiment to analyze Martian soil for photosynthetic life similar to plant life on earth; experiment that would add nutrient to solid sample and measure metabolic conversion; gas exchange experiment to monitor environment surrounding sample for changes in gaseous makeup that would indicate presence of living organisms; and light-scattering experiment to provide nutrient to soil sample and detect any increases in scattering attributable to growth of microorganisms. Also, three-legged probes would snap photos; study Martian atmosphere; return meteorological data, pressures, temperatures, wind, and humidity; report on Mars’ magnetic and physical properties; and check seismic events. Probes would be lowered by parachute and retrorocket after landers had obtained orbit in procedure designed to land them accurately in areas deemed most likely to be habitats for life. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/10/71, 29; Miles, latns, W Post, 12/19/71, A41)
Mariner 9 photographed Martian plateau from 6500-km (4000-mi) altitude. Photo, released by jpl Dec. 29, showed area 120 km (75 mi) square in Phoenicis Lacus region, covered with fault lines and resembling wrinkled elephant hide. Faults and scarcity of craters suggested region was volcanic and relatively young geologically. (AP, B Sun, 12/30/71, A5; Miles, LA Times, 12/30/71)
Successful free-flight development test of parachute system for Viking Mars landers to be launched in 1975 was conducted by NASA at dot Joint Parachute Test Facility in El Centro, Calif. Test was to verify functioning of main decelerator parachute and its deployment mechanism and confirm structural adequacy of system design. Deployment mortar and parachute—16 m (53 ft) in diameter, packaged in instrumented drop vehicle 3 m (10 ft) long and 51 cm (20 in) in diameter—were dropped from NASA B-57 aircraft at altitude of 15 200 m (50 000 ft), (nasa Release 71-162; frc pio)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 spacecraft were functioning normally en route to Mars, Tass announced. At 6:00 am Moscow time June 8 (11:00 pm edt June 7) Mars 2, launched May 19, had completed 14 communications sessions and was 4 897 000 km (3 042 900 mi) from earth. Mars 3, launched May 28, had completed 19 communications sessions and was 2 880 000 km (1789 000 mi) from earth. (Sov Rpt, 6/25/71, 7)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 probe (launched May 19) ejected capsule 1380 km (858 mi) above Mars on direct trajectory to planet’s surface. Capsule, carrying pennant bearing U.S.S.R. hammer-and-sickle coat of arms, became first man-made object to reach surface. After capsule ejection Mars 2 decelerated and entered Martian orbit with 25 000-km (15 500-mi) apogee, 1380-km (858-mi) perigee, 1080-min (18-hr) period, and 48.9° inclination. Mars 2 had traveled 470 million km (292 million mi) to reach Mars. During flight it had explored interplanetary space and three midcourse corrections had been conducted, June 17, Nov. 20, and automatically on Nov. 27. Spacecraft was reported operating normally in Martian orbit. U.S.S.R. did not indicate whether capsule softlanded or hard-landed or what mission was. (NYT, 12/1/71, 20; O’Toole, W Post, 12/1/71, A23; fbis-Sov-71-231-3, 12/1/71, LI)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 3, approaching Mars, had detected possible evidence of earth’s magnetic tail farther out in space than previously reported, Pravda article said. Both Mars 2 and Mars 3 had passed through area 19 million km (12 million mi) from earth, where they had detected magnetic field. When Mars 3 passed through area it recorded streams of charged particles whose velocities differed from those observed in solar wind. Soviet scientists speculated that particles of solar wind were mixed with those of earth’s magnetic tail. (NYT, 12/5/71, 9)
Findings on atmosphere of Mars from UV spectrometer observations made during NASA’s 1969 Mariner flyby missions were reported in Science by Univ. of Colorado scientists Dr. Charles A. Barth and Dr. Charles W. Hord: “Mars . . . reflects sunlight in the ultraviolet, but it is the atmosphere, not the surface, that is responsible for the reflected light. Even though there are atmospheric scatterers in addition to the molecular scatterers, it is possible to relate the intensity of the scattered radiation with the atmospheric pressure. The variation of the pressure over the planet reveals the topography to vary over 7 kilometers [4Yz miles] in height and to be correlated with visible features. The carbon dioxide polar cap, in addition to being a cold trap for volatile gases in the atmosphere, may also be a very efficient absorption trap for nonvolatiles. This last property may make the cap a repository for gases produced by geological or biological activity.” (Science, 7/16/71, 197-201)
New York Times editorial commented on first global map of Mars produced by U.S. Geological Survey from Mariner 9 photos [see Nov. 27] : “Ever since telescopes were invented people have wondered to what extent Mars resembles Earth. Now, for the first time, the existence of a reasonably comprehensive picture of Mars provides a basis for comparison.” Despite differences from earth, “increased familiarity with the forces that have shaped its surface is bound to give man a more cosmopolitan view of how planets evolve—a view that should provide us with better understanding of the planet we call home.” (NYT, 11/29/72) November 30:	Six-day countdown for Apollo 17 began at 8:30 am EST at Kennedy Space Center. Spacecraft was scheduled for launch at 9:53 pm EST Dec. 6 (ksc Hist Off; AP, W Post, 12/1/72, A22)
NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe (launched May 30, 1971) completed photo-mapping of entire Mars surface with acquisition of final elements needed in playback of 30 pictures, bringing total photo count to more than 7000. Spacecraft—in Mars orbit since Nov. 13, 1971— would make 500th revolution around Mars July 20. During next three months Mariner 9 would provide precision tracking data to test relativity theory that electromagnetic radiation—spacecraft’s radio signal— passing close to sun would be slowed by sun’s gravitational field. Additional pictures would be taken once in August, once in September, and twice in October and stored for playback in late October. Lifetime was dependent upon supply of attitude-control gas. (nasa Release 72-143)
Results of U.S.S.R. research of Mars as released by Soviet press were summarized by Interavia. Initial analysis of data collected by Mars 2 and 3 (launched May 19 and May 28, 1971) spacecraft during interplanetary flight had indicated large variations in composition of interplanetary plasma ions at 20 million km (12.5 million mi) from earth. Data had also revealed new information on distribution of solar plasma around solar system and its relationship with interplanetary and terrestrial magnetic fields. No magnetic field had been detected near Mars, indicating possible lack of liquid core. Orbits of spacecraft had been selected to cover areas of Martian surface difficult to investigate from earth-central latitudes of southern hemisphere to 65° south, equatorial zone, and northern hemisphere to 29° north. During Martian orbit infrared radiometer data had shown certain areas of surface to be definitely warmer than immediate surroundings, indicating possible volcanic activity. Mars 2 and 3 had found steam content in Martian atmosphere to be 2000 times less than that existing in terrestrial atmosphere. At times precipitated water could be 50 micrometers; at others, less than 10. Since photos taken by NASA’s Mariner 9 revealed impressive valleys which could have been formed by erosion, Soviet scientists had theorized that higher temperatures and pressures, sufficient to produce water in liquid form, existed on Mars in previous era. Very sharp differences in planet’s brightness, never before observed from earth, were observed by visible range photometer. Data were collected from measurement of radio-wave reflection. After landing, scientific results from Mars 2 and 3 had been meager. Mars 2 had hardlanded a capsule on Mars Nov. 27, 1971. Photos and measurements by Mars 3 (which softlanded a capsule Dec. 2, 1971) had indicated a dust cloud 6 to 8 km (4 to 5 mi) thick covering landing area, leading to speculation that either dust storms had raged over area and caused capsule to land incorrectly or capsule had sunk into dust layer. Soviet Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov had said U.S.S.R. planned to use 1973 launch windows if program of Martian exploration continued as planned. (Interavia, 10/72, 1139—41; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
nasa’s Pioneer 10 Jupiter probe (launched March 2) entered Asteroid Belt, beginning first reconnaissance of huge region of dust and rocks that circled sun between orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Doughnut-shaped belt was about 3 billion km (1.8 billion mi) around, 280 million km (175 million mi) wide, and 80 million km (50 million mi) thick. Asteroids in belt ranged in size from dust particles to rock chunks as large as Alaska. Passage of Pioneer 10 through belt would permit first measurements of asteroids too small to be seen with earth-based telescopes and of amounts and kinds of asteroidal material. During seven-month passage through belt, spacecraft was expected to pass within 8.9 million km (5.5 million mi) of asteroid Palomar-Layden Aug. 2 and asteroid Nike Dec. 2. Pioneer 10 carried three experiments for measurements in Asteroid Belt—asteroid-meteoroid detector, gas-cell-array meteoroid detector, and imaging photopolarim-eter. (nasa Release 72-136; arc Astrogram, 7/20/72, 1)
Cameras on board NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe (launched May 30, 1971) were turned off to check out malfunction in onboard computer. (nasa Release 72-67)
Pravda article by scientists from Soviet Academy of Sciences Institute of Space Studies described preliminary results from U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 probes. Spacecraft (launched May 19 and May 28, 1971) had measured atmospheric humidity and surface temperature, photometered atmosphere and surface, and photographed surface. Temperature along route from 58° south latitude, 330° longitude to 30° north latitude, 190° longitude had been determined. Highest temperature—recorded near mid-day region—was 253 K (—20°C; —4°F). On night side of planet temperature dropped to 183 K (—90°C; —130°F). Dust storm that had covered Mars since Mars 2 reached planet Nov. 27, 1971, was subsiding. “Photometric recordings obtained by means of the red filtre show dark areas corresponding to the Martian ‘seas’ that were previously absolutely undistinguishable. But the recordings made with the ultraviolet filter again showed bright clouds.” Onboard instruments to record emissions in three spectral bands containing lines of hydrogen, oxygen, and argon atoms showed that hydrogen emissions stretched to more than 3400-km (2100-mi) altitude and oxygen atoms concentrated near surface up to 600-800 km (370-500 mi). (Tass, fbis-Sov, 1/10/72, L3)
Science agreements signed during U.S.-U.S.S.R. summit meetings May 22-26 were praised in Science article: “Taken together, they represent not only a significant expansion of programs already in existence, but forays into areas hitherto unexplored.” Agreements were designed to “insulate cooperative scientific endeavors from the stresses of international politics by putting authority into the hands of appropriate government agencies rather than the foreign ministries.” In space agreement, “nasa is operating on the assumption that the joint docking is only the first in a series of increasingly ambitious mutual experiments—serving both the causes of economy and international understanding—which could conceivably lead to something as grandiose as a joint landing on Mars 20 years hence.” (Holden, Science, 6/9/72, 1106-8)
Soviet scientists V. Moroz and L. Ksanfomaliti described in Izvestia findings on Mars atmosphere from Mars 2 and 3 spacecraft. Difference in contrast on two wavelengths between continents and seas during dust storm and change in contrast in same field had permitted evaluation of dust particle size and cloud thickness. Average radius of particles over Iapigya region Dec. 15, 1971, was estimated to be less than one micrometer and density of particles to be 100 million per sq cm (645 million per sq in). “If clouds of such density uniformly envelop the entire planet, its atmosphere must have contained several thousand million tons of dust.” Estimates suggested that particles have mostly silicate composition, “which agrees with the infra-red spectra obtained by Mariner 9. Particles of such a tiny size . . . fall very slowly—for about a month even in the absence of supporting vertical currents in the atmosphere. Hence the conclusion that no prolonged storm in the true sense of the word, i.e. constant winds in the period of investigation, occurred.” Unlike Venus, where cloud layer and atmosphere were more pervious and created “hothouse effect,” surface of Mars “gets cool rather than heated, giving rise to what may be described as an ‘anti-hothouse effect.’ When the storm ended, the temperature rose.” Water vapor content of atmosphere was low during and after the dust storm (Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/22/72, LI)
NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe—orbiting Mars since Nov. 13, 1971—had resumed its scientific examination of Mars following engineering analysis of onboard computer, NASA announced. Cameras had been turned off March 17 while trouble-shooting procedures were conducted. Cause of problem had not been determined, but systems were working properly and problem had not recurred. Mariner 9 was 288 million km (179 million mi) from earth and had returned 7000 pictures of Mars and mapped 85% of Mars since launch May 30, 1971. Last pictures to be taken by Mariner 9 until first week in June had been recorded March 22 and 23 and science instruments would be turned off March 30. From April 2 to June 4 Mariner 9 would pass through Mars shadow once during each orbit for periods of up to 100 sec, during which spacecraft would operate on battery power. Limited science operations would resume after June 4, with spacecraft recording data and taking pictures about once a week until mission ended in November. Primary objectives of mission had been completed Feb. 11. (NASA Release 72-67)
Photographic equipment carried by U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 spacecraft in Mars orbit were described by Tass: “Automatic devices take pictures on the film which is automatically processed after photographing and then, on command from earth, the pictures are sent by television channels to the flight control centre.” Each spacecraft carried two “photo-television devices with wide-angle and long-focus objectives. ... all units and elements are placed together in one rigid body with the objective fixed outside and in the wide-angle camera—together with the objective and a device for changing colour filters.” Pictures were taken synchronously and transmitted with “an optico-mechanical television device.” (fbis—Sov, 3/8/72, LI)
Tass reported completion of U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 missions. Spacecraft, launched May 19 and'May 28, 1971, had reached Mars in November and December 1971 and had transmitted data on planet and atmosphere. Mars 3 instrumented capsule had landed on Mars and transmitted data from surface for 20 sec. Preliminary findings were: temperature ranged from 163 K (— 166°F) to 286 K (55°F); soil had low conductivity, with Martian seas warmer than continents; surface-level atmospheric pressure was 50-60 newtons per sq m (5.5-6 millibars), 200 times less than earth’s; carbon dioxide atmosphere broke up into carbonic oxide molecule and oxygen atom at 100-km (62-mi) altitude; atmosphere was 10 times less dense than earth’s and was closer to surface; and magnetic field charges exceeded interplanetary background level 8 times. (fbis-Sov, 8/25/72, LI)
NASA released three photos of Mars taken by Mariner 9 Aug. 7. Pictures showeid that Mars north polar icecap was shrinking and showed sedimentary systems during late spring. Fractured terrains, partially flooded by volcanic extrusions, were visible in center of planet. (LA Her-Exam, 9/7/72)
First photos of Mars taken by U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 spacecraft were shown on Moscow TV. One photo showed equatorial zone with sun at low angle throwing long shadows over mountainous area. Second photo showed sharply defined, ring-shaped formation against light-colored background. Origin of formation, visible through dust clouds, was not established. Third photo showed craters of Syrtis Major. (NYT, 1/23/72)
Mission officials for Viking Mars mission were concerned about tenuous values of dielectric constant (measure of electrical charge a substance could withstand at a given electrical field strength) estimated from radar observations of Mars surface, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Massachusetts Institute of Technology investigators had found strong signal in 2-5 dielectric-constant range and weaker signal above that. Values suggested Mars had either hard bedrock surface impenetrable by spacecraft sampling equipment or deep dust surface that could not support landing vehicle. (Av Wk, 9/11/72, 11)
Institute of High Energy Physics at Serpukhov, near Moscow, inaugurated experimental complex which could extract proton cluster with maximum energy from 70-bev proton accelerator in millionth fractions of a second. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 6/9/72, LI) June 8-9:	NASA’s Mariner 9 spacecraft—orbiting Mars since Nov. 13, 1971—began photographing Mars after two-month rest period. Clear photos of Mars south and north poles—not clearly visible with earth-based telescopes and obscured from spacecraft by clouds in winter and spring—were taken June 8 and stored before transmission June 9 to Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Goldstone Tracking Station. Pictures were taken during 418th revolution in orbit with 16 900-km (10 500mi) apogee and 1650-km (1000-mi) perigee. Mariner 9 would take about 500 pictures during next nine weeks. It had taken 6876 photos covering 85% of planet between Nov. 13, 1971, and April 2, 1972, before it entered occultation period. (NASA Release 72-123)
Space researchers should look for insect life on Jupiter and for seeds and pollen on Saturn, Russian-born cosmologist Dr. Immanuel Velikovsky said during lecture sponsored by Ames Research Center’s Biotechnology and Planetary Biology Divs. at arc. He hypothesized that Venus and Mars had been in different orbits and had passed close enough to earth in centuries before Christ to cause cataclysms described in Old Testament. Dr. Velikovsky also suggested that several magnetic shells within solar system could return echoes and urged that spacecraft be sent to investigate them, (arc Astrogram, 8/3/72, 1; Mead, San Jose, Calif, Mercury, 8/15/72)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) had completed 111 revolutions of Mars and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971) had completed 6 revolutions, Tass announced. Radio contact with spacecraft remained stable and onboard instruments were continuing to function satisfactorily. (fbis—Sov, 2/22/72, L2)
U.S. planned to commemorate 200th anniversary of Nation’s birth by attempting to land unmanned spacecraft on planet Mars July 4, 1976, according to NASA spokesman quoted in Washington Post. Attempt would be made by Viking spacecraft scheduled to enter Mars orbit about July 1, 1976. (W Post, 4/6/72, A2)
NASA’s Pioneer 10 spacecraft, en route to Jupiter, crossed orbit of Mars and entered space never before visited by spacecraft. Pioneer 10 had safely crossed region of “Great Galactic Ghoul” 209 million km (130 million mi) from sun where two Mars-bound spacecraft had been lost and third had stopped transmitting for seven hours, apparently because of impact of high-velocity meteoroids. Since launch March 2 Pioneer 10 had traveled 249 million km (155 million mi) on its 998-million-km (620-million-mi) flight path to Jupiter and was 75 million km (47 million mi) straight-line distance from earth. It would enter Asteroid Belt in early July, reach Jupiter in December 1973, and cross orbit of Pluto in about 15 yrs. (NASA Release 72-111)
NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe (launched May 30, 1971) photographed vast Mars chasm with branching canyons resembling network of dry river beds. Describing photo, which was released to press Jan. 19, Harold Masursky, of U.S. Geological Survey, said in interview that chasm probably had been caused by “faulting of the crust,” a cracking and sliding process associated with earthquakes. Masursky believed line of small craters running parallel to canyon had probably been caused by venting volcanic gases and ash. Wind erosion and landslides had probably altered canyon, but landscape in photo appeared to be geologically young. (Wilford, NYT, 1/20/72, 25)
Low-altitude qualification test of Viking parachute—decelerator system to slow Viking spacecraft for softlanding on Mars 1976—was conducted by NASA at Dept, of Defense Joint Parachute Test Facility in El Centro, Calif. Parachute, 16-m (53-ft) in diameter and deployed by mortar, was dropped from B-57 aircraft. It opened on schedule, but dropped payload. Test was first of two low-altitude tests planned for 1972 and followed series of six development tests. High-altitude tests with balloon-launched parachute would be conducted during summer. Investigation was under way to determine cause of failure, (frc Release 6-72; W News, 4/28/72, 45)
U.S.S.R. hoped to land robot life-detection laboratory on Mars within few years, according to Leninskoye Znamya (Lenin’s Banner) newspaper article by Soviet space experts. Automatic Microbiological Laboratory would scoop up sample of Martian soil and examine it for microorganisms such as bacteria, yeasts, and fungi that might be able to survive in thin Martian atmosphere. Laboratory would also draw Martian air through filter to trap and analyze microorganisms and would detect emission of heat and carbon dioxide. (Wilford, NYT, 3/27/72, 7; upi, W News, 3/13/72, 5)
Mariner Mars ’71 extended mission of 259 days beyond primary mission was adjudged success. Objectives of extended mission of Mariner 9 (launched by NASA May 30, 1971, and inserted in Mars orbit No. 13, 1971) had been to map 70% of planet with 1-km (0.6-mi) visual resolution and to study dynamic characteristics of Mars at reduced data-acquisition rate. During extended mission Mariner 9 had mapped 100% of planet and had observed large areas with infrared and ultraviolet instruments. S-band occultations and celestial mechanics measurements had proved Mars to be geologically and meteorologically active. (nasa proj off)
NASA’s Mariner 9 completed 146th day in Mars orbit. Since launch May 30, 1971, Mariner 9 had responded to 37 764 commands and had taken 6876 pictures. Spacecraft was undergoing solar occultation (passing into shadow of Mars) and would resume acquisition of data in early June when occultation ceased. Spacecraft resources were being budgeted to keep Mariner 9 active through superior conjunction of Mars and sun in September when spacecraft signals would be deflected by solar gravity. Analysis of deflection could provide accurate check on theory of relativity. (NASA proj off)
Experiments at U.S.S.R.’s Radio Physics Institute had suggested that upper Mars mantle was hard and porous like earth dendrites, Tass reported. Report on study had said small, isolated dust regions were source of Mars dust storms and there was no uninterrupted dust mantle. Dust over Martian surface was no more than 1 mm (0.04 in) thick. White polar caps were reported to be hard-frozen carbon dioxide. (fbis-Sov, 7/31/72, LI)
New Mexico Univ. geologist Dr. Bradford A. Smith said riverbeds on Mars probably had dried because of orbital changes. When the Mars orbit was more elliptical than at present, the perihelion would be much closer to the sun, perhaps producing long-term climate changes which might, “at certain times, permit liquid water to exist.” Dr. Conway B. Leovy, Univ. of Washington, said dust storms encountered by Mariner 9 were “phenomena which will recur on Mars depending on the particular astronomical relationship between the perihelion and the solstice.” Dust storms might have been responsible for “the remarkable laminated terrain which has been observed in both polar zones.” Scientists had determined from Mariner 9 photos that the planet was a more varied and dynamic body than expected. Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Sciences, said: “Mars is like three planets: the old cratered planet, the young volcanic active planet that you see, and then an entirely different situation in the polar regions in Mars.” Mars as “planetary laboratory” of towering volcanoes, deep rift valleys, broad plateaus broken by fault lines, ancient planes with moonlike craters, sand dunes, clouds with water ice, and ever-changing polar caps would “substantially increase our basic knowledge of planets . . . and . . . when that history is written you will find that planetary exploration has contributed in a major way to the health and welfare of life on this planet.” (Transcript)
Photo-mapping of Mars by Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) had revealed multiple circular features surrounding both poles which might indicate that the Martian north and south poles had moved, California Institute of Technology scientists reported in Science. Some of the concentric patterns were centered on points displaced from the present north and south poles of Mars, implying that these were ancient positions of the poles and testifying to a slow drift of the Martian spin axis. Such a drift of the earth axis could explain the evidence for radical climate changes in the past—fossil coral reefs in Greenland and fossil forests in the South Pole—and revive the debate with scientists who believed the climate changes were due to the constant moving of the earth’s continents and oceans. (Murray, Malin, Science, 3/9/73, 997999)
“The equatorial sinuous channels on Mars detected by Mariner 9 point to a past epoch of higher pressures and abundant liquid water. Advective instability of the martian atmosphere permits two stable climates—one close to present conditions, the other at a pressure of the order of 1 bar [100 kilonewtons per sq mi] depending on the quantity of buried volatiles. Variations in the obliquity of Mars, the luminosity of the sun, and the albedo of the polar caps each appear capable of driving the instability between a current ice age and more clement conditions. Obliquity driving alone implies that epochs of much higher and of much lower pressure must have characterized martian history. Climatic change on Mars may have important meteorological, geological, and biological implications.” (Science, 9/14/73, 1045-8)
Results of the Mariner 9 ultraviolet spectrometer experiment to measure seasonal variation of ozone on Mars were reported in Science by Univ. of Colorado and Cal Tech scientists. Observations made between Nov. 14, 1971, and Oct. 27, 1972, had shown ozone to be present in polar regions of Mars and to have seasonal variation. In summer, the amount in the polar atmosphere was less than three micrometer-atmospheres. In autumn, ozone increased and was found in association with formation of the polar hood. In winter, the maximum amount of ozone was present, “57 micrometer-atmospheres over the polar hood and 16 over the polar cap. In spring, the amount over the polar cap decreases mono-tonically until by the beginning of summer the ozone disappears. Ozone is not observed in the equatorial region during any season.” (Barth et al., Science, 2/23/73, 795-6)
Selection of the Chryse valley near the mouth of the Martian Grand Canyon and of Cydonia in the Mare Acidalium, 1600 km (1000 mi) northeast, as landing sites for NASA’s two unmanned Viking spacecraft in July and August 1976 was announced at an Hq. press conference. The two spacecraft were scheduled for launch on their year-long, 740-million-km (460-million-mi) journey toward Mars in the summer 1975. The sites had been selected by prominent scientists after a one-year evaluation of 22 potential areas for scientific interest and the probability of a successful landing. The possibility of finding water at these sites increased the chances of finding evidence of life. Backup sites were Tritonis Lacus and Alba. Arriving at Mars, the spacecraft would enter a highly elliptical orbit and then separate into two parts, an orbiter and a lander. Each lander would carry a miniature chemical laboratory to analyze Martian soil for signs of life. A 3-m (10-ft) retractable claw would scoop soil samples for analysis. Other instruments would analyze the atmosphere and measure pressure, temperature, wind velocity, and quake activity. The orbiter would perform visual, thermal, and water-vapor mapping. (Transcript; nasa Release 73-91)
Climatic changes on Mars indicated by Mariner 9 (launched by NASA
nasa’s Pioneer 11 probe, launched April 5, was traveling at 120 000 km per hr (74 000 mph) and had covered 48 million km (30 million mi), one fifth of its 20-mo journey to the planet Jupiter. All experiments and spacecraft systems were functioning well. Instruments were sampling the sun’s field and wind, measuring solar and galactic cosmic ray particles, measuring hydrogen and helium in interstellar space, and making sky maps of the zodiacal light (sunlight reflected from cosmic dust between the earth and Jupiter). Meanwhile, Pioneer 10 (launched March 3, 1972) had covered 560 million km (350 million mi) of its 1-billion-km (620-million-mi) flight path and was due to arrive at Jupiter in December. Good data were being returned from all scientific instruments. Pioneer 10 was defining for the first time the interplanetary medium far beyond the orbit of Mars and the Asteroid Belt, (nasa Release 73-107)
The U.S.-U.S.S.R. Working Group on Interplanetary Exploration released a statement following a weeklong meeting in Moscow. Scientists had met to analyze data about the Mars surface and atmosphere for selection of future landing sites for unmanned spacecraft. They also had discussed new results from exploration of Venus by Venus 8 (launched by U.S.S.R. March 27, 1972) and earth-based optical and radio measurements. Recommendations for cooperation would be announced when confirmed by both sides [see March 5]. The Group had been established under a NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences agreement of January 1971. U.S. scientists were led by Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs in nasa’s Office of Space Science. Soviet participants were headed by Academician Georgy I. Petrov, Director of the Institute of Space Research, (nasa Release 73-20)
The U.S.S.R. had abandoned its women’s cosmonaut training program, the Washington Evening Star and Daily News reported. Gen. Georgy T.	Reregovoy, commander of the Soviet cosmonauts, had said in an interview with the Polish newspaper Express Wieczerny in Warsaw, “We train only young men, not women.” (upi, W Star & News, 2/23/73, A3) February 24:	A Raltimore Sun editorial commented on the Feb. 15 press conference on the Pioneer 10 Jupiter probe (launched March 2, 1972) : “There was reason to worry for Pioneer’s wellbeing, as it traveled the section beyond Mars; so many chunks of rock float along there, on such erratic tracks, that our expensive new-model spacecraft could have inadvertently smacked into something a great deal bigger than itself. Even a sideswipe might have thrown it off course. Happily, it has registered contact only with the sort of fine-grained debris that litters space in general.” Pioneer 10 had indicated the existence of more asteroids between the earth and Mars than previously realized and fewer between Mars and Jupiter. “Or is it so new a phenomenon, that the closer to earth’s big cities you come, the thicker the traffic gets?” (R Sun, 2/24/73)
The next 10 yrs in transportation could be the decade of the hovercraft, Jane’s Surface Skimmers said in its 1973-74 edition. Editor Roy Mc-Leavy noted that'the Soviet Ekranoplan already carried 900 fully armed troops at more than 350 km per hr (220 mph) over almost any surface. Hovercraft production would almost certainly develop into “one of the world’s major industries.” U.S. Navy surface ships might cost as much as $50 million; France was studying “hoverfrigates”; and the U.S.S.R. was joining in “this more sophisticated approach to naval strategy.” (AP, W Post, 11/29/73, A32) November 28—December 1:	An International Colloquium on Mars was held at Cal Tech and Jet Propulsion Laboratory by nasa, the American Astronautical Society, and the American Geophysical Union to evaluate new ideas stimulated by the successful Mariner 9 mission to Mars (launched by nasa May 30, 1971). Four hundred scientists from 10 countries participated in the program, which discussed Martian surface history and evolution, atmospheric history as related to interactions with the surface, and future exploration of Mars, (nasa Release 73-255; jpl pio)
The U.S.S.R. launched its Mars 4 probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 12:31 am local time (3:31 pm edt, July 21) into a parking orbit from which it was inserted into a 470-million-km (290-million-mi) trajectory toward Mars. All systems performed satisfactorily, Tass reported. The spacecraft would reach Mars in February 1974 to continue scientific exploration of the planet and the space near it begun by Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971). United Press International reported Western sources as saying the apparent aim of Mars 4 was to softland research instruments and TV cameras on the Martian surface. Mars 4 would be the fourth Soviet spacecraft to reach Mars. Mars 1 (launched Nov. 1, 1962, to fly by Mars) had transmitted data to the earth for more than four months during its journey, before communications went dead. Mars 2 had been put into orbit around the planet and transmitted data to the earth into August 1972. An instrumented capsule from the spacecraft crashlanded on the Martian surface Nov. 27, 1971, becoming the first man-made object to reach the surface. Mars 3 had also attempted to softland an instrumented capsule, during a dust storm. TV pictures were transmitted to the earth for 20 sec before transmission ceased abruptly. The spacecraft ended its mission in August 1972. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/73; fbis-Sov, 7/23/73, LI; upi, NYT, 7/23/73, 8; A&A 1962, 1963, 1971, 1972)
nasa and European Space Research Organization officials met in Paris to discuss future cooperative missions to the planets. Joint mission possibilities included an out-of-the-ecliptic flight to study the sun, missions to Jupiter and Mercury, and experiments on missions to Venus and Mars. NASA would receive suggestions for the 1980s from European nations during the next few months, nasa Director of Planetary Programs Robert S. Kraemer had said that international cooperation would be necessary for one third to one fourth of the payloads the agency envisioned for the next 15 yrs. (nasa, Spec Asst to Deputy Assoc Admin, interviews, 20-21 Jan 75; Couvault, Av Wk, 1 April 74, 38-9)
NASA had deleted a backup Viking lander spacecraft and would substitute the proof test orbiter for one of two flight orbiters to help offset significant cost increases and meet target dates for the two 1975 missions to explore the planet Mars, NASA reported to Speaker of the House Carl Albert. Technical problems in the guidance-and-control computer, biology instrument, and lander proof-test capsule qualification had delayed cornpletion of the landers, made the schedule “extremely tight,” and increased costs an estimated $48.8 million over the $89 million in the FY 1975 budget. NASA notified the House that' it planned to use for Viking $48.8 million available from the Skylab program after its successful completion. (Text in Viking Proj Hearings, House Subcom on Space Science, 21-2 Nov 74)
Grigory Khozin of the Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Institute of U.S. Studies expressed resentment of criticism by some U.S. press members and others of Soviet motives and technical ability in the cooperative Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Writing in the weekly Literaturnaya Gazeta, Khozin particularly censured suggestions of early Soviet reluctance to cooperate in space and of Soviet spacecraft docking difficulties, made in the recent book U.S.-Soviet Cooperation in Space by former U.S. Ambassador to the U.S.S.R., Foy D. Kohler. He accused “certain U.S. circles” of being “glad to cast a shadow” on ASTP and to “smear the forthcoming joint experiment precisely because it is a joint one [and] promotes the establishment of normal relations between countries.” Khozin declared that the U.S.S.R., as well as U.S. space program leaders and “ordinary Americans,” favored further close cooperation in space. (fbis-Sov, Sept 74, B2-3; Smith, NYT, 19 Sept 74) 18 September—21 October, 24 November-14 December: Two sets of critical surface-simulation tests were successfully conducted on the Viking lander proof-flight vehicle in a Martin Marietta Corp. thermal vacuum chamber under Martian temperature and pressure conditions. The tests verified the ability of Viking systems to withstand Martian temperatures and verified lander operations and ground support systems from the acquisition of a simulated Martian soil sample to analysis, interpretation, and reporting of data by Viking science teams. The spacecraft performed tasks—using the surface sampler, imaging system, meteorological sensors, x-ray spectrometer, seismometer, and thermal control systems—in temperatures ranging from 178 to 308 K (—135° to 95°F). (nasa prog off, interview, 21 Oct 75; Av Wk, 4 Nov 74,44-45)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, was quoted as saying in an interview: “From what we know today, there is no medical reason to bar a two-year mission to Mars. . . . We still need more data, but I don’t think the medical findings from a six-month or a year-long mission would differ appreciably from the experience with our three Skylab missions.” On a two-year mission to Mars (not likely to be considered before the early 1990s), “we’re going to have a hard time keeping people completely busy,” leaving astronauts more time to think of their isolation. “That’s another problem we’ll have to deal with.” Meanwhile, all the data indicate “that man is really adapting to the zero-gravity environment of space. He does that in a way that causes some very large fluctuations initially in various body systems” but, “with time, it appears that these fluctuations settle down.” (US News, 11 Feb 74, 62-64)
A Today editorial had commented on the planned Viking flight to Mars: “Success of the Viking flight could mean additional Congressional support for more sophisticated flights in the future. ... It will be almost another year before we will have the answers to the Viking experiments. . . .At that time, we will be celebrating the 200th birthday of our country—and what better way to celebrate the birth of one nation than with the discovery of another?” (Today, 20 Aug 75)
The Soviet Union might attempt to land an automatic microbiological laboratory on Mars before the U.S. Viking spacecraft, whose twice-delayed launch is now scheduled for 20 Aug., could arrive, the Christian Science Monitor reported Finnish astronomer Heikka Oja as telling the British Interplanetary Society. By launching a probe between 17 Sept, and 3 Oct. and using higher speeds and shorter trajectories, the Russians could reach Mars in May 1976, 2 mo before the scheduled Viking arrival. Between 1971 and 1973 the Soviets had made 4 attempts to land probes on Mars; only Mars 3 (launched 28 May 1971) succeeded in softlanding a capsule (on 2 Dec. 1971). Landing in a dust storm, it ceased transmitting after 20 sec. Oja said the Soviets hoped to repeat this experiment, this time in a region near the south polar cap of Mars where the thin, mostly carbon dioxide atmosphere might contain moisture. (Gatland, CSM, 19 Aug 75) . .
The press commented on the mission of the Viking spacecraft to Mars [see 20 Aug.]. The Washington Post said that the essence of the space program had been “to provide mankind with new knowledge, not in hopes that this knowledge will be useful immediately here on Earth but in hopes that it will expand our understanding of the universe in which we live and . . . enable us to reach better solutions to our philosophical and political, as well as practical, problems.” The Viking missions had opened a new era in which the search for knowledge was to be done largely by machines; the rewards promised to be rich, beyond measure in strictly monetary terms. The Christian Science Monitor agreed, commenting that Viking represented “an opportunity for mankind’s self-awareness to take a greater stride away from earth-centered thinking than was afforded by Neil Armstrong’s historic step on to the moon.” Discovering organic life on Mars would strengthen the conviction that life existed abundantly throughout the universe and that we were not alone. Some had questioned whether the U.S. should spend a billion dollars on such a program when resources were hard pressed on earth, but anew discovery, that life was not a meaningless chance but part of a grand design, could give new inspiration to humanity’s efforts to deal with earthly problems. Here was a challenge for the architects of detente, the Monitor asserted. The U.S. and Russia had been needlessly duplicating scientific efforts, their cooperation amounting to little more than “arm’s-length information exchange.” The two countries had much to share. “By abandoning costly competition for a truly joint program, the two countries could gain from each other’s capabilities, minimize the cost to each of them, and pursue this cosmic outreach on behalf of all mankind.” (W Post, 22 Aug 75, A24; CSM, 22 Aug 75, 28)
Viking 2 was successfully launched at 2:39 pm EDT from the Eastern Test Range on a Titan-Centaur launch vehicle. The spacecraft entered on a trajectory toward Mars accurate to within the 3-sigma tolerance. If flown without midcourse correction, Viking 2 would reach Martian orbit 279 259 km from the target. The launch had been rescheduled from 1 Sept., after the launch crew during a 28 Aug. precountdown test discovered a degradation in the detection threshold of the orbiter’s S-band radio receiver. On 1 Sept., project officials decided to remove the spacecraft from the launch vehicle for additional evaluation. The launch was rescheduled for 9 Sept, after evaluation concluded that the anomaly had been caused by a faulty connector or conductor between the diplexer module and the high-gain antenna. Since the faulty part could not be isolated, the antenna and cabling were replaced, the orbiter and lander retested, encapsulated, and mated to the launch vehicle. After launch, all onboard systems and experiments were checked out. A trajectory correction maneuver on 19 Aug. targeted Viking 2 for a rendezvous with Mars on 7 Aug. 1976. Viking 2 was the second of two identical planetary probes [see 20 Aug.], each consisting of an orbiter and a lander, launched toward Mars in 1975 for rendezvous and orbital and surface exploration in 1976. (NASA MOR S-815-75—01—02, 16 Sept 75; Viking Science Activities rpt no. 89; Mission Operations Status Bulletins 10—14)
A lunar scientist in Johnson Space Center’s Division of Lunar and Planetary Sciences had suggested that low-viscosity lava rather than water could have caused the large channels seen on Mars, JSC announced. Ernest Schonfeld, in a paper to be presented at the annual meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union, said that the abundant large channels—one of the most puzzling landforms on Mars—were more easily explained by lava than by water; scientists had not been able to identify thick deposits of sediment that should have resulted from channel formation by water. Viking 1 had landed near the mouth of a large channel where thick sediments should have been deposited, but rocks at that site appeared to be volcanic. Schonfeld proposed that thin basaltic liquid melted below the Mars surface had flowed freely to erode the surface, and said that the coincidence of the age of volcanic activity on Mars and the erosion of the channels supported his idea. (JSC Release 76-72)
Viking 2 apparently touched down at about 6:39 EDT in a field of windswept sand dunes on the Utopian plains of Mars at the edge of its northern polar cap, after a communications breakdown that left JPL scientists without contact during the last 3 hr of the spacecraft’s journey of more than 650 million km through space. The stabilization system on the orbiter, which served as a relay link between the lander and the deep space tracking network on earth, lost power 26 sec after separation of the lander at 3:40 pm EDT, and the high-power antenna on the orbiter no longer pointed at the earth. The blackout lasted nearly an hr, while mission personnel tried to reestablish communications. A low-power transmitter on the orbiter, installed to provide limited 2-way communications with earth, finally sent engineering data at 6:59 pm indicating that the lander had touched down. Lander signals were strong for 17 min until the orbiting relay link passed out of range. First pictures from the lander would be relayed about 3 am EDT on 4 Sept, as the first step in a “recovery plan” to put the experiments and systems back on schedule. All pictures and data taken by the lander were being stored on tape in the orbiter for later playback. Except for the orbiter malfunction, the pictures would have been available within 2 hr of the touchdown. The landing date of Viking 1, originally 4 July, had been postponed for 2 wk in order to ensure a safe site; the spot for Viking 2 was chosen because indications of frost or fog in the area made it likely to encourage the presence of life, scientists said. Results from Viking 1 suggested either that chemical processes never observed in earth laboratories occurred on Mars, or that life forms existed on Mars that were unknown on earth. Life search by Viking 2 would not begin for a wk; the 2 landing craft were about 7400 km apart on the surface of Mars, Viking 1 at Chryse near the equator (at a latitude comparable to that of Mexico City) and Viking 2 in a warmer area (at a latitude comparable to that of Montreal) more than 1600 km northeast of the Viking 1 site. (IVStar, 4 Sept 76, A— 1; B Sun, 4 Sept 76, A-l; ATT, 4 Sept 76, 1; WPost, 4 Sept 76, A-l)
Radio links with the Viking landers on Mars were reestablished, ending a month of silent hibernation during which communications had been blocked by the passage of the sun between Mars and earth. Scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena sent a “wake-up call” to the robot laboratories on Mars that had been collecting a month’s supply of data during the blackout period; these data, to be played back beginning 20 Dec., would include images of the area around the two landers, inorganic chemical analysis, additional biology data, and any records to support the (thus far unsuccessful) search for marsquakes, using the seismometer on the Viking 2 lander. Resumption of activity would begin Viking’s 18-mo “extended mission,” which would provide more images of the Mars surface and polar regions, as well as measurements of water vapor and temperature, some at twice the resolution of previous observations; process more samples of the surface for life-detection tests and inorganic chemical analysis; photograph Deimos and Phobos, the moons of Mars; and monitor daily and seasonal weather changes, origins of planetwide dust storms, and any seismic activity that might occur. As Mars entered its closest approach to the sun in the spring of 1977, scientists would be watching for signs of the dust storms thought to be triggered by perihelion; when Mariner 9 arrived at Mars in 1971, the entire planet was engulfed in the greatest dust storms in the history of Mars observations and surveys from orbit were limited for several months. Such storms could endanger the Vikings on the surface of Mars, besides impeding the view from orbit. (W Post, 15 Dec 76, 2; NASA Release 76-208; W Star, 16 Dec 76, A-7; NYT, 21 Dec 76, 21)
Something found by Viking 1 on the surface of Mars behaved as if it were alive, said 6 biologists on the science team at JPL, who nevertheless refused to confirm the presence of life on Mars until results from Viking 2 were in. Viking 2 was on its way to a landing scheduled for 3 Sept, on Utopia Planitia (the Utopian plains) above which the air was found by Viking 1 ’s orbiter to contain 5 to 10 times as much water as that over the Chryse area where Viking 1 landed. A surface sample of Chryse itself dug by a mechanical arm was found to contain a surprising amount of water that boiled off when it was heated by an instrument on the Viking 1 lander. Four other instruments, 3 built to look for life, received samples of the Mars soil: one to look for photosynthesis, the second to look for signs of metabolism, the third to detect “breathing” or “sweating” characteristic of earth-type life forms. All 3 instruments appeared to detect what they were looking for, but the biologists explained the results as an exotic chemistry not connected with biology. Having quoted odds of a million to 1 against finding life on Mars, the biologists now said they could never state with 100% certainty that Viking had found life until they could return a Mars sample to earth, which some were afraid to do: Nobel prizewinner Dr. Joshua K. Leder-berg of Stanford University had told associates that Martian life forms brought to earth might threaten the 2 million species of life here by competing in unknown ways for food, water, or air needed to survive. (Thomas O’Toole, W Post, 3 Sept 76, A-2)
The rate of production of radioactive gas from a Mars sample monitored by an instrument on Viking 1 had “plateaued,” said Dr. Gilbert V. Levin, who designed the instrument, and the slowdown in activity was puzzling from both a biological and a chemical standpoint. A biological response would generally evolve gas for a longer period, whereas the count—if recording a merely chemical reaction—“took place at a very rapid rate initially and then, uncharacteristically, slowed down and took a long time to plateau.” A special team of scientists from several fields was convened to consider all possible nonbiological explanations for the unusual readings from Viking 1, and various laboratories around the U.S. were being enlisted to help test the theories. (ATT, 3 Aug 76, 18; W Star, 3 Aug 76, A-7; 1VSJ, 2 Aug 76, 1)
NASA Hq and LaRC announced that A. Thomas Young, former mission director for the Viking project, had been appointed Director for Lunar and Planetary Programs at NASA Hq and would begin his new duties 6 Dec. in the Office of Space Science. Young, who had worked with the Viking project since 1968 and helped develop Mars mission objectives, was most recently the mission operations manager and director of the 750-person Viking flight team at JPL in Pasadena, Calif. In his new job he would manage NASA’s unmanned planetary programs, including Viking, Pioneer, Mariner, and Helios, as well as studies in planetary astronomy, atmospheres, and geology; advanced scientific planning, programming, and technology; extraterrestrial materials research; and flight-program support. (LaRC Release 76-40; NASA Hq special anno., 5 Nov 76)
Enticing hints but no firm answers” to the question of life on Mars were the product of an increasing volume of scientific data from the Viking 1 lander; “practically faultless operation” for more than 5 wk had produced enough information to keep the Viking scientists busy, especially the data from the 3 bioexperiments and a related molecular analysis of Martian soil. Results were “certainly not what would be expected” if earth-type organisms were present, but they were not explainable in terms of “simple” nonbiological chemistry, said Nature magazine. The labeled-release (LR) instrument added a small amount of water containing nutrients “labeled” with carbon 14 to its Mars sample, and incubated it at 15°C, warmer than the surface temperature of Mars. “Totally unexpected” was a massive and rapid release of radioactivity into the gas phase—presumably carbon monoxide or dioxide—and the radioactive count reached 4500 in 10 hr, leveling off at about 8500 in 48 hr. A second dose of radioactive nutrient produced an initial burst followed by a drop in radioactivity, and the graph “almost” flattened out for the remaining 4 days of the experiment; however, scientists were surprised to discover a possible trend to very slowly accelerating release of radioactivity. “Unfortunately,” said Nature, “the experiment (was) stopped for performance of a control test...” A repetition of this experiment later would extend incubation over wk or mo rather than days; “results certainly do not look like anything one would expect” from an earth sample in the same situation. Most popular explanation for the initial burst of activity was oxidation of the labeled nutrients. The gas-exchange (GE) experiment used gas chromatography to monitor a Mars sample wetted with a “soup” of nutrients to detect any changes in the instrument’s content of gas. First dampening of the sample produced “a remarkable burst of oxygen” that leveled off after several hr but remained stable for days. The experiment would continue “for some time,” to see if further changes occurred. Viking scientists were trying to duplicate results of the LR and GE experiments in earth laboratories using simple catalysts and oxidizing agents. The pyrolytic-release (PR) experiment, most technologically complex, proved “least equivocal when it comes to interpretation” of the results, Nature reported. A Mars sample incubated in a “Martian atmosphere,” with added water vapor and irradiation from a xenon lamp to simulate solar radiation, was heated to 625°C to drive off and account for unreacted carbon monoxide and dioxide and to pyrolyze any organic compounds trapped as vapor. The vapor trap, heated to 700°C, would release and oxidize any remaining organic compounds. A sterile sample should provide a peak ratio of about 500 to 1; the results from the Mars sample were about 75 to 1, “several times more active” than non-sterilized soil from the dry valleys of Antarctica. Results from the control experiment with heat-sterilized soil would be “crucial” because a high peak ratio would indicate that biological, rather than chemical, processes were going on in the soil that could fix atmospheric carbon monoxide or dioxide in the presence of light. If life were present on Mars, science would expect a high peak ratio from a surface sample strongly illuminated in atmosphere of about 90% carbon dioxide. Unfortunately, the initial run of the organic-chemistry analysis was spoiled by a failure of the surface-sampling arm to deliver a full load to the gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer. A further analysis would be performed on a full load obtained subsequently. Lack of detectable organic compounds in this sample would further complicate interpretation of the 3 biology experiments. (Av Wk, 30 Aug 76, 22; Nature, 26 Aug 76, 734)
The Tass news agency reported the soft landing of “the automatic interplanetary station” Viking 1 on the surface of Mars, adding that the first pictures of the surface showed “a foot-pad of the craft on . . . dust-covered terrain strewn with small sharp stones . . . According to the preliminary assessments, the ground consists of basalt rocks and volcanic lava. It is believed to be comparatively soft.” Tass noted the postponement of the Viking landing, originally scheduled for 4 July, and the search for bacterial life on Mars which was “one of the aims of this exploration.” (FBIS, Tass in English, 20 July 76)
An all-systems simulation of landing Vikings 1 and 2 on the surface of Mars, to exercise the entire 750-person Viking flight team so that everyone knew exactly what to do when the time came later this year, began 20 Feb. and built up to a “Mars landing” 22 Feb., concluding today as a “fantastic success” according to James S. Martin, Jr., project manager at Viking Control in the Jet Propulsion Laboratory installation in the San Gabriel Mts. near Pasadena. The computer program had to be redesigned to facilitate uplink command to the spacecraft cameras, and more time had to be allowed for certain ground-control and data-processing procedures, but no major problems developed. In the room where a full-scale model of the Viking lander complete with operational cameras stood on a simulated Martian surface, prankish team members had put three tiny marine fossils from earth’s Paleozoic period on the sand within the camera field-of-view. When the camera came on to transmit after the simulated landing, the first picture was startling, but the fossils were immediately recognized, and the joke demonstrated that even tiny objects near the landing site would appear in the pictures transmitted from Mars. (NYT, 4 Mar 76, 32)
Tests completed in flight on the two Mars-bound Viking spacecraft showed that each had 2 ovens of the organic chemistry experiment in good working order. JPL spokesmen said they were confident the instruments would carry out the investigations planned on the Mars surface later in the year. Earlier data indicated that one oven on each spacecraft might have failed, but investigators would not be certain until the Mars landings, scheduled for early July and Sept. The ovens—3 on each Viking lander—were designed to heat surface samples to 500°C to release organic matter in the soil for analysis by the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer on each lander. (NASA Release 76-43)
Viking 2's lander dug a soil sample from beneath a rock on Mars and delivered it to the biological instrument package. All three experiments received a part of the sample; initial data from two of them—the labeled-release and the pyrolytic-release experiments—were sent to mission control at JPL. The third (gas-exchange) experiment was in a long incubation period that would continue through solar conjunction—a movement of the bodies which would put the sun between Mars and the earth— preventing communication with the Viking landers and orbiters. Conjunction would begin about 10 Nov. and continue through early Dec.; if the landers were revived successfully after the communications gap, more samples would be collected in mid-Jan. Leonard Clark, surface-sampler engineer, foresaw no problem in reactivating the arm mechanisms, adding that they had worked very well, “just the way they did during ground testing on earth before they left the manufacturer.” (Av Wk, 1 Nov 76, 15)
As Viking 2’s lander was preparing for its scoop-and-analyze sequence on the rocky Utopia site of Mars, the Viking 1 orbiter fired its engines to shift orbit around the planet in 40° longitude jumps each day for 9 days before taking over the relay of communications from the Viking 2 lander. Viking 2's orbiter would then begin a polar-orbital scan of Mars to search for traces of organic materials—carbon-based molecules found in all life forms on earth—not yet detected by Viking 1 experiments. Viking 1 ’s lander would remain in standby mode after its weeks of testing at the Chryse site. Project scientist Dr. Gerald A. Soffen, commenting on the confusing results of the Viking 1 experiments (which hinted at the existence of life but offered no evidence of organic chemicals), said he had been prepared for the discovery of organic chemicals without life, but the suggestion of Martian life without organics was totally unexpected. Just after 6 a.m. EDT on 12 Sept., the 3-meter arm of Viking 2 dug its first sample of Mars soil and dropped it into the hopper leading to three biology instruments. First cycle of the pyrolytic-release experiment began when the soil reached the test chamber, to be incubated in a carbon monoxide-carbon dioxide atmosphere containing a radioactive tracer; after 5 days, the atmosphere would be flushed out and the soil sample heated to vaporize any organic material. A detector would measure the radioactive carbon that had been ingested by any organisms. The gas-exchange detector—looking for signs of photosynthesis in the dark— would reveal the presence of organisms that might exhale gases Such as oxygen or carbon dioxide through the night as well as in the daytime. (The first results of the same experiment on Viking 1 at Chryse had showed the soil was releasing six times as much gas as it would have in the absence of photosynthesis; a second trial had produced a signal a third as strong as the first, but still twice what it would have been if no photosynthesis were going on. Neither the readings nor their differences had been explained to everyone’s satisfaction.) The third biological instrument—the labeled-release experiment—would add a nutrient liquid to the test chamber on Tuesday and monitor over 10 days the release of radioactive tracer from any metabolized nutrient. A second soil sample would be used beginning Monday, 13 Sept., for an organic-chemistry analysis to detect carbon molecules, and for an x-ray fluorescence experiment to learn the composition of inorganic chemicals in the Mars soil. Scientists believed chances of finding definite traces of life would be better at Utopia, where five times more water had been measured in the air than at Chryse. They also planned to reduce chances of ambiguity in the Utopia readings by conducting the photosynthesis search at night, and by moving a rock to take a sample of Mars soil that was shielded from the killing solar ultraviolet constantly impinging on the planet’s surface and that was deeper than the sample taken at Chryse. (WStar, 12 Sept 76, A-14; W Post, 13 Sept 76, A-5; C Trib, 13 Sept 76, 6-16)
NASA’s upcoming 5yr plan (1978-1982) had projected annual budgets for fiscal yrs 1980-1982 in excess of $4.7 billion, Aviation Week reported. The plan, an internal document used to guide the agency, would allow NASA as many as 7 major new mission starts in FY 1979, including a Mars rover and a Halley’s Comet rendezvous. (A v Wk, Mar 7/77, 47)	•
AvWk reported that James S. Martin, Jr., manager of the Viking project, would receive the Goddard award for “brilliant leadership of the Viking project to land an instrumented, automated spacecraft on the planet Mars.” (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 9)
NASA announced that Pioneer 11 would fly just outside the rings of Saturn during its first encounter with the giant planet in 1979. The spacecraft would pass 30 000km (18 OOOmi) from the edge of the outermost ring and would swing in under the plane of the rings to a distance of 25 000km (15 OOOmi) from the planet’s surface. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, NASA associate administrator for space science, and A. Thomas Young, director of planetary programs, had made the decision to fly the Pioneer outside rather than inside the rings mainly because NASA wanted to use it as a pathfinder for the two Voyager spacecraft headed for Saturn encounter in 1980-81. The Pioneer would cross the ring plane at about the same distance as the trajectory that would use Saturn’s gravity to propel Voyager 2 toward Uranus. The uncertainties regarding a ring crossing even at 30 000km (18 OOOmi) from the outer edge of the rings called for NASA “to do everything we reasonably can to ensure Voyager’s success,” said Young. Should the Pioneer not survive the rings, NASA would have to revise its plan of sending Voyager 2 on to Uranus; however, a successful pass by Pioneer 11 would increase confidence in committing Voyager 2 to the Uranus option even if Voyager 1 had not achieved all its objectives at Saturn. An outside pass offered much better odds for success than an inner one, which would bring the spacecraft as close as 6000km (3700mi) to Saturn’s surface. The 1979 flyby by Pioneer 11 would be the first close encounter with Saturn; until the rings of Uranus were discovered, Saturn was considered the only ringed planet in earth’s solar system. The origin of the rings remained unknown, but their composition was defined by astronomers in 1970 as ordinary water ice, and radar readings in 1973 detected snowball-size chunks of solid material. (NASA Release 77-250)
NASA planned to send a roving laboratory over the Martian surface during the next Mars landings, Nature reported. Dr. Gerald A. Soffen, chief Viking project scientist, said that, although no future Mars missions were officially scheduled, the outlook was favorable given the scientific success of, and public enthusiasm for, the two Viking landers. Speaking at a Paris conference to disseminate Viking information, Soffen invited U.S. and foreign scientists to participate in examining Viking data and in developing experiments for the next generation of Mars missions. (Nature, Mar 10/77, 112)
JPL reported it had assisted DFRC with an engine problem on a possible Mars reconnaissance plane, a small remotely powered vehicle (RPV) called the Mini Sniffer developed by DFRC’s Dale Reed for environmental research at 100 000ft above earth’s surface. The 13ft aircraft with a 22ft wingspan, powered by an airless 30hp engine running on hydrazine, was the first propeller-driven plane designed to operate above 50 000ft. JPL had taken a hand when asked by DFRC to help with an engine-catalyst problem; Dr. Jose Chirivella, who solved the problem, saw the possibilities of using the miniplane on Mars. Deployment of 16 mini RPVs, 8 from each of 2 carrier spacecraft, over Mars so that each could make 5 or more separate takeoffs and landings in different locations, could achieve a total of 80 possible missions. The carriers, orbiting about Mars, would serve as comsats to collect data from the mini RPVs for relay to earth. The Martian RPVs would be instrumented to collect seismographic, meteorological, and geochemical data; they would conduct aerial magnetic and gravity surveys, take high-resolution photos, look for subsurface water, and study the speed and direction of winds and the pressure and density of the atmosphere. They might also collect surface samples from widely separated areas, storing them at a central location for return to earth by later missions. The small craft could be folded into 3m-long canisters protected by coverings that would fall away when parachutes unfolded to support the vehicles as they opened out to flight configuration for descent and cruise through the lower Martian atmosphere, landing like helicopters under power from variable-thrust retrorockets. (JPL Universe, Dec 9/77, 1)
Radio signals between the four Viking spacecraft on Mars and earth-based antennas had provided the most accurate confirmation so far of Einstein’s theory of relativity in an experiment conducted Nov. 25, 1976, when Mars moved behind the sun relative to the earth, causing a total blackout of communications with the Viking spacecraft. Radio signals transmitted to the Viking spacecraft from antennas at Goldstone, Calif., and Canberra, Australia, had produced “incredibly precise” measurement of the radio transmission. According to Adam I. Braufman of the Mass. Institute of Technology, the “uncertainty” over a space of some 322 million km was less than 2m, an accuracy of five parts in 10 million millionths. The Viking radio science team was trying to confirm Einstein’s prediction that the sun’s gravitational force would bend and delay radio signals (or any form of radiation) traveling close to a massive body such as the sun. Previous tests using the spacecraft communications systems tended to confirm the theory, but the Viking test proved much more accurate than the previous ones. (NYT, Jan 7/77, A-8; W Post, Jan 7/77, A-l)
NASA announced resumption of communication with the four Viking-mission vehicles—two landers and two orbiters—at the end of the “conjunction” period during which contact was degraded and temporarily lost because of the changing position of Mars, behind the sun with relation to the earth since Nov. 1976. The Viking mission extended into the post-conjunction period would use the functioning spacecraft to obtain seasonal-variation data, do long duration sampling for statistically important experiments, and gather additional information not possible during the primary mission because of time or observational constraints. No known limitations would preclude completion of at least a year of extended mission and probably more, the announcement said, as the orbiters had made minimal use of their consumables during the early mission and had performed a minimal number of battery-recharge cycles. Lander B’s location at Mars 44°N would encounter temperatures below the qualification limits in the winter season, but the effect of this was unpredictable because lander tests had not gone beyond qualification limits. Extended-mission data collection had actually begun last Nov. when controllers had used the spacecraft transponders passively to measure ranging, tracking, signal-time delay, and solar-corona-induced perturbation. The extended mission would continue through May 1978, the announcement said, and data analysis would continue through Sept. 1977; requirements for data analysis beyond FY 1978 were under study. (MOR-S-815-75-01/02)
NASA formally adjudged the Viking 75 mission, launched toward Mars on Aug. 20 and Sept. 9, 1975, successful, according to the post-landing mission operations report. All Viking instruments except the seismometer on the first lander (which failed to uncage itself) operated successfully and were continuing to send data to earth. The prelaunch mission objectives (advancing knowledge of Mars by orbital observation and by direct measurements in the atmosphere and on the planet’s surface) had been realized, the report said. (MOR S-815-75-01/02)
Despite NASA’s failure to win FY 1979 funding for a new Mars mission, such a mission remained the major planning element in the agency’s planetary programs office, Aviation Week reported. A Mars rover/orbiter mission had strong support from the Natl. Academy of Sciences, to lay the groundwork for a sample-return mission using either Martian-orbit rendezvous or direct ascent from earth to Mars. At a KSC briefing, A. Thomas Young, NASA’s director of planetary programs, said the highest priority missions NASA might implement “in the near term” would include the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR), a lunar-polar orbiter, a Saturn orbiter probe, and a rendezvous with comet Halley or Encke, or both, or possibly with an asteroid. “As we go through the budgetary process, on one side I wish Mars would go away,” Young said. “But when you stop and think about rivers, volcanoes, enormous Mars icecaps, the chemistry potential for life, and the atmosphere, you realize that understanding Mars is so important toward understanding where earth has been and is going that you’ve got to treat it in a responsible manner.” He said NASA planning should benefit from the 2.4m-diameter space telescope, aimed primarily at bodies outside the solar system but sure to provide significant data on objects nearer earth. {AvWk, Nov 14/77, 55)
A short-circuit in the power supply of Viking l’s gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer (GSMS) had forced controllers at JPL to turn off the instrument Mar. 12, NASA reported. JPL received confirmation of the command from the Viking system Mar. 14. NASA had shut down the GCMS, which had analyzed the composition of Martian atmosphere and soil early in the mission, to avoid damage to other instruments such as the onboard computer and communications system. (NASA Release 77-51)
NASA announced that Voyager 1 on its way to Jupiter and Saturn had completed transit of the asteroid belt, leaving the region Sept. 8. The belt, a band of rock and dust 360 million km (233 million mi) wide between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter with its inner edge about 105 million km (65 million mi) from earth’s orbit, was formerly believed an impassable hazard to spacecraft bound for outer planets and beyond. Voyager 1, launched after Voyager 2, had entered the asteroid belt Dec. 10 a few hours behind Voyager 2 on a master trajectory that would carry it steadily beyond Voyager2, which it would overtake Dec. 15. Voyager 1 would make its closest approach to Jupiter Mar. 5, 1979, at 286 000km (178 OOOmi); Voyager 2 would pass 643 000km (399 OOOmi) from Jupiter in July 1979. Both spacecraft would continue on to Saturn where Voyager 1 would arrive in Nov. 1980, Voyager 2 in Aug. 1981. (NASA Release 78-137)
NASA announced that scientists working for NASA and NSF had discovered living organisms inside rocks on the frozen deserts of the Antarctic. The discovery, made in a region called the Dry Valleys whose harsh climate resembled conditions on Mars, would significantly extend the known limits of life on earth, and would have important implications in a search for extraterrestrial life. Dr. E. Imre Friedmann and Dr. Roseli Ocampo-Friedmann, a husband-wife team who had searched for more than 15yr for microbial life in rocks, had made the discovery. They had isolated the newly discovered microorganisms (bacteria, algae, and fungi) and were growing them in laboratory cultures for clues to their endurance. Although the Dry Valleys of Antarctica had appeared lifeless, and the region’s freedom from snow and ice, combined with constantly blowing winds, had produced an environment among the world’s harshest, the Friedmanns had found in the Dry Valleys a widespread rich microbial vegetation under the surface of rocks, in the airspaces of porous rocks, or in fissures. Rocks broken open had revealed the presence of organisms as a dark-green layer a few millimeters deep. Dr. Richard Young, NASA’s chief of planetary biology, said the Dry Valleys in many ways resembled the environmental extremes found on Mars by the 1976 Viking landers, which searched the Martian soil unsuccessfully for signs of microbial life or organic molecules. “If Martian life forms exist only in the interior of Martian rocks, as is principally the case in the Antarctic, that could easily serve as an explanation for the lack of evidence on Mars,” Young said. “This interesting (if speculative) analogy is of considerable interest to NASA in designing future attempts to study planetary surfaces for evidence of life.” NASA and NSF research grants had supported the Friedmanns’ work. (NASA Release 78-14)
AvWk reported NASA’s announcement that it would send Pioneer 11 to fly just outside the rings of Saturn as a pathfinder for two Voyager spacecraft scheduled to reach Saturn in 1980 and 1981. Passing 15 OOOmi rather than 3700mi from Saturn’s surface, the new course would place Pioneer 11 at about the same distance from Saturn as the trajectory of Voyager 2, if NASA should decide to use Saturn’s gravity to hurl Voyager 2 toward Uranus. The outside trajectory would permit NASA to achieve the maximum science return for all three spacecraft. Pioneer 11 should reach Saturn in Sept. 1978. {AvWk, Jan 2/78, 15; Lewis News, Jan 6/78, 2)
A new gallery, “Exploring the Planets,” opened Nov. 7 at the National Air and Space Museum, the Washington Star reported. Melvin Zisfein, acting museum director, said the gallery was “jammed full of information and contains more facts and figures and concepts than any other gallery in the museum. Yet the information is easy to digest. We tried hard to make sure you didn’t need a degree in astronomy to understand it.” Keeping up with new information on the solar system (the gallery would be updated continuously) was one of the challenges. The gallery, designed by Lucius Lomas, had succeeded in teaching without neglecting imaginative features visitors had come to expect at the museum. Visitors could make a “Descent to Venus” in a simulated cockpit of an interplanetary spaceship circa 2150. A “Flight over Mars” from an altitude of 100 000 to 200 000ft (actually relief maps of the Martian landscape sculpted on to rotating cylinders and viewed through special windows) was based on photos taken from Mariner 9 and Vikings 1 and 2. A full-scale replica of the Voyager spacecraft was the largest single object in the gallery. The relative sizes of Jupiter and 21 other planetary bodies was conveyed in a corner by brightly colored spheres made to scale: Jupiter was 10ft in diameter; Ceres, the largest asteroid, linch; the earth, 1ft. Six computer terminals offered “Space Academy exams” where visitors could test their knowledge of the solar system. (W Star, Nov 7/78, F 3)
The most extensive study ever made of Venus would begin in December when Pioneer Venus 1 and 2 arrived at the planet, NASA announced. Pioneer Venus 1 would swing into orbit around the planet Dec. 4, taking pictures and making measurements for one Venusian yr (225 earth days) or more. On Dec. 9 the four probes and transporter bus constituting Pioneer Venus 2 would plunge into the Venusian clouds at widely separated points to make detailed measurements of the dense atmosphere from top to bottom. These flights, the first devoted to studying the atmosphere and weather of another planet on a global scale, would use the largest number of vehicles so far for such a study, and would make measurements at the greatest number of locations. They also would seek information on characteristics of Venus’s upper atmosphere and ionosphere, as well as the lower atmosphere, and would study the interactions of these regions with the solar wind. At periapsis (orbital low point) the Pioneer orbiter would come as close as 150km (90mi) to the planet’s surface, dipping into the thin ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1978 ORIGINAL PAGE IS rJOVEMBER OF POOR QUALITX Venus upper atmosphere, sampling its composition, and making radar measurements of surface elevations and roughness. It would also take daily ultraviolet and infrared pictures of the thick clouds and atmosphere. The orbiter’s primary mission was designed to cover the time it took Venus to make one revolution on its axis; the slow rotation of the planet under the periapsis of the orbit would permit closeup radar mapping of the entire circumference. The four probes of Pioneer Venus 2 would enter the atmosphere at points 10 000km (6O00mi) apart over the planet’s earth-facing hemisphere: the large probe would enter Venus’s atmosphere near the equator on the day side; the day probe would enter Venus’s southern hemisphere Artist’s conception of Pioneer Venus arbiter and multiprobe investigating the cloud-covered planet on their arrival in late 1978. The orbiter (left) v/ould circle Venus for 8mo, relaying images of the clouds and measurements of the atmosphere, while making radar maps of the surface. The probe (right) would split into five entry craft, four to sample the atmosphere down to the surface at widely separated points; the transport bus would continue to sample the upper atmosphere until it burned up from friction. (NASA photo 78-H-20&) on the planet’s day side; the night probe, the night southern hemisphere on the night side; and the north probe, the north polar vortex on the night side. The transporter bus would enter in the southern hemisphere on the day side. Critical operations on arrival near the planet would be to inject Pioneer Venus 1 into orbit while it was out of radio contact behind Venus, and the entry and descent through the atmosphere of the four probes and bus. On Dec. 2, controllers at ARC would orient the orbiter for orbit insertion, and the next day would load command-memory sequences. On Dec. 9, the probes would be in position to make their hr-long descent through Venus’s atmosphere. Major operations problem would be retrieving probe data; during the critical lhr 38min of probe and bus operations at Venus, all the Pioneer spacecrafts would be transmitting simultaneously. Radio frequencies of the probe signals would shift rapidly because of huge entry decelerations — from 42 OOOkm/hr (26 OOOmph) to about 65km/hr (40mph)—and signal distortions caused by Venus’s dense atmosphere. One consequence would be that, after the 10- to 15-sec communications blackout during entry, signals would reappear again at new frequencies. To ensure recovery of the data, NASA had installed special equipment in DSN stations at Goldstone, Calif., and Canberra, Australia. To avoid loss of data, both DSN stations would use newly developed receivers and recorders with a frequency band wide enough to ensure receipt of the four shifting signals. The real-time system would use automatic tuners, but would lose some data. Scientists believed that the coordinated Pioneer Venus atmospheric data, combined with similar data from Mars, Jupiter, and other planets, would aid understanding of atmospheres in general. Studies of the interactions of temperatures, pressures, composition, clouds, and atmospheric dynamics different from those of earth should define mechanisms on another planet that would improve scientists’ understanding of earth’s complex weather processes. (NASA Release 78-181)
NASA announced that JPL engineers had commanded the shutdown of the Viking 2 orbiter on July 25, when it ran out of attitude-control gas after circling Mars 706 times over the past 2 yr. Several mo previously, orbiter 2 had sprung a leak in one of its attitude-control jets; engineers had slowed the leak but could not stop it completely. Viking 2, launched Sept. 9, 1975, had traveled more than 643 735 000km (400 million mi) to reach Mars orbit Aug. 7, 1976. The Viking 2 lander, riding piggyback on the orbiter, had landed Sept. 3, 1976, in the Utopia Planitia region of Mars’s northern hemisphere. Plans called for the Viking 1 orbiter and both Viking landers, functioning well almost 3yr after launch, to operate through Feb. 1979. The Viking project would continue through Sept. 1979 to allow scientists and engineers to process a backlog of data from the spacecraft and experiments. NASA had designed the orbiters to operate for 150da after planetary encounter and to orbit for at least 50yr, in hopes of avoiding planetary contamination before they disintegrated. (NASA Release 78-115)
Pioneer 10 had become the first U.S. craft to fly beyond Mars, Today reported. An Associated Press (AP) story said Pioneer 10, now 2 billion miles from home, had crossed the orbit of Uranus July 11 on its way out of the solar system. Launched in March 1972, Pioneer 10 sent back the first close-up views of Jupiter 21 months later and continued to transmit “valuable data about unexplored space and the outer solar system,” said NASA spokesman Duke Reiber. A spokesman for TRW, which built both Pioneer 10 and Pioneer 11, said Pioneer 10 would cross Pluto’s orbit in 1987. (Today, July 13/79, 10A; NASA Release 79-84)
NASA reported that the Viking 2 lander cameras had photographed a new layer of frost on the Utopia Planitia site, creating “a scientific puzzle” for researchers. In September 1977, the lander recorded frost on the surface of Mars during its northern winter (one Mars year and almost two Earth years ago); scientists had explained the frost as the result of a major dust storm, during which atmospheric particles picked up moisture that wound up as frost on the surface. However, latest observations of Mars showed the atmosphere clearer than it had been since the Vikings arrived in 1976, so that the frost could not be explained as before. (NASA Release 79-107; JPL Universe Aug 17/79, 1)
The Washington Star reported on a campaign to raise $1 million for a Viking fund to collect and preserve data from Mars. The Viking landers “sitting on the red sands of Mars and sending back information” could keep doing so for the next 10 years, the story said, but NASA had decided that no life existed on Mars and stopped listening to the Viking transmissions. Among those supporting the fundraising campaign was Ben Bova, editor of Omni magazine, who said “the only people who have lost interest in space are here in Washington.” NASA had not officially endorsed the effort, but “at least one spokesman” said the agency would be delighted to accept the contribution. (W Star, Feb 20/80, C-l)
The first Viking soft-landed on Mars just four years ago, the Washington Star noted, but “it seems now like ancient history”: this week, the Viking orbiter would shut down for good [see July 9]. It had been mapping Mars with high-resolution photographs since 1976; even more remarkable was the lander, scheduled to last for 90 days and now programmed to operate possibly through 1994. “All this suggests an extraordinary contrast,” the paper said, “On Mars, American technology is thriving. . .on earth, the American genius that made such things possible is not being encouraged.” As the last messages arrive from the Viking orbiter, “its most important message—what the end of its useful life has to say about America’s scientific and technological future—is the one not heeded.” (W Star, July 28/80, A-6) July JO:LaRC said that its researchers, working with the FAA in a Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics, might have solved a problem relating to general aviation aircraft distress-signal equipment, six of every seven failing to transmit after a plane crash and about 75% of all signals being false alarms. The devices, emergency locator transmitters, emitted a signal on a wavelength designated for emergency use to locate downed aircraft and were supposedly activated by the impact force of a crash. The problem was in the sensor switch, which was sometimes too sensitive to normal aircraft vibrations (and sent false alarms), sometimes not sensitive enough to forces in a crash. Langley engineer Huey D. Carden had designed and tested an experimental switch sensitive to low-cycle vibrations out of the range of normal aircraft vibrations and closer to the low-cycle pulselike force of a crash. The researchers were also looking into the general usefulness of the beacons and their performance as a total system. (LaRC Release 80-53; NASA Release 80-118)
Viking 1 launched toward Mars in August 1975 arrived there June 19, 1976. Its lander reached Mar’s surface July 20 with a planned 90-day lifetime but on July 20, 1980, would have observed the planet for more than two full Mars years (four Earth years) and would operate unattended on Mars into 1990, perhaps into 1994. The orbiter and lander of Viking 2 had been commanded off on July 24, 1978 and April 11, 1980, respectively. Fewer than 30 people at JPL remained in Viking operations and data processing. (JPL Release 940; NASA Release 80-108)
A robot craft, Venera 13, fifth from the Soviet Union to land on Venus, sent the first color pictures of that planet’s surface and scooped up a soil sample for the most detailed analysis to date of Venus chemistry, Tass reported. A module detached from Venera 13 plunged through Venus’s dense carbon dioxide atmosphere to an area called Phoebe, south of its equator. A Venera 14 identical lander was scheduled to arrive March 5 at an area east of the Phoebe site. Soviet mission planners had consulted scientists and radar maps from the U.S. Pioneer Venus project in deciding where to aim the Veneras; they promised to share Venera data at future international scientific conferences. U.S. scientists familiar with the Soviet plans said that the Veneras were equipped for “much more sophisticated” studies of Venus soil chemistry than previous probes; these were the first craft able to drill into the crust, extract a sample, and analyze it, as the Vikings had on Mars. Pioneer Venus 1 had been orbiting Venus since December 1978, mapping the planet by radar. Pioneer Venus 2 deployed five probes to sample the planet’s atmosphere, only one of them surviving to transmit an hour of data on surface temperatures. Soviet studies of Mars failed, but Venera 9 and Venera 10 in 1975 transmitted the first images from the Venus surface, and Venera 11 and Venera 12 in 1978 collected data on radioactive soil. After separation and landing, Venera 13 had survived to send surface data relayed by the mother ship for 127 minutes. (FBIS, Moscow, Tass in English, Mar 1/82, Mar 2/82; NY Times, Mar 2/82, C-l; W Post, Mar 2/82, A-10)
After months of unsuccessful effort to communicate with Viking lander 1 (the Mutch Memorial Station on the surface of Mars), engineers at JPL decided that they probably could not reestablish contact. Launched in August 1975, the lander reached Mars July 20, 1976, ami was joined by lander 2 September 3 of that year for the most thorough examination of another planet ever undertaken. When contact was lost in November 1982, engineers vainly transmitted command series based on studies of possible failure modes. However, lander l’s internal program could initiate signals to Earth without being commanded; if the lander were still operating, it might transmit in May. Lander 1 was renamed the Mutch Memorial Station to honor Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, former leader of the Viking imaging team, who disappeared in
NASA reported on scientific data of the Viking Lander Monitor Mission (VLMM) in the areas of meteorology, radio science, and imaging. The Viking program had explored Mars, using two instrumented orbiters operating in conjunction with two instrumented landers on the planet’s surface. Two identical spacecraft, each consisting of a lander and orbiter, were launched in 1975 and began operating at Mars in 1976. A frugal VLMM was conducted from the end of the extended mission in 1980 until June 1983. Based on the data acquired in support of the mission objectives, NASA judged the VLMM successful. Analyses of the data from the mission would continue for some years, supported by the Mars Data Analysis Program of the Solar System Exploration Division. (NASA MOR S-815-75-01/02 [postlaunch] Jan 16/84)
Dr. John Billingham, chief of the Extraterrestrial Research Division at Ames Research Center (ARC) and founder of the ARC-based Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI), said at a Lewis Research Center (LeRC) ALERT colloquium that study of the earth's part in the 15-billion-year cosmic evolution held the key to searching for life beyond the solar system, the Lewis News reported. "By studying how our own planet formed and how basic elements required for life evolved, we can theorize that a similar life-structuring process may be occurring or had occurred elsewhere in the universe," Billingham said. As an example, he mentioned the collection of microorganisms scientists observed in 3.5-billion-year-old rock formations discovered in the marine environment of Western Australia. Scientists could use that data to study rock-like formations on other planets that might display a similar evolutionary process. Billingham believed that it was reasonable to assume that life, including intelligent life, existed in the universe because, with 400 million stars in earth's galaxy alone, the natural cosmic process included formation of planets—a rule, not an exception—and the basic stuff of life existed throughout the universe. Because the Viking program had failed to turn up signs of life on Mars, SETI would focus its sights on life beyond the solar system, Billingham said. To accomplish this would require either a manned interstellar vehicle or radio telescopes. The former option would require, to reach the nearest star, a four-stage spacecraft weighing 34,000 tons, traveling 3/10 the speed of light and using electrical power equal to 500,000 years of earth usage driven by antimatter—hardly a feasible option, he noted. However, researchers could design and build radio telescopes to listen to life from other cosmic sources, he said. Such a system would make use of the microwave window frequency range, a quiet region of the spectrum that provided the best chance of picking up extraterrestrial signals. To accomplish this, SETI's information system would need to develop the technology using the largest radio telescopes to amplify the signal (1 to 3 GHz) and to build a signal processing system driven by a specially designed SETI computer. Billingham said the biggest challenge facing the SETI program would be identifying the format, frequency resolution, and time of the signals in order to recognize and eliminate as much interference as possible, thus separating noise from sound manifestations. To determine signals of non-natural origin, SETI would apply a sequence of logical tests coupled with a huge computer-based storehouse of information that would filter out most of the interference signals. "A radio telescope placed in low earth orbit will help eliminate some of the interference problems," Billingham said, "and the prospect of a much larger lunar orbiting radio telescope would offer an even more advantageous interference-reducing listening position that would cover a radius of 1,000 light years." SETI was then preparing its first system radio telescope prototype for testing at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, where a 1,000-ft. radio telescope conducted signal searches. Once fully operational and in orbit, the new telescope would receive signals originating 30 to 40 light years away. "Either we are alone or not," Billingham concluded, "and either has large implications. And we wonder, indeed if there is intelligent life elsewhere, will it help us understand our own." (Lewis News, March 22/85, 2) SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
Finland and Sweden would together build measuring equipment for two Mars space probes for launch in three years by the USSR, FBIS, Helsinki Domestic Service in Finnish reported. The work was significant, the service quoted Risto Pellinen of the Finnish Meteorological Institute as saying, because it was the first time Finns would build equipment to be launched into space. Altogether 11 countries and the European Space Agency would participate in the program. The Mars probes would study solar winds, the planet itself, its near surroundings, and its two moons (Phobos and Delmos). Finland with Sweden would build equipment to measure the nature and characteristics of space particles. Participants and funding sources for the Finnish program were the Center for the Development of Technology, the Academy of Finland, the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the Scientific-Technical Cooperation Committee of the Foreign Ministry, and the Meteorological Institute. (FBIS, Helsinki Domestic Service in Finnish, May 29/85)
Technology developed by NASA for delivering a culture medium into the Martian soil was modified and implanted into a diabetic patient to serve as an insulin pump. Although other insulin pump implants have been used in the past, the spaceage pump not only had a longer life, but also was programmable after being implanted. (C Trib, Nov 20/89)
Negotiators concluded an agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union for cooperation in scientific exploration, primarily focusing on Mars research, said officials from NASA. The agreement, said other sources, made no commitment to a specific joint mission and could be signed at the upcoming summit meeting. (LA Times, Nov 11/86; CSM, Nov 11/86)
A guidance system malfunction caused the Soviet Mars observer spacecraft Phobos 1 to wobble out of control on its way toward Mars. The spacecraft stopped responding to commands from Soviet ground controllers and was rapidly losing power as it was unable to properly orient its solar panels toward the Sun. Phobos 2 continued to function normally. (UPI Sep 9/88; NY Times, Sep 9/88; W Times, Sep 9/88;
The Soviet Union successfully launched the Phobos 2 spacecraft to Mars aboard a 198foot Proton launch vehicle from the Baikonur launch facility. The Phobos 2 launch occurred less than a week after the launch of its companion spacecraft, Phobos 1. (FBISSov88134, Jul 13/88; SSR 1988 059A; W Post, Jul 13/88; W Times, Jul 13/88; LA Times, Jul 13/88; P Inq, Jul 13/88; C Trib, Jul 13/88)
The Los Alamos National Laboratory urged NASA and the National Space Council to fund a multibillion dollar nuclear propulsion project that the group believed would reduce the Mars journey by half of the expected time. The proposed system would draw on a 1970s technology, Rover and Nerva programs, that circulated liquid hydrogen through a solid reactor core, thereby heating the hydrogen and creating thrust. The reactor engine could operate only in a vacuum, so testing it on Earth would prove difficult. The program, reported Space News, would likely receive substantial money. (Sp News, Feb 1925/90)
A letter from Lennard A. Fisk to Jacques Breton of the French space agency, the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales, revealed NASA's defunct plans for a U.S.French experiment that was to fly aboard a 1994 Soviet mission to measure the mineral content of Mars. The constraints recently imposed on the two countries was the reason given for cancellation of the project. W Post, Jun 18/90)
A panel of experts convened by the National Academy of Sciences opined against a U.S./U.S.S.R. joint mission to Mars. The reason they cited was the lack of any experience in cooperation between the two and instead suggested a "graceful path of coordinated but independent explorations." (NY Times, Apr
According to the Los Angeles Times, an ingenious "Mars rover" that Soviet scientists want to send to Mars, was ready to be tested in the Mojave Desert. The desert was selected because it resembles the surface of Mars. (LA Times, Sep 13/91)
A cover story feature article on Mars dealt at length with NASA and the Bush Administration's plans for a "New Age of Exploration" that was intended to result in the "terraformation" of Mars. Life on Mars was described at length and as was planned launching of the Mars Observer. Various stages of terraformation were discussed, beginning with the first (2030-2080), which is to raise the mean temperature of the planet. The final stage (2150-2170) is conceived as having achieved a breathable medium, when Earth's vast investment would begin to pay off. (Life, Apr/91)
NASA Administration Daniel Goldin said President Bush's goal of a manned flight to Mars by 2019 was unrealistic because it would take longer to develop the spaceship and fly the robotic missions that must precede humans. (USA Today, Apr 3/92)
David A. Paige of the University of California at Los Angeles reexamined the thermodynamics of ice under Martian conditions and concluded that there could be some ground-ice deposits just a few feet below the surface and that "these deposits could be valuable resource for human exploration." (W Post, Mar 9/92)
Scientists prepared to decide whether Dante, a walking robot, would make a descent next month into an active Antarctic volcano. The project had two goals: testing the prototype robot for possible Mars missions, and getting a rare look at the minerals and gases ejected by the 12,000-foot icebound volcano. Scientists also wanted to learn about the permanent lava lake that bubbles and boils on the crater's floor. NASA, along with the National Science Foundation, was funding the $2 million project. (The Sun, Nov 29/92; W Post, Nov 29/92; P Inq, Nov 18/92)
NASA sent its remote-controlled robot named "Dante" to Antarctica, where it was scheduled to explore the active volcano Erebus. The $2 million mission was intended to use Antarctica to test possible Mars-bound technology because the harsh climate is as close to that of Mars as occurs naturally on Earth. Upcoming U.S. missions to Mars were expected to land small robots programmed to look around, take samples, and perhaps begin mapping the planet, all tasks "Dante" would test in Antarctica.  (WSJ, Dec 8/92; NY Times, Dec 8/92)
Arthur C. Clark, the legendary science-fiction writer, whose accomplishments include numerous literary awards, academic honors, and more than 70 written works, including "2001: A Space Odyssey," declared that his latest personal odyssey was contemplating the feastability of "colonizing" and "farming" on Mars. "Mars is the next frontier, what the Wild West was, what America was 500 years ago...Mars is where the action is going to be in the next thousand years," declared Clark. (LA Times, Jan 24/92)
The launch date of Mars Observer was rescheduled from September 16 to 25 in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew. Although the hurricane passed well south of Cape Canaveral, the craft was nonetheless removed from the launch pad for protection. It required cleaning before it could be repositioned for launch, necessitating launch postponement. (NASA Release Launch Advisory, Sept 2/92; W Post, Sept 4/92; AP Sept 3/92)
NASA's Mars Observer spacecraft returned its first image of Mars taken last week when the spacecraft was 3.6 million miles from the red planet.  Mars Observer was to orbit Mars on August 24, and global mapping operations were scheduled to begin December 16. (NASA Note to Editors N93-43)
NASA said that the Mars Observer spacecraft fired four of its 24 thrusters as a means of adjusting its course so it could begin orbiting Mars on August 24. This was the third correction maneuver since the spacecraft was launched September 25 from Cape Canaveral, Florida. (APn, Mar 18/93)
According to an article in the Washington Times, scientists from NASA and the National Science Foundation were using the Antarctica as a model for Mars in the Antarctic Space Analog Program. The program used the harsh Antarctica terrain to test technology and techniques that might work on Mars. Sophisticated robots, already being used in Antarctica, would pave the way for human exploration of Mars. A spaceflight may carry a small robot to Mars as early as 1997. (W Times, Apr 4/93)
Several articles in the media discussed the planet Mars. An article in the Christian Science Monitor discussed Mars exploration, noting that the arrival of the Mars Observer spacecraft on Mars was just the beginning of a new saga of planetary exploration.
Mars Observer was scheduled to zoom into orbit around Mars next week, as the United States returned to Martian skies for the first time in 17 years. Mars Observer, which was launched from Florida on September 25, was scheduled to reach Mars on August 24. After maneuvering a near-polar orbit, it was scheduled to turn on its instruments and make one complete photographic map of the planet during a month-long test. It was scheduled to formally start its exploration on December 16. (P Inq, Aug 19/93)
NASA announced that the Mars Observer spacecraft had returned to normal operations after its main antenna failed to point at Earth for the third time in about four months. Engineers were fairly certain that the glitch had been caused by a computer-programming problem. (AP, May 3/93; W Times, May 4/93)
UPI reported that a solar-powered drill used to bore into icecaps on Earth could be used on a mission to Mars to collect ice samples from Mar's north pole. The drill would sample a core about three feet deep. The drill was scheduled to be used this summer to sample two ice caps in the Peruvian Andes. (UPI, June 6/93)
A NASA spokesman announced that the Mars observer spacecraft had spent eight days pointing the wrong direction but engineers thought that they now had the problem under control. It was the Observer's fourth such malfunction. Mars Observer was scheduled to go into elliptical orbit around Mars on August 24. (AP, May 18/93)
NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) were cooperating on an experiment that involved three spaceships "listening" for passing gravitational waves. The spacecraft, now travelling to separate destinations in the solar system, were  NASA's Mars Observer, Galileo, and the ERS's Ulysses spacecraft.
NASA announced the selection of an ancient flood plain on Mars as the landing site for the 1997 mission of Mars Pathfinder, one of the first in a new generation of small, low-cost aircraft. The Pathfinder was scheduled to arrive at Mars on July 4, 1997. (NASA Release 94-149)
A flight plan change seven months before the Mars Observer launch may have caused the craft's failure. Its propellant tanks were pressurized not five days after launch but eleven months into the flight as it reached Mars, thereby apparently causing a catastrophic rupture in a fuel line that spun the craft out of control. Pressuration, needed to fire the braking rockets to put the craft into orbit around Mars, involves opening previously closed valves and releasing high-pressure helium to squeeze the hydrazine fuel and nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer from separate tanks to mix and ignite. Minute amounts of condensed oxidizer possibly reached the hydrazine fuel, ignited, and ruptured the pipes, which released propellant into space and caused the uncontrolled spin. Peter G. Wilhelm, Director of the Naval Center for Space Technology, a panel member who focused on the propulsion system, said that the team debated the change extensively, and JPL project manager Glenn E. Cunningham stated that the team considered and rejected an option to change valves as too costly and slow, and a procedure that might have meant missing the 1992 launch window, thus requiring a two-year launch delay. (W Post, Jan 10/94)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced it would not claim a $21.3 million on-orbit performance fee and would return $17 million already received because of the failure of the Mars Observer craft. The total cost of the craft and its instrument cargo was $1 billion. Referring to the presumed explosion caused by a change in the flight plan with an eleven-month delay in pressurizing a system, discussed in the four-volume report but omitted in news media interviews, Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory and leader of the panel investigating the failure, said that "had J.P.L. been more closely involved with Martin Marietta in the development of the spacecraft, it is conceivable this issue would have been identified earlier." (NY Times, Jan 11/94; W Post, Jan 11/94)
Eric Glomboske, an 11th grader at Highland High School, was one of 10 regional winners in the NASA-sponsored Space Science Student Involvement Program. To compete, Eric designed, planned, and mapped out a human journey to Mars. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 25/94)
NASA�s telescope on its Kuiper Airborne Laboratory has begun to examine the chemical composition of Mercury, which is the least understood of the four terrestrial planets-Earth, Mars, Venus, and Mercury. Flying at 41,000 feet, the specially outfitted C-141 military transport plane is able to detect invisible infrared radiation that is refracted and reflected by the planet�s surface rocks. While nothing startling was immediately about the planet�s surface, weeks or months of analysis are likely to turn up new information about Mercury. (NY Times, May 16/95; Fla Today, Jul, 9/95)
The Mars robot, that will land around July 4, 1997, will be named after �Sojourner� Truth, who advocated the right for all people to be free. (NASA Release 95-112; NY Times, Jul 16/95; AP, Jul 14/95)
NASA commemorated the 20th anniversary of Viking 1’s landing on Mars, the first time that a spacecraft had successfully descended to the surface of the planet. NASA marked the occasion with an address from Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and the celebration of Mars Day at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. Viking 1 had searched for life on Mars, but at the end of its quest, scientists had found no evidence of life on Mars. As it celebrated its accomplishments, NASA continued its efforts to learn more about Mars throughout its 20th anniversary year, with the development of Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Pathfinder.(NASA, “Activities Planned To Commemorate 20th Anniversary of First Mars Landing,” news release 96-141, 15 July 1996.)
Mars Global Surveyor fired its engine enabling Mars’s gravitational pull to capture it. Researchers from NASA’s JPL declared that the spacecraft had behaved exactly as planned during the crucial entry to Mars’s gravitational field. Experts predicted that the mission would produce 700 million bits of data, more than the amount acquired in all previous Mars missions combined. The mapping mission continued a new era of Mars exploration for NASA, involving dozens of probes surveying the planet’s surface and atmosphere.(Kathy Sawyer, “New Visitor from Earth Poised for Mars Orbit,” Washington Post, 11 September 1997; Associated Press, “Everything ‘Perfect’ as Surveyor Craft in Countdown to Mars Orbit,” 11 September 1997; Associated Press, “Mars Global Surveyor,” 12 September 1997.)
After exceeding even the most optimistic predictions made during its primary mission, the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft concluded its initial research maneuvers and began extended operations. The initial mission had returned to Earth 1.2 gigabits of data and more than 9,000 images of the Martian landscape. Project Manager of the Mars Pathfinder Mission Brian Muirhead said that the mission had not only had gathered an impressive amount of data, but also validated NASA’s new approach to exploring space. “This mission demonstrated a reliable and low-cost system for placing science payloads on the surface of Mars,” he stated. “We’ve validated NASA’s commitment to low-cost planetary exploration.” After completing the planned 30-day mission and traveling 171 feet (52 meters) across Mars’s landscape, the rover Sojourner remained in excellent condition. Operators gave Sojourner a two-day rest period to recharge its battery, before it began an extended exploration of the planet.(NASA, “Mars Pathfinder Results Generating New Picture of Mars as Mission Moves into Extended Operation,” news release 97-174, 8 August 1997; Los Angeles Times, “Mars Mission ‘100 Percent Success’, NASA Says,” Los Angeles Times, 9 August 1997.)
NASA’s AeroVironment Pathfinder, a remote-controlled, ultra-lightweight aircraft, set a new world record for highest altitude for a solar-powered aircraft. AeroVironment Pathfinder reached an altitude of 67,350 feet (20,500 meters), shattering the previous record of 50,500 feet (15,400 meters). The experiment took place at the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility in Kauai, Hawaii. Engineers had designed Pathfinder to fly at extremely high altitudes, to supply researchers with atmospheric and environmental data that other planes could not gather. In traveling to such heights, Pathfinder experienced temperatures as low as -100°F (-73°C). After climbing for about 6 hours, the aircraft ascended into record-breaking territory, flying for more than 90 minutes at an altitude above 60,000 feet (18,300 meters). A partnership formed under the Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology Alliance, involving NASA, aerospace companies, and members of the scientific community, was responsible for developing AeroVironment Pathfinder.(Michael A. Dornheim, “Pathfinder Surpasses Propeller Altitude Record,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 146, no. 25 (16 June 1997): 53; NASA, “Pathfinder Sets New World Record,” news release 97-132, 12 June 1997. 267 NASA, “Hubble Is First To Spot Colliding Supernovas,” news release 97-129, 10 June 1997.)
Two Yemeni men filed a lawsuit against NASA, claiming that NASA had committed trespassing violations when it landed Pathfinder on Mars. The men claimed that their ancient ancestors had deeded the planet to them as an inheritance, requesting that Yemen’s prosecutor-general bring U.S. Ambassador David G. Newton to court to stop the violation. Although no legal restitution was expected, the lawsuit highlighted the excitement surrounding NASA’s Mars mission and the widespread interest in the Red Planet’s exploration.(Reuters, “Get Off Our Planet, Yemeni Men Tell U.S.,” 25 July 1997.)
After more than nine days without sending a signal, Mars Pathfinder’s main transmitter resiliently delivered a message to Earth. To anxious project managers, the message was a welcome relief. The breakdown in the spacecraft’s communication to NASA controllers had necessitated NASA’s activating a contingency plan for Sojourner. The rover had stopped gathering data and reverted to slowly circling its parent spacecraft, waiting to receive directions, a pattern that some scientists feared would be the long-term fate of the rover. The spacecraft’s aging batteries had caused the breakdown in communication of data. However, in spite of the malfunction, NASA officials reiterated that the mission had fulfilled its objectives, emphasizing that solving the problem of communicating with the craft while it was resting on the Red Planet would benefit future explorations of Mars.(Associated Press, “Lacking Signal, Mars Vehicle Is Left To Be Roving in Circles,” 7 October 1997; Associated Press, “Pathfinder Checks in After Weeks of Silence,” 8 October 1997.)
NASA successfully landed the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft on Mars, exactly seven months after its launch from Earth. Project managers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) called the landing “near perfect,” celebrating the beginning of the “second era in the exploration of Mars.” The Mars Pathfinder Mission was the first to attempt a planetary landing on initial orbit, and Pathfinder’s safe landing followed a journey in which the spacecraft traveled at speeds of up to 16,600 miles (26,800 kilometers) per hour. Although NASA made its first successful flyby of Mars in 1965, in recent years it had taken a new approach to exploring the Red Planet. NASA achieved the development and deployment of Mars Pathfinder for US$266 million, a bargain compared to the US$1 billion cost of the failed Mars Observer. Because of its tightening budget, NASA had adopted a course of planning several simple, but targeted excursions, using low-cost spacecraft, rather than mounting a few complex and expensive missions. Pathfinder landed almost exactly at the point aimed for and immediately transmitted signals back to Earth announcing its safe landing. Officials at JPL noticed a slight complication, when early images revealed that some of the airbags used to cushion the craft’s landing had bunched up around the door that Sojourner⎯the rover set to explore the planet⎯would use to exit Pathfinder. NASA’s engineers clarified, however, that the temporary problem would not compromise the rover’s planned exploration.(John Noble Wilford, “Landing Called Near Perfect by NASA,” New York Times, 5 July 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Spacecraft Lands Today on the Planet of Dreams,” New York Times, 4 July 1997; Tony Knight, “Pathfinder Zeroes in on Red Planet,” Los Angeles Daily News, 4 July 1997; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 3.)
As Mars Pathfinder and its surveyor Sojourner triumphantly explored the surface of Mars, NASA named as Software of the Year the Dynamics Algorithms for Real-Time Simulation (DARTS) software⎯a program used on the Pathfinder mission. Abhinandan Jain, Guillermo Rodriguez, and Guy K. Man of JPL had created the software to provide real-time simulations to test other software and hardware. DARTS allowed NASA mission managers to test procedures in a cost-effective manner.(NASA, “Software Used on Mars Pathfinder Wins NASA’s Software of the Year Award,” news release 97-154, 16 July 1997.)
NASA announced the selection of nine researchers to form the Science Team for the Mars Microprobes, “a technology validation mission that will hitchhike to the [R]ed [P]lanet aboard NASA’s 1998 Mars Polar Lander mission.” NASA intended the probes to collect data measuring thermal and physical properties of the soil while searching for the presence of water ice. The nine selected scientists were David C. Catling, Julio A. Magalhaes, Jeffrey E. Moersch, James R. Murphy, and Aaron Zent of NASA’s Ames Research Center; Ralph D. Lorenz of the University of Arizona; Paul Morgan of Northern Arizona University; Bruce C. Murray of California Institute of Technology; and Marsha Presley of Arizona State University.(NASA, “Science Team Chosen for Technology Validation Mission To Explore the Subsurface of Mars,” news release 98-59, 8 April 1998.)
New data from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor Mission provided insights into the planet’s deeply layered terrain, its strong, localized magnetic fields, and the genesis and evolution of a Martian dust storm. Scientists analyzed data collected in October and November 1997, publishing the first set of formal results in the 13 March 1998 issue of Science. Mars Global Surveyor had used a variety of instruments to collect data. The thermal emission spectrometer had mapped the temperature and opacity of the Martian atmosphere during the sandstorm, and a camera had returned visual images of the storm’s effects. The spectrometer had also obtained some infrared emission spectra of Mars’s surface, indicating “the presence of pyroxene and plagioclase, minerals which are common in volcanic rocks, with a variable amount of dust component.” Surveyor’s magnetometer and electron reflectometer had measured strong localized magnetic fields on Mars. A laser altimeter had collected data from Mars’s northern hemisphere, revealing a flat surface, becoming increasingly rough toward the equator. Scientists had interpreted a variety of landforms in the Mars images, including the northern polar cap and gigantic canyons, ridges, craters, and shield volcanoes.
NASA officially declared Mars Pathfinder “dead” six months after its mission ended, after getting no response to one last set of commands. Pathfinder’s mission had ended on 27 September 1997, when NASA lost communication with the craft. Pathfinder and its rover Sojourner had landed on Mars on 4 July 1997, and NASA had expected the two craft to “live” on Mars for only 30 days. However, Pathfinder had exceeded its mission by eight weeks, and Sojourner had roamed the Martian terrain 10 weeks longer than the originally planned one-week operation.(Dan Whitcomb for Reuters, “Scientists Declare Pathfinder Officially ‘Dead’,” 10 March 1998.)
The ESA signed a 60 million Euro contract with Matra Marconi Space, to design and build the Mars Express spacecraft, with a planned launch date of June 2003. The agency chose that target date because the planets would be in optimal alignment, allowing for minimum travel time to Mars with maximum payload capacity. Major space missions can require upwards of 11 years from concept to launch, and only six years remained before the 2003 date, so the ESA selected a contractor with the means to develop missions quickly and inexpensively. Matra Marconi demonstrated that it would be able to streamline the development of Mars Express, building and launching the mission for about half the budget required for similar efforts.
NASA announced that scientists studying high-resolution images from Mars Global Surveyor had detected no evidence that ocean shorelines once existed on Mars. Previously, researchers had interpreted features in images from NASA’s Viking missions of the 1970s as remnants of ancient coastlines. However, Surveyor images taken in 1998, with a resolution 5 to 10 times sharper than images that Viking had produced had not provided evidence that water in a coastal environment had formed those features. Michael C. Malin of Malin Space Science Systems, Principal Investigator for the Mars Orbiter Camera aboard Surveyor, remarked that although scientists could not rule out the presence of oceans on Mars at one time, the evidence in the new images appeared to undermine the “foundation for the ‘ocean hypothesis’ developed in the 1980s on the basis of suspected shorelines.” Nevertheless, Malin acknowledged “significant other evidence of water on Mars in the past,” suggesting that as the Mars Orbiter Camera continued to acquire new high-resolution images, scientists might have new clues to the role of water in the evolution of Mars.(NASA, “New Mars Images: No Evidence of Ancient Ocean Shorelines,” news release 99-114, 1 October 1999.)
JPL appointed Glenn E. Cunningham, Manager of NASA’s Mars Surveyor Operations Project, as the new Deputy Director of JPL’s Mars Exploration Directorate. In the newly created position, JPL tasked Cunningham with overseeing the implementation and operations of all Mars missions through 2013. As Cunningham’s successor, JPL appointed Richard A. Cook, former Flight Operations Manager for the 1997 Mars Pathfinder Lander and Rover Mission, to manage the Mars Surveyor Operations Project.
NASA announced the winner of an essay contest to name the Deep Space 2 microprobes, which the Mars Polar Lander spacecraft was carrying to Mars. NASA had scheduled the two probes to crash into Mars’s south pole on 3 December. Paul Withers, a graduate student at the University of Arizona in Tucson, studying the thin upper atmosphere of Mars, had suggested naming the pair Amundsen and Scott, in honor of Roald Amundsen and Robert F. Scott, the first explorers to reach Earth’s South Pole. In his winning essay, Withers recalled that one century ago, Antarctica was Earth’s only unexplored continent. Withers wrote, “Scott perished in Antarctica. His memorial’s inscription reads: ‘To strive, to seek, to find, not to yield.’ These are the aims of the Deep Space 2.” NASA had designed the two probes with a dual purpose: to test advanced technology for future planetary-surface microlanders and to search for water ice 3 feet (0.9 meters) below the Martian surface. Deep Space 2 Project Manager Sarah A. Gavit remarked that the names of the Antarctic explorers were appropriate for the probes, because “like Amundsen and Scott, Deep Space 2 will have to survive great odds, including not only braving the elements but also crashing into the terrain with unbelievable force.”(NASA, “Mars Penetrator Probes Named for Pioneering Polar Explorers,” news release 99-135, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-135.txt (accessed 12 March 2008).)
Engineers discovered that exposure to 11 months of cold temperatures in outer space could cause the descent engine on Mars Polar Lander to malfunction. NASA had scheduled Mars Polar Lander to land on Mars on 3 December. Lander’s companion craft, Mars Climate Orbiter had burned up as it entered its Martian orbit on 23 September. The investigative panel studying the cause of Orbiter’s loss had uncovered the potential problem with Lander’s engines. Because of the discovery, scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) altered their plans, deciding to turn on the craft’s descent engine heaters earlier than originally scheduled, to warm the engines to 46.4°F (8°C) before Lander’s descent.(Larry Wheeler, “NASA Finds Flaw in Mars Lander Engine Turning On Descent Heaters Earlier Should Prevent Failure of Mission,” Florida Today, 9 November 1999; Mark Carreau, “Mars Probe To Get Brake Check: NASA Engineers To Warm Descent Rockets of Polar Lander,” Houston Chronicle, 9 November 1999.)
The Mars Climate Orbiter Mission Failure Investigation Board released its first report, identifying eight contributing factors that had led to the 23 September loss of Orbiter as it entered its Martian orbit. Arthur Stephenson, chairperson of the board investigating the failure, agreed with NASA on the causes of the mission’s failure. The board reported that “the failed translation of English units into metric units in a segment of ground-based, navigation-related mission software” was the primary cause of the loss, but that other significant factors had set the stage for the mission’s failure. Moreover, the team had failed to identify and correct multiple mistakes, leading to “a major error in our understanding of the spacecraft’s path as it approached Mars.” The failure board faulted the Mars Climate Orbiter team with “inadequate consideration of the entire mission and its postlaunch operation as a total system, inconsistent communications and training within the project, and lack of complete end-to-end verification of navigation software.” Although engineers working with Lockheed Martin Astronautics’ mission operations team had failed to convert English units into metric for entering data into ground-based navigation software, the investigating board focused most of its attention on the navigation team at NASA’s JPL, which had overall management authority for the mission. The board remarked that, because it had navigated interplanetary spacecraft successfully for 30 years, JPL had developed a “widespread perception that ‘Orbiting Mars is routine’,” leading it to pay inadequate attention to the risk of faulty navigation.(NASA, “Mars Climate Orbiter Failure Board Releases Report, Numerous NASA Actions Underway in Response,” news release 99-134, 10 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-134.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Earl Lane, “Report Details NASA Failings: Assigns Blame for Orbiter’s Loss,” Newsday (Long Island, NY), 11 November 1999.)
A six-member team of Brown University scientists used data from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor to examine six categories of evidence supporting the hypothesis that oceans once existed on Mars. The team, led by planetary geologist James W. Head III, published their findings in the journal Science. Primarily using altimetry data and images captured by Surveyor, the researchers had found that the border between two geologically dissimilar areas was nearly level in elevation, suggesting an ancient coastline. Furthermore, they found that the topography below the possible coastline was consistent with the effects of sedimentation and the volume of the hypothetical sea was within range of previous estimates of Martian water. A series of terraces running parallel to the supposed shoreline gave credence to the idea of receding water; low areas contained the appearance of possible mud cracks; and scars from impact craters suggested groundwater or ice near the surface.(James W. Head III et al., “Possible Ancient Oceans on Mars: Evidence from Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter Data,” Science 286, no. 5447 (10 December 1999): 2134–2137; William J. Broad, “Tantalizing Signs of Ancient Martian Ocean,” New York Times, 10 December 1999.)
NASA released its first three-dimensional global map of Mars. The Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA), an instrument aboard NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor, had generated the data for the high-resolution map, created from measurements gathered in 1998 and 1999. David E. Smith of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, Principal Investigator for MOLA and the lead author of a study published in the journal Science, said that, according to the new topographic map, Mars is slightly lopsided⎯the northern hemisphere is low and smooth, but the southern hemisphere had many craters and an elevation of about 5 kilometers (3.1 miles) higher than that in the north. Additionally, Smith noted that the depression in Mars’s northern hemisphere is “distinctly not circular,” indicating that it formed from internal geologic processes rather than an external impact. Carl B. Pilcher, NASA’s Science Director for Solar System Exploration, commented that the data MOLA had collected enabled scientists to know “the topography of Mars better than many continental regions on Earth.” Pilcher said that the data would “serve as a basic reference book for Mars scientists for many years,” inspiring “new insights about the planet’s geologic history.”(NASA, “First Global 3-D View of Mars Reveals Deep Basin and Pathways for Water Flow,” news release 99-66, 27 May 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-066.txt (accessed 7 February 2008); David E. Smith et al., “The Global Topography of Mars and Implications for Surface Evolution,” Science 284, no. 5419 (28 May 1999): 1495–1503.)
Scientists studying images obtained by NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor published two reports in the journal Nature about Martian volcanic activity. One study reported that the images contained evidence that “ten times more lava” than previously thought had erupted onto Mars’s surface. The other study suggested that at least one of Mars’s volcanoes was still active.(William Hartmann et al., “Evidence for Recent Volcanism on Mars from Crater Counts,” Nature 397, no. 6720 (18 February 1999): 586; Alfred S. McEwen et al., “Voluminous Volcanism on Early Mars Revealed in Valles Marineris,” Nature 397, no. 6720 (18 February 1999): 584; Rick Callahan, “Mars Was Truly Red Planet⎯as in Red- Hot Molten Lava⎯Scientists Say One Volcano Would Have Coated U.S. 4 Miles Deep,” Seattle Times (WA), 17 February 1999.)
NASA announced that the magnetometer on board Mars Global Surveyor had revealed “banded patterns of magnetic fields on the Martian surface,” bearing a “striking similarity to patterns seen in the crust of the Earth’s sea floors.” Scientists interpreted the patterns as evidence that the Martian crust had shifted in the past. The discovery of banded patterns on the floor of Earth’s oceans had provided a record of Earth’s magnetic history, validating the theory of plate tectonics. Jack Connerney of NASA’s GSFC, a member of Global Surveyor’s magnetometer team, explained, “if the bands on Mars are an imprint of crustal spreading, they are a relic of an early era of plate tectonics on Mars.” He added that such tectonic activity on Mars is likely extinct, unlike on Earth. The spacecraft’s magnetometer had been able to capture the magnetic field observations because of the extended aerobraking phase, devised to protect against further damage to one of the spacecraft’s solar panels. The period of aerobraking had permitted the magnetometer to “obtain better-than-planned regional measurements of Mars.” Each time it reached the lowest point of its elliptically shaped orbit, below the planet’s ionosphere, the probe encountered minimal magnetic interference and enabling it to obtain additional data.(NASA, “Magnetic Stripes Preserve Record of Ancient Mars,” news release 99-56, 29 April 1999.)
NASA announced that it planned to implement a new Mars Exploration Program over the following two decades. NASA planned six major missions during the next 10 years, launching the Mars Odyssey orbiter mission in 2001, twin Mars Exploration Rovers in 2003, and Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter⎯a powerful scientific orbiter⎯in 2005. Additional plans included the development and launch, possibly as early as 2007, of a “long-range, long-duration mobile science laboratory,” which would “pave the way for a future sample return mission.” NASA also proposed to create a new line of small missions called Scout missions, involving airborne vehicles or small landers. NASA would select designs for the Scout spacecraft from proposals submitted by the scientific community. Besides sending additional scientific orbiters, rovers, and landers to Mars during the second decade of the program, NASA announced its plans to launch its first sample-return mission in 2014, with a second mission in 2016. The new program incorporated “lessons learned from previous mission successes and failures” and built on recent scientific discoveries. Although NASA led the revamped program, the Mars missions also included international participants, particularly France and Italy, whose space agencies had agreed to conduct collaborative scientific orbital and surface investigations, as well as to contribute sample collection-and-return systems, telecommunications assets, and launch services.(NASA, “NASA Outlines Mars Exploration Program for Next Two Decades,” news release 00-171, 26 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-171.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
Nearly one year after the highly publicized failure of a probe to reach the surface of Mars, NASA announced plans for at least one, possibly two, robotic rovers to explore Mars by 2003. The new design plan, the outcome of an overhaul of NASA’s Mars Program in the aftermath of the unsuccessful mission, called for a rover larger than Mars Sojourner, which had successfully navigated the Martian surface in 1997. NASA planned for the new probe to continue the search for water on the surface of the Red Planet.(Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Moves To Send Robot Rovers To Explore Mars Surface,” Washington Post, 28 July 2000; Peter N. Spotts, “New Rover To Look for Signs of Water on Mars,” Christian Science Monitor, 31 July 2000; Tribune News Services, “NASA Unveils Plans for 2003 Mission to Mars,” 28 July 2000.)
NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft completed its primary mission, having collected more information about Mars than all of the previous missions combined had acquired. “By any conceivable measure the scientific impact of Mars Global Surveyor has been extraordinary,” said Global Surveyor Project Scientist Arden L. Albee. Since reaching the Red Planet in 1998, Global Surveyor had gathered data on Mars’s climate, topography, and geology, as well as mapping the entire planet. The orbiter, which launched in November 1996, had provided a steady stream of invaluable data. Among the most significant findings of the primary mission had been the detection of significant evidence of liquid water, the detection of a magnetized crust on the planet’s southern hemisphere, and the discovery of new information about seasonal changes on the planet. The spacecraft had gathered the data in the course of more than 8,500 orbits of the planet, during which it had collected 58,000 images. With Mars Global Surveyor still functioning effectively, NASA planned to extend its mission and continue its research.(NASA, “New Era Begins as Mars Global Surveyor Completes Prime Mission,” news release 01-14, 31 January 2001.)
Herbert V. Frey of NASA’s GSFC revealed a fundamental new finding about the complexion of Mars’s surface. According to Frey and his team of researchers, data gathered by Mars Global Surveyor had corrected a commonly held belief about the topography of the Red Planet and the age of its crust. Most scientists had believed that the crust covering the relatively smooth northern lowlands of the planet was much younger than that of the rest of the planet. However, Frey’s research using Surveyor’s pathbreaking instruments had shown that the lowlands are not actually smooth at all. Using the measurements obtained by the spacecraft’s laser altimeter, Frey and his team had documented more than 600 ancient craters lying just beneath a layer of dust on the lowlands, many of the craters larger than 30 miles (48 kilometers) in diameter. From this finding, the team had concluded that the crust of the northern lowlands is older than scientists had expected. According to James W. Head of Brown University, who was not a member of Frey’s research contingent, the findings would “push the reset button” on ideas about how Mars had evolved as a planet.(Robert C. Cowen, “Red Planet Still a Mystery, but Mars Global Surveyor Makes It Less So,” Christian Science Monitor, 14 June 2001.)
NASA’s Mars Odyssey provided its first image from its orbit around the Red Planet. Odyssey took the image as part of a calibration process for the spacecraft’s thermal-emission imaging system, which NASA had designed to observe the surface of Mars in both light and darkness. The initial image, a thermal infrared image of the planet’s southern polar carbon-dioxide ice cap, covered an area greater than 6,500 kilometers (3,900 miles) at a resolution of approximately 5.5 kilometers (3.4 miles) per pixel.(NASA, “Mars Odyssey’s First Look at Mars Is All Treat, No Trick,” news release 01-214, 31 October 2001.)
NASA revealed time-lapse images of the biggest dust storm on Mars to occur in nearly 30 years. The HST and Mars Global Surveyor had captured the images, which showed that the storms had begun as a local event in the Hellas region of Mars and had rapidly propagated throughout the planet. The storms had obscured the surface of Mars and dramatically affected temperatures in the planet’s atmosphere, including heating the upper portions of its atmosphere to as much as 80°F (26.7°C). NASA scientists hoped that data about the storms would help them learn more about sediments on Mars, as well as helping them plan future missions to the Red Planet.(William Harwood, “Mars Wearing Veil of Dust; Biggest Storm in Three Decades Obscures Surface, Alters Temperatures,” Washington Post, 12 October 2001; NASA, “Scientists Track ‘Perfect Storm’ on Mars,” news release 01-193, 11 October 2001.)
Researchers at NASA’s JPL successfully demonstrated the first use of robotic rovers capable of cooperating to perform tasks together while navigating uneven natural terrain. The researchers hoped that the rovers would be able to perform sustained research on Mars and to assemble and maintain orbiting spacecraft. In outdoor tests, JPL researchers had used two rovers to simulate the deployment of a solar power station. In these simulations, the two robots had grasped and carried a container measuring 2.5 meters (8 feet) long, for more than 50 meters (160 feet). The project had used new software called the Control Architecture for Multi-Robot Planetary Outposts, which equipped the rovers with a distributed and autonomous intelligence producing instinctively reactive behaviors, shared sense and control, and collective decision making. This new technology, along with other innovations, had developed rovers―referred to as the Robotic Work Crew―capable of sharing both work and thinking. Project scientists hoped these capabilities would enable the rovers to collaborate in performing designated tasks, while coping with the unknown and unpredictable surface of Mars and encountering other scenarios unforeseen by scientists on Earth.(NASA, “Robotic Construction Crew Rolls Up Its Sleeves,” news release 02-04, 9 January 2002; NASA JPL, “TechnologyFeature: Researchers Toy with New Rover Designs,” 21 December 2001, http://jpl.nasa.gov/news/features.cfm?feature=489 (accessed 28 July 2008).)
ESA announced that the Beagle 2, ESA’s Mars Lander, had separated from the Mars Express orbiting spacecraft. ESA had scheduled the Beagle 2 to land on Mars early on 24 December (EST), while, at approximately the same time, Mars Express would enter Martian orbit.
ESA formally opened its first deep space ground station in New Norcia, Australia. Construction on the US$47 million (EUR 28 million) facility had begun in April 2000. The key component of the station was a massive antenna, 40 meters (125 feet) high and weighing 600 tonnes (661.4 tons or 600,000 kilograms), with a 35-meter (110-foot) dish. ESA had selected the New Norcia site because its distance from urban areas protected it from interference from other transmission devices, its latitude was perfect for deep space operations, and its weather was excellent. ESA had built and opened the station in time for it to play a key role in ESA’s Mars Express mission, scheduled for launch in June. The Mars Express craft would carry a lander dubbed Beagle 2―named in honor of the ship that Charles Darwin sailed on during his search for the origins of life―which would map the surface, subsurface, atmosphere, and ionosphere of Mars.(ESA, “ESA’s First Deep Space Ground Station Opens in Western Australia,” ESA news release 14-2003, 5 March 2003, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_14_2003_p_EN.html (accessed 28 August 2008); Agence France-Presse, “Australian Town Host to European Space Quest,” 6 March 2003.)
JAXA spokesperson, Junichi Moriuma, announced that JAXA had failed in its final effort to return the Nozomi craft to the correct trajectory for orbiting Mars. Insufficient fuel supplies had prevented the craft’s engines from firing. Nozomi―Hope―had been traveling toward Mars for five years and was schedule to arrive in one week. JAXA had planned for Nozomi to examine the Martian atmosphere’s interaction with the solar wind, to determine whether the planet has a magnetic field. During its journey from Earth to Mars, Nozomi had experienced several malfunctions that had altered its trajectory, placing it on a course that was too low and causing concern that the spacecraft would crash into Mars, possibly contaminating the surface. JAXA officials stated that, although they had failed to place the craft on the correct trajectory, they had greatly reduced the probability of the craft’s colliding with Mars. Instead, the craft would escape Mars’s gravitational field and enter a long-term orbit of the solar system. Moriuma remarked that Japanese scientists would continue to modify Nozomi, allowing it to carry out alternative missions, such as monitoring solar activity.(Kenji Hall for the Associated Press, “Japan Quits Mars Mission as Probe Strays,” 10 December 2003; Jason Testar for Canadian Press, “Japanese Fail To Salvage Mars Mission Carrying Canadian Research Instrument,” 10 December 2003.)
ESA reported that Mars Express had discovered the first direct evidence of water on Mars. Whereas some previous research had suggested that water might be present on Mars, Mars Express had detected the presence of actual water ice covered by a layer of frozen carbon dioxide at the planet’s south pole. The spacecraft had also found that the amount of carbon dioxide in Mars’s atmosphere was inadequate to have warmed the planet sufficiently for the formation of liquid water and the support of life on the planet’s surface. Scientists regarded the findings as crucial in determining whether Mars could have supported life in the past.(ESA, “Mars Express Sees Its First WaterScientific Results,” ESA news release 6-2004, 23 January 2004; Jean- Pierre Bibring, “Perennial Water Ice Identified in the South Polar Cap of Mars,” Nature 428, no. 6983 (8 April 2004): 627–630.)
ESA and UK Science Minister Lord David Sainsbury announced that ESA and the United Kingdom would conduct a joint inquiry into the failure of the Beagle 2 Mars lander. ESA Inspector-General René Bonnefoy would oversee the inquiry, which would investigate the reasons for the mission’s failure and establish lessons that ESA could apply in future missions. Beagle 2, a component of ESA’s Mars Express mission, had failed to communicate with ESA after the time of its scheduled landing on Mars on 25 December 2003. The Beagle 2 Management Board had declared the spacecraft lost on 6 February 2004.(ESA, “UK and ESA Announce Beagle 2 Inquiry―Investigation To Learn Lessons from Mars Lander,” ESA news release 9-2004, 11 February 2004.)
NASA reported that its Mars Exploration Rovers had discovered geological evidence indicating that Mars had once had water. The rover Spirit had found a volcanic rock containing fissures filled with material that could have crystallized from water. A few days earlier, on 2 March 2004, the rover Opportunity, operating nearly 6,600 miles (10,622 kilometers) from Spirit, had found minerals and geological features that appeared to have been leached by groundwater or to have been formed by sediment in what was previously a body of water. However, scientists were unable to conclude from the two rovers’ findings when Mars had actually had water in the past or whether the water had been located above or below the planet’s surface.(Guy Gugliotta, “Mars Rover Finds Signs of Water,” Washington Post, 7 March 2004; NASA, “Opportunity Rover Finds Strong Evidence Meridiani Planam Was Wet,” news release 04-077, 2 March 2004.)
a comet’s nucleus and to place a probe on a comet’s surfaceto study the comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko. Rosetta, equipped with solar arrays spanning 105 feet (32 meters) and relying on solar cells for its power supply, was also the first probe designed to travel past Mars. Scientists hoped that, in studying comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenkoa remnant of a primitive nebula from which Earth’s solar system emergedRosetta would help them understand more about the role of comets in forming the solar system and contributing to the development of life on Earth.(ESA, “Rosetta Begins Its 10-Year Journey to the Origins of the Solar System,” ESA news release 14-2004, 2 March 2004; Warren E. Leary, “Intricate European Mission Goes Hunting for a Comet,” New York Times, 24 February 2004.)
NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity landed on Mars nearly three weeks after its twin rover Spirit had landed on the planet. NASA had created the two mobile robotic rovers to explore rocks and soils on Mars to determine whether the planet had previously possessed water and the ability to sustain life. NASA had designed the mission so that the rovers would explore Mars simultaneously, on nearly opposite sides of the planet.(NASA, “NASA Hears from Opportunity Rover on Mars,” news release 04-037, 25 January 2004.)
NASA approved a five-month extension of the Mars Exploration Rovers’ mission nearly two weeks before its originally scheduled end on 26 April 2004. NASA had originally planned for the mission to last three months but had decided to extend it because the robotic rovers―Opportunity and Spirit―had satisfied all of their primary mission criteria, achieving several successes, such as discovering evidence that Mars had once had water. According to officials, NASA planned to provide US$15 million to continue the rovers’ operations, doubling the mission’s duration at less than 2 percent of the overall mission’s cost.(NASA, “NASA Extends Mars Rovers’ Mission,” news release 04-122, 8 March 2004.)
A commission composed of officials from ESA and the British National Space Centre released the results of their investigation into the loss of the Beagle 2 spacecraft, the first European spacecraft designed to explore the surface of Mars. On 19 December 2003, the Beagle 2 had successfully separated from ESA’s Mars Express, the spacecraft that had carried the Beagle 2 to its orbit of Mars. However, subsequently, Beagle 2 had failed to send any signals to mission engineers, and its eventual fate remained unknown. Although its report did not identify any single technical issue that had caused the mission loss, the investigating panel did provide 19 recommendations for future missions. These recommendations, implicitly critical of the Beagle 2 mission, suggested that future missions should have adequate funding and adequate testing, and that an agency with appropriate capabilities and resources should manage the missions.
NASA’s JPL released a series of images that Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) had captured on 20 and 21 April, which showed, for the first time, NASA’s Mars Odyssey and ESA’s Mars Express spacecraft orbiting Mars. MGS had orbited the planet since 1997, Mars Odyssey had arrived in 2001, and Mars Express had arrived in late 2003. MGS and Mars Odyssey followed similar near- polar orbits, sometimes passing within 9 miles (15 kilometers) of each other, but Odyssey orbited higher than MGS to prevent collision. MGS had captured two images of Odyssey 7.5 seconds apartthe first from a distance of 56 miles (90 kilometers) and the second from 84 miles (135 kilometers). The following day, MGS had captured an image of Mars Express from a distance of 155 miles (249 kilometers).(Tariq Malik, “New Photos Are First of Spacecraft Orbiting Mars,” Space.com, 20 May 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/050519_mgs_orbiters.html (accessed 16 September 2009).)
After a delay of more than one year, ESA’s Mars Express deployed the first of three booms that form the craft’s Mars Advanced Radar for Subsurface and Ionosphere Sounding (MARSIS). The MARSIS booms would search for evidence of water under the surface of Mars. The deployment marked the beginning of a 10-day sequence, originally scheduled for April 2004. NASA’s JPL had conducted an investigation that had warned of the possibility that one or more of the antenna components could swing back and hit the spacecraft, a risk that had caused ESA to delay the deployment. Although an ESA review board had concluded that, even if such an event were to occur, the risk of damaging Mars Express remained low, scientists had voiced concerns that a strike from any of the booms could damage delicate instruments on board the orbiter. According to Mars Express Mission Manager Fred Jansen, engineers had analyzed the problem over the past year to assure themselves that any existing risks would not affect the spacecraft. As deployment commenced, telemetry data indicated that the first boom, which formed half of MARSIS’s primary antenna, had deployed successfully. ESA had scheduled the second half of the antenna to deploy four days later.
ESA announced that its Mars Express spacecraft had discovered ancient geological structures and ice reservoirs―but not liquid water―below Mars’s surface. Mars Express, equipped with radar capable of conducting subsurface analyses of the planet, had detected a crater approximately 250 kilometers wide (155 miles wide) below the planet’s surface, as well as 1.8 kilometers (1.1 miles) of subsurface water ice near its north pole. However, the spacecraft had not detected the liquid water necessary to support life. Even deep below the surface of Mars, the planet’s polar temperatures decline to -129oC (-200oF), preventing its ice from melting. Scientists regarded the discovery of subsurface ice as evidence that Mars’s environment was unable to harbor life.(John Johnson, “European Mars Express Show[s] That the Red Planet Was Not as Warm or Wet as Previously Thought,” Los Angeles Times, 1 December 2005; “Radar Provides Deeper View of Ice on Mars,” Nature 438, no. 7068 (1 December 2005): 545.)
ESA and the government of the United Kingdom (UK) officially published the report of the investigation into the circumstances and possible reasons for the failure of the Beagle 2 mission. Beagle 2, the Mars lander that had “piggybacked” aboard ESA’s Mars Express Orbiter, had failed to communicate after its landing date of 25 December 2005. The UK government and ESA had commissioned the report in February 2004, and the commission had completed the report in April 2004. Initially, ESA and the UK government had refused to publish the report, citing details of confidential intergovernmental agreements, as well as commercially sensitive information. Instead, they had issued a set of recommendations for future missions. However, the New Scientist had requested the report’s publication under the UK’s new Freedom of Information Act, in force since the beginning of 2005. Colin Pillinger, the planetary scientist who had first proposed the Beagle 2 project, and Mark Sims, the mission’s project managerboth at the Open University in the UKagreed that the report contained little, if any, commercially sensitive information. However, the report concluded that ESA and the UK government should never have approved the project. ESA committee investigating the loss of the probe had found several fundamental errors, such as classifying the lander as an instrument aboard Mars Express, instead of as a separate spacecraft, and making inaccurate estimates about the characteristics of the Martian atmosphere. The committee also determined that ESA and the UK had underfunded the mission from the start. Moreover, the committee found that the mission’s logistics were too complex for Pillinger’s team.(British National Space Centre, “Beagle 2”; Justin Mullins, “Beagle 2 ‘Should Never Have Been Built’,” New Scientist, 4 February 2005; BBC News, “Report Scorns Beagle 2 Decision,” 4 February 2005.)
NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) began the primary science phase of its mission, a phase scheduled to continue until December 2008. NASA had designed MRO to conduct reconnaissance and exploration of Mars, while orbiting the planet, and had launched the orbiter in August 2005. During the primary science phase, MRO would produce high-resolution surveys of 15 percent of Mars’s surface. NASA planned to use the images to identify particular areas for more detailed examination. NASA anticipated that data from MRO’s surveys would enable scientists to examine changes in the surface of Mars occurring over time, including the effects of water and wind.(NASA, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA’s Newest Mars Orbiter Passes Communications Relay Test,” 17 November 2006, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/features.cfm?feature=1230 (accessed 16 August 2010); NASA, “Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter Arrival” (press kit, March 2006), 8–18, http://marsprogram.jpl.nasa.gov/mro/ files/mro/mro-arrival.pdf (accessed 16 August 2010).)
NASA announced that its Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) was likely no longer operational. The spacecraft had ceased communications with NASA on 2 November 2006, and NASA’s subsequent efforts to reestablish communications had failed. NASA did not officially terminate the spacecraft’s mission. NASA had launched MGS in November 1996 to create a map of Mars. After completing its primary mission in January 2001, MGS had remained in operation, and NASA had decided to extend the spacecraft’s mission. The MGS mission had eventually become the longest and most productive ever sent to Mars, producing nearly 240,000 images that revealed features of Mars never before seen, as well as the first strong evidence of the previous existence of water on the planet.(NASA, “NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor May Be at Mission’s End,” news release 06-357, 21 November 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/nov/HQ_06357_MGS_update.html (accessed 7 July 2010); Thomas H. Maugh II, “Missing Mars Craft Appears To Be a Lost Cause,” Los Angeles Times, 22 November 2006.)
After a seven-month, 310-mile (498.9-kilometer) journey, NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) completed the crucial step of entering orbit around Mars. To achieve initial capture by the planet’s gravity, the orbiter fired its main propulsion engines for 27 minutes, thereby reducing its speed by 3,540 kilometers per hour (2,200 miles per hour). This placed the US$720 million spacecraft in a highly elliptical orbit. The next phase of the orbiter’s mission would involve a seven-month “aerobraking” process. The spacecraft would dip into Mars’s atmosphere hundreds of times, using the friction of atmospheric drag to move from an approximately 35- hour orbit, extending almost 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometers) above the planet, to a 2-hour polar orbit that skims only 190 miles (300 kilometers) above Mars’s surface. A two-year phase of scientific study would follow the aerobraking phase. During those two years, the orbiter would use six instruments to study every level of Mars, from underground layers to the top of the atmosphere. The instruments would include the most powerful telescopic camera ever sent to another planet, an advanced mineral mapper to identify water-related areas, radar to probe beneath the surface for buried ice and water, and a weather camera that would monitor the planet daily. MRO Project Manager James Graf predicted, “this spacecraft will return more data than all previous Mars missions combined.”(NASA, “Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter Arrival,” press kit, March 2006, http://marsprogram.jpl.nasa.gov/ mro/files/mro/mro-arrival.pdf (accessed 30 July 2010); Damian Carrington, “New Mars Probe Safely Enters Orbit,” New Scientist, 10 March 2006; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. Spacecraft Enters Orbit Around Mars,” New York Times, 11 March 2006.)
NASA awarded Scripps Institution of Oceanography a grant valued at US$750,000, to develop an instrument to detect signs of biological compounds on Mars. European Space Agency (ESA) selected the Urey Mars Organic and Oxidant Detector (Urey), named for the late Nobel Laureate, Harold C. Urey, to fly aboard its ExoMars rover mission in 2013. Jeffrey L. Bada, Lead Investigator on the Urey team and Director of the NASA Specialized Center of Research and Training in Exobiology at Scripps, explained that Urey would be the first instrument with the capacity to detect amino acids, as well as other possible biomolecules. To search for trace levels of amino acids and for some components of DNA and RNA, Urey would heat and analyze spoon-sized amounts of Martian soil, collected from 2 meters (6.6 feet) beneath Mars’s surface. Urey would then trap and condense any molecules released from the heated soil and probe them with a laser. If the laser detected amino acids in the soil, another instrument, developed at the University of California at Berkeley, would examine the amino-acid composition to determine whether the molecules came from biological or nonbiological sources.(Scripps Institution of Oceanography, “NASA Funds Scripps Instrument for Probing for Life on Mars: Detector To Hunt for Organic Molecules During Proposed 2013 Mission,” Scripps News, 9 January 2007, http://scrippsnews. ucsd.edu/Releases/?releaseID=768 (accessed 9 November 2009).)
NASA announced that the chemical analyzer at the end of the arm of the Mars rover Spirit had measured a concentration of pure silica in a soil sample at Gusev Crater, providing the strongest evidence to date that Mars was much wetter in the ancient past than at present. At 90 percent, the concentrated deposit of silica could only have formed in the presence of water. Spirit’s discovery had been the result of a mechanical failure. One of the rover’s six wheels, which had become incapable of rotating, had gouged a deep impression as it moved through the soil. The scraping had exposed patches of bright soil, leading to the discovery of the silica. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, Principal Investigator for the Mars rovers’ scientific instruments, underscored the significance of the discovery, stating, “the fact that we found something this new and different after nearly 1,200 days on Mars makes it even more remarkable.” J. Douglas McCuistion, Director of NASA’s Mars Exploration Program, added that the unexpected discovery was a reminder that Spirit and Opportunity were still conducting cutting-edge exploration more than three years into their extended mission.
The journal Science published a special issue about water on Mars. The issue included five reports that had used the scientific results derived from the detailed images that NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) had captured during the first 100 days of its mission. MRO’s primary mission was to study Mars’s hydrologic history, using six scientific instruments, including the High-Resolution Imaging Science Experiment camera (HiRISE), which provided 10 times the resolution of any previous Mars imager. The papers published in this special issue of Science indicated that evidence for liquid water on Mars was rare and difficult to discern. NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor (MGS), which had visited Mars in 1999, had raised researchers’ hopes that the probe had detected modern flows of liquid water on Mars. However, MRO’s observations suggested otherwise—that landslides of loose, dry materials had created the deposits that scientists had interpreted as evidence of liquid water. In addition, MRO had captured images suggesting that flowing lava, rather than water, had shaped some Martian landforms, such as branched channels and fan-like deposits. Moreover, MRO images indicated that, although certain gullies and rims of craters did indeed contain liquid water, the presence of water at these locations did not reveal the presence of a water table. Rather, the images suggested that objects impacting Mars had triggered trickles of water at these sites. Radar and gravity data indicated that the cap on Mars’s south pole held the largest reservoir of water ice on the planet.(NASA, “NASA Orbiter Provides Insights About Mars Water and Climate,” news release 07-206, 20 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07206_Mars_Water.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Joanne Baker, “Introduction to Special Issue: Water, Water, Not Everywhere?” Science 317, no. 5845 (21 September 2007): 1705, http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/summary/sci;317/5845/1705?maxtoshow=&hits=10&RESULT FORMAT=&fulltext=Mars+Reconnaissance+Orbiter&searchid=1&FIRSTINDEX=0&resourcetype=HWCIT (DOI: 10.1126/science.317.5845.1705; accessed 10 August 2010); Jeanna Bryner, “Hope for Water on Mars Dims with Sharp New Images,” Space.com, 20 September 2007, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/070920_mars_tale. html (accessed 10 August 2010).)
NASA announced that its solar-powered Mars rover duo, Spirit and Opportunity, had survived severe dust storms and were ready to continue their mission. Spirit had awakened and, on 5 September, had climbed onto a plateau of layered bedrock, its long-term destination. On the plateau, known as Home Plate, Spirit would examine clues about an explosive mixture of lava and water. Meanwhile, Opportunity had begun preparing for its descent into Victoria Crater, where it would examine an exposed layer of bright rocks. The rocks might provide preserved evidence of an ancient interaction between the Martian atmosphere and surface. Dust storms in July had delayed Opportunity’s scheduled descent into the crater, blocking significant amounts of sunlight and causing researchers to become concerned that the rovers’ daily energy supplies might plunge too low for recovery.(NASA, “Mars Rovers Survive Severe Dust Storms, Ready for Next Objectives,” news release 07-187, 7 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07187_Mars_Rovers.html (accessed 4 August 2010).)
NASA’s JPL announced that the Phoenix Mars Lander flight-operations team had successfully tested the craft’s descent-monitoring radar and UHF radio on 24 August. During its flight to Mars, Phoenix had communicated with Earth via an X-band radio unit, but the craft would switch to UHF radio after landing on Mars. Because the X-band radio unit was mounted on a part of the craft that would jettison shortly before Phoenix reached the Martian atmosphere, the UHF radio would become critical to communications once the craft reached Mars.(NASA JPL, “Phoenix Mars Lander Status Report: Radar and Other Gear Pass Checkouts,” news release 2007- 094a, 4 September 2007, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2007-094a (accessed 9 August 2010); Dave Mosher, “Phoenix Spacecraft Passes In-Flight Tests,” Space.com, 5 September 2007, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/070905_phoenix_update.html (added 9 August 2010).)
Andrews-Hanna, Mary T. Zuber, and W. Bruce Banerdt, “The Borealis Basin and the Origin of the Martian Crustal Dichotomy,” Nature 453, no. 7199 (26 June 2008): 1212–1215. Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics. At NASA, Shank had served as Director of Strategic Investments for the Office of Program Analysis and Evaluation.(NASA, “Strategic Communications Chief Hopkins Leaving NASA,” news release 08-164, 30 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08164_Hopkins_leaving_NASA.html (accessed 21 April 2011). 81 NASA, “NASA Reveals New Discoveries from Mercury,” news release 08-166, 3 July 2008, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08166_Messenger_Mercury.html (accessed 26 May 2001); Andrea Thompson, “Volcanoes on Mercury Solve 30-Year Mystery,” Space.com, 3 July 2008, http://www.space.com/5589-volcanoes- mercury-solve-30-year-mystery.html (accessed 26 May 2011).)
Researchers led by Mikki M. Osterloo of the University of Hawaii announced in the journal Science that their team had found evidence of salt deposits on the surface of Mars. The scientists explained that the existence of salt deposits would provide evidence that Mars had once had an abundant supply of near-surface water, which could have sustained life. NASA’s Mars Odyssey Thermal Emission Imaging System, a camera capable of producing images in visible light and infrared wavelengths, had made the discovery. The images showed spectral features consistent with chloride minerals, located at approximately 200 sites in the southern hemisphere. The salt deposits ranged in size from 0.5 square miles (1.3 square kilometers) to 25 times that size, with a thickness ranging from 3 to 10 feet (0.9 to 3 meters). Scientists believed that the mineral sites, which were approximately 3.5 to 3.9 billion years old, had formed when groundwater seeped to the surface and evaporated, leaving behind salty deposits.(NASA, “NASA Mission Finds New Clues To Guide the Search for Life on Mars,” news release 08-084, 20 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08084_Mars_Deposits.html (accessed 13 January 2011); David Mosher, “Newly Found Martian Salt Deposits Suggest Ancient Life,” Space.com, 20 March 2008, http://www.space.com/5150-newly-martian-salt-deposits-suggest-ancient-life.html (accessed 13 January 2011); M. M. Osterloo et al., “Chloride-Bearing Materials in the Southern Highlands of Mars,” Science 319, no. 5870 (21 March 2008): 1651−1654.)
NASA announced that officials had ceased operations on the Phoenix Mars Lander after Lander stopped communicating with mission engineers on 2 November 2008. The project team had originally scheduled Phoenix for three months of operations, launching Phoenix on 4 August 2007 and landing it on Mars on 25 May 2008. NASA had extended its mission twice until, with the seasonal decline in sunlight, Phoenix’s solar arrays could no longer charge its batteries. During its mission, the US$428 million Lander had taken more than 25,000 pictures of Mars and had observed the planet’s soil and weather, looking for indications that Mars might have had an environment suitable for microbes in the past. Phoenix had documented falling snow on Mars; had found calcium carbonate, perchlorates, and salts deposits; had observed alkaline soil; and had verified the presence of two distinct types of water ice. The University of Arizona had led the Phoenix mission, and NASA’s JPL had managed the project.(NASA, “Mars Phoenix Lander Finishes Successful Work on Red Planet,” news release 08-284, 10 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-284_Phoenix_Finishes_ Mission.html (accessed 22 August 2011); Kenneth Chang, “NASA Loses Contact with Mars Lander and Ends Its Mission,” New York Times, 11 November.)
NASA announced that its Phoenix Mars Lander had verified the presence of water ice in the Martian soil. Phoenix, which landed on Mars on 25 May 2008, had collected a soil sample from a 2-inch-deep (5.08-centimeter-deep) trench. Phoenix Mars Lander had dug the trench in the Martian polar region. The spacecraft had experienced difficulty moving the soil into the Thermal and Evolved-Gas Analyzer (TEGA) for testing, because the freshly dug soil samples had been
A team of researchers announced in the journal Science that they had found on Mars soil deposits composed of more than 90 percent silica. NASA’s Spirit rover had found the deposits in the Columbia Hills in Mars’s Gusev Crater. Initially, scientists had used Spirit’s Miniature Thermal Emission Spectrometer (Mini-TES) and Alpha Particle X-Ray Spectrometer to identify a pure silica deposit in the groove that Spirit’s broken front wheel had made as it dragged through the dirt. Subsequently, they had found other silica deposits nearby. On Earth, pure silica forms from the interaction of hot water and rock. Therefore, the scientists believed that these deposits might indicate that Mars had possessed hydrothermal vents in its ancient past. Because hydrothermal vents support microbial life on Earth, scientists believed that similar vents on Mars might also have hosted life.(Andrea Thompson, “Hydrothermal Vents on Mars Could Have Supported Life,” Space.com, 23 May 2008, http://www.space.com/5374-hydrothermal-vents-mars-supported-life.html (accessed 16 March 2001); see also S. W. Squyres et al., “Detection of Silica-Rich Deposits on Mars,” Science 320, no. 5879 (23 May 2008): 1063−1067.)
A team of scientists reported in the journal Nature that they had gathered new evidence to support the theory that Mars’s Borealis Basin is a large impact crater. After NASA’s Viking spacecraft had captured the first clear images of the Martian surface in the 1970s, scientists had puzzled over the dichotomy of the planet: the roughly cratered southern highlands have an altitude 2.5 to 5 miles (4.02 to 8.05 kilometers) higher than the smooth plains of the northern lowlands. One theory that scientists had advanced to explain this dichotomy was that the impact of a foreign object had created the lowlands of the Borealis Basin. However, many in the scientific community had doubted this theory because the images from the 1970s suggested that the basin did not have the typical shape of an impact crater. In the article in Nature, NASA’s MRO and NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor teams reported that they had gathered new topographical and gravitational data, showing that the basin has an elliptical shape consistent with that of impact craters. Moreover, two other studies published in the same Nature issue had used computer models to demonstrate that a meteor might conceivably have created the Borealis Basin. Scientists estimated that an object 1,250 miles (2,011.68 kilometers) wide, traveling at a speed of approximately 20,000 miles (32,186.88 kilometers) per hour, could have formed the crater when it crashed into Mars. If this theory proved correct, the Borealis Basin would be the largest known impact crater in the solar system.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Reveal Largest Crater in Solar System,” news release 08-159, 25 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08159_Mars_crater.html (accessed 21 April 2011); Kenneth Chang, “Astronomers Explain Mars’s Lopsided Shape,” New York Times, 26 June 2008; see also Jeffrey C.)
A team of scientists led by Janice L. Bishop of the SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) Institute announced in the journal Science that they had found geological evidence that water, and possibly microorganisms, had been present in Mars’s Mawrth Vallis region in the past. Using NASA’s MRO’s Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM), the scientists had studied the layers of sediment comprising the 4 billion-year-old clay deposits of that region. The top layer of clay, which contained many aluminum deposits, had probably formed in a wet environment when other minerals were leached from the soil leaving large amounts of aluminum behind. Immediately below the top layer containing aluminum-rich clay was a layer of silica opal. Clay rich in reduced iron formed a still lower layer. A large body of water interacting with a lakebed of basaltic ash or rock probably formed the lowest layer, which is composed of iron and magnesium smectites. Bishop’s team noted that, on Earth, the actions of microorganisms frequently cause iron reduction in the soil. However, the team also stated that other forces could have been responsible, on Mars.(Andrea Thompson, “Clays Shed Light on History of Mars Water and Possibly Life,” Space.com, 7 August 2008, http://www.space.com/5709-clays-shed-light-history-mars-water-possibly-life.html (accessed 20 July 2011); see also Janice L. Bishop et al., “Phyllosilicate Diversity and Past Aqueous Activity Revealed at Mawrth Vallis, Mars,” Science 321, no. 5890 (8 August 2008): 830−833.)
Based on data that NASA’s rover Opportunity had collected in the Victoria impact crater, researchers reported new findings in the journal Science, providing further evidence that water had once existed on Mars. Before arriving at Victoria, Opportunity had explored the Eagle and Endurance craters, revealing distinctive sediment layers in Endurance, along with evidence that water had been a factor in actively shaping those layers. Scientists had decided to send Opportunity to Victoria because of the crater’s 400-foot (122-meter) depth. They hoped that exploration of Victoria would shed more light on the Meridiani Planum region. Opportunity had spent two years driving along the crater’s edge and then had traveled down into the crater. The rover had found layers of sulfate-rich sandstone like that of the Endurance crater, “with evidence that water had weathered away minerals in the rocks, then evaporated, leaving behind salts that eventually solidified into rocks again.” The findings indicated that water had acted at both the Endurance and the Victoria sites, suggesting that water had acted across the entire Meridiani region. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University, Lead Scientist for the Mars Exploration Rover Project, remarked that this evidence was probably the most significant finding of the Victoria expedition.(Andrea Thompson, “Entire Region of Mars Likely Shaped by Water,” Space.com, 21 May 2009, http://www. space.com/6739-entire-region-mars-shaped-water.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Jessica Berman, “NASA Scientists Find More Evidence of Water on Mars,” Voice of America, 22 May 2009.)
NASA announced that it had selected the two scientific investigations that NASA would undertake in partnership with ESA. NASA and ESA planned to use NASA’s Deep Space Network (DSN) of radio telescopes to track part of ESA’s ExoMars mission, scheduled to launch in 2016. ESA’s ExoMars mission consisted of a fixed lander and a rover that would collect soil samples on Mars for detailed analysis. The Lander Radio-Science on ExoMars (LaRa) would relay data from the lander back to the DSN, enabling scientists to measure and to analyze variations in the length of the day and in the location of the planet’s rotational axis. The ExoMars mission data would help researchers further dissect the structure of the Martian interior, including the size of Mars’s core. For the second investigation, named Strofio, ESA and NASA would use a unique mass spectrometer. Part of ESA’s BepiColombo mission, scheduled for launch in 2013, Strofio would determine the mass of atoms and molecules, helping to reveal the composition of Mercury’s atmosphere. NASA had selected LaRa and Strofio from among eight proposals that researchers had submitted in December 2008, in response to NASA’s new Stand Alone Mission of Opportunity (Salmon). NASA had required Salmon proposals to address planetary scientific research objectives for nonagency missions and to accomplish scientific research goals, including data archiving and analysis, for less than US$35 million. Scientists expected LaRa to cost US$6.6 million and Strofio, US$31.8 million.(NASA, “NASA Selects Future Projects To Study Mars and Mercury,” contract release C09-020, 4 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_C09_020_NASA_Salmon_Awards.html (accessed 20 June 2011).)
Global Aerospace Corporation announced that it had received funding through NASA’s Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program to develop a Hypersonic Control Modeling and Simulation Tool (HyperCMST) focusing on a type of ballute (balloon plus parachute). Goodyear Aerospace had invented the large, inflatable devices in 1958, to enable the use of atmospheric drag to decelerate spacecraft. However, unlike most ballute concepts, HyperCMST would encompass more than a drag-only device with no steering capability. Global Aerospace intended to use the HyperCMST to develop a new type of ballute, called a lifting-towed-toroidal ballute. A spacecraft could be able to steer the toroidal ballute using tethers between the spacecraft and the ballute. For example, a ballute-assisted orbit capture of a lander vehicle above the surface of Mars would use a toroidal ballute and inflation tubes connected to the lander via multiple tethers. The spacecraft would tow the ballute using tethers, rather than using some form of rigid attachment device. The spacecraft would jettison the ballute once it had achieved the desired capture orbit. The tethers, which the spacecraft could manipulate, would create aerodynamic lift, making control of the ballute system possible.(Global Aerospace Corporation, “Control of Hypersonic Vehicles for Planetary Capture and Entry Missions,” news release 15 April 2009, http://www.gaerospace.com/press-releases/apr2009.html (accessed 23 May 2011); Bill Christensen, “Ballutes Studied for Hypersonic Space Vehicles,” Space.com, 21 April 2009, http://www.space.com/ 6602-ballutes-studied-hypersonic-space-vehicles.html (accessed 24 May 2011).)
NASA and Google announced the release of the new Mars mode in Google Earth, the latest benefit to result from a Space Act Agreement that NASA’s ARC had signed with Google in November 2006. The Agreement established a collaborative effort intended to make NASA data sets available to the world. The Mars mode provided a rich, immersive three-dimensional view of Mars, to help the public understand Mars science while simultaneously providing researchers with a platform for sharing data, much as Google Earth did for Earth scientists. NASA and its partners—Google, Carnegie Mellon University, Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI), and other institutions—had produced the data to make the Mars mode in Google Earth possible.(NASA, “NASA and Google Launch Virtual Exploration of Mars,” news release 09-024, 2 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-024_Google_Mars_map.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
