                          [COMMITTEE PRINT]




       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL
               EVENTS O F 1962



                              REPORT
                                   OF THE

1      NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE
               ADMINISTRATION
                                   TO THE

    COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND ASTRONAUTICS
       U.S. HOUSE O F REPRESENTATIVES
                   EIGHTY-EIGHTH CONGRESS
                             FIRST SESSION




                               J U N E 12, 1963


I



      Printed f o r the use of the Committee on Science and Astronautics
I                                 [ C O M M m E E PRINT]




        ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL
                EVENTS OF 1962



                                       REPORT
                                             OF THE

        NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE
                ADMINISTRATION
                                             TO THE

    COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND ASTRONAUTICS
       U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
                         EIGHTY-EIGHTH CONGRESS
                                      FIRST SESSION




                                       J U N E 12, 1963




      Printed for the use of the Committee on Science and Astronautics


                            U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                      WASHINGTON : 1963
     97317



             For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U S Government Printing OfEw
                                                           ..
                                  Washington 25, D.C. - Price $1.00
            COMMITTEE O N SCIENCE AND ASTRONAUTICS
                      GEORGE P. MILLER, California, Chairman
OLIN E. TEAGUE, Texas                       JOSEPH W. MARTIN, JR., Massachusetts
JOSEPH E. RARTH, Minnesota                  JAMES G. FULTON, Pennsylvania
KEN HECHLER, West Virginia                  J. EDGAR CHENOWETH, Colorado
EMILIO Q. DADDARIO, Connecticut             WILLIAM I . VAN PELT, Wisconsin
                                                          (
J. EDWARD ROUSH, Indiana                    R. WALTER RIEHLMAN, New York
THOMAS 0. MORRIS, New Mexico                CHARLES A. MOSHER, Ohio
BOB CASEY, Texas                            RICHARD L. ROUDEBUSH, Indiana
WILLIAM J. RANDALL, Missouri                ALPHONZO BELL, California
JOHN W. DAVIS, Georgia                      THOMAS M. PELLY, Washington
WILLIAM F. RYAN, New York                   DONALD RUMSFELD, Jllinois
THOMAS N. DOWNING, Virginia                 JAMES D. WEAVER, Pennsylvania
JOE D. WAGGONNER, JR., Louisiana            EDWARD J. GURNEY, Florida
EDWARD J. PATTEN, New Jersey                JOHN W, WYDLER, New York
RICHARD H. FULTON, Tennessee
DON FUQUA, Florida
NEIL STAEBLER, Michigan
CARL ALBERT, Oklahoma
                                       Ezecutive Diretor and Chief Counsel
               CHARLES DUCANDER,
                        F.
                         JOHN CARSTARPHEN, chief Clerk
                              A.                 Jr.,
                                                    Counsel
                              P a p B. YEAQER,
                            FRANK HAMMILL, Counsel
                                    R.            Jr.,
                                          Technical Consultant
                           W. H. BOONE,
                        WILLIAM DITCH,Technical Consultant
                                 E.
                        HAROLD Goum, Technical Consultant
                                 A.
                           RICHARD HINES, Staff Consultant
                                    P.
                       JOSEPH FELTON,      Assistant Staff Consultanl
                              M.
                          DENISC. QUIQLEY, Publicatiom Clerk
       I1
                           FOREWORD
   Days, weeks, months, and years of the space a e clock on. Note-
worthy events in space science and technology ifash by at an ever-
accelerating rate. Many events appearing of current importance be-
come less so with the passage of time, whde others emerge slowly as
the signxcant milestones align themselves into the dynamic patterns
of progress. Our comprehension of the meaning of astronautics to
the future of mankind is likewise a growing thing. The great breadth
of the social, political, economic, and strategic impact of man’s
nascent steps to explore his universe must not be ignored. Yet all
of us tend to become preoccupied with our problems and reaponsibili-
ties near a t hand.
   One of the useful tools to help gain perspective and greater appre-
ciation is a chronology of documented events. As current meaning
stems from the decisions and progress of the past, so also is the future
conditioned by the comprehension and the actions of the present.
Prepared from open sources, this chronology has reference value of
contemporary utility and will also serve the cause of future historians
and analysts.
   The year 1962 was only the H t h year since the Soviet BPUTNIK
opened many American eyes to the early practical significance of
space science and technology. Yet it was another spectacular ear
in space affairs. The highlights of 1962 were many: the orzital
flights of Mercury Astronauts Glenn, Carpenter, and Schirra ; the
successful launching of more than 61 American vehicles; the spectacu-
lar data-recording flight past the planet Venus by MARINER 11, not to
slight RANGER v hitting the moon and the first international satellites,
ARIEL I and ALOUETTE. There was the continued contribution of Tiros
weather satellites as well as the dramatic first live global telecom-
munications achieved by TELSTAR. The rocket-powered x-15 research
airplane continued its record-making contribution to the science and
technology of manned space flight. Decisions b management and
                                                  H
progress throughout NASA[S program also are re- ected in this chro-
nology, not to ignore the mdispensable contributions of other govern-
mental agencies, the aerospace industry, and the academic community
to the massive research and development effort now well underway.
   In his address a t Rice University on September 12, 1962, President
John F. Kennedy said that this Nation “means to be a leading space-
faring nation.” These words sound the challenge for which a response
must be fashioned by all Americans. While 1962 was an eventful
year, the future of astronautics appears even more stimulating.
                                      GEORGE SIMPSON,
                                               L.             Jr.,
     Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy
        Planning, National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
                                                                 m
ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL
               CONTENTS

                                 Page
                                  xi1
                                  vi1
                                   1
                                  12
                                  27
                                  46
                                  67
                                  93
                                 114
                                 136
                                 169
                                 206
                                 228
                                 257
                                 285
                                 299
                                 306
                            PREFACE
  A chronology is not a full-fledged history. But this chronology is a
necessary beginning of the historical process of documentation,
analysis, and verification concerning the activities, problems, and
accomplishments of the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion and its academic, industrial, governmental, and international
partners in the exploration and use of space for the benefit of all
mankind.
   This historical report was prepared from open, public sources.
Science and technology in today’s world are essentially indivisible.
Space-related efforts by the De artment of Defense and the military
                               P
services, as well as inhrnationa items of a non-NASA character, have
therefore been included to help retain a valid historical context. Any
effort by a free society also manifests considerable public discussion
and policy comment, the inclusion of which was considered pertinent
to meaningful presentation of known events in the science and tech-
nology of space exploration. The NASA Historical Staff appreciates
the generous sup ort by various NASA offices and centers as well as by
                E
members of the ‘storical community in compilation of this report.
   Astronautical and Aeronautical Events of 1962 is supplemental to
Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1915-60, published by NASA (GPO,
Superintendent of Documents), as well as Aeronautical and Astro-
nautical Events of 1961, a NASA Historical Report published in 1962 by
the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Appendix A:
“Satellites, Space Probes, and Manned Space Flights-1962, ” com-
piled by Dr. Frank W. Anderson, Jr., Assistant NASA Historian, is a
continuation of Appendix A in both of the above chronologies.
pendix B : “Chronology of Major NASA Launchings, 1958-62,
originally drafted by Mr. Robert Rosholt, provides a useful catalog
not previously available.
   Compilation of this chronology involved the entire NASA Historical
Staff m t h Mrs. Helen T. Wells carrying the major draftin and edi-
torial responsibilities. Appendix A was launched by Mgr. Alfred
Rosenthal, Historian of the Goddard Space Flight Center, while
NASA Center historians a t Launch Operations Center, Manned Space-
craft Center, and Marshall Space Flight Center also made their mark
in this preliminary report.
   Incompleteness, perhaps errors, either by commission or omission,
may require further gutdance by history-makers and scholars. Com-
ments and criticism are welcomed by the NASA Historical Staff a t any
time.
                                                M.
                                           EUGENE EMME,
                                                   Historian   (AFEH).
                                            NASA
                                                                VZI
                           JANUARY 1962
January 1: National Bureau of Standards and U.S. Naval Observa-
    tory increased the standard frequency transmissions by 2 parts
    in 1billion to allow for higher precision in scientific measurements,
    radio communications and navigation, and satellite tracking.
  ∞ The United Nations should tax commercial ventures in outer space,
    the ocean depths, and polar regions to obtain financial support,
    said Dr. Eugene Staley of the Stanford Research Institute in
    a memorandum to the United Nations. He also proposed that
    the U.N. should be given exclusive authority to license and regu-
    late space traffic and satellites relaying telephone and television
    signals.
January 2: Army announced installation of new 102-foot antenna
    near Fort Dix built in conjunction with DOD’S Project Advent,
    one link in development of a microwave radio-relay system for
    global communications using active-repeater satellites in a 22,300-
    mile-high orbit.
  ∞ Walter Hahn of General Electric’s Defense System Department
    was named NASA’s    Director of Management Analysis Division.
January 3: NASA announced that Mercury Mark II spacecraft would
    be named “Gemini,” after the third constellation of the zodiac
    featuring the twin stars Castor and Pollux. Gemini would be a
    two-man spacecraft used in development of the rendezvous
    technique, would be 50% larger than the Mercury capsule, and
    launched into orbit by a Titan I1 booster.
∞ Mercury capsule installed on top of Atlas booster preparatory for
    MA-6 manned flight; it was also reported from Cape Canaveral
    that 6rst American orbital manned flight was now unofficially
    scheduled for January 23.
∞ Vice President Johnson sent a congratulatory telegram to members
    of the OSCAR amateur radio satellite team: “For me this project
    is symbolic of the type of freedom for which this country stands-
    freedom of enterprise and freedom of participation on the part
    of individuals throughout the world.” OSCAR I was launched
    with DISCOVERER x x x v ~ December 12, 1961.
                               on
∞ Dartmouth College announced new graduate program leading to a
    doctorate in the field of molecular biology.
January 3-10: Soviet cosmonaut, Major Gherman S. Titov, visited
    Indonesia at the personal invitation of President Sukarno, was
    then scheduled to go to Burma.
January 4: Announced at the Manned Spacecraft Center that a large
    “innertube” or “flotation collar” may be used to keep Mercury
    capsule afloat after a water landing. Collar would be installed
    by Navy frogmen. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard took part in
    proving tests conducted on Chesapeake Bay.
                                                                 1
2     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

January 4: NASA announced contract with the University of Texas to
    design and build a radio antenna at the Balcones Research Center
    to be used in making radiation measurements of the moon and
    planets. It would be 16 feet in diameter and operate effectively
    at 30,000 to 150,000 megacycles.
  ∞Dr. William W. Kellogg of the NAS Space Science Board reported
    on the study of the planet Venus u t the American Geophysical
    Union. Bolometer studies of the atmosphere of Venus indicated
    a temperature of -40’ C (presumably the cloud tops), while
    temperatures deduced from measurements by large radiotele-
    scopes indicated temperatures of about 300O C (572’ F) (believed
    to be surface tempertLturc). A planetary probe could probably
    answer questions raised on the tliickness and nature of Venus’
    aorosphere.
January 5: President Kennedy released part of a report submitted
    earlier by Vice President Johnson, Chairman of the Space Council.
    The report stated that the U.S. had generated a greater rate of
    progress in space in 1961 than in any other year but that “it
    is too early to make definitive comparisons as between our newly
    developing competence and the capabilities of the U.S.S.R.”
∞ NASA first made public drawings of three-man Apollo spacecraft

    to be used in lunar landing development program.
∞ Dr. J. P. Kuettner, formerly chief of the Mercury-Redstone pro-

    gram, was named MFSC Manager of the Saturn-Apollo System
    Integration Program.
∞ USAF Minuteman successfully fired from silo a t Cape Canaveral,

    its third straight success in underground firing.
January 6: FAA released memorandum dated December 29, 1961,
    stating that Stanford Research Institute’s radiotelescope was
    a hazard to air navigation. The first of three such telescopes
    to be built in the U.S. by SRI extends 90 feet too high for Moffett
    Field air traffic and 128 feet too high for Palo Alto Airport
    traffic.
January 7: National Science Foundation re orted that Congress
    had appro riated $10.8 billion for researct and development in
    F Y 62, wtich included $3 billion for research, $6.7 billion for
    development, $1billion for facilities, and $100 million for informa-
    tion. NASA spent $1.4 billion, the DOD $6.2 billion.
∞ Executive Director of the Space Science Board of the National

    Academy of Sciences, Dr. Hugh Odishaw, reviewed the prospects
    in space in first of a series of lectures prepared for the Voice of
    America. Despite the great promise of practical application of
    space technology, Odishaw said: “I would contend that the
     challenges of research dwarf those of adventure and application.”
     Other members of the Space Science Board were slated for later
     lectures in this Voice of America series.
 ∞ Reported by J. Alsop that experts estimate that the U.S.S.R. could
     possibly test an antisatellite missile during 1962, and would
     probabl do so in 1963.
January 8: special hand tools for use in zero-gravity conditions were
     tested by personnel of the Manned Spacecraft and the Marshall
     Space Flight Centers. Experiments were conducted in simu-
     lated space environment to try out non-torque hand tools drawn
     from a number of industrial sources.
                                                                        3
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EV ENTS OF 1962

January 8-15: Fiveday symposium on aerospace medicine held a t
      School of Aerospace Medicine a t Brooks AFB, Texas, which
      included some 500 medical school professors, industrial scientists,
      military, and other Government specialists.
                       Associate Administrator, Dr. Robert C. Seamans,
January 9: NASA’s
      Jr., moderated a panel discussion on “Reliability-The Key to
      Space Operations,” at the 8th National Symposium on Reli-
      ability and Quality Control in Washington. Panelists John H.
      Rubel, Assistant Secretary of Defense; Dr. C. Stark Draper,
      Head of the Dept. of Aeronautics and Astronautics, MIT; Dr.
      Simon Ramo, Exec. VP of Thompson Ramo Wooldridge, Inc.;
      and Dr. Jack A. Morton, VP Device Development, Bell Tele-
      phone Laboratories discussed means of comprehensive, planned
      efforts to increase the Nation’s percentage of success in space
      launchings and operations.
                           
   ∞ Addressing SAM’S Aeros ace Medicine symposium, Major General
      C. H. Mitchell, Vice ommander of AFCS, said that the “Russian
      threat in space is becoming obvious . . . Clearly it is our re-
      sponsibility as a nation to insure that space is used to benefit all
      mankind. We can insure this only through development of the
      ability to conduct military operations in space with maximum
      effectiveness . . .”
January 10: NASA announced that the Advanced Saturn launch ve-
      hicle, to be used for manned flights around the moon and for
      manned lunar landings with rendezvous technique, would have
      five-engined first and second stages. The first stage (S-IB)
      would be powered by five F-1 engines (total of 7.5 million pounds
      thrust) and the second stage (S-11) would be powered with five
      5-2 engines (total of 1 million pounds thrust). A third stage
       (S-IVB) with a single J-2 engine would be used on escape
      missions.
   ∞ X-15 No. 1 piloted by Cdr. Forrest Petersen (USN) made its first
      forced landing in 47 flights when its rocket engine failed to ignite
      in mid-air after two attempts. X-15 was brought down without
      incident at Mud Lake, Nevada.
   ∞ NASA and AEC awarded 5-yr. contract for the development of the
      Nerva engine to Aerojet-General Corp. At same time, Aerojet-
      General signed a subcontract with Westinghouse Electric Corp.
      for nuclear portions of the development which began in 1955.
January 11: In his State of the Union message to the Congress,
      President Kennedy said: “With the approval of this Congress,
      we have undertaken in the past year a great new effort in outer
      space. Our aim is not simply to be first on the moon, any more
      than Charles Lindbergh’s real aim was to be first to Paris. His
      aim was to develop the techniques and the authority of this coun-
      try and other countries in the field of the air and the atmosphere.
          “And our objective in making this effort, which we hope will
      place one of our citizens on the moon, is to develop in a new
      frontier of science, commerce and cooperation, the position of
      the United States and the free world. This nation belongs
      among the first to explore it. And among the first, if not the
      first, we shall be.
          “We are offering @ow-how and cooperation to the United
      Nations. Our satehtes will soon be providing other nations
4      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

    with improved weather observations. And I shall soon send to
    the Congress a measure to govern the financing and operation of
    an international communications satellite system, in a manner
    consistent with the public interest and our foreign policy.
       “But peace in space will help us naught once peace on earth
    isgone . . . .7 1
January 11: USAF B-52H flew nonstop and without refueling 12,519
    miles from Okinawa to Madrid, breaking by 1,283.4 miles the
    1946 record set by Navy P2V-1 “Truculent Turtle.” Maj. C. E.
    Evely headed crew of eight making the 21-hour-52-minute flight.
  ∞ At SAM symposium on aerospace medicine, Lt. Col. Burt Rowen
    (USAF),  Chief of Bioastronautics a t AFFTC, presented heartbeat
    and breat,hing records of Maj. Robert White during X-15 record
    speed flight of November 9, 1961. “When the President’s
    Scientific Advisory Committee f i s t became aware of the high
    heart and respiration rates [of pilots in high-performance air-
    craft] they became concerned with the question of success of the
    Mercury program. . .        But now this has come to be regarded
    as normal.” Dr. Charies Sandhous of the University of Cali-
    fornia warned that an astronaut caught in space during a solar
    flare might age three years or more as a result of the radiation
    received.
  ∞ At Eighth National Symposium on Reliability and Quality Control
    in Washington, W. T. Sumerlin of the Philco Corp. estimated
    that 3,000 engineers and others were now devoting full time to this
    ‘(new field.”
  ∞ E. I. DuPont de Nemours & Co. announced it had awarded grants
    totaling $1,693,300 to 161 American universities and colleges to
    strengthen the teaching of science and related subjects, to pro-
    mote fundamental research, and to aid facilities for education or
    research in science and engineering.
January 12: John Jay Ide, European representative of NACA (1921-40,
    1946-50) and U.S. representative at numerous international air
    law and commerce conventions, died in New York. He was a
    founder and fellow of the IAS, a board member of the NAA, and an
    honorary member of the Royal Aeronautical Society. Mr. Ide
    had contributed to world aviation in making known the results
    of NACA research and in acquiring information on European
    progress, as well as helping the establishment of transatlantic
    commercial air routes.
January 13: USAF DISCOVERER XXXVII launched from Vandenberg
    AFn but did not attain orbit.
  ∞ NASA launched %stage Aerobee sounding rocket from Wallops Sta-
    tion to an altitude of 130 miles to obtain planning data for future
    solar physics projects.
  ∞ Dr. Hans-Georg Clamann, Chief of Space Medicine at SAM, sub-
    mitted that a mountain peak near the south pole of the moon
    may be the ideal location for a lunar base. Continuous sunlight
    would provide support for growing vegetation.
  ∞ Reported from New York that three-day US.-British discussions
    on U.N. problems had devoted considerable time to problems of
    “the law of outer space.” U.S. representatives indicated that
    the U.N. resolution of December covering “international co-
    operation and the peaceful uses of outer space” had extended
                                                                        5
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    international law to space. I n view of this, the U.N. resolution
    destroyed any argument that surveillance satellites violate inter-
    national law, as orbitmg satellites are legally no different from
    operating a destroyer in international waters.
January 14: National Science Foundation released comprehensive
    report on “Education and Professional Employment in the
    USSR” by Nicholas DeWitt of the Harvard Russian Research
    Center.
January 15: “Big Shot” suborbital inflation test of 135-foot di-
     ameter sphere in Echo I1 program was conducted from AMR.
    The 44-inch cannister containing the uninflated balloon that
    would be larger and more rigid than ECHO I was separated a t
     altitude from a specially stabilized Thor booster which carried
    both TV and 16-mm movie cameras. These cameras monitored
    the separation of the cannister and inflation of the “balloon satel-
    lite,” showed the too-rapid inflation that ripped the balloon apart
    a t 250-miles altitude; capsule with movie film re-entered and was
    later recovered by skin divers.
  ∞ In regular press conference, President Kennedy announced that he
    had asked his Science Advisory Committee, in cooperation with
    the Federal Council for Science and Technology, to report “as
    quickly as possible on the specific measures that can be taken
    within and without the Government to develop the necessary
    and well-qualified scientists and engineers and technicians to meet
    our society’s complex needs-government, educational and in-
    dustrial.” He prefaced his announcement with a review of the
    declining number of scientists and engineers educated in the
    United States since 1951.
  ∞ In NASA press conference in New York City, Dr. Abe Silverstein,

    Director of the Lewis Research Center, outlined factors in
              nation-wide recruitment of 2,000 scientists, engineers,
     NASA’s
     and technicians: (1) NASA had already interviewed 4,000 candi-
     dates in other cities and hoped to screen another 1,000 in New
     York; (2) salaries in industry tended to be higher than in Federal
     em loyment but NASA offered better postgraduate experience as
       9
     we as opportunity to acquire national or international reputa-
     tion; (3) NASA’s manpower drain on the annual pool of 40-45,000
     engineering graduates was small; and (4) the new specialists
     trained in the space program during the next decade would be an
     effective argument for much of the cost of the entire space effort.
January 16: In speech to the American Astronautical Society, Dr.
    Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aero-
    nautics and Space Council, submitted that Russia could match
     the U.S. in space “only if we place short-run convenience ahead
    o our nation’s future. . . . There are those who seem to take
      f
     for granted that a country like Soviet Russia, with less than half
     the per capita income of the United States, can afford a major
    successful space program, while we can not. That is, at best,
    ridiculous, and, a t worst, deliberate sabotage.”
  ∞ Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of the House Committee on
    Science and Astronautics, spoke to the American Astronautical
    Society on the broad benefits derived from the space program.
    He said: “Space exploration is of such immense importance to
    man’s total knowledge that it will benefit and alter the course of his
6      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

     existence in ways no more foreseeable today than those which
     resulted from the invention of the wheel. . . . One of themajor
     benefits being gleaned from this vast effort to conquer space is
     the stimulus which it is providing for scientific research in new
     and uncharted areas. . . .7 1
January 16: Army Pershing missile successfully fired on longest test
    flight to d a t e 4 0 0 miles-from AMR.
January 17: x 1 (No. 3) flown to 3,715 mph and 133,000 ft. in test
                -5
     of new autopilot control system, NASA’s Neil Armstrong as pilot.
                                               
  Navy F8U Crusader piloted by Cdr. George Talley (USN) made
    first aircraft landing on a nuclear-powered carrier, the U.S.S.
    Enterprise, off the Virginia Capes.
January 18: Administration budget for FY 63 presented to Congress
    by President Kennedy. NASA requests totaled $3,787,276,000,
     with $2,968,278,000 going to research, development, and opera-
     tions, and $818,998,000 to construction. DOD requests totaled
     $51.64 billion, with $6.843 billion going to research, development,
     test, and evaluation.
  ∞ In a NASA press conference following the presentation of the Admin-
    istration’s budget to Congress, Mr. James Webb, NASA Adminis-
    trator, commented on the general attitude toward NASA’s      doubled
     appropriation request: “I would say that the people I have talked
    to have felt that we ought to go forward with the effort at about
     the level the President has recommended. I have seen no indi-
    cation as we have had advanced discussion with some of the
    leaders, like the Chairman of the House Committee, Congress-
    man Miller, the Chairman of the Senate Committee, Senator
    Kerr, and with some of the Appropriations members; we have
    seen no disposition on their part to just simply throw up their
    hands and say, ‘No, sir.’ Each one of them has said that what
    you have makes sense and we are going to look it over very care-
    fully, of course, but nevertheless there has been no tendency to
    start out with a reaction that i t was simply out of line with
    reality. . . . Under those circumstances my judgment is that
    there will be a good, strong, vigorous debate, just as there was
    when this agency was formed, and that when the issues are clearly
    out on the table, and the success of the very active flight program
    that we are now conducting makes itself felt, that there will be
    support for the program and that we will end up with about the
    recommendations of the President.”
  ∞ NASA Goddard Space Flight Center selected Rohr Aircraft Corp.
    to negotiate for the manufacture and erection of three 85-foot-
    diameter parabolic antenna systems to be located at Pisgah Na-
    tional Forest (Rosman, N.C.), Fairbanks, Alaska, and an unde-
    termined location in eastern Canada. When completed, these
    facilities in addition to similar system completed at Gilmore
    Creek, Alaska, wodd serve as the core of NASA’s           wide-band
    satellite instrumentation network. They would receive and re-
    cord telemetry from large “second generation” satellites includ-
    ing Nimbus and the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao).
                                                                   7
                       AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962
       ASTRONAUTICAL

January 19: At NASA press conference, scientists described preliminary
    scientific results obtained by EXPLORER XII: based on study of
    10 per cent of the data, it now appears that instead of the two
    radiation belts (previously called the inner and outer Van Allen
    belts) there is one magnetosphere extending roughly from 400
    miles above the earth to 30,000 to 40,000 miles out. In this
    magnetosphere there is only a handful of matter but a very
    wide range of charged particles trapped by the earth’s magnetic
    field. Density of electrons is now considered to be 108/cm2/sec
    as o posed to the 10” derived from previous satellites. Radiation
        P
    leve s of protons in the lower portion of the magnetosphere were
    found to be the same as reported by previous satellites, so that
    the magnetosphere still poses a formidable radiation problem to
    extended manned flight. At about 10 earth radii the magneto-
    sphere ends abruptly. Above it is an extended area, about
    20,000 km. across, of electromagnetic turbulence and featuring
    very low ener       particles on the order of 1 to 20 kilovolts.
                   T
    Beyond this is t ought to be true interplanetary space.
  ∞ Ranger III lunar shot postponed because of technical difficulties
    with Atlas booster rocket.
  ∞ Dr. John P. Meehan of the University of Southern California
    reported that “Enos,” 37-lb chimpanzee who orbited the earth
    in MA-5 on November 29, 1961, developed temporary hyper-
    tension during flight due to frustration and confusion caused by
    equipment malfunction.
  ∞ In speech before the Builders and Contractors Exchange, Thomas

    F. Dixon, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, pointed out
    that one fourth of the total NASA appropriation for FY 1963 was
    for construction of facilities. This construction does not include
    that to be undertaken by other Government agencies or by the
    thousands of private industries, educational mstitutions, and
    others with a role in the space effort.
∞ NASA received patent (3,016,693) for electrothermal rocket invented

    by John R. Jack and Wolfgang E . Moeckel of Lewis Research
    Center.
∞ Department of Defense authorized USAF to proceed with develop-

    ment of a mobile mid-range ballistic missile (MMRBM).
 ∞ Unnamed Soviet scientist, called “chief designer of Soviet space-
    ships,” reported by Tass as saying that U.S.S.R. planned to
    establish an “industrial undertaking” on the moon.
January 21: NASA announced the launching of two Arcas meteor-
    ological sounding rockets from Kindley AFB, Coopers Island,
    Bermuda, the first of a series of tests to measure the structure
    and denrihy of the atmosphere in support of an atmospheric
    re-entry experiment utilizing a Scout rocket fired from Wallops.
January 22: Reported from AMR that MA-6 launch would be delayed
    until January 27 at the earliest, due to difficulties in the oxygen
    system of the Mercury spacecraft.
  ∞ Fuel tank of the Atlas booster of Ranger I11 was repaired from
    inside in 48 hours, first such repair while booster was upright on
    the pad. Effort of General Dynamics/Astronautics crew was
    necessitated by fuel leak.
8      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

January 23: NASA’s     Goddard Space Flight Center announced the
    selection of Motorola, Inc., Military Electronics Division, of
    Scottsdale, Ariz., as contractor for research and development
    on the Goddard range and range-rate tracking system. Intended
    for tracking satellites in near-space and cislunar space, the
    system will measure spacecraft position to within a few feet
    and velocity to within fractions of a foot per second by measure-
    ments of carrier and side-tone modulations.
 ∞ Institute of the Aerospace Sciences awarded: the Louis W. Hill
    Space Transportation Award, carrying a $5,000 honorarium, t o
    Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA’s         Manned Spacecraft
    Center, for his “outstanding leadership in technical development
    of spacecraft for manned space flight”; the Lawrence B. Sperry
    Award to Douglas G. Harvey for design, development, and testing
    of the first two nuclear auxiliary powerplants placed in orbit;
     and the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award to Alfred J. Eggers, Jr.,
    chief of Vehicle Environment Division at NASA’s    Ames Research
    Center, for his work on solving problems of space vehicle re-entry
    and alleviating heat problems at hypersonic, satellite, and escape
    speeds.
  ∞ National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board report on the
     atmospheres of Mars and Venus released. Prepared by William
    W. Kellogg of RAND and Carl Sagen of the University of Cali-
    fornia, it reported that available evidence suggests the existence
    of life on Mars and that space flights during the next decade
     would probably resolve this question.
  ∞ Reported by Dr. Sigmund Fritz of the Weather Bureau that TIROS
    1 1 had spotted fifty tropical storms during the summer of 1961.
      1
  ∞ Construction contract for Saturn umbilical tower (Launch Complex
    34, Cape Canaveral) was awarded by NASA Marshall Space Flight
    Center to Consolidated Steel and Ets-Hokin-Galvin. Cost of
    the 240-ft. steel tower was estimated at $504,900.
January 24: NASA announced Aerojet-General Corp. had been selected
    as the contractor for design and development of the M-1 liquid-
    hydrogen engine. To develop 1,200,000 pounds of thrust, the
    M-1 would be used in the Nova vehicle as propulsion for the 2nd
     (4 M-1 engines) and 3rd (1 M-1 engine) stages. Target date
    for the operational use of the engine was 1965, total cost of the
    contract expected to be $90,000,000.
 ∞ Mr. John Stack, Director of Aeronautical Research, NASA, speaking
    before the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences in New York,
    advocated a variable-wing, variable-fuselage configuration for
    the nation’s supersonic transport aircraft. Not only were these
    practicable for the state of the art but the only way he saw to
    gain the necessary subsonic vs. sonic flight characteristics and
    load flexibility to make the aircraft economically usable.
  ∞ Composite I, the Navy’s 5411-1 satellite package, was launched
    from AMR but failed to achieve orbit when the 2nd stage of the
    Thor-Able-Star booster rocket misfired.
                                                                      9
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

January 25 : EXPLORER x detected a “shadow” on the side of the
           6
    earth facing away from the sun; in this shadow there is an absence
    of the solar ‘(wind”, a belt of plasma moving out from the sun
    at about 200 miles per second but deflected around the earth by
    the earth’s magnetic field and creating a cone-shaped “shadow”
    some 100,000 miles across a t its larger end. The EXPLORER x
    findings were reported to the annual meeting of the American
    Physical Society in New York by Dr. Bruno Rossi of MIT.
  ∞ NASA approved Saturn G-5 development program and authorized
    NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to direct its development.
  ∞ “Satellite Communications Corporation” bills were introduced by
    Senator Robert Kerr (S. 2650) and by Rep. George Miller (H.R.
    9696), which would amend the NASA Act by adding a new section
    which would declare that it is “the policy of the United States
    to provide leadership in the establishment of a worldwide com-
    munications system involving the use of space satellites.’’ The
    section would create a “Satellite Communication Corporation”
    which would be privately owned and mana ed, and which would
                                                 gs
    develop and operate a communications sate lite system.
  ∞ Stars may devote 36 of their lifetime energy to production of neu-
    trinos, according to Dr. Hongyee Chiu of Yale and NASA’S
    Institute for Space Studies, speaking before the American Ph ical
                                                                  gY
    Society in New York. Neutrinos are among the most eusive
    of atomic particles, having no weight and no electrical charge,
    passing through matter with little chance of being stopped and
    with minimum interaction. Dr. Chiu theorized that the universe
    may have once been made up entirely of neutrinos which inter-
    acted to produce other particles and elements and that eventually
    the universe may return to neutrinos.
  ∞ The 140-ft. radiotelescope under construction a t Green Bank,
    W. Va., would not be completed until 1963 and its ori ‘nal cost
                                                             7
    of $6 million would rise to $13 million, the Nationa Science
    Foundation reported. Cause of most of the delay and added
    cost was said to be the danwer of brittle fracture in the steel used
    to construct the antenna, wkch required that the fabricated parts
    be scrapped and new parts made.
 ∞ Army Signal Research and Development Laboratory at Fort Mon-

    mouth announced development of a super-powered laser with a
    peak power of more than 3 million watts. The laser (light ampli-
    fication by stimulated emission of radiation) is 300 times as
    powerful as lasers in general laboratory use. It has potential i   n
    the fields of communications, range-finding, space vehicle guid-
    ance and special-purpose illumination.
 ∞ Ten- ear program for the study of weather, climate, and the atmo-

       i
    sp ere was submitted to the President’s Special Assistan’t for
    Science and Technology, Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner. Report by
    Dr. Sverre Petterssen was based on six conferences among 189
    meteorological specialists and called for tripled manpower and
    expenditures including much research in space programs.




     97317-63-2
10     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 19 6 2

January 26: RANGER 111 was launched from AMR; excessive accelera-
    tion by the Atlas 1st-stage booster caused the 727-113. payload to
    pass 22,562 miles in front of the moon on January 28 instead of
    impacting as had been planned. Failure of a high-gain antenna
    to home on the earth rendered signals too weak to provide usable
    television photographs from the ones RANGER took of the moon
    as it passed it. R A N G E R 111 went into orbit around the sun. The
    flight proved out many of the systems within the payload, includ-
    ing the mid-flight guidance mechanism.
 ∞ During hearings of the Joint Senate and House Economic Com-
    mittee, Senator Paul H. Douglas stated that “the public has
    never really had a chance to consider” the space program and
    that one third of the members of the American Astronautical
    Society had indicated in a poll that “a man ltmding on the moon
    was not desirable.” Budget Director David IC. Bell stoutly
    defended the space program. Senator Sparknian questioned
    Senator Douglas: “1 wonder whether Congress felt the same way
    when it put up money for Samuel Morse” to develop the tele-
    graph.
January 27: With the countdown at T-29 minutes, NASA postponed
    the first U S . manned orbital flight until February 1 because of
    cloud cover at the launching site that would have precluded
    adequate tracking of the vital first minutes of the flight. Astro-
    naut John H. Glenn had been in the Mercury capsule atop the
    Atlas launch rocket for more than 5 hours when the launch was
    postponed.
January 29: NASA announced selection of three firms to submit final
    proposals on the design and development of the Rift (Reactor-
    In-Flight-Test) rocket stage that would flight-test the Nerva
    nuclear rocket engine. The firms were General Dynamics/
    Astronautics, Lockheed Missile and Space Company, and Martin
    Marietta Corp. When selected, the contractor would be re-
    sponsible for designing the Rift stage, fabricating and assembling
    it a t the Michoud Operations Plant, and conducting tests and
    checkouts related to eventual flight test. The three firms were
    selected from five who submitted initial bids on January 3, fol-
    lowing a first-phase preproposals conference at Marshall Space
    Flight Center on December 7 attended by 33 firms.
  ∞ The last test model of the USAF Titan I I C R M was successfully fired
    from AMR. It was the 47th Titan I launching from Cape
    Canaveral, of which 34 were successes, 9 partial successes, and
    4 failures.
January 30: NASA announced at Cape Canaveral that manned MA-6
    launch would be postponed until February 13 because of “tech-
    nical difficulties with the launching booster.” John A. Powers,
    NASA press spokesman, quoted Astronaut John Glenn as saying:
    “Sure, I’m disappointed, but this is a complicated business.
    I don’t think we should fly until all elements of the mission are
    ready. When we have completed all our tests satisfactorily then
    we’ll go.”
∞ NASA announced that Cdr. Forrest S. Petersen (USN),           one of six
    research pilots assigned to the x-15 flight project, returned to
    Navy duty after 3j4 years with the X-15.
                                                                 11
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

                                                       “U.S. Aero-
January 31: President Kennedy submitted the 1961
    nautics and Space Activities” to the Congress. I n the preface,
    he said: “During 1961, major attention was devoted to establish-
    ing our policy objective of space leadership and to accelerating
    our efforts toward achieving that objective.”
∞ Reported by Irene Fischer of the Army Map Service that three

    experimental methods measured the mean distance from earth
    to the moon as 238,866 miles, a figure accurate within about a
    mile. A fourth method gives a figure accurate within about 8jh
    miles. The 238,866-mile distance is 9 miles more than previously
    accepted fi ure used for decades and based on direct observation
              3
    of the par lax of the moon a t its mean distance from the earth.
 ∞ USAF contracted with Boeing Co. and General Dynamics Corp. to
    undertake final studies on a new tactical fighter aircraft known
    as TFX, one suitable for both Tactical Air Commmd and Navy
    carrier operations.
  ∞ Nike-Zeus with three solid-fuel stages successfully flight-tested a t
    White Sands Missile Range.
  ∞ EXPLORER I completed its fourth year in orbit with a life expectancy
     of several more years.
  ∞ First 5-2 engine of Block I RLD series of Saturn C-1 was succekfully
     test-fired by Rocketdyne Div., North American Aviation.
During January: Manned Rogallo-wing paraglider built by NASA’s
    Ffght Research Center launched by automobile tow from Rogers
    Dry Lake, Calif. Tests may include launch of glider by aircraft
     tow, leading to development of inflatible paraglider for use with
     Gemini and Apollo programs.
  ∞ European     Broadcasting Union in Brussels undertook detailed
    planning for intercontinental TV experimentation and rograming
    via NASA’s    Project Relay and A T ~ T ’ S Telstar sategites to be
    launched in late summer of 1962. Construction of stations for
       articipation in the tests were reported underway in England,
    grance, West Germany, and Italy.
∞ Nimbus meteorological satellite underwent rigorous test pro       am
                                                              g.
     a t GE’s Missile and Space Vehicle Center a t Valley Forge,
∞ NASA awarded contract to Kollsman Instrument Division for 38-

    inch-diameter primary mirror in the space telescope to be used
    in the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao).
∞ NASA let contract with University of Denver to study the commer-

     cial use of space technological advancements as well as possible
     means to increase and forecast future civil products which may
    be generated by current space research.
∞ NASA lnitiated a $1.2 million contract with Documentation, Inc.,
    to operate a completely integrated technical information center
    for one year. The Center will disseminate space data to NASA,
    its prime contractors, and designated organizations and individ-
    uals throughout the free world, using latest automation for in-
    formation retrieval, communication, and data acquisition equip-
    ment. The facility will be located in Bethesda, Md.
  ∞ Management of Centaur contracts became a direct responsibility
    of MSFC, with tra sfer of Hawthorne (Calif.) Centaur Space
                     d
    Vehicle Project 0 ce to MSFC.
                                         FEBRUARY 1962
                February 1: KASA announced that MA-6 manned orbital flight would
                    be scheduled no earlier than February 13. Repair of leak in
                    Mercury-Atlas fuel tank would be completed by then.
                  ∞ Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of JPL, predicted in a press
I                   conference at Sunnyvale, Calif., that one of the next two attempts
                    to impact the moon with a Ranger spacecraft would be a partial
I                   success. He reported that RANGER 111 was now more than
                    500,000 miles from the earth and moving into a solar orbit a t
1
I                   2,600 mph.
                 ∞ Ten members of XASA’S Office of Advanced Research and Tech-
!                   nology, headed by Thomas E‘. Dixon, Deputy Associate Admin-
I                   istrator, visited MSFC.
                February 2: NASA announced that it was negotiating with Bendix Corp.

i                   and Radio Corp. of America on a contract to operate five manned-
                    spaceflight tracking stations a t Bermuda, Grand Canary Island,
                    Kano (Nigeria), Zanzibar, and Guaymas (Mexico), as well as test
                    and demonstration facility a t NASA Wallops Station, Va. Project
                    Mercury network would also be used for Project Gemini.
                 ∞ Rep. James G. Fulton, senior Republican on the House Committee
                    on Science and Astronautics, said in an interview: “There’s no
    I               doubt our overall space program is slipping despite the high
                    words and fine praise coming from the White House . . . If it
                    continues to slip, we’ll be lucky to get a man on the moon before
                    1980.”
                  ∞ Reported from Cairo, Egypt, that Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin has said
    I
                    that the United States “eventually” would orbit a man around
    I               the earth.
    i           February 3: Interviewed a t home, Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., said
                    that scheduled MA-6 launch on February 13 “can only bode
    I
                    for success.” Surveying the crowd of newsmen on his lawn,
    I



    I
                    Colonel Glenn remarked that “it looks like Hangar-S was not
                    such a bad place a€ter all.”
                February 4: Hindu astrologers predicted disaster during the period
        I
                    February 4-5 when five planets, the sun. the moon, and an in-
                    visible body called Khentu moved into rough alignment. Pre-

    i               dictions of disaster were based on astrological tables. Reaction
                    was so widespread that it prompted Prime Minister Nehru to
                    ridicule the predictions in an address: “I do not know the secrets
                    of nature. We will know them gradually. But what we don’t
                    know, we should not accept blindly. At least what strikes our
                    intelligence as completely absurd should not be accepted.”
                      12
        I
        I
            i

            I
            I
            1
                                                                     13
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

February 5: NASA submitted to the Congress a draft NASA authori-
    zation for FY 1963 bill. It would provide legislative authority
    to support the NASA budget for FY 1963, and authorize NASA to
    spend $2,968,278,000 for research, development, and operations
    and $818,998,000 for construction of facilities.
 ∞ Results of Aviation Week poll of the members of the House of
    Representatives to secure “grass-roots” opinions on the U S .
    space program were published. Representatives were asked to
    indicate how their constituents felt about key space aspects.
    The ma’ority indicated that the U.S. space program is “proceed-
            h
    ing a t t e right pace”; of the minority who disagreed with this,
     twice as many favored “speeding up the program.” Landing a
    man on the moon was considered “something the U.S. must do
    primarily to keep up with the Russians.” The majority also
    felt that NASA rather than the military should run the space
    program (“emphatic support for NASA on this question by a ratio
                                           B   Daddario noted on his
    of almost 5 to 1”). Rep. Emilio
     questionnaire that it is regrettable t a t the space program is
    linked in the public mind to the cold war contest with Russia:
     “I am concerned by this because the space program does not
     therefore stand on its own and there is the resulting danger that it
    will not receive the continuous support it will need over the years
     ahead to do what must be done . . .J’
∞ In Voice of America broadcast, Dr. Herbert Friedman, Supt. of

    Atmosphere and Astrophysics Division of NRL, reported that
    the mechanism involved in solar flares may contain the secrets
                                                 rwer*
    of controlled production of thermonuclear
∞ USAF Cambridge Research Lab team, headed          y Dr. Richard Dunn
    of the Sacramento Peak Observatory, successfully observed
    perfect total eclipse in Lae, New Guinea, making useful observa-
    tions of the chromosphere (1,000- to 10,000-mile band of energy
    between sun’s visible surface and the corona) and the sun’s
    corona.
∞ Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., visited the White House a t the invita-
    tion of the President.
∞ Navy HSS-2 Sea King became h t helicopter to exceed 200 mph

    in official speed trial; a claimed world record of 210.65 mph was
    flown by the twin-turbine helicopter over 19-km. course in Con-
    necticut. Pilots were Lt. R . W. Crofton (USN) and Capt. L. K.
    Keck (USMC).
∞ According to Tass, Academician Blagonravov reported that Soviet
    radar observations of Venus last year defined the astronomical
    unit as 149,599,500 kilometers, plus or minus 2,000 km.
February 6: Announced a t Cape Canaveral that the M A 4 launch
    attempt had been changed from February 13 to February 14.
 ∞ Tiros launch a t AMR postponed due to technical difficulties.
February 7: In a special message to the Congress, President Kennedy
    proposed the creation of a “Communications Satellite Corpora-
    tion” to be financed through the sale of stock to communications
    cornpanibs and the general public. This privately-owned cor-
    poration would ’have the responsibility to develop, own, and
    operate communications relay stations in space. The President
    declared that the creation of a satellite communication system
    would be “a measure of immense long-range importance.”
14     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

February 7: In regular press conference, President Kennedy was asked
 eray
    for his “evaluation of our progress in space a t this time” and
    whether the U.S. had changed its “timetable for landing a man on
                                                              a
    the moon?” He replied: “I have said from the beginnin we’ve
    been behind. And we are running into the difficulties whic come
    from starting late. We, however, are going to proceed. We’re
    making a maximum effort, as you know, and the expenditures
    in our space program are enormous. And, to the best of my
    ability, the time schedule, I hope, has not been changed by the
    recent setbacks.”
∞ President Kennedy requested $1 56 million supplemental appropria-
    tions for NASA during FY 1962, $85 million of which was to cover
    Advanced Saturn, the Centaur vehicle program, and the M-1
    engine program.
 ∞ AEC and NASA announced that the Catalytic Construction Co. had
    been selected as construction contractor for nuclear rocket de-
    velopment facilities for Project Rover a t the AEC Nevada Test
    Site near Las Vegas, Nev.
  ∞ Army launched Nike-Zeus from underground cell, a t White Sands.
  ∞ Harrison E. Salisbury reported that “in the most advanced echelons
    of Soviet science there is emerging a tendency to seek a nonma-
    terialist concept of the universe.” According to the former
    Moscow correspondent who recently toured the Soviet Union
    for two months, “some of the most eminent figures in the galaxy
    of Soviet hsyicists, astronomers and mathematicians are in-
                 f
    volved,” a though they are not believers in formal religion or
    dogma.
                     TIROS IV launched by a 3-stage Thor-Delta rocket
February 8: NASA’s
    from Cape Canaveral into a near-circular orbit with an apogee of
    525 miles and perigee of 471. TTROS IV featured the same basic
    types of equipment as in previous Tiros satellites, including cam-
    eras for cloud-cover photography and infrared sensors to measure
    temperatures a t various levels in the atmosphere. Principal
    innovation was a camera with new type of wide-angle lens cover-
    ing an area 450 miles on a side, which was expected to provide
    minimum distortion. NASA press conference reported that qual-
    ity of TIROS IV pictures was good.
∞ Navy, in conjunction with Weather Bureau and Canada, launched

    a major ice reconnaissance effort in the Gulf of St. Lawrence as
    part of a project to develop procedures and techniques for inter-
    preting satellite readouts of ice formation. Called Project Tirec,
    the effort was timed to coincide with the successful launch of
     TIROS IV.
 ∞ Deputy NASA Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden accepted invita-
    tion to become an Honorary Fellow of the British Interplanetary
    Society, an honor only accorded to eight persons who have
    rendered major services to astronautics over a number of years.
  ∞ Edmund F. Buryan was named consultant to NASA to develop plans,
    policies, and programs for applying technological advances to
    practical benefit of the U.S. economy and industry.
February 9: Weather Bureau reported that TIROG IV had taken
    “striking pictures, of excellent quality, of cloud cover, and of
    snow and ice distribution” during its first 24 hours in orbit.
                                                                     15
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

February 9: NASA-Wide conference reviewing NASA’s
                                               Future Applica-
    tions Program was held in headquarters to review best means of
    increasing application of technological advances derived from the
    space program to commercial and industrial purposes.
  ∞ NASA announced that Genera1 Electric had been selected for a
    major supporting role in the manned lunar Apollo project, to
      rovide integration analysis of the total s ace vehicle (including
    Eooster-spacecraft interface), assuring reyiability of the entire
    space vehicle, and developing and operating a checkout system.
  ∞ First successful captive firing of R G l O Centaur engines on a single-
     tank propulsion test vehicle, at Edwards Rocket Site, Calif.
February 11: Project Oscar Association chairman, M. C. Towns,
    reported that signal reports on OSCAR I, placed in orbit in De-
    cember 1961, had been received from radio amateurs throughout
    the world. No confirmation was received that OSCAR’S Morse
    signal was heard behind the Iron Curtain. Towns announced
    that the 250,000 hams would have another Oscar, tentatively
    set for launch sometime in late spring.
  ∞ Reported in Tass that a Soviet expert on rocket propulsion, not
    mentioned by name, had said: “The creation of powerful rockets
    has been full of pitfalls. Our investigations and experiments
    have not always been successful-far from it. There have
    been difEculties . . .”
February 12: In NAs-sponsored lecture on “Geomagnetism” for Voice
     of America broadcast, Dr. James P. Heppner of NASA Goddard
     Space Flight Center said: (‘Each new space experiment adds to
     the list of unanswered questions about our electromagnetic
     environment.” He pointed to the changes in the scientific con-
     cepts of the boundary of the earth’s atmosphere and of relation-
     ships between the earth’s ma netic field and solar radiation that
                                  %
     have resulted from data alrea y acquired by satellites and probes.
∞ Soviet officials indicated that newsmen may be allowed to cover the
     next Soviet space shot, a report later denied.
February 13: USAF Atlas-E model ICBM completed its test-flight
 eruy
     program with a 7,000-mile strike down the Atlantic Missile Range.
     The Atlas-E, already operational at Vanderberg AFB, Calif. ;
     Warren AFB, Wyo.; Fairchild AFB, Wash.; and Forbes AFB, Kan.,
     showed an overall test record of nine successes, seven partial
     successes, and two failures.
∞ Reported from Moscow that Soviet authorities were considering
     an offer to purchase licenses on U.S. patents, with royalties for
     their use. An agreement for the visit of a Soviet trade delega-
     tion later in the year for negotiation of such an arran ement was
                                                           8
     announced by the National Patent Development orporation
     in New York.
February 14: MA-6 launch postponed because of bad weather in
    recovery axeas. At regular press conference, President Kennedy
    was asked about the eighth postponement of “Col. Glenn’s fight.”
     He replied as follows: “Well, it is unfortunate. I know it strains
     Colonel Glenn. It has delayed our program. It puts burdens
     on all those who must take these decisions a to whether the
                                                      s
    mission should o or not.
                    EB
        “I think it’s een very unfortunate. But, I have taken the
    position that their-the judgment of those on the spot should be
16     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

    final in regard to this mission and I’ll continue to take that
    judgment .
        “I think they would be reluctant to have it cancelled for another
    three or four months because it would slow our whole space
    program down at a time when we’re making a concentrated effort
    in space.
        “But I’m quite aware of the strain it caused everyone and it’s
    been a source of regret to everyone and-but I think we ought to
    stick with the present group who are making the judgment and
    they are hopeful still of having this flight take place in the next
    few days.
       ‘(And I’m going to follow their judgment in the matter even
    though we’ve had bad luck.”
February 14: 25-ft. space environmental simulator used for the first
    time at, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, in beginning of 3-week test of
    Mariner spacecraft designed for a Venus probe.
 ∞ Twenty specialists of Weather Bureau’s Research Flight Facility,
    who make prolonged and repeated flights into hazardous weather
    for data for use in atmospheric research, were awarded the De-
    partment of Commerce Gold Medal.
February 15: USAF Minuteman ICBM launched from underground silo
    a t AMR, the 5th successful silo test in a row since last November.
  ∞ Dr. Bernard Lubarsky of NASA’s      Lewis Research Center named one
    of Ten Outstanding Young Men in the Federal Government for
    1961 to receive Arthur S. Flemming Awards.
February 16: Following an early morning weather briefing, Mercury
    Operations Director Walter C. Williams advised that weather
    conditions again precluded a launch attempt of the MA-6 mis-
    sion. February 20 was announced as the earliest possible launch
    date. Notified of the decision a t 12:50 AM, Astronaut Glenn
    said: “I guess it was to be expected. We all knew the weather
    was marginal.”
  ∞ Dr. Robert C. Seamans, NASA Associate Administrator, outlined
             views of solid-propellant Nova-class motors in a letter to
    NASA’s
    John H. Rubel, Deputy Director, Defense Research and Engineer-
    ing:
        (‘NASA has a strong interest in the technology of solid-propellant
    rockets and hopes to make use of them in NASA vehicles when
    the appropriate feasibility is demonstrated . . .” NASA interest
    was expressed for motors with thrust levels of “about 2.5 million
    and 5 million lbs. and burning times of approximately 115
     seconds.”
        ((Thehigher thrust level produced by motors about 240 inches
    in diameter by about 100 feet long is especially attractive from
    a long-range, payload growth viewpoint. In addition, the
    great*er thrust and impulse per motor results in designs with
    fewer motors per stage, and thus with greater potential for
    reliability. . . .”
 ∞ Congressman V. Anfuso and Senator H. Humphrey introduced
    similar bills (H.R. 10203 and S. 2849) to movide for research
    into and development of practical means fbr the utilization of
    solar energy.
∞ Hartley A. Soul6 of NASA’s     Langley Research Center retired after
     34 years’ service at Langley. Soul6 was instrumental in the
                                                                   17
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    establishment of what is now the NASA Flight Research Center
     at Edwards, California, and directed the research on the X-1
     (which in October 1947 first broke the speed of sound) and the
    X-15. More recently he was NASA Project Director for the
    multimilliondollar Project Mercury worldwide tracking and
    ground instrumentation system.
February 16: SAC combat missile crew launched successful Atlas ICBM
    from Vandenberg AFB, California.
  USAF awarded contract to Martin-Marietta Corp. for study of
    design criteria for a Titan I11 standardized space launch vehicle.
February 17: 100-inch diameter, 53-foot long, solid-fuel rocket static-
 eray
    fired for 98 seconds and developed 600,000 pounds of thrust by
    Aerojet-General, the largest solid rocket fired to date.
February 18: NASA announced Project Fire, a high-speed re-entry
    heat research program to obtain data on materials, heating rates,
    and radio signal attenuation on spacecraft re-entering the atmos-
    phere at speeds of about 24,500 mph. Information from the
    program would provide technology for manned and unmanned
    re-entry from lunar missions. Under management of Langley
    Research Center, Project Fire would use Atlas D boosters and
    the re-entry velocity package would be powered by Antares solid-
    fuel motor (3rd stage of the Scout).
  ∞ NASA Administrator James E. Webb, Assistant Administrator Hiden
    T. Cox, and other NASA speakers addressed the annual convention
    of the American Association of School Administrators. Mr.
    Webb said: “Space science and space exploration have become
    an integral and vital part of a great industrial and technological
    revolution which is now taking place in our own country and
    throughout the world . . . [the] rapid rate of change as much as
    the change itself is one of the dominant facts of our time.” Dr.
    Cox outlined NASA’s   program of educational services to meet the
    needs of education in and for the Space Age.
  ∞ Four time-to-climb records claimed by USAF Northrup T-38 Talon
    supersonic trainer.
February 19: NASA-AEC designated the Jackass Flats area of the AEC
    Test Site as the Nuclear Rocket Development Station. Placed
    under management of the joint NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Pro-
    pulsion Office (SNPO), the new station has been used since 1959
    for ground tests of Kiwi reactors.
  ∞ In Voice of America broadcast, Alan H. Shapley of the National
    Bureau of Standards’ Central Radio Propagation Laboratory,
    reviewed the “new dimension to research in ionospheric science”
    added by space vehicles. He pointed out that (‘scientificexpedi-
    tions landing on the surface of Mars or Venus, whether manned
    or unmanned, will have to communicate by radio with terrestrial
    headquarters. We must know which frequencies will get through
    the planetary ionosphere, and which can be used with the radio-
    mirror effect to talk from one part of the planet to another.
    So far we have had only [the earth’s] ionosphere to study, but
    this is like the doctor with only a single case. To understand a
    disease he needs many cases.”
  ∞ The Air Force Space Plan, a ten-year blue-print for military space
    technology, was given to a House committee by Lt. Gen. James
    Ferguson, DCSIRLT. The Space Plan foresaw a military need for
18    ASTRWAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    rendezvous, docking, and transfer. The USAF expected to depend
    on a manned rendezvous vehicle, using the two-man Gemini,
    built by NASA, as an initial vehicle. The Space Plan was sent
    to the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board for review.
February 19: Army fired Pershin ballistic missile in extended range
                                 1
    test at Ctipe Canaveral, whic exceeded the range of the 200-mile
    Redstone.
∞ Reported that Russian Cosmonauts Gagarin and Titov were assured
    membership in the Supreme Soviet. Neither was opposed in
    election slates and both will represent their home towns. It was
    also reported that the U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry’s press depart-
    ment had denied the rumor that Russia was preparing to let
    Western newsmen cover the next Soviet space shot.
February 20: Mercury spacecraft (Capsule 13), FRIENDSHIP 7, was
    launched into orbit by Atlas booster (109D), Lt. Col. John H.
    Glenn, Jr., (USMC), as astronaut. After three orbits (apogee:
    162.5 mi.; perigee: 98.9 mi.), FRIENDSHIP 7 re-entered and para-
    chuted into Atlantic some 166 miles east of Grand Turk Island
    in the Bahamas. Picked up by the destroyer Noa, Glenn re-
    mained inside capsule until on deck. Beyond being the first
    U.S. manned orbital space flight, MA-6 flight of FRIENDSHIP 7
    provided aerospace medical data during 285 minutes of weight-
    lessness, including consumption of solid and liquid food and dis-
    orientation exercises. Astronaut Glenn was forced to “fly by
    wire” (i.e., pilot the spacecraft) during 2nd and 3rd orbits due
    to troubles with the automatic pilot. Glenn was pronounced
    “hale and hearty” after his 81,000-mile flight of 4 hrs. 56 min.
 ∞ President Kennedy made a statement to the press on the lawn of
    the White House, expressing the “great happiness and thanks-
    giving of all of us that Col. Glenn has completed his trip . . . .
       “I also want to say a word for all those who participated with
    Col. Glenn in Canaveral. They have faced many disappoint-
    ments and delays-the burdens upon them were greatybut they
    kept their heads and made a judgment and I think their judgment
    has been vindicated.
       ‘‘We have a long way to go in this space race. We started late.
    But this is the new ocean, and I believe the United States must
    sail on it and be in a position second to none.
       “Some months ago I said that I hoped every American would
    serve his country. Today Col. Glenn served his, and we all ex-
    press our thanks to him.”
  ∞ Estimated that over 60 million Americans witnessed the launch of
     FRIENDSHIP 7 on live TV. Voice of America carried live overseas
    radio coverage. The U.S. Senate recessed at 2:30 PM EST just
    before the landing of Mercury spacecraft. The U S . Post
     Office placed Project Mercury postage stamp on sale minutes
     after Astronaut Glenn stepped on the deck of Noa.
February 21 : At regular press conference, President Kennedy opened
     with a statement on space, saying:
       “It is increasingly clear that the impact of Col. Glenn’s mag-
     nificent achievement yesterday goes far beyond our own times
     and our own country. The success of this flight, the new knowl-
     edge it will ive us, and the new steps which can now be under-
                d
     taken will a ect life on this planet for many years to come.
                                                                      19
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

        “This country has received more than 30 messages of congrat-
     ulations from other heads of state all over the world . . . . I
     want to ex ress my thanks to them and a t the same time pay
                !
     tribute to t e international cooperation entailed in the successful
     operation of the Mercury tracking network . . . .
        “. . . Chairman Khrushchev of the Soviet Union [suggested]
     . . . that it would be beneficial to the advance of science of our
     countries if our countries could work together in the exploration
     of space. I am replying to his message today . . . .
        “We believe that when men reach beyond this planet they
     should leave their national differences behind them . . . .
        “It has been said that peace has her victories as well as war,
     and I think all of us can take pride and satisfaction in this history
     of technolo y and the human spirit.”
February 21: Mercury officials debriefin Astronaut John Glenn a t
 eray
                                          E
     GI and Turk Island announced that e was in “excellent physical
     condition.” Dr. Robert B. Voas, psychologist and training
     officer, said that it was “quite significant” that Glenn had been
     unable to detect any ill effects during almost five hours of weight-
     lessness. Voas pointed out that lon er flights such as the 17
                                              i
     orbits of Cosmonaut Titov are require to document the physical
     effects of prolonged weightlessness.
  ∞ In formal response to congratulatory note from Premier Khrushchev
     on the flight of FRIENDSHIP 7, President Kennedy said: “. . . I
     welcome your statement that our countries should cooperate in
     the exploration of space. . . . We of c o m e believe also in strong
    support of the United Nations in this field and are cooperating
    directly with many other countries individually.
        “I am instructing the appropriate officers of this Government
     to prepare new and concrete proposals for immediate projects of
     common action, and I hope at a very early date our representa-
    tives may meet to discuss our ideas and yours in a spirit of
    practical cooperation.”
 ∞ NASA announced plans to attempt to launch 440-lb. Orbiting Solar
    Observatory (Oso) containing 13 experiments, within a week.
  ∞ D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of NASA’s       Office of Manned Space
    Flight, addressed the Engineers, Scientists, and Architects Day
    meetmg, in which he said: “as a stimulus to our fervent interest in
    rocketry have been the realities of life in a world which is divided
    into two armed camps, one of which has the avowed intention of
    imposing its own way of life on free peoples everywhere. We are,
    in short, compelled to achieve and maintain leadership in space
    research and technology because our own fate as a free nation
    and, in fact, the fate of human civilization as we know it, will
    depend upon whether the spacecraft of the future are devoted to
    peaceful purposes or to the destruction of the human race . . .”
 ∞ Thomas F. Dixon, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, in a
    speech on the Apollo Program at San Jose, California, outlined
             progressim of flight programs leading to goal of a manned
    NASA’s
    lunar mission before 1970, relating the X-15, Ranger, Surveyor,
    Mercury, Gemini, and rocket propulsion developments to the
    Apollo program.
20     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S O F 1 9 G 2

February 21: Dr. Orr E . Reynolds, formerly head of the DOD’S Office
    of Science, named Director of NASA’s      Bioscience Programs in the
     Office of Space Sciences. During 1949-1957, Dr. Reynolds was
     Director of ONR’S Biological Sciences Division.
 ∞ In speech to National Conference on Application of Electrical
    Insulation, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (USAF) pointed to the
    lessons of history:
              . . Our boldest predictions do not keep very far ahead of
       ((.

    technical developments.
        “A second lesson is that the advance of scientific and engineer-
    ing knowledge is most effectively achieved through joint effort.
    The growth of military airpower has owed much to the scientific
    and industrial community . . . . I think we can predict the
    same mutual benefits in space exploration . . .”
 ∞ USAF announced that an unnamed satellite had been launched by a
    Thor-Agena B booster from Vandenberg AFB.
February 22: Before the 3rd West Coast Reliability Symposium, Dr.
    Landis S. Gephart, NASA’S Director of Reliability and Quality
    Assurance Office, said that the U.S. has “reliability requirements
    greater than our record of achievements to date will satisfy.”
    He pointed out that when Saturn-class vehicIes will cost an esti-
    mated $20 to $30 million a launch, neither NASA or the nation
     can tolerate a “batting average of 500.” Dr. Gephart then
     discussed three publications NASA was issuing in connection with
    contracts to ensure tighter quality control for NASA hardware.
 ∞ In speech before the Wonian’s National Press Club, Adlai Stevenson,
     U S . Ambassador to the United Nations, said that the U.S.,
    U.S.S.R., and other qualified nations should pool their space
    efforts under the auspices of the United Nations. ((Perhaps
    their children,” he said, “will sail to Mars together.”
  ∞ First International Woman’s Space Symposium held a t Los
    Angeles, Shirley Thomas as chairman.
  ∞ The National Center for Space Studies of France, headed by Pierre
    Auger, released a summary of its 1962 space program: launching
     of sounding rockets containing a rat and later a cat to 125 miles
     altitude; research observations of the sun and various planets ;
     and telecommunications experiments. France would also co-
    operate in a joint satellite project with the U S . and participate
    in the European Organization for Space Research.
February 23: In ceremony at Cape Canaveral, President Kennedy
     thanked the Project Mercury team for the successful flight of
     F R I E N D S H I P 7:
         “. . . it’s my great pleasure to speak on behalf of all our fellow
     Americans in expressing pride and satisfaction to those intimately
     involved in this effort. All of us remember a few dates in this
     century and those of us who were very young remember Col.
     Lindbergh’s flight, Pearl Harbor, and the end of the war, and
     remember the flight of Alan Shepard, Major Grissom and we
     remember the flight of Col. Glenn . . .”
        President Kennedy then awarded the NASA Distinguished
     Service Medal to Robert R. Gilruth and read the citation, (‘for
     his distinguished leadership of the team of scientists and engineers
                                                                    21
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 6 2

    that carried Project Mercury, the U.S. initial manned space flight
    program, from its inception to the successful accomplishment of
    man’s flight in orbit about the earth . . .”
       Lt. Col. John H. Glenn also was awarded the NASA Distinguished
    Service Medal by the President, the citation to which said:“ . . .
    made an outstanding contribution to the advancement of human
    knowledge of space technolo y and a demonstration of man’s
                                  8
    capabilities in space flight.   is performance was marked by his
    great professional skill, his skill as a test pilot, his unflinching
     courage. . , . l l
       In his remarks, Astronaut Glenn thanked fellow astronauts and
    the entire Mercury organization: “we all acted literally and
    figuratively as a team. . . . It goes across the board . . . sort
    of a crosscut of Americana, of industry, and military and civil
    service. . . . It was headed up by NASA, of course, but thousands
    and thousands of people have contributed as certainly much or
    more than I have to the project. . . .”
February 23: In later NASA press conference a t Cape Canaveral,
           
    Astronaut John Glenn described his three-orbit flight. He related
    his observation, his pilotage during almost two orbits, and his
     concern when burning fragments of the retrorocket packa e dur-
                                                                4
    ing re-entry appeared to indicate to him that the heat s h e d was
    breaking up. He referred to (‘weightlessness” as a ‘(very pleas-
    ant” sensation to which he is becoming “addicted.” Adminis-
    trator Webb and Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center,
    Robert Gilruth, spoke briefly. This conference, like all events
    associated with the MA-6 flight, was fully covered in all detail
    b the entire American press, radio, and TV.
     E
  ∞ 12 European nations agreed on draft convention for the creation
    of a European Space Research Organization. Once si ned by
    member nations (Britain, France, West Germany, Italy, ielgfum
    Denmark, Norway, Sweden, the Netherlands, Switzer and:
    Austria, and Spain), the organization would cooperate with the
    U.S.’s NASA and the International Committee on Space Re-
    search of which the Soviet Union is a member.
 ∞ DOD and NASA si ned an agreement that neither agency would
                    K
    begin the deveopment of a launch vehicle or a space booster
    without the writt<enacknowledgment of the other.
 ∞ Senator Henry M. Jackson in a radio interview said there was
    evidence that “lives were lost” in the Russian manned space
    flight program. He urged the Kennedy Administration to
    challenge the U.S.S.R. to “lay bare” its trials and errors in
    achieving manned space fight.
 ∞ Drew Pearson repeated rumors previously published in his column
    that 5 Soviet cosmonauts may have been killed in manned space
    flight attempts.
 ∞ USAF Titan I ICBM launched by military crew a t Vandenberg
           calif.
    AFB,
 ∞ Reported that two radio hams of Ann Arbor, Mich., J. Schmidt
   and E. Nuttle, recorded the voice transmissions of Astronaut
   Glenn during the three-orbit flight of FRIENDSHIP 7.
22     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

February 24: Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech reported on f i s t direct
    detection of elastic waves 40 to 50 miles high that carry heat from
    the sun to its corona. Photographs made through Mount Wilson
    Observatory detected the energy transfer mechanism of waves
    which rose and fell a t the rate of 1,000 mph and in five-minute
    periods.
 ∞ Department of Defense Directive (No. 5030.18) issued which
    specified responsibilities and procedures for the support of NASA
    “in order to employ effectively the Nation’s total resources for
    the achievement of common civil and military space objectives.”
    It assigned responsibilities within DOD to cover existing DOD-NASA
    Agreements on program content, funding, scheduling, and assign-
    ment of respective responsibilities.
  ∞ Studies conducted by American Airlines revealed that 78% of
    Americans have never traveled on commercial airliner, while
    8 million use the airlines regularly (15% of these accounting for
    64% of commercial air passengers).
February 25: Soviet scientists claimed to have discovered the third
    radiation belt around the earth and published such findings two
    years before the findings of EXPLORER XII were made public by
    NASA on January 19, 1962. Academician Blagonravov, Vice
    President of the International Committee on Space Research,
    said in an Izvestia interview that the existence of a dense belt
    with energies of 200 to 20,000 electron volts at a distance of
     25,000 to 50,000 miles was recorded by Soviet space launchings
    in 1958. Such findings, he said, were published by Dr. K.
    Gringauz and associates in the February and April issues of the
    Soviet Academy o Sciences Proceedings in 1960, and in later
                         f
    publications. Commenting on the view that the three radiation
    belts really formed a single large pulsating band that might be
    called a ‘imagnetosphere,” Blagonravov agreed that the bound-
    aries might be arbitrary but that the charged particles in each
    belt had distinctive characteristics and that it would be “inex-
    pedient” to reject t,he theory of three belts.
February 26: John Glenn Day in Washington, D.C. An estimated
     250,000 persons lined the rain-drenched parade route from the
     White House to Capitol Hill. I n 20-minute address to the joint
     session of the Congress, Astronaut Glenn paid tribute to the
     Project Mercury team and pointed to the unbounded future of
     space exploration:
           . . I feel that we are on the brink of an area of expansion of
       ((.

     knowledge about ourselves and our surroundings that is beyond
     description or comprehension a t this time.
        “Our efforts today and what we’ve done so far are but small
     building blocks on a very high pyramid to come . . .
        “We’re just probing the surface of the greatest advancement
     in man’s knowledge of his surroundings that has ever been
     made . . . There are benefits to science across the board. Any
     major effort such as this results in research by so many different
     specialties that it’s hard to even envision the benefits that will
     accrue in many fields.
        “Knowledge begets knowledge. The more I see, the more
     impressed I am not with how much we know but with how tre-
     mendous the areas are that are yet unexplored . . .”
                                                                   23
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

February 26: In NAS lecture for Voice of America broadcast, Dr. Joseph
     W. Chamberlain of the University of Chicago’s Yerkes Observa-
     tory predicted that space-age research techniques may soon pro-
     vide final answers to questions about the aurora that have eluded
     scientists for centunes. “Better understanding of
                                                             IhYsica1
     processes producing the aurora,” he said, “should allow t e spec-
     troscopist to derive even more information from his observations
     of the auroral spectrum about the physics and chemical processes
     in the high atmosphere.” He suggested that space probes may
     detect auroras on other planets which will provide an entire new
     set of data different from terrestrial phenomena with which to
     test hypotheses for auroral bombardment mechanisms.
 ∞ Technical dficulties with third stage of Thor-Delta booster post-
     poned launchin of Os0 satellite a t AMR.
                  $?et
  ∞ Senators Estes       auver and Wayne Morse proposed legislation
     calling for a government-owned corporation to operate space
     satellite communications network.
  ∞ Soviet representative at the United Nations, Valerian A. Zorin, told
     a news conference that the U.S.S.R. would cooperate with the
     U.S. and other member nations of the U.N. Committee on the
     Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting on March 19. Zorin said
     that he hoped that the committee would be able to agree on a
     work program for “mutually beneficial and advantageous
     cooperation. ”
February 27: NASA Administrator Webb introduced Robert R. Gilruth
     an? Astronauts Shepard, Grissom, and Glenn to NASA Head-
     quarters’ personnel assembled in FOB No. 6, Washington.
∞ House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearin s on

     $3.7-billion NASA authorization request. Administrator $ebb,
     Robert R. Gilruth (Director MSC), and Astronauts Glenn, Gris-
                         a
     som, and Shepard ap eared as witnesses.
       Mr. Webb outline NASA’s     projected pro am to be covered in
                                               Y
    detail in subsequent testimony: (1) tota ten year program
     ahead may cost over $35 billion; (2) new astronaut trainin pro-
                                                               f
    gram to include scientists will be announced shortly; (3) uture
    manned spacecraft will be capable of landing on land or water;
     (4) NASA is opposed to using astronauts as goodwill ambassadors,
    as they are needed on the current program; (5) 92% of NASA’s
    budget will be spent through industry and universities.
       Astronaut Glenn pointed out that the Nation “must be pre-
    pared” for failures in future manned space flights. “We don’t
    envision every flight,” he said, “coming back as successfully as
    the three we have had so far . . . I hope we will always have the
    confidence in the program that we now have despite the fact
    there will be times when we are not riding a crest of happiness
    and enthusiasm as we now are.”
 ∞ NASA witnesses appeared before the Senate Committee on Aero-
    nautical and Space Sciences hearings on communication satellites
    system. Deputy NASA Administrator Dryden stated that the
    U.S. would have operational satellite communications within
    five years.
  ∞ USAF DISCOVERER xxxvzIi launched into orbit with undisclosed
    payload.
24    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S O F 1 9 6 2

February 27: Second Saturn flight vehicle (SA-2) arrived a t Cape
     Canaveral aboard the barge Promise.
  ∞ I n testimony before closed session of the House Appropriations
     Committee, Prof. James A. Van Allen stated that man-in-space
     programs were not necessary €or scientific space exploration.
     “For the same investment of‘effort we learn much more without the
     man. . . . A monkey made the first orbital trip and he made
     out alright.” I n testifying on behalf of the National Science
     Foundation appropriation, Van Allen said that the US. should
     not rush into a cooperative space .program with Russia; failures
     would worsen relations since Russia has more to gain from such
     a program. The US., he said, had surpassed Russia “in nearly
     all areas of purely scientific investigation of outer space” but,
     some American scientists have “an uneasy, creeping feeling that
     Russia is about to launch a manned flight around the moon.”
     Testimony was released on May 14.
∞ USAF witnesses before the Senate Military Appropriations Sub-
     committee testified under questioning that DOD budget was not
     adequate in all areas. Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, USAF Chief of
     Staff, said that funds should be provided for “at least 100 more
     Minuteman ICBM’S” than in present budget, and that he favored
     a “little more e~izpliasis”in the military space program on early-
     warning systems. Secretary Eugene Zuckert indicated that he
     favored development of the RS-70 as a full-fledged weapon
     system.
 ∞ Dr. Nancy Roman, Chief of Astronomy and Solar Physics in NASA’s
     Office of Space Sciences, was one of six receiving the Federal
     Women’s Award.
February 28: Mercury astronauts Shepard, Grissom, and Glenn
     appeared before both the House Science and Astronautics Com-
     mittee and the Senate Aeronautics and Space Committee,
     answering a variety of questions on future manned space flight.
     Dr. Robert Seamans, NASA Associate Administrator, summarized
     specific NASA program, manpower, and money requirements
     before the House Committee.
∞ USAF Atlas-E     ICBM launched from Vandenberg AFB, the first such
     launch from this base.
∞ NASA announced that it would acquire launch facility a t the Pacific

     Missile Range to be used for all NASA Thor-Agena B launches
     requiring a polar orbit (e.g. Echo 11). The basic Thor pad
     structure is being provided by the USAF in addition to manage-
     ment for certain pad modifications, while the Army provided
     a surplus Redstone Service Tower and the Navy operates the
     Pacific Missile Range. NASA field responsibility on the West
     Coast is provided by the NASA Launch Operations Directorate
     Test Support Office, Point Mugu, headed by Simon J . Burttschell.
∞ H. Douglas Garner and Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., aerospace tech-

     nologists at NASA Langley Research Center, awarded $1,000 for
     invention of Horizon Scanning Active Attitude Orientation of Sta-
     bilized Space Vehicles. James S. Albus, engineer at NASA Goddard
     Space Flight Center, awarded $1,000 for his invention of a Digital
     Solar Aspect Sensor. Invention awards of less than $1,000 were
     made to following NASA employees: William H. Kinard and
                                                                    25
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

     Sidney A. Batterson, Langley Research Center; Estin N. Baker,
     Jess S. W. Davidsen, Ralph L. Mossino, and Gilbert G. Robinson,
     Ames Research Center; Wilhelm Angele, Marshall Space Flight
     Center.
February 28: Under Secretary of State George C. McGhee testsed
           
     before the Senate Aeronautics and Space Committee in support
     of the Administration b l to create a private corporation for the
                             il
     U.S. portion of a global satellite communications system. He
     said that it “would lead to opportunities for a l members of the
                                                      l
     family of nations . . . to participate in a truly joint venture
     which will be clearly to the benefit of a l mankind . . . .>,
                                               l
∞ USAF released unclassified “US. A r Force Space Policy” Report to
                                       i
     the House Armed Services Committee in executive session. It
     was reported as saying that the U.S. must “recognize the peril”
     of Soviet space supremacy, take the lead in military space tech-
     nology, and called for continued close cooperation with NASA.
∞ Ejection capsule test a t Edwards AFB, Chief W/O Edward J. Murray
     (USAF) was ejected from B-58 flying a t 565 mph and capsule
     parachuted to earth successfully.
During February: Kenneth C. Sanderson of NASA’s         Flight Research
     Center was named Chairman of the Dyna-Soar Instrument De-
     velopment Team, a joint UsAF-NAsA-Industry group formed to
     provide technical direction over the development of sensors,
     communications systems, signal conditioners, airborne recorders
     and telemetry, ground recovery devices, and data processing
     equipment. Sanderson succeeded Frank Smith of NASA’s       Langley
     Research Center.
∞ Pilot course in the practical engineering aspects of space satellites
     began a t Texas A&M College under an agreement with NASA.
∞ Major problem under study by Air Force Cambridge Research
     Laboratories’ Sacramento Peak Observatory was the prediction
     of safe intervals for manned space flight. Since March 1961,
     intensive study has been made of proton showers originating from
     solar flares and arriving a t the earth from 30 minutes to 6 hours
     after the flare has peaked. One major flare out of every four
     produces proton showers which follow the ll-year cycle of activ-
     ity. Sunspot maximum occurred in 1957-1958 and the minimum
     is expected in 1964-1965.
         announced establishment of Space Construction Office in the
∞ Arm

     O&ce of the Chief of Engineers to coordinate all activities carried
     out for NASA, to be headed b Brig. Gen. T. J. Hayes, 111.
                                 B
∞ Dr. Alla G. Masevich, Deputy       hairman of the Soviet Astronomical
     Council, published first serious mention of ECHO I in a leading
     non-technical Russian magazine (Ogonyok). Virtually nothing
     has been said about ECHO I in the Soviet press since its launch
     in August 1960, although it has remained in orbit longer than any
     Soviet satellite and was visible to Soviet citizens.
∞ Draft convention presented to Australia covering joint use of the

     Woomera Rocket Range by space research program of the
     western European nations.
          Marshall Space Flight Center was presented an Award of
∞ NASA’s

     Honor by the National Safety Council for having logged nearly
     4 million working hours without a disabling injury or fatality.

     937
     71-
26     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

During February: Astronaut John Glenn’s orbital space flight pro-
     duced a great propaganda dividend for the United States, Mr.
     Edward R. Murrow, Director of the United States Information
     Agency, said. “The contrast was immediately drawn around the
     world between the openness, the complete coverage of the flight,
     compared to the Russian efforts in this area . . . More news-
     papers normally hostile to the United States had to admit not
     on1 the scientific achievement but the fact that we were prepared
        9
     to et our own people and the rest of the world see the entire
     operation from beginning to end.”
                            MARCH 1962
March 1: John Glenn Dav in New York City. An estimated four
    million people lined the streets to cheer the Mercury astronauts.
    Mayor Robert Wagner presented the city’s highest award. the
     Medal of Honor, to Col. Glenn and Robert R. Gilruth.
 ∞ Third successful static-test firing of “Old Salty”-an H-1 engine
    that had been submerged in salt water for four hours before each
    of its test runs. Purpose of tests was to determine feasibility
    and costs of recovering, rebuilding, and reusing booster engines
    as opposed to cost of new engines. Early results indicated that
    engines could be recovered and rebuilt a t a cost of about 10%
    of new engines.
 ∞NASA fired a Scout rocket from Wallops Station, Va. The rocket
    flew 135 miles high and about 800 miles downrange in a re-entry
    test reaching speeds of 19,000 mph.
 ∞ Rift (Reactor-in-Flight-Test) bidders conference held a t Marshall
    Space Flight Center.
 ∞ Morton J. Stoller was named Director of the Office of Applications
    in NASA Hq., a post he had held in an acting capacity since
    January 1962. He was made Deputy Director in November
    1961.
 ∞ Reported in the press that a 3-ft. by 2-ft. metal fragment found on a
    fapm in South Africa on February 21 was identified by numbers
    stamped on it as a part of the Atlas booster that placed Ast,ronaut
   John Glenn into orbit on February 20. Local reports of an
    explosion about 1 AM on February 21 indicated that the fragment
    came to earth after about 8 hours in orbit. Fragment was
    reported as 4 ft. by 2-ft. ‘(stainlesssteel” in Capetown telegram
    to NASA Feb. 26, 1962.
 ∞ NASA selected Chance-Vought Corp. as contractor to study rendez-
    vous of space vehicles. A primary part of the contract would
    be a flight simulation study exploring the capability of an astro-
   naut to control an Apollo-type spacecraft.
 ∞ American Airlines 707 jet transport crashed in Jamaica Bay, N.Y..
   seconds after takeoff from New York International Airport, and
                                                                   US.
   all 95 persons on board were killed, the highest toll
   history in the crash of a single airplane. The crash occurred
   about one hour before the start of the giant Darade in honor of
           . ~   ~~
                                             v

   Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr.
March 2: Mercury astronauts visited the United Nations, and John
        
   Glenn, during an informal reception given by Acting Secretary-
   General U Thant, said: “To be here a t the United Nations this
   morning and have all these tributes to our project and all the
   people that are working on it from people of this calibre, is
   indeed overwhelming all over again after yesterday. . . ,
       “As space science and space technology grows still further
   and our projects become more and more ambitious, we wl be    il
   relying more and more on international teamwork.
                                                             27
28    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

       “And the natural center for this teamwork is the United
   Nations . . . .” Colonel Glenn also expressed the gratitude of
   Project Mercury to those countries who had cooperated in the
   flight operations.
March 2: I n Nation-wide radio-TV address, President Kennedy an-
   nounced that the U.S. would begin atmospheric nuclear tests from
   Johnston and Christmas Islands in the Pacific during April unless
   such tests were rendered unnecessary by the clear willingness of
   the U.S.S.R. to take mutual steps toward “general and com-
                                                    I




   plete disarmament.”
 ∞ Five Nike-Caiun rockets were fired from Wallom Station, Va..
   in a series “of tests to measure atmospheric cinditions at high
    altitudes. At 5:47 AM NASA scientists fired the first rocket
    to spread a trail of water vapor up to 89 miles altitude. At
    5 :54 AM the second rocket was fired. It loosed a cloud of sodium
   vapor starting at 26 miles and rising with the rocket to 84 miles.
    The cloud was spectacular in the sunrise and visible for hun-
    dreds of miles along the Atlantic coast. At 6:15 AM the third
   rocket jettisoned and detonated grenades one at a time at alti-
   tudes from 24 to 55 miles. Two additional Nilce-Cajun rockets
   were fired in the evening with sodium and grenade experiments.
 ∞ USAF reported that “an Air Force satellite had provided the first
    continuous data on the actual size and intensity of the inner belt”
    of proton radiation over the Equator at altitudes of 600 to 3,000
    miles. Stating only that the data was acquired from a 23-lb.
    experiment aboard an Agena, the report said radiation intensity
    at the center of the belt was 600,000 proton particles passing
    through one sq. inch per second, previously estimated at 100,000.
 ∞ A simple satellite plotter costing only a few hundred dollars and
    accurate to within 10 miles on any orbit was devised by Major
    William Gamble of the Canadian Defence Research Board. The
    Defence Research Board would use the device to give quick fixes
    on satellite orbits to radar stations.
March 3: Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was welcomed in his home
    town of New Concord, Ohio, by a crowd estimated at 50,000
    people (normal population of New Concord, 2,127).
 ∞ Capsule from DISCOVERER XXXVIII recovered in midair over the
    Pacific by a USAF C-130 piloted by Capt. Jack R. Wilson. It
    was his second recovery, the 8th midair recovery, and the 12th
   recovery air or sea during the Discoverer series. The capsule
    had been in polar orbit 4 days since its launch on February 27.
 ∞ NASA selected Sverdrup and Parcel of St. Louis as contractor for the
    design criteria and initial master planning for the Mississippi
    Test Facility, the 13,500-acre site that would eventually contain
    6 or more static test stands for testing booster stages of Saturn
    and Nova vehicles.
 ∞ U.S. NAVY filed claims with F6dBration Aeronautique Internationale
    for new time-to-climb records for the McDonnell P4H Phantom
    I1 fighter (which is also slated for USAF service as the F-llo),
     superseding records held by the USAF’S F-104 since 1958 and
     apparently bettering new USAF claims for the same marks based
     on flights made by the T-38 Talon trainer on Feb. 19, 1962.
     The Phantom claims: 3,000 meters: 34.523 sec, LCdr. J. W.
     Young (USN); 6,000 meters: 48.787 sec, Cdr. D. M. Longton
                                                                     29
                                              EVENTS O$ 1963;
       ASTRONAUTICAL ANb AERONAUTIC&

              9,000 meters: 61.629 sec, Lt. Col. W. C. McGraw, Jr.
     (USN);
    (USMC); 12,000 meters: 77.156 sec, Lt. Col. W. C. McGraw, Jr.
    (USMC); 15,000 meters: 114.548 sec, LCdr. D. W. Nordberg
    (USN).
March 4: USAF’S first bdloon launching in Project Stargazer ended
    when the large helium balloon exploded at 42,000 feet two hours
    after launch. It dropped its gondola loaded with telescopic
    camera equipment into deep Sierra Mountain snow. Launched
     from Chico, Calif., the balloon was to have ascended to the
     upper atmosphere where its telescopic cameras would have
    photographed the stars and planets free from the filtering action
    of the atmosphere.
March 5: USAF B-58 Hust,lerbomber claimed 3 transcontinental speed
    records after a Los Angeles-to-New York-to-Los Angela non-
    stop flight: round trip, 4 hrs. 42 min. 12 sec.; west-to-east, 2 hrs.
     1 min. 39 sec.; east-to-wesb, 2 hrs. 15 min. 12 sec. Flying most
    of the way a t 50,000 ft. and a t an average speed of 1,044.3 mph,
    the B-58 trailed a 40-mile-wide sonic boom along the ground in
    its wake. Crew was: Capt. Robert Sowers, pilot; Capt. Robert
    MacDonald, navigator; and Capt. John Walton, defense systems
    operator.
∞ U.S. reported to the United Nations that a total of 72 U.S. space
    vehicles and associated objects were in orbit around the earth a8
    of February 15.
 ∞ Department of Defense has issued a directive providing for closer
    and more effective cooperation between DOD and NASA, DOD’S
    Deputy Director of Research and Engineering John H. Rube1
    told the Senate Aeronautical and Space Committee. The direc-
     tive gave the WAF authority to work with NASA on al levels for
                                                            l
    purposes of coordinating efforts and exchanging technical infor-
    mation but reserved to DOD the responsibility for establishing
    new programs and assigning military support to NASA.
  ∞ Tiros weather satellites have been of major assistance in improving
    forecasts for airline operations. Mr. Silvio Simplicio, supervis-
    ing forecaster at New York International Airport, said: “We can
                                                                       .
    do a job nowadays we never thought we could do years ago . .
    With the aid of the Tiros satellites we never had it so good, and
    with the Nimbus meteorological satellite now undergoing tests,
    we expect even better results.”
∞ NASA selected American Telephone and Telegraph Co. as contractor
    for system engineering support for the manned space flight
    program. It w s estimated that some 200 specialists would be
                     a
     available under the contract for quick fact-finding in regard to
    critical decisions on the complex program.
 ∞ Caledonian Airlines DC-7 with 111 persons aboard crashed near
    Douala, Cameroon, the worst single aircraft disaster in civil
    aviation history.
March 5-7: NASA Wallops Station, Va., suffered storm damage first
    estimated in excess of $1 million as a result of high seas accom-
    panying series of severe storms. Facilities of the main base
    on Wallops Island unused by NASA were subsequently opened
    to house evacuees from Chincoteague and surrounding areas.
30     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 6 2

March 6: Each of the series of weather satellites, Tiros, Nimbus, and
    Aeros, would not only provide an advance in capability but would
    extend observations into vital new areas, Morton J. Stoller,
            Director of Applications, testified before a subcommittee
    NASA’s
    of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Speaking
    of Nimbus and Aeros, he said : “With one Nimbus in orbit, about
   half a day passes before we again see the same area. This will be
    a reasonably satisfactory time for the observation of such systems
    as cyclonic storms and hurricanes whose normal life is consider-
    ably greater than 12 hours. But, if we attempt to observe
    thunderstorm cells or tornadoes, systems whose life is apprec-
    iably less than 12 hours and often less than 6 hours will usually
   form, move and die without ever being detected. It is for this
   reason that the Aeros satellite with its capability for focusing on
   small short-lived storm systems and tracking them continuously,
   is considered to be an integral component of the eventual oper-
    ational system.”
∞ Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, speaking before the
    Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce, cited Dr. Hugh L. Dryden’s
   summation of the purposes of the national space program-‘‘( 1)
   insurance of the nation against scientific obsolescence in a time
    of explosive advances in science and technology; and (2) insur-
    ance against the hazards of military surprise in space.” The
    Secretary added: “He defined in these two purposes the peace-
   time role of NASA in the national space program, and the defense
   role of the Air Force. The two must advance in harness, and
   they do. They are interdependent. One cannot move without
   the other. Furthermore, the nation cannot stand for any diver-
   sion of the efforts of either toward jurisdictional conflicts which
   which can rob us of the most precious ingredient-time.”
 ∞ Dr. Arthur E . Raymond was appointed a special consultant t o the
   NASA Administrator. He would be concerned with organization
   and management of research and development programs, espec-
   ially those involving advanced research and over-all systems
   planning. Dr. Raymond retired in 1960 as senior vice president
   of engineering for Douglas Aircraft Co., having spent 35 years
   with the company. He served as a member of NACA from 1946-
   1956.
 ∞ AEC selected the Martin-Marietta Corp. as contractor to design,
   build, and ground test Snap 11, the thermoelectric nuclear gen-
   erator for use on NASA’s    Surveyor spacecraft. Snap 11 would
   weigh about 30 Ibs., including shielding, and would provide a
   minimum of 18.6 watts of power continuously for 90-day lunar
   missions.
 ∞ Army fired a Nike-Zeus antimissile missile from Kwajalein Island
   and successfully intercepted an electronically simulated ICBM
   warhead.
March 7: os0 I (Orbiting Solar Observatory) was successfully launched
   into orbit from Cape Canaveral, marking the seventh straight
   success for the Thor-Delta booster. The 458-1b. satellite, with
   an apogee of 370 mi. and a perigee of 340 mi., immediately began
   sending back signals on the sun’s radiation in the ultraviolet,
   x-ray, and gamma ray regions from its position above the filter-
   ing action of the earth’s atmosphere. By an intricate position-
                                                                    31
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    ing apparatus,          13 instruments were focused constantly on
                     080’s
     the sun with a pointing accuracy of 1 minute of arc. This was
     the ftrst of a series of Osos to be launched by NASA in the next
      11-year sun cycle.
March 7: NASA established the NASA Launch Operations Center at
     Cape Canaveral, with Dr. Kurt H. Debus as Director. Report-
     ing to the Director of Manned Space Flight a t NASA Hq., the new
     Center would serve all NASA projects launched from Cape Canav-
     eral, absorbing Marshall Space Flight Center’s Launch Operations
     Directorate. Similarly a t Point Mugu, Calif., the NASA Test
     Support Office was redesignated the NASA Pacific Launch Opera-
     tions Office, with Cdr. Simon J. Burttschell as Acting Director.
  ∞ D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA’s       Director of Manned Space Flight,
     testified before a subcommittee of the House Science and Astro-
     nautics Committee on the very large and complex manned space
     flight program. The most important step in space capability
     in 1961, he said, “was not that of awarding particular contracts
     or making technical decisions, but rather Mr. Webb’s carefully
     planned reorganization of the National Aeronautics and Space
     Administration.” Speaking of future launch sites for the Ad-
     vanced Saturn vehicle as the workhorse of the manned lunar
     program, he said: “. . . it shows our plans for an entirely new
     come t of launching our large space vehicles. Instead of literally
          t
     assem ling or building the launch vehicles on the pads as we do
     at present, this arrangement would permit assembly and test
     a t a location remote from the launch pads and under cover,
     protected from weather. It will be possible to have vertical
     transfer of the entirely assembled vehicle to the launch pad in a
     tested condition. This arrangement should offer many ad-
     vantages in order to permit better and more thorough check-
     out, and to assure more rapid launching and efficient utilization
     of each pad. For the extremely tight schedules that will be
    required for launch operations in support of orbital rendezvous,
     this rapid launch capability is highly desirable.”
∞ Escape-velocity    ayloads with the nuclear-engine Rift as the 3rd
    stage on an Ac fvanced Saturn booster would be more than double
     that of a 3-stage, all-chemical Advanced Saturn and higher
    than that of the Nova 12-million-pound-thrust vehicle, according
    to testimony given to a subcommittee of the House Committee
    on Science and Astronautics by Harold B. Finger, NASA’s    Director
    of Nuclear Systems.
 ∞ Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA’s     Director of Space Sciences, testifyin
                                                                     2
    before a subcommittee o€ the House Committee on Science an
    Astronautics, said: “Because of this great breadth and scope of
    s ace science, and because of the many basic scientific problems
    tFa t it encompasses, our country must have a sound and vigorous
       l
    space science program if we intend to maintain our position of
    leadership in world science . . .
         “The space science of today is needed to sow the seeds for
    the harvest of future applications of space knowledge and tech-
    nology. The weather, communications, and navigation satellites
    of today grew out of the scientific engineering and research of
    the past decades. Their perfection, and the development of new
32     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    applications, will rest upon the space science and engineering of
    today and the years to come.”
March 7: USAF launched an unidentified satellite with an Atlas-Agena
   B from Point Arguello, Calif.
March 8: John L. Sloop, NASA’s        Director of Propulsion and Power
    Generation, testifying before a subcommittee of the House Com-
   mittee on Science and Astronautics, said: ‘(. . . some of the new
   solid propellants promise an increase in performance of over 18
   percent. . . . I applied to our new Surveyor spacecraft de-
                      f
   signed to land instruments on the moon, this 18 percent increase
   in solid propellant specific impulse could make possible an increase
   in the weight of instruments aboard by more than 50 percent.”
 ∞ Tracking network that operated during Glenn orbital flight would
   for the most part be suffcient to handle the 18-orbit flights to
   follow, according to Edmond C. Buckley, NASA’s              Director of
   Tracking and Data Acquisition, in testimony before a subcom-
   mittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics.
   For the Glenn flight, the ground stations had to provide five
   minutes of contact and communication for every 15 minutes of
   flight during the 4)/,-hour mission. For 18 orbits the current
   requirement was one contact per orbit. This would require re-
    positioning of the two ship stations and adding more telemetry-
   receiving equipment and command systems to some of the
    existing sites.
 ∞ Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, speak-
    ing before the 1.4s National Prorsulsion Meeting in Cleveland.
    sayd: “As we move on toward themoon, with SGurn, Advanced
    Saturn, and Nova as our launch vehicles, the reliability problem
    takes on a new dimension.
       “These big space vehicles will be the first developed especially
    for manned space exploration. The unit cost will be high. Only
    a few of each version will be produced. The systems and tbe
    missions are extremely complex, involving long periods of opera-
    tion in space and a return launch from the moon without the
    help, needless to say, of a lunar Cape Canaveral.”
∞ Army launched a %stage Nike-Zeus anti-ICBM missile in its first
    full-missile test from Point Mugu, but the missile was destroyed
    in midair when it seemed to be going off its planned trajectory.
 ∞USAF Minuteman ICBM fired from a silo at Cape Canaveral and
    flew more than 3,000 mi. down the Atlantic Missile Range,
    the sixth straight success in the underground launchings.
March 9: In a Pentagon ceremony, Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., was
    awarded the Navy’s astronaut wings and a new Marine Cor s
                                                                       P
    device-a winged rocket superimposed on a globe-that wou d
    also be given to all future Marines who orbited the earth in a
    space capsule.
 ∞ Titan I1 underwent a successful 20-second full-power captive
    firing a t Cape Canaveral and was considered ready for its first
    flight test in about a week. usAF-developed Titan I1 produced
     430,000 lbs. thrust in its 1st stage; the 2nd stage would add another
     100,000 lbs. thrust; compared with 400,000 lbs. for the Atlas E
     and 380,000 for Titan I. Titan 1 ,already selected as booster for
                                          1
             %man Gemini capsule, burns storable fuels that emit a
     NASA’s
     stream of hot, clear gases rather than flame.
                                                                      33
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

March 10: In address a t fund-raising dinner a t Miami Beach, Presi-
    dent Kennedy pointed out that NASA would spend five times as
    much in Florida during next fiscal year as last, and that “research,
    development and production expenditures will also increase a t
    the Cape, in this state’s private industry, and in your great
    universities.”
 ∞ The Astronautics Committee of the 51-nation Fadration Aero-
    nautique Internationale , meeting in Paris, certified Soviet
    Cosmonaut Gherman Titov as holder of two new world records
    for space flight: duration of flight, 25 hrs. 11 min.; and length of
    flight, 436,911 mi. I n certifying Titov’s records, the committee
    relaxed its rule that the pilot must land with his vehicle (Titov
    parachuted to earth). The heaviest payload in orbital flight
    still belongs to the other Soviet cosmoqaut, Yuri Gagarin (10,419
    lbs.).
March 11: Second anniversary of the launching of the unsurpassed
    PIONEER v space probe. PIONEER v produced first data on the
    nature of interplanetary space, including solar flare effects in
    interplanetary space which were compared with earth-orbiting-
    satellite readings, and sent back telemetry 22.5 million miles
    from earth on June 26,1960, a communications record unmatched
    until the flight of MARINER 11.
∞ Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences an-

    nounced that improvements had been made in the second Project
                 a
    West Ford ackage soon to be launched into orbit: (1) weight
    had been re uced from 75 to 50 lbs., thus reducing the number of
    dipoles in the package from 350 million to 250 million; (2) the
    container had been redesigned to ensure that it would be im-
    parted with the proper spin by the rifle-like barrel from which it
    is ejected (this caused failure of the first experiment to disperse) ;
     (3) VHF beacon and telemetry were included to ensure tracking
    capability; and (4) a fail-safe device would prevent the capsule
    from ejecting at any other than the proper orbit. Report sent to
    International Astronomical Union to assure astronomers that
     every care was being taken that the fdaments not interfere with
     astronomical observations.
∞ NASA announced that ECHO I, the 100-ft. balloon-type        assive com-
    munications satellite launched on August 12, 1960, gad recently
    become increasingly difficult for observers to see. The sphere
    now presented only >4 to >iits original size, due either to shrinkage
    or distortion during its year and a half in orbit.
∞ Reported in London that U.S.S.R. has nearly completed negotia-
     tions with the United Arab Republic and Iraq for supply of
    Soviet guided missiles.
March 12: U.S.S.R. had shown a “change in attitude in recent weeks”
     on cooperating with the U.S. on development and use of a weather
    satellite system, Dr. Francis W. Reichelderfer, Chief of the US.
    Weather Bureau, testified before a subcommittee of the House
    Committee on Science and Astronautics.
  ∞ Orbital data from satellites have suggested that scientists do not
    really know the shape of the earth, Dr. George P. Woollard,
    Director of the Geophysics and Polar Research Center of the
    University of Wisconsin, said in a Voice of America broadcast.
    Such studies have indicated that the earth may have not only
34    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

   the “flattened ‘tomato shape’ that has been assumed since the
   time of Isaac Newton but also a superimposed ‘pear shape.’”
    Citing the number of forces that can operate on a satellite, thus
   requiring extremely careful analysis of its data, Dr. Woollard
   pointed out that the Committee on Geodesy of the Space Science
   Board of the National Academy of Sciences had recommended
    the launching of a specially instrumented geodetic-research satel-
   lite to resolve some of the questionable areas of influence on
   magnetic readings.
March 12: U S . News and World Report carried article on “Red Space
   Failures,” pointing to official U S . policy with regard to Soviet
   launchings: “No Soviet feat [in space] has ever been publicly
   challenged in Washington and no failure publicly announced.”
   It reported that while Premier Khrushchev was a t the United
   Nations in September 1960, “a Soviet cosmonaut was sent more
   than a hundred miles into space and killed”; that in a five-month
   period in 1960-61, four Soviet space probes were fired toward
   Mars and Venus, but failed; and that during the same period “a
   dozen other Soviet space shots went awry . . .”
March 13: Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of NASA’S Lewis Research
   Center, received the National Civil Service League’s Career
   Service Award, one of 10 Government leaders so recognized.
 ∞ Sharp rise in heating of re-entry vehicles returning from manned
   lunar missions a t speeds of 25,000 mph was described to the
   subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astro-
   nautics by Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicle Re-
   search and Technology, NASA. Mr. Ames stated that a simula-
   tion study a t NASA’s  Ames Research Center had “demonstrated
     reat promise for pilot-controlled re-entries during orbital and
   k n a r missions, and we plan to extend our work in this area.”
 ∞ USAF launched its second Stargazer balloon from Chico, Calif., and
   achieved an altitude of some 88,000 ft. Balloon performed well
   in this test preliminary to manned flights that would send two
   men and a stabilized telescope to 16 miles. The f i s t Stargazer
   burst at 40,000 ft. on March 4.
∞ March 14: NASA’s    Director of Aeronautical Research, John Stack,
   testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on
   Science and Astronautics, spoke of NASA support of DOD missile
   programs: “Included in this work are such as Pershing, Atlas,
   Nike, Nike-Zeus, Eagle, GAR-9and Skybolt. The NASA contribu-
   tions have been in two areas, one providing critical aerodynamic
   information for performance determination and control system
   characteristics and the other in suggesting configuration improve-
   ments to improve the over-all characteristics.”
 ∞ NASA announced that sea damage to Wallops Station, Va., occurring
   earlier in the month was not extensive, and that rocket firings
   would be resumed in a few days. Although launch pads and some
   tracking gear on the island itself had been damaged by water,
   the more important tracking and data acquisition facilities on the
   mainland were undamaged.
 ∞ EXPLORER IX, launched on February 16, 1961, provided new and
   refined information on the density of the upper atmosphere, a
   press conference of NASA and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observa-
   tory scientists reported. They confirmed a figure previously
                                                                     35
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1903

    released-that the density of the atmosphere a t 420 mi. was 3 x
    lo-’’ grams per cubic centimeter, or 1/40 million millionth of that
    a t sea level. EXPLORER IX density values were about 10 times
    lower than those computed in 1959 from earlier satellites. Most
    of this decrease is attributed to the decrease in solar activity since
    the peak of the solar cycle in 1958 and 1959. Changes were also
    clearly related to the 27-day rotational period of the sun and to
    the occasional violent solar storms that affect the earth’s atmos-
    phere. EXPLORER IX, a 12-ft. aluminum-foil sphere painted with
    white “polka dots,” was expected to have an orbital life of two
    more years. As it spiraled down into denser atmosphere, it was
    expected to provide much more information on density at altitudes
    down to 100 mi.
March 14: United Nations opened a public register on satellites in
    orbit. At the time of opening, it contained only the U.S. report
    submitted on March 5, which reported “72 US. space vehicles
    and associated objects in sustained orbit or space transit” as of
    February 15, 1962.
∞ NASA and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced the selection
    of Military Electronics Division of Motorola, Inc., aa con-
    tractor to manufacture and test radio equi ment in the fist two
    phases of a program to augment the Deep !s pace Instrumentation
    Facility b providing “S” band capability for stations at Gold-
    stone, Cah.; Woomera, Australia; and Johannesburg, South
    Africa. With these stations located some 120’ apart around
     the earth, DSIF would have a high-gain, narrow-beam-width,
    high-frequency system, with very little interference from cosmic
    noise and would provide much improved telemetering and track-
    ing of satellites as far out as the moon and nearby planets.
∞ Walter C. Scott, Chief of NASA’s     Space Power Technology Program,
     testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astro-
    nautics, said one of the promising developments in solar cells
    was the possibility of producing thin strips of silicon solar cells
     on some kind of substrata. I this can be done, the “much lower
                                     f
     cost, lower weight and improved mechanical properties will be
     attractive to the space industry and for that matter to the
     civilian economy. Thin films of cadmium sulfide have been
       roduced in small areas with conversion efficiencies of 3%. It
     {as been stated that if this efficiency could be increased to 5%
     and produced in large areas, solar power would be economically
     competitive with conventional sources a t rates of 3 to 4 mils per
     kilowatt hour.”
∞ Navy launched solid-propellant Terrier-Asp IV sounding rocket

     from Point Arguello in successful first flight test.
 ∞ Theodore Shabad, Moscow correspondent for the N        ew York Times,
     described the Clubs of Young Cosmonauts in U.S.S.R. The
     Moscow club was organized in January 1962 under joint sponsor-
     ship of Moskovsky Komsomolets,newspaper of the Young Com-
     munist League, and the cosmonautics section of the Soviet
     Federation of Aviation S orts. Its purpose was to interest
                                 Y
    youngsters in space and a s 0 to publicize Soviet achievements
     in space.
  ∞ USAF announced it would extend space surveillance to the moon
     through a system developed by the Space Track Research &
     Development Facility a t Laurence G. Hanscom Field, M s .        as
36     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 62

    There will be surveillance of orbiting man-made or natural objects
    beyond the earth’s nominal, low-altitude orbital areas out toward
    the moon.
March 14: Six candidates were selected by the USAF for Dyna-Soar,
    including four Air Force and two NASA test pilots. Dyna-Soar is
    designed to be boosted into orbit by a Titan 1 1  1.
March 15: NASA announced that LCdr. M. Scott Carpenter (USN)
    would be the pilot on the next Mercury orbital space flight
    (MA-7). Major Donald K. Slayton (USAF) , the astronaut orig-
    inally scheduled for the flight, was disqualified because of an
    “erratic heart rate,” after the medical findings had been reviewed
   by an Air Force medical board and a board of civilian cardiolo-
   gists. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was named as Carpenter’s
   backup pilot.
∞ Editorial in the Royal Aero Club magazine Flight claimed that
   because the U.S. had made “six major launches on which basic
   orbital information had been withheld from world scientists,”
    the U.S. was practicing “brinksmanship in space.”
 ∞ National Rocket Club announced the establishment of the Dr.
    Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award, an annual competi-
    tion in the history of rocketry and astronautics, the first such
    competition in the field of history.
March 16: USAB Titan I1 ICBM successfully launched on first flight,
   from Cape Canaveral. Initiated less than 2 years ago, Titan 1      1
    is powered by storable propellants (430,000-lbs. thrust in 1st
   stage, 100,000-lbs.in second stage), and will also be used as the
   boosters for NASA’s    Gemini two-man spacecraft.
 ∞ Premier Khrushchev claimed that the U.S.S.R. had a new “invul-
   nerable global rocket,” announced the orbiting of COSMOS I
    (the 16th Russian satellite), and stated that the U.S.S.R. would
    carry out new atmospheric nuclear tests if the U.S. resumes its
    atmospheric tests. Tass released a news story on the new satel-
   lite, giving its orbital data as apogee, 609 mi. ; perigee, 135 mi. ;
   period, 96 min. ; and inclination, 49’ to the equator. A scientific
   payload included measurements of meteoric impacts, low-energy
   solar radiation, earth’s radiation belts, cosmic rays, earth’s mag-
   netic field, short-wave radiation from sun and other celestial
   sources, and atmospheric cloud patterns.
 ∞ First anniversary of the dedication of the Goddard Space Flight
   Center, NASA. During that year, seven Goddard satellites were
   orbited, the Center successfully operated the new 18-station world
   tracking network for the Glenn flight, began expansion of the
    13-station scientific satellite tracking and data network, saw some
   70 of its sounding rocket payloads launched from Wallops Sta-
   tion, established the Institute for Space Studies in New York,
   and added three buildings and 700 persons to the Goddard staff.
 ∞ At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon
    B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation
   should begin in outer space. “AS we attempt to look 25 years
   into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in
   large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus-of
   a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of
   space-of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space
   stations or space forts a t key locations for the conduct of space
   research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.”
                                                                  37
                                                         1962
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF

       Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented:
    the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was
    presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to
    Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National
    Rocket Club Award was given to the N w York Times; the Nelson
                                           e
    P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio
    Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros
    meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award
    was given to William G. Stroud of NASA’s     Goddard Space Flight
    Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological
    satellites.
March 17: VANGUARD I began fifth year in orbit, having traveled
    543,195,264 miles i n 15,712 orbits and still transmitting. Its
    rotation had slowed from three revolutions per second to one
    revolution in 23 seconds due to dampening effect of the earth’s
    magnetic field.
∞  President Kennedy wrote Premier Khrushchev proposing specific
    areas of peaceful cooperation in space to be undertaken by the
    U.S. and U.S.S.R.: (1) in furtherance of an operational weather
    satellite system, proposed each country launch a weather satellite
    in near-polar orbit, disseminate data to all nations; (2) in space
    tracking, proposed each country build a tracking station in the
    other’s territory and train personnel of the host country to main-
    tain and operate the station; (3) in mapping the earth’s magnetic
    field, proposed each country launch a magnetic-measurement
    satellite, one in near-earth orbit and one farther out, and dis-
    seminate data to all nations; (4) in communications satellites,
    proposed that U.S.S.R. join in cooperative program to establish
    an operational communications satellite system, to be made
    available to all nations; (5) i manned space flight, proposed that
                                   n
    the two countries pool their knowledge of space medicine; (6)
    proposed general continued future cooperation, as in joint ex-
    ploration of the lunar surface or scientific investigation of Mars
    and Venus. Purt,her proposed that any agreements reached be
    reported to the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
    Space.
∞ Soviet News Agency Tass reported        that COSMOS I satellite was
    transmitting a steady stream of technical data.
March 19: U.N.’s reorganized 28-nation Committee on the Peaceful
    Uses of Outer Space opened its meetings with the reelection of
    Dr. Franz Matsch of Austria as chairman and his subsequent
    ruling that the committee would make decisions by “consensus”
    rather than by vote. U.S. delegate was F’rancis T. P. Plimpton;
    his deputy was Richard N. Gardner, Deputy Assistant Secretary
    of State for International Organization Affairs. Dr. Hugh L.
    Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, was Plimpton’s tech-
    nical adviser. Dr. Homer Newel1 of NASA and Leonard C.
    Meeker of the State Department were alternate representatives.
    Congressional advisers were Senators Howard W. Cannon and
    Margaret Chase Smith, and Representatives James G. Fulton
    and George P. Miller. U.S.S.R. representative was Platon D.
    Morozov. V. Dobronravov, member of the Soviet Academy of
    Sciences and space expert, was his scientific adviser.
∞  Space science might provide an answer within five year0 to the
    question of whether gravitation is growing weaker with time,
38     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

   Dr. Robert H. Dicke, Professor of Physics at Princeton Univer-
   sity’s Palmer Physical Laboratory, said in a lecture for the Voice
   of America. This new theory of gravitation, not in accord with
   Einstein’s theory of gravitation, could be tested with a satellite
   that was instrumented to act as a “gravitational clock’, and
   checked against an atomic clock.
March 20: Premier Khrushchev replied to President’s letter of
   March 17 proposing U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation on peaceful uses
   of outer space by accepting in principle and specificall approving
   of cooperation in certain areas (letter released on L a r c h 21):
    (1) communications satellites ; ( 2 ) weat,her satellites ; (3) coordina-
   tion of tracking and data reception on scientific satellites; (4)
   international search and rescue opertltions to recover space
   crews who have returned to earth outside the planned recovery
   areas; ( 5 ) mapping the earth‘s magnetic field and exchange of
   information on space medicine; (6) joint agreement on problems
   of international law as related to space exploration, beyond those
   points already agreed to in the U.N., especially the prohibition of
   space experiments that would inhibit the space experiments of
   other nations. Premier Khrushchev warned, however, that
   space cooperation would “depend t o some extent on the settle-
   ment of the disarmament problem,” since much military hard-
   ware and techniques were used in peaceful space exploration
   vehicles.
 ∞ U.S.S.R. representative to U.N.’s Committee on Peaceful Uses of
   Outer Space pledged that U.S.S.R. would cooperate “by deeds”
   in international programs on space. Promised reports to U.N.
    on Soviet satellite and rocket launchings, cooperation on com-
   munications satellites but on the basis of “international regional
    agreements.’’
 ∞ USAF awarded contract to North American Aviation, Inc., for
    development of RS-70 prototypes, including fabrication of three
    aircraft.
March 21: President Kennedy opened his news conference with the
    announcement that he had received Premier Khrushchev’s reply
    to his letter on cooperation in the peaceful uses of space and
   stated: “I’m gratified that this reply indicates that there are a
    number of areas of common interest.” He further announced
    that Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, had
    been designated to lead the technical discussions with Soviet
   representatives beginning in New York on March 27.
∞ House of Representatives passed by a vote of 430 to 0 a bill author-
    izing $13 gillion to DOD for procurement of shi s, aircraft, and
                                                          P
    missiles. Included was $491 million for deve opment of the
    controversial RS-70 but without the previous Congressional
    language directing DOD to use that amount for the RS-70 in FY
    1963. Rep. Carl Vinson, Chairman of the House Armed Services
    Committee, read letters from the President and Secretary of
    Defense in which they asserted their Constitutional obligation
    to make the final determination in such matters but promised, in
    view of the Committee’s concern over continued bomber develop-
    ment, to re-examine the RS-70 program.
 ∞ House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Panel on Science and
    Technology recommended that Project Anna, DOD’S geodetic
    satellite, be declared an international scientific satellite.
                                                                     39
                                              EVENTS OF 1962
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL

March 21:  NASA announced selection of Westinghouse Electric Co
                                                                     ‘:
                                                                     1
                                                              and flig t
    as contractor for constructing and testing protot
   models of the S-52 US.-U.E. scientific satellite.       econd of the
   three satellites in this program, S-52 was scheduled for launch
   from Wallops Station, Va., in 1963, would contain 3 major experi-
   ments for measurement of galactic radio noise, of vertical distri-
   bution of ozone, and of micrometeorite flux.
March 21-22: Fourth meeting of the Panel on Science and Technolog
   of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics held. Fiz
   teen leading American scientists and engineers plus Dr. George B.
   Kistiakowsky, Dr. Harrison S. Brown, and Sir Bernard Lovell
   discussed mapping and eodetic satellites, propulsion problems,
                              7
   use of boron as a fuel eement in space flight, and the need to
   strengthen universities in the training of scientists and engineers.
   Dr. James Van Allen commended NASA for “marked improve-
   ment” during the past two years in its fostering of university
   scientific research and training programs and suggested that five
   per cent of the national space budget be so invested.
March 22: Experimental ejection-seat capsule for use in supersonic
        
   aircraft was ejected from USAF B-58 a t 870 mph and 35,000 ft.
   Bear and capsule landed safely by parachute near Edwards AFB.
   Calif., 7 min. 49 sec. later.
 ∞ USAF launched a Minuteman from a silo a t AMR and sent it 4,000
   miles downrange, the seventh straight success in the Minuteman
   silo-launch test series.
 ∞Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of the Jodrell Bank Experimental
  i
    Station in England, testified before the House Science and
    Astronautics Committee that life on other planets was a real
    possibility, estimated that four per cent of the billions of stars in
   the universe must have planets capable of sustaining life. Listen-
   ing for messages from other planets would not be worthwhile on a
   random basis; if disarmament came, military radar might be
    devoted to this purpose, he said.
 ∞ NAA announced that Mrs. Constance Wolf would receive the 1961
    Montgolfler Award from the FAI for her balloon flight from Big
    Springs, Tex., to Boley, Okla., on November 19-20,1961. Claim-
   ing 15 world records, Mrs. Wolf would be the first woman to receive
    this international award.
March 23: President Kennedy, speaking at the University of Cali-
   fornia in Berkeley on the occasion of the University’s Charter Day
   and the awarding to the President of an honorary degree of Doctor
                         . . history may well remember this week
    of Laws, said:    ((.

    for . . . the decision by the United States and the Soviet Union
   to seek concrete agreements on the joint exploration of space . . .
   the scientific gains the joint effort would offer might be small
    compared to the gains for world peace. For a cooperative
    Soviet-American effort in space science and exploration would
   emphasize the interests that unite us instead of the conflicts that
   divide us. It offers us an area in which the stale, sterile dogmas
   of the cold war can be left literally a quarter of a million miles
   behind. And it would remind us on both sides that knowledge,
   not hate, i the passkey to the future-that howled e transcends
               s
                                   it speaks a universaf language-
   national antagonisms-that
   that it is the possession, not of a single class, a single nation or
   a single ideology, but of aJl mankind.”
40    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

March 23:  USAF combat missile crew launched an Atlas D ICBM from
   Vandenberg AFB, Calif., during President Kennedy’s visit to the
   missile base, the first time an American President had witnessed
   a live launching of an ICBM.
∞ NASA launched a Nike-Cajun rocket from Wallops Station, Va.,
   which released an 80-mile-long sodium-vapor cloud to measure
   air density and wind direction in the upper atmosphere.
 ∞ Early tests of pressure and dynamic stability models of the Apollo
   spacecraft were completed in wind tunnels at JPL and Langley
   Research Center.
 ∞ D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA’s       Director of Manned Space Flight,
   speaking before the Explorers Club in New York, listed one of the
   NASA organizational accomplishments of recent months as “the
   establishment of a liaison office with the Department of Defense,
   particularly with the Air Force Systems Command.”
 ∞ Bell Telephone Laboratories announced the formation of a new
   corporation, Bellcom, Inc., to supply system engineering support
   to NASA’s   space program. The new corporation would be owned
   jointly by AT&T and Western Electric Corp.
∞ First U.S. patent granted to a citizen of U.S.S.R. in 10 years was
   granted to Nikolai V. Soodnizin of Moscow on a powered device
   for coupling and uncoupling lengths of pipe in an oil well.
   U.S.S.R. recently began encouraging its citizens to apply for for-
   eign patents.
March 24: Two-week meeting of Study Group IV of the International
   Radio Consultative Committee (CCIR) of the International Tele-
    communication Union (ITU) concluded in Washington, D.C.
   Study Group IV reviewed technical phases of space communica-
    tions, including the selection of frequencies for telecommunica-
    tions with and between space vehicles. Over 200 representatives
   from 30 countries participated in these sessions, Dr. John P.
   Hagen serving as head of the US. delegation.
∞ Prof. Auguste Piccard, pioneer Swiss explorer of the stratosphere
    and ocean depths, died in Geneva a t the age of 78. I n 1931
    Prof. Piccard ascended to 51,777 ft. in the gondola of a balloon of
    his own design. In numerous balloon ascents in the 1920’s and
    1930’s, he made many studies of radioactivity, atmospheric
    electricity, cosmic rays, and other scientific phenomena. Turn-
    ing from the air to the oceans, Prof. Piccard designed his bathy-
    scaphe and in 1953 he and his son reached a depth of two miles.
    I n 1960 the U.S. Navy took an improved version of his craft
    down to 37,800 ft.
∞ Soviet Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, executed in 1937 on Stalin’s
    orders and exonerated in 1956, was honored in the official military
    newspaper, Red Star. It was pointed out that in 1932 Tukha-
    chevsky insisted on the development of rocket engines and that
    he persisted in this effort until purged.
March 25: National Academy of Sciences announced that the John J.
    Carty Medal would be awarded Provost Charles H. Townes of
    MIT for his pioneering work in the development of the maser
    (microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation).
    Dr. Townes was credited with the conception of the idea for the
    maser in 1951, which was subsequently used in radio astronomy
    in recording and charting minute radio signals emanating from
                                                                    41
                                                       OF 1962
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS

   celestial bodies and to receive echoes of a radar signal reflected
   from the planet Venus.
March 26: U.S.S.R. submitted information on 16 Soviet s ace fights
                                                           Y
   for inclusion in the U.N. public registry on space aunchings.
   Included were the manned orbital flights by Majs. Yuri A.
   Gagarin and Gherman S. Titov. U.S. submitted a similar list to
   the U.N. on March 5, covering U.S. space launchings to Feb. 15,
   1962, that were still in orbit.
∞ Coordination of international arrangements for exchange and dis-
   semination of weather data, including weather satellite informa-
   tion,. was on the agenda of the third session of the U.N.’s Com-
   mission for Synoptic Meteorology as it opened a 26-day session
   in Washington. Technical experts from more than 100 nations
   had been invited.
 ∞ Dr. James A. Van Allen, Chairman of the Department of Physics
   and Astronomy a t the State University of Iowa, summarized the
   satellite and space probe findings about the structure of the
   geomagnetic field surrounding the earth. Describing the inner
   zone as relatively stable in intensity of charged particles and
   caused by a combination of internal and external forces, he said
   the outer zone showed fluctuations in intensity “by factors of
   100 to as much as 1,000,” said these were complexly related to
   solar flares and geomagnetic storms. The only convincing expla-
   nation for the origin of the outer zone yet made is “the capture
   of ionized solar gas which sweeps by the earth in F e a t clouds
   from time to time. . . . But the detailed mechanism for pro-
   ducing the observed energy spectrum remains obscure and the
   nature of this mechanism is perhaps the most interesting unre-
   solved problem in the subject of trapped radiation:”
 ∞ John A. Johnson, General Counsel of NASA, testifylng before the
   Senate Subcommittee on Monopoly, stated that as of Feb. 28,
    1962, a total of 297 inventions had been reported by NASA con-
   tractors under the patent provisions of the National Aeronautics
    and Space Act of 1958. Of these, 268 had been determined to
   be Government property, 29 had been or are being considered
   for waivers.
March 27: U.S. and U.S.S.R. technical representatives held the fist
   of a series of talks on-the possibility of joint cooperation in space
   research and exploration. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Admin-
   istrator of NASA, represented the U.S.; Dr. Anatoli A. Blagon-
   ravov, of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, represented the
    U.S.S.R.
        fired a Nike-Cajun rocket from Wallops Station, Va., which
 ∞ NASA
    released a sodium vapor cloud between 25 and 74 miles altitude.
    Rays of the setting sun colored the sodium cloud red, instead of
    sodium vapor’s normal yellow.
  ∞ In address t o the Institute of Radio Engineers in New York, NASA
    Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden stated: “The costs of
    satellites and space probes are so great that every possible step
    must be taken to assure success. In our scientific experiments we
    insist that the bench prototype developed by the physicist be
    redesi ed by engineers to meet the environmental requirements,
            e engineered prototype be tested on vibrators, in vacuum
    that t%l    I
    and temperature chambers and other ground equipment simu-
     9731743--4
42     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    lating the space environment beyond the required conditions,
    and that, if possible, the equipment be tested on the less expen-
    sive sounding rockets prior to use on the more expensive satel-
    lites. . . .
       “To state the matter another way, we desire assured and dem-
    onstrated performances and reliability. The cost of the neces-
    sary engineering and tests is small compared t o the cost of a single
    i‘ailure. We do not wish t o be the first to use the newest and
    most advanced device nor the last to give up the obsolete. A
    moderately conservative engineering approach with adequate
     analysis and test is indicated as the best design philosophy.”
March 27.- Dr. Edward Teller, testifying before the House Committee
    on Science and Astronautics, recommended a program for estab-
    lishing a large and independent colony on the moon, as a means of
    having a working base in space and control of near space from a
    standpoint of national security. A nuclear reactor should be de-
    veloped t o operate on the moon, eventually to furnish the power
    to extract water from the moon’s rocks and soil, he said.
March 28: U S . submitted to the U.N. a supplemental list of U.S.
    space launching, covering the period of Peb. 15 to March 15,
     1962, updating the coverage of the first U.S. list submitted on
    March 5 , 1962. This second official list did not include Astro-
    naut John Glenn’s 3-orbit flight, since the US. contended that
    the U.N. roster was supposed to contain only those space objects
    still in orbit, not those that had already re-entered. U.S.S.R.
    listed all its space flights in its report to the U.N. on March 26.
    Although MA-6 flight was not registered, the U.S. submitted in-
    formation on the Glenn fight to the U.N. on April 3.
∞ U.S. and Soviet space officials ended two days of technical discus-
    sions in New York on possible cooperation in outer space. No
    public announcements were made.
 ∞ Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee unanimously
    approved a bill for ownership and operation of the Nation’s com-
    mercial communications satellites.
 ∞ In speech a t Worcester, Mass., Gen. Curtis E. LeMay stated that
    the U.S.S.R. is “moving a t full speed for a decisive capability in
    space” and that the U.S. could not afford a “fatal technological
    surprise in the 1970’s.” Gen. LeMay pointed out that many
    people looked a t military space operations as “merely an exten-
    sion of nuclear weapons. . . . This may not be the case a t all.
    Our national security in the future may depend on armaments
    vastly different from any we know today, and believe me they
    won’t be ultimate weapons either.”
 ∞ David Sarnoff, Chairman of the Board of Radio Corp. of America,
    speaking to the Institute of Radio Engineers in New York, called
    for the free world to organize an international community of
    science, stnffed by its best scientific brains, to expand knowledge
    of basic science and to attack pressing world problems such as
    global communications and weather and adequacy of world’s
    food, water, and power supplies.
                                                                    43
        ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

March 29: In testimony before a subcommittee of the House Com-
   mittee on Science and Astronautics, Gen. Bernard Schriever,
      Commander of AFSC, discussed the “reciprocal support” between
      NASA and the USAF, and the national requirement for military
      space weapons systems. He pointed out that: (1) 102 USAF
      officers were assigned full-time with NASA as well as 23 Navy
      and 33 Army; (2) $49 millions of NASA support was funded by
      the USAF through FY 61 and over $200 millions in FY 62; (3)
      $270 millions of NASA funds were processed under cognizance of
      AFSC during FY 61; and (4) NASA use of USAF booster, launch,
      and tracking capabilities and the joint x 1 program further
                                                  -5
      demonstrated “the work NASA and the Air Force are doing to-
      gether as a team.” Gen. Schriever pointed to the fundamental
      capabilities of future space weapon systems and the assignment
      by the Secretary of Defense of major responsibility for military
      space systems development to the A r Force.
                                            i
   ∞ President Kennedy sent to Congress a reorganization plan that
0
      would establish an Office of Science and Technology within the
      White House staff. Its director would advise and assist the
      President on (1) major science policies and
      Federal government; (2) assessment of scientiIip‘ogramstechnical
                                                                  in the
                                                        c and
      developments for effect on national policies; (3) review, integra-
      tion, and coordination of major Federal science activities; (4)en-
      suring “good and close relations” with Nation’s scientists and
      engineers. President said this would leave the National Sci-
      ence Foundation free to concentrate on fostering basic research
      and science education.
       ∞  NASA announced selection of Republic Aviation corp. as contractor
0

      for Project Fire, the fight re-entry research program. Contract
      would call for construction of two re-entry spacecraft to be flown
      in the second half of 1963 and re-enter the earth’s atmosphere a t
      a speed of 25,000 mph.
   ∞ A four-stage NASA Scout rocket carried P-21A probe payload 3,910
0
      miles into space and 4,370 miles downrange from Wallops Station,
      Va. In 97-minute flight measurements were taken of the iono-
      spheric electron density profiles, ion density, and types of ions,
      data needed to improve communication between earth and space.
   ∞ European Launcher Development Organization (ELDO) formally
0
      came into being when a convention was signed in London between
      Great Britain, France, West Germany, and Italy to develop the
      rocket vehicle to launch a satellite from Woomera, Australia, in
      1965. First stage would be the British Blue Streak rocket, second
      stage the French Veronique, third stage would be developed by
      West Germany. The Netherlands, Belgium, and Australia were
      expected to join the organization soon.
   ∞ Second altitude record attempt in two da s by X-15 was scrubbed
                                             P
0
      just before drop from B-52, caused by ailure of inertial guidance
      s stem.
       6
    ∞ McDonnell Aircraft Corp. first showed Gemini capsule mock-up, a t
      St. Louis plant.
44     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

March 29: Subcommittee of the Senate Antitrust and Monopoly Com-
    mittee headed by Sen. Estes Kefauver opened hearings on pro-
    priety of establishing a privately-owned communications satellite
    system.
  ∞ Ambassador Francis T. P. Plimpton, chief of the U.S. delegation to
    the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, invited
    the 28-nation committee to inspect launching facilities at Cape
    Canaveral in April. Chairman Franz Matsch of Austria an-
    nounced that technical and legal subcommittees would meet in
    Geneva on May 28 to start detailed work on space control
    programs.
March 30: Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, US. negotiator on outer space coop-
    eration, read joint statement covering three conferences held
    with Anatoli Blagonravov, Soviet negotiator. Statement said
    that informal, exploratory discussions would be resumed either
    at the International Committee on Space Research sessions
    April 30-May 10 in Washington, or at Geneva on May 28 when
    technical and legal subcommittees of the U.N. Committee on the
    Peaceful Uses of Outer Space began discussions.
  ∞ House Appropriations Committee cut a $65 million NASA item for
    purchase of land at Cape Canaveral and in Mississippi from a
    supplemental appropriations bill for the balance of F Y 1962.
    The action was taken because the House Science and Astronautics
    Committee had not authorized the expenditure. Approved was
    $80 million for development, $5 million less than NASA asked for.
  ∞ Army announced that Nike-Zeus antimissile missile had intercepted
    3,000-mph Nike-Hercules missile in test over White Sands.
  ∞ France carried out six successful missile tests in the Sahara during
    the previous week. Two of the launchings were of Agate mis-
    siles, with which France has planned to develop a missile striking
    force and eventually to launch a satellite.
  ∞ RAF claimed an international speed record for its Vulcan bomber in
    a flight from London to Aden, 3,895 miles in 6 hrs. 13 min., for an
    average speed of 627 mph.
  ∞ LCdr. F. T. Brown piloted the F4H Phantom I1 at NAS Point Mugu
    on record flight to 20,000 meters, claiming new time-to-climb
    record of 178.5 seconds.
  ∞ Navy Polaris missile destroyed over Cape Canaveral after launch.
March 31: Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects Divi-
    sion at NASA’s  Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded the
    $1,000 Galabert Prize in Paris for his studies on nonchemical
    booster rockets.
During March: NASA completed work on its first major launching
    facility on the West Coast, a Thor-Agena pad at Vandenberg
    AFB, Calif. A used gantry was shipped from MSFC and installed
    at a $1 million saving over cost of new construction. Pad would
    be used for NASA polar-orbit launches, such as Echo 1 , Nimbus,
                                                           1
    and Pogo (Polar Orbiting Geophysical Observatory).
  ∞ USAF announced selection of four USAF and two NASA pilots as
    “pilot-engineering consultants” for the Dyna-Soar program. A
    decision would be made later whether the men would actually fly
    the spacecraft. USAF officers selected were: Maj. James W. Wood,
    Capt. Henry C. Gordon, Capt. Russell L. Rogers, and Capt.
    William J. Knight. NASA pilots selected were: Neil A. Armstrong
    and Milton 0. Thompson.
                                                                    45
        ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

During March: White House panel headed by Dr. Paul Beeson of Yale
      University, assisted by Dr. James Hartgering, special assistant in
      the President’s Scientific Adviser’s office, recommended that NASA
      make greater use of USAF capabilities in bioastronautics.
   ∞ Specific use of the fuel cell as source of auxiliary power was con-
0
      firmed when North American Aviation, Inc., rime contractor for
              Apollo vehicle, awarded two fuel-ce.I1p development con-
      NASA’s
      tracts to Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft Corp.
      and Tapco Div. of Thompson Ram0 Wooldridge.
                             APRIL 1962
April 1: Beginning of third year of successful weather satellite opera-
 pi
    tion by the U.S. NASA’s     TIROS I, launched on April 1, 1960,
    performed beyond all expectations, operated for 78 days, trans-
    mitted almost 23,000 cloud photos, of which some 19,000 were
    useful to meteorologists. TIROS 11, launched November 23, 1960,
    transmitted more than 33,000 photos and one year after launch
    was still occasionally taking useful photos. TIROS 111, launched
    July 12, 1961, took 24,000 cloud photos and was most spectacular
    as a “hurricane hunter.” TIROS IV, launched February 8, 1962,
    has averaged 250 operationally-useful photos per day.
  ∞ Senator Margaret Chase Smith, in a radio interview with Senator
    Kenneth B. Keating, expressed doubt on the value of space
    cooperation with the U.S.S.R. A member of the Senate Aero-
    nautical and Space Sciences Committee, Sen. Smith said the U.S.
    had “decided superiority over Russia on really important space
    development. Russia has the edge over us on thrust power but
    when it comes to finer scientific space developments and informa-
     tion, we have great superiority over Russia. Perhaps one of
    our greatest areas of superiority is in the development of miniatur-
    ization. I think we could learn something from Russia but there
    is a question as to just how far we can trust her and what we get
    in return.”
April 2: OSO I, launched March 7, 1962, was reportfedby NASA to be
 pi
    performing well. As of this date, 360 telemetry data tapes had
    been recorded from 403 orbits. Tapes would require about one
    year for complete analysis of data.
  ∞ Dr. John A. Simpson, of the University of Chicago’s Enrico Fermi
    Institute for Nuclear Studies, said in a Voice of America broad-
     cast that space probes and satellites have offered the scientist
     the first tools for direct measurement and study of electrody-
    namics in the interplanetary medium. EXPLORER x, for example,
    had recorded a density of protons in space substantially below
    predicted values and “almost one million billion times less than
    the best vacuum that man creates in the laboratory.
        “Such experiments in space emphasize the fact that there
     occur phonemena in nature which cannot be scaled down without
    losing the essence of their physical properties.”
  ∞ USAF announced it would build a new phased-array radar system
     that would have a multiple-track capability and quicker reflexes
     than present radar for the detection, tracking, identification, and
     cataloging of satellites. Contractor woud be Bendix Aviation
     Corp.
April 3: Senate Permanent Investigations Subcommittee opened
 pi
     hearings to determine whether the US. has paid “unnecessary
     and excessive profits” to companies working on DOD contracts.
     Sen. John L. McClellan, chairman of the committee, announced
      4ti
                                                                 47
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

     that investigation would begin with the Army’s family of Nike
     missiles, to be followed by the USAF% Atlas.
April 3: USAF said it would procure twelve additional Thor space
     boosters to meet future requirements. Since January 1957 there
     have been 142 launches of Thor with 111successes, thirteen partial
     successes, and eighteen failures.
 ∞ LCdr J. W. Young piloted F4H-1 to its seventh world time-to-climb
     mark, reaching 25,000 meters in 230.44 seconds.
April 4: NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking before the
     National Association of Broadcasters in Chicago, cited NASA’s
     space sciences program as “a quest for fundamental knowledge”
     without which the applied science and technology “would soon
     run dry. . . . Suppose we had laid out a program five or six
     years ago, directly tied to manned space flight. We would
                                                               ...
     never have discovered the Great Radiation Belt, which
     constitutes one of the severest manned-space flight problems we
     face.”
∞ Soviet cosmonauts have had changes introduced into their training,
     including special gymnastics, in an attempt to offset nausea
     induced by prolonged weightlessness, according to Trud, news-
     paper of the Central Labor Union.
∞ Army fired Pemhing missile 200 miles at AMR, 29th success out of

     33 test f i g s .
∞ AFSC formed the Research and Technology Division, Provisional,

     to “plan and manage AFSC’S basic research, applied research, and
     advanced technology and . . . create a broad base of research
     and technology for rapid use in the development of Air Force
     aeros ace systems.”
         B
∞ AEC an     DOD in a joint announcement designated an 800-by-600
     mile area around Christmas Island in the Pacific as a U.S. nuclear
     test mea, effective April 15.
∞ U.S.S.R.   was converting a 1300-mph bomber into a transport so
     it can claim the first supersonic commercial aircraft, Najeeb E.
     Halaby, FAA Administrator, stated.
∞ James T. Koppenhaver was appointed NASA’s          Director of Relia-
     bility and Quality Assurance, succeeding Dr. Landis S. Gephart
     who resigned to take a position with private industry.
April 5: X-15 No. 3 flown to speed of 2,830 mph (mach 4.06) and to
     altitude of 179,000 ft. in a test of new ada tive control system
                                                P                Neil A.
     to be used in Dyna-Soar and Apollo vehices. NASA’s
     Armstrong was pilot. Whereas the previous control system was
     automatic only while the X 1 was within the atmosphere and
                                  -5
     the pilot had to control flight with reaction jets while in space,
     the new system would be automatic in both regimes.
∞ Two outstanding challenges to science today were the conquest of

     space and the achieving of controlled fusion power, Dr. Peter L.
     Kapitza, one of Russia’s leading physicists, wrote in the April
     issue of the Bulletin o the Atomic Scientists. Very-long-range
                          f
     rockets would have litt e practical use except as a means of cheap,
     safe disposal of radioactive waste in outer space, he said.
∞ Army launched Nike-Zeue missile in what was described w a

     successful intercept of a simulated ICBM nose cone.
48     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

April 6: NASA sponsored a day-long technical symposium in Washing-
     ton on results of the MA-6 three-orbit space flight. Astronaut
     John H. Glenn, Jr., and officials of Project Mercur reviewed the
     findings of the Feb. 20 flight and stressed the concLsion that the
    presence of the astronaut had been indispensable to successful
     completion of the three-orbit mission. On the Glenn effect-the
     firefly-like particles Glenn reported seeing outside his capsule
     during each of the three sunrises-Dr. John A. O’Keefe, Assistant
     Chief, Theoretical Division, Goddard Space Flight Center, re-
    ported that study had shown them to be flakes of paint from the
    spacecraft.
∞ NASA research pilot Glenn W. Stinnett and Stanford physiologist

    Dr. Terence A. Rogers emerged from 7-day confinement in a
    simulated lunar spacecraft. Unique study by Ames Research
     Center involved performance of continuous and realistic profes-
    sional tasks while under confined space flight conditions.
 ∞ Soviet Union announced launching of COSMOS II satellite (975-mile
     apogee, 133-mile perigee, 49’ inclination, 102.5-minute period).
     COSMOS 11 reportedly had the same instrumentation as COSMOS I
    launched on March 16 : investigation of radio transmission,
    radiation belts, magnetic field of the earth, distribution and for-
    mation of cloud cover, and to test (‘elements of space vehicle
     construction.JJ
 ∞ Test flight of first Atlas-Centaur rocket canceled because of heavy
    cloud-cover at Cape Canaveral.
 ∞ In ejection capsule test, brown bear “Big John” rode in capsule
    ejected from B-58 a t 1,060 mph and 45,000 ft. and parachuted to
    earth near Edwards AFB, Calif.
∞ In testimony before Senate subcommittee, Federal Communications

     Commissioner T.A.M. Craven reported that talks with Russian
     and other representatives had been encouraging on establishment
    of a global communications satellite s stem. FCC Chairman
                                                9
    Newton N. Minow said that FCC (‘could ive with” the proposed
    U.S. corporation with stock to be owned by the public and b
                                                                       3
    communications companies. The FCC was, Minow stated,
    e uipped to handle a Government-owned system.
∞ Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA’s    Director of Space Sciences, speaking to
    a sectional meeting of the American Society for Engineering
    Education a t Texas Technological College, Lubbock, Texas,
    said: “. . . accomplishing the space mission absolutely requires
    the strong and vigorous participation of our colleges and univer-
    sities, which in turn requires that NASA bear its fair share of the
    support required to make it possible for the universities and col-
    leges to participate. The universities must bear their share of
    responsibility to the space program and allocate an appropriate
    fraction of their material, as well as human, resources to the effort.
    I n such a partnership, NASA stands ready to invest an appreciable
    fraction of its resources.”
 ∞ Soviet Academician Leonid Sedov denied in interview with Trud
    that U.S.S.R. had launched other men into orbit besides Majs.
    Gagarin and Titov. U.S. press had speculated that as many as
    five Russian cosmonauts had been killed in unsuccessful flights.
  ∞ Space-age religion must be an “open undogmatic religion which
    itself reaches out for undiscovered truth,” Rabbi Sheldon H.
                                                                   49
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVEWI”T OF 1962

    Blank, professor a t the Hebrew Union CollegeJewish Institute
    of Rehgon, said in Williamsburg, Va. If space exploration dis-
    covers rational people living on other lanets, religious people
                                             g
    on earth ‘fwilI have to abandon paroc ialism and reach for a
    God who is less comfortably near than we have wanted to believe.”
April 7: Atlas-Centaur launching from AMR was again postponed,
    this time because of high-altitude winds.
∞ A censored transcri t of testimony before a closed hearing of the
    House Defense lppropriations Subcommittee by Dr. Harold
    Brown, DOD’S Director of Research and Engineering, on March
    19, was released, disclosing questions by Chairman George H.
    Mahon on security aspects of the prepared statement which out-
    lined DOD’S R ~ projects. Dr. Brown replied that it was neces-
                      D
    sary under the US. system to inform the public, that no numbers
    of weapons or s ecific capabilities of weapons were given, and that
                   2:
    “having the ot er side know what we are thinking can in some
    cases be useful.”
 ∞ Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of England’s Jodrell Bank radiotele-
    sco e, said in an interview in Los Angeles that Soviet secrecy
       K
    wit regard to their space launches was justified. “There are
    two ways of looking at this thing, you know. In scientific
    circles it is customary not to announce an achievement until it
    has actually proven a success.”
 ∞ Educational Testing Service received a $30,300 grant from the
    National -Science Foundation for the showing of science films
    over stations of the National Educational TV Network of 58
    stations.
 ∞ State Board of Education in Minnesota voted to stop requiring
    any science or mathematics as prerequisite to high-school gradua-
    tion. Members argued that some students were not suited to
    courses in science and mathematics.
April 8: Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, in a Tass interview, said:
     “It is now necessary to determine how long a man can operate in
    outer space without prejudice to his health-five days, ten days,
    or more. This is one of the main tasks before proceeding to more
    complex flights to the moon, for example, or to the establishment
    of orbital or interplanetary stations.” He criticized the U.S.
    for being “reluctant” to file details of the Glenn flight with the
    U.N. “The best information about outer space has been ob-
    tained in the U.S.S.R. The Americans can benefit more by our
    experience than we by theirs. Some people in America are not
    interested in exchanges of scientific information.” The US. had
    submitted information concerning the Glenn flight to the U.N.
     on April 3,1962.
  ∞ Surveyed by the Washington Post on the proposaI to fire rockets
    loaded with radioactive waste into outer space, Washington-area
     clergymen responded variousIy. Comments on the proposal
    ranged from a “dreadful desecration of the Heavens” to a “fulfill-
    ment of the divine commandment to protect man and the earth
    on which he dwells.” Soviet nuclear scientist, Dr. Peter Kapitza,
    had made the proposal in the April issue of the Bulletin of the
    Atomic SckntiSts.
50    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S O F 1962

April 9: Astronaut John H. Glenn was awarded the Hubbard Medal
    of the National Geographic Society “for extraordinary contribu-
    tions to scientific knowledge of the world and beyond as a pioneer
    in exploring the ocean of space.” Awarded only 20 times since it
    was struck in 1906, the Hubbard Medal honorees have included
    Adm. Robert E. Peary, Charles A. Lindbergh, Roald Amundsen,
    and Adm. Richard E. Byrd.
∞ Aerospace Medical Association, meeting in Atlantic City, heard
    research papers indicatin new findings about space radiation.
                             B
    Dr. Sol M. Michaelson, o the University of Rochester School of
    Medicine and Dentistry, said preliminary evidence from animal
    tests indicates the possibility that one type of radiation expo-
    sure-mild amounts of microwave-might enhance recovery from
    x-ray damage because it generated increased activity in the bone
    marrow. Maj. Robert W. Zellmer (USAF), of the School of
    Aerospace Medicine, Brooks AFB, Texas, said tests on rats indicated
    the possibility that seriously excessive G forces, such as experi-
    enced during launch and re-entry of a spacecraft, might also give
    some protection against radiation.
 ∞ USAF launched its fifth unidentified satellite employing an Atlas-
    Agena B booster, from Point Arguello, Calif. I n Washington,
    the State Department said the satellite would be registered with
    the U.N. if it went into orbit and stayed in sustained orbit.
 ∞ President Kennedy nominated Dr. J. Herbert Holloman to the new
    post of Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science a.nd Tech-
    nology. Dr. Holloman was general mana er of the General
                                                8
    Engineering Laboratory of GE in Schenecta y, N.Y.
 ∞ An Atlas ICBM blew up on the pad during launching at AMR. The
    missile had been heavily instrumented in an effort to determine
    causes of diaculties on recent flights.
 ∞ Joint AEC-DOD announcement designated a second nuclear test
    area in the Pacific, this one centering on Johnston Island and
    enclosing an area with a radius of 470 mi. on the surface, ex-
    panding to an area with a radius of 700 mi. a t 30,000 ft. and
    above. Ban on entering the area would become effective
    April 30.
 ∞ U.S. space experiments with regard to the moon may well give
    scientists new information on “how the Earth and the planets and
    the Sun were formed,” Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Associate
    Director of the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics
    of the University of California, said in a Voice of America broad-
    cast. The seismometer to be landed on the moon by NASA’s
    Ranger, for example, would help determine whether there are
    “moonquakes” some eight times more frequent than earthquakes,
    as there should be if the moon contains the same concentration
    of radioactive elements as the earth.
 ∞ European Broadcasting Union ended a 20-nation conference in
    Seville, Spain, with an announcement that preliminary arrange-
    ments had been made for an international television service
    by use of communications satellites. Three U.S. television
    networks-css, NBC, and ABc-would join with USIA to operate
    the system from the US., transmittin from Andover, Maine,
                                           Fi
    and the European receiving station wou d be the British General
    Post Office Facilities in Cornwall, which would relay the signals
    to other members of the European Broadcasting Union.
                                                                    51
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

April 9: U.S.S.R. Presidium of the Supreme Soviet declared April 12,
    anniversary of the fist Soviet space flight, to be a national annual
    holiday in Russia. In announcing ceremonies for Cosmonautics
    Day 111 the Soviet Union, Leonid Korneyev reviewed the
    U.S.S.R.’s space program from its beginnin in April 1932, with
                                                9
    the formation of a group to study jet prop sion. Between 1932
    and 1941, Korneyev pointed out, the U.S.S.R. had developed
    118 different liquid-fuel rocket engines.
April 10: Fifty-five delegates from the U.N. toured the Atlantic
    Missile Range a t the invitation of the State Department. Six
    Communist countries were represented, but delegates from the
    U.S.S.R. had declined at the last minute. Among the si hts were
    the U.S.-U.K. satellite scheduled for launch that day %ut post-
    poned because of trouble in the second stage of the Thor-Delta
    booster, the Saturn rocket being prepared for launching, and the
    Project Mercury site and control room.
∞ Assistant Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach testsed before
    the Senate Commerce Committee that the compromise communi-
    cations satellite bill, while generally acceptable to the Adminis-
    tration, would place control of the system in the communications
    industry. “There is real danger,” he said, “that ground stations,
    if separately owned by the carriers, may because of their high cost
                                                         remature
    represent an obstacle to technical growth so as
                                                                        to
    freeze the type of system.” The compromise b$ approve by
    the Senate Space Committee two weeks ago, provided for a 50-50
    split of the stock in the satellite corporation between the com-
    munications industry and other companies and investors.
∞ Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of AFSC, said in a speech a t
    Mississippi State College: “The Materials Laboratories a t Wright-
    Patterson A r Force Base developed the basic material and struc-
                  i
     tures used in ‘sandwich construction’ of aircraft; titanium alloy
     as a structural material; plastic, ceramics, and metallic alloys to
     withstand the high temperatures encountered during re-entry
    into the earth’s atmosphere.”
∞ The Boys Clubs of America honored Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr.,
    for his example of good citizenshp to youth, presenting him with
     the “Man and Boy Award’’ a t Alexandria, Va.
∞ First stage (SI) for Saturn vehicle SA-3 had its fist flight qualifi-
     cation test a t MSFC, all eight engines firing for 30 sec.
April 11: NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testifymg before the
    Senate Committee on Commerce, supported the President’s bill
     setting up a communications satellite corporation and approved
     of the Senate amendments, except for a cautlon o n the one that
     would direct the FCC to encourage communlcatlons common
     carriers to build and own their own ground stations. Mr. Webb
     summarized NASA’s      responsibilities under the bill: (1) to advise
     FCC on the technical characteristics of the system; (2) to advise
     FCC on the technical feasibility of attaining the desired technical
     characteristics; (3) to coordinate its space communications R ~ D
     work with that of the corporation; (4) to furnish launching
     facilities, vehicles, and services in connection with the develop-
     ment and operation of the system; (5) to furnish other services
     on a reimbursable basis; and (6) to advise the Secretary of State
     on technical feasibility of the system providing communications
     service to a particular point in the world.
$2     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O$ 1 9 6?
                                                     !,

April 11: USAF launched an Atlas missile from Vandenberg AFB, Calif .,
    in a test flight down the Pacific Missile Range. A SAC combat
    missile crew launched the Atlas from a horizontal, semi-hard
    “coffin” launcher.
 ∞ In a recent tightening of DOD policy on information about military
    satellite launchings, officials were reported to have stated that
    in future even the Discoverer flights would not be so identified.
    Any information beyond bare announcement of launch of an
    unidentified satellite would be considered on a case-by-case basis.
 ∞ Atlas-Centaur initial launch from AMR was again postponed by
    NASA, this time because of fueling problems.
 ∞ Robert J. Lacklen, NASA’s   Director of Personnel, said that the first
    part of NASA’s  nationwide recruiting drive to hire 2,000 scientists
    and engineers had ended on March 15, with the completion of
    the field work. During this phase, teams of interviewers con-
    tacted 14,000 persons, interviewed 5,000. The second phase
    would involve setting up a national job register.
 ∞ Dr. Ross A. McFarland of Harvard University was awarded the
    Walter Boothby Award by the Aerospace Medical Assn. for out-
    standing research directed a t the promotion of health and pre-
    vention of disease in professional airline pilots.
April 12: NASA was studying the roblem of falling fragments from
                                   P
    orbital objects and the possibi ity of injury or damage to persons
    or property on earth. Four fragments from the Atlas booster
    that put Astronaut John Glenn into orbit were recovered on
    earth, the first pieces known to have re-entered from an orbiting
    object without burning up. Statistically the chances of injury
    to anyone on earth would be extremely small, especially since the
    orbits are over water about 80%.of the time. NASA pointed out
    that some 100 meteorites weighing two pounds or more struck
    the U S . every year, yet there had never been a report of anyone
    being struck by one.
∞ USAF Blue Scout launched from Cape Canaveral but second stage

    did not fire.
∞ NASA would begin an education program in the fall of 1962 to provide
    financial support for 10 doctoral candidates in science and engi-
    neering at each of 10 U.S. universities, NASA Administrator James
    E. Webb announced to the Institute of Environmental Sciences
    in Chicago. Students would receive a stipend of $2,400 per year,
    expenses up to $1,000 per year, and the university would be reim-
    bursed for tuition, fees, and other expenses. Grants would be
    for one year, renewable to a maximum of three years. Mr. Webb
    said NASA expected the program “will increase considerably in
    years to come.”
 ∞ NASA awarded $1,000 to NASA engineers for inventions contributing
    to the advancement of aeronautical and space science and tech-
    nology. Langley Research Center’s Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., and
    H. Douglas Garner split a $1,000 award for conceiving a simple,
    lightweight attitude control system to control the axis of a spin-
    ning vehicle. Goddard Space Flight Center’s James S.Albus
    received a $1,000 award for his digital solar aspect sensor that
    has been flown in several Explorer satellites.
                                                                      53
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

April 12: Army launched the full three-stage Nike-Zeus antimissile
    missile from Point Mugu, Calif., in its first successful flight test
    with all stages.
∞ US.Navy claimed a new record for an aircraft speed climb when an
    F4H-1 Phantom I1 piloted by LCdr. Del W. Nordberg sped
    from a standing start to 98,425 ft. (30,000 meters) in 371.43 sec.
    at Point Mugu, Calif.
 ∞ National holiday in the Soviet Union, the anniversary of orbital
    flight of Yuri Gagarin. In ceremony in the Kremlin’s Congress
    Hall, Cosmonaut Gagarin declared: “We are on the threshold
    of more new space launchings. When these space ships return
    to earth, the Soviet people will have more holidays to celebrate.”
    Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev and Cosmonaut Titov also made
    short speeches, while Matislav Keldysh, President of the Soviet
    Academy of Sciences, made the major address.
 ∞ Pravda editorial extolled the future of communism as demonstrated
    by Soviet space achievements as follows: “The successes of the
    Soviet con uerors of space reflect the great achievements of the
                P
    Soviet peop e in the development of the mighty productive forces
    of our homeland, the indisputable advantages of socialism, and
    its superiority over the capitalist system. The most reasonable
    representatives of the western world cannot fail to admit that
    socialism, as Comrade Khrushchev put it, is indeed the reliable
    launching pad from which the Soviet Union launches its
    spaceships.
       “Only a year has passed since a Soviet man heralded the dawn
    of the space age by making his &st flight into interplanetary
    space, but this year has been packed with great events. The
    22nd CPSU Congress adopted a party program which gave wings
    to the Soviet people and marked out the clear prospects for build-
    ing communism. Guided by the historic decisions of the congress
    and the new party program, our Soviet people will exert every
    effort to foster the building of a communist society, the bright
    future of all mankind . . . .1 ,
       In Tass statement, Cosmonaut Gherman Titov described
    Cosmonautics Day as a “holiday of labor and man’s victory over
    the forces of nature.”
April 13: NASA announced the X-15 had been assigned a service func-
    tion in aeronautical and space research beyond its original role
    as an experimental test vehicle. The National Research Airplane
    Committee, composed of NASA, USAF, and USN delegates, had
    approved a series of experiments including ultraviolet stellar
    photography, horizon scanning for research on accurate horizon
    sensing in space vehicles, atmospheric density and micrometeor-
    ite measurements, and evaluation of advanced systems and
    structures.
∞ In a NASA press conference on theX-15 additional research program,
                               Director of Aeronautical Research, said:
    Mr. John Stack, NASA’s
    “. . . when I was talking about the total research airplane pro-
    gram, this started really because two men in high positions in a
    time of great stress also had time to think of the future, and I refer
    to General Arnold and Dr. George W. Lewis. And when this
    approach, this sort of thing, was put to them in late ’42-and
    you can readily appreciate General Arnold and Mr. Lewis were
54     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    pretty busy men a t that time-they did under the stress of all that
    find time to think also of the future. And this kind of a program
    that has progressed is a kind of a monument to the foresight of
    those two men.”
April 13: NASA Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the Na-
    tional Conference of the American Society for Public Administra-
    tion in Detroit, said: “NOnew department or a ency in the recent
                                                     f
    history of the Executive Branch of the Federa Government was
    created through the transfer of as many units from other depart-
    ments and agencies as in the case of NASA. Three and one half
    years ago, NASA did not exist. Today NASA comprises approxi-
    mately 20,500 employees, ten major field centers, and an annual
    budget approaching the $2 billion mark.”
∞ Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aero-
    nautics and Space Council, was awarded the Arnold Air Society’s
    trophy as the civilian who had made the most outstanding
    contribution to aeros ace science and national security in 1961.
                           7
April 13-14: US. Army c aimed two world flight records for time-to-
    climb in a helicopter in flights made a t Fort Worth, Texas. On
    April 13, Capt. Boyce B. Buckner (USA) piloted a YHU-1D
    Iroquois helicopter to 6,000 meters (19,686 ft.) in 5 min. 51 sec.
    On April 14, Lt. Col. Leland F. Wilhelm (USA) took the turbine-
    powered helicopter to 3,000 meters (9,843 ft.) in 2 min. 14.6 sec.
April 14: Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA’s   Director of Space Sciences, said
    that in addition to NASA’s  international program for space science
    and the European organizations for cooperative space research,
     “some South American groups are considering the possibility of
    cooperative sounding rocket endeavors.”
∞ USAF selected pro osals submitted by United Technology          Corp.
                     K
    for the 120-inc solid motor and STL-ARMA for the guidance
    efforts to be placed in Titan I11 which will serve as a large space
    booster. Contracts were contingent upon final program approval.
April 15: U S . Weather Bureau began daily international transmis-
    sions of cloud maps based on photos taken by TIROS IV. This
    was the first time that the actual cloud map was sent abroad by
    radio facsimile, although coded data had been sent previously.
 ∞ In an article in Ekonomicheskya Gazeta, the economic newspaper of
    the Soviet Communist Party, Dr. Peter Kapitza, one of Russia’s
    outstanding physicists, said that Soviet science had been
    hampered by attempts to judge the validity of scientific theories
    on the basis of Marxist dialectics. I Soviet scientists had
                                               f
    listened to Marxist philosophers in the 1950’s, he said, the Rus-
    sian achievements in space would have been impossible.
April 16: Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA’s     Deputy Administrator, speak-
    ing to the Federation of American Societies for Experimental
    Biology in Atlantic City, said: “. . . the air age brought us
    great supplies of aluminum and the basis for building lightweight
    structures, not only for airplanes but also for trains, buses, and
    ships. The nuclear age brought applications of isotopes in medi-
    cine and in inspection of materials. Nuclear developments
    brought remote manipulators and sealed pumps for hazardous
    liquids and gases. The space age has brought to maturity the
    concept of systems analysis and optimization of designs involving
    many branches of science and engineering. In addition the space
                                                                  55
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1963

    age has given us high-temperature ceramics, ablating materials
    for heat protection, pressure-stabilized lightweight tanks, com-
    puters handling large amounts of data, and many other de-
    velopments which are finding application throughout industry.”
April 16: Senate passed the NASA supplemental appropriations bill,
    with amendments providing $71,000,000 for construction at AMR
    but contingent on passage of authorization legislation. Bill
    would now go to Senate-House conference to iron out Werences
    between the versions passed by the two Houses.
 ∞ Technical planning and review of the NASA lunar program held with
    60 key officials, at MSFC.
 ∞ Representatives of Australia, Belgium, France, West Germany,
    Italy the Netherlands, and Britain signed an agreement for the
    estabbshment of the European Satellite Launcher Development
    Organization in London.
 ∞ In a ceremony at the Smithsonian Institution marking the 95th
    birthday of Wilbur Wright, the Early Birds-an organization of
    pilots who soloed before December 16, 1916-presented plaques
    to its members, about 90 of whom were on hand. Also bronze
    busts were presented to the Smithsonian of Mario Calderara and
    Umberto Savoia, Italy’s first military pilots and taught by Wilbur
    Wright.
 ∞ AFSC announced that a small, inexpensive radar capable of showing
    an airport control tower operator whether any of the runways or
    taxiways are occupied even under conditions of zero visibility or
    when obstructed by houses, trees, snowbanks, etc., has been under
    test and would be the subject of a final report in May 1962.
    The runway radar is known as ASDE (Airport Surface Detection
    Equipment).
∞ House of Representatives passed a resolution declaring February 20
    to be John Glenn Day, sent it to the Senate.
 ∞ AEc-Australian research balloon intended to collect dust samples at
    105,000 ft. to determine the density of radioactive fallout was
    launched from Mildura, Australia, 350 mi. NW of Melbourne,
    but burst at 100,000 ft.
 ∞ Dr. Gerald de Vancouleurs, Professor of Astronomy a t the Uni-
    versity of Texas, said in NAS Voice of America broadcast that
    the discovery of clues to the prehistory of the solar system and
    possible contact with extraterrestrial forms of life “stand out as
    two of the most challenging and promising goals of space explora-
    tion.” Dr. de Vancouleurs pointed out that direct sampling
    and probing of the surface and crusts of the moon and planets
    ma help discover these clues. “Of even greater scient& and
       19
    ph‘ osophic interest,” he said, “is the probability that direct
    exploration of at least one planet-Mars-may           place us in
    contact with extraterrestrial forms of life, whose study may
    help solve the problems of the origin and evolution of life under
    different planetary conditions.”
April 17: NASA launched a Nike-Cajun soundin rocket from Wallops
                                               f
    Station, Va., which detonated 12 enades rom 25 to 57 mi. alti-
    tude. Fifteen minutes later a fike-Asp sounding rocket was
    launched. It released a cloud of sodium va or from 26 to 144
    mi. altitude in a study of wind velocities a n i upper-atmosphere
    densities.
56    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S O F 1962




    Henry VIII as a possible aid in spacesuit design. The 94-lb.
    suit of armor was designed for jousting tournaments with the
    wearer on foot; it covered the whole body and its joints per-
    mitted full mobility.
April 18: NASA approved the highest national priority for the Apollo
    program, covering Saturn C-1, Saturn C-5, Titan 11,and Atlas-
                                                                        57
           ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

April 19: X-15 made its 50th successful flight from Edwards AFB,
                      Joseph A. Walker as pilot. The X-15 No. 1,
    Calif., with NASA’s
    testing an emergency flight control system, reached a speed of
    3,920 mph (mach 5.84) and an altitude of 150,000 ft.
         announced that FRIENDSHIP 7, the Mercury capsule in which
  ∞ NASA

     Astronaut John Glenn orbited the earth three times, would be
     lent to USIA for a world tour, with some 20 stops on the itinerary
     and touching all continents. In mid-August the capsule would
     be displayed at the Century 21 Exhibition in Seattle, Washington,
     before being presented to the Smithsonian Institution in Wash-
     ington, D.C., for permanent exhibition.
∞ USAF Skybolt missile launched from B-52 bomber over the Atlantic

     Miss& Range in first live flight test; considered successful
     though second sta e failed to ignite.
                       6
∞ House Commerce           ommittee reported out a commercial com-
      munications satellite bill similar to the Senate measure, including
      a provision “encouraging)) communications companies to build
      and operate their own ground stations.
∞ State Department received a visa application from Cosmonaut

      Gherman Titov, who would be a part of the Soviet delegation to
      the COSPAR International Space Science Symposium to be held
      in Washington April 30-May 9. U.S. officials indicated that the
      request would be approved.
 ∞  University of Maryland announced that in September it would
      begin a program leading to undergraduate and graduate degrees
      in astronomy. NASA has granted the university $192,000, partly
      for equipment and expenses and partly for 3-year stipends to 10
      graduate students recently chosen from among 60 candidates.
∞ A high-level Presidential study group set up in July 1961 to study
      the role of nonprofit organizations in rela tion to Government
      reported that the U.S. must continue to rely heavily on such
      organizations and private industry for directing and carrying
      out Federal research. It further recommended that the Govern-
      ment strengthen its own research organizations and its research
      management capabilities.
 ∞ In opinion poll taken in Ohio Congressional District (23) by Con-
      gressman William E. Minshall on whether the US. should enter
      into a cooperative space program with Russia, 47% replied
      affirmative, 39.6% replied negative, and 13.3% made “no
      opinion” replies.
 ∞ Congressman O h Teague submitted H. Con. Resolution 461, to

      express the sense of Congress that the US. should not participate
      in any program for the exploration of space with foreign nations
      or international bodies which would involve the disclosure of any
      technical information, unless the Soviet Union by “positive
      action” participates in an inspection system for armaments and
      informs the world about hitherto-secret information about its
      space program. Similar resolutions were introduced by Con-
        essmen Young, Kilgore, Purcell, Roberts of Texas, Riehlman,
      goudebush, Casey, and Morris.
 ∞  Italian Space Research Commission announced Italy would attempt
      to orbit its first satellite in 1963. The 200-lb. scientific satellite
      would be launched from a platform floating in the Indian Ocean
       97317-63--6
58    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1962

     and would measure air density variations caused by solar
    radiation.
April 20: X-15 NO. 3 flew to 207,000 ft. and 3,818 mph (mach 5.33)
     in a test of a special adaptive control system. Flight was made
     from Edwards AFB, Calif., NASA’s Armstrong as pilot.
                                         Neil
  ∞ Attempt at first flight test of NASA’s Centaur was canceled because
     of troubles in the ground-handling equipment used to pump
     liquid oxygen into the vehicle.
  ∞ NASA published an integrated series of three Quality Publications
     setting forth NASA’s   intensified quality assurance program now
     required in NASA space programs from R&D concept through space
     operations. These publications required NASA prime and sub-
     contractors on space system work to establish and maintain a
     quality program that in many elements was beyond traditional
     quality control. They also provided guidelines for NASA manage-
     ment to evaluate contractor quality performance both as a factor
     of current contract performance and as a consideration in award
     of future contracts.
  ∞ White House released report on “Strengthening the Behavioral
     Science” prepared at the request of the President’s Science
     Advisory Committee by a subpanel headed by Prof. Neal E.
     Miller of Yale University. The report submitted that “the
     general issues studied by behavioral scientists are critically
     important to our national welfare and security,” and that (‘ways
     must be found to strengthen these disciplines and improve their
     use.” It recommended increasing general and specific education
     in the behavioral sciences following the lead in the physical
     sciences. It also suggested that the Social Science Research
     Council be invited to appoint a standing committee, and that a
     group of representatives of relevant governmental agencies be
     created, to review and provide “appropriate advice in the light
     of current possibilities and needs of behavioral science.”
∞ USAF announced selection of seven USAF officers and one USN officer

     for the second class in the USAF’S space pilot school. The class,
     to begin on June 18 at Edwards AFB, Calif., would include LCdr.
     Lloyd N. Hoover (USN), Majs. Donald M. Sorlie and Byron F.
     Knole (USAF), and Capts. Albert H. Crews, Jr., Charles C. Bock,
     Jr., William T. Twinting, Robert W. Smith, and Robert H.
     McIntosh (USAF).
∞ Jessie G. Vincent, automotive and airplane engine designer and
     holder of over 400 patents, died i Detroit a t age 82. Vice
                                           n
     president of the Packard Motor Car Co. from 1915 to 1948, Mr.
     Vincent was codesigner of the Liberty Marine engine in World
     War I and as an Army major helped get the Liberty engine into
     production, a t which time it was regarded as the world’s finest
     power plant of its kind.
 ∞ U.S. Army claimed a new world speed record for helicopters, when
     Capt. William F. Gurley (USA) flew a YHU-1D Iroquois heli-
      copter over a closed-circuit course near Fort Worth, Texas, at
      133.9 mph, shattering a two-year-old Soviet mark of 88 mph.
                                                                   59
                                                      OF 1962
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS

April 21: Fifth attempt to launch NASA’s
                                      Centaur space booster was
    canceled a t the last second a t AMR. Engines on the Atlas first
    stage had been ignited when an automatic detection device
    s otted a malfunction and shut off the engines.
∞ Sir Frederick Handley Page, British aviation pioneer, and chairman
   
    and managing director of Handley Page Ltd., died in London a t
    age 76. Inventor of the slotted wing, he provided En land with
                                                           7
    its fist bombers in 1915 and his Halifax bomber of Wor d War 11,
    of which more than 60,000 were produced, was a key weapon of
    RAF Bomber Command.
April 22: Jacqueline Cochran became first woman to pilot a jet air-
    craft across the Atlantic and claimed 49 world records in 5,120-
    mile flight from New Orleans, La., to Hanover, Germany, with
    stops at Gander and Shannon, in a Lockheed Jet Star.
April 23: NASA’s  RANGER IV was launched by Atlas-Agena from AMR,
    went into parking orbit, and was put into proper trajectory to
    the moon by restart of the Agena B booster. Failure of a timer
    in the RANGER IV payload caused loss of both internal and ground
    control over the vehicle. Anal sis of the trajectory indicated
                                     P
    that the payload would probab y slsim the leading edge of the
    moon on April 25 and be pulled by the moon’s gravity to a crash-
    landing on the far side of the moon, but that none of the expen-
    ments would operate and no data would be received.
 ∞ U S . and U.S.S.R. scientists have agreed on a proposal to establish
    a “world weather watch” for improved collection, analysis, and
    dissemination of world weather information by means of con-
    ventional weather techniques and weather satellites. Dr. Harry
    Wexler, Director of Research, U.S. Meatlier Bureau, and Dr.
    Viktor A. Bugaev, Assistant Director of the Hydrometeorological
    Service, U.S.S.R., drafted tho plan at the V70rld Meteorological
    Organization headquarters in Genera. Plan would call for
    expanded and improved weather observation by both conven-
    tional and satellite means, the establislment of world and regional
    weather centers to collect, analyze, and disseminate weather
    information, including participation by underdeveloped countries
    through pooling of their resources to develop regional weather
    forecasting centers. Soviet participation was indicated by Dr.
    Konstantin T. Logvinov, Deputy Director of U.S.S.R.’s Hydro-
    meteorological Service. He indicated possibility of Soviet
    weather satellites, although he said U.S.S.R. \vas not as advanced
    as U.S. in this area--L‘We are just Iearniiig from American ex-
    perience”-and establishment in U.S.S.R. of a ground station
    to receive cloud-cover photos from satellites. The proposed
    global weather plan was to be submitted to the World Meteoro-
    logical Organization May 22 and then to the U.N.
 ∞ First International Symposium on Rocket and Satellite Meteorology
    opened in Washington, D.C. Attended by some 500 delegates
    from more than 20 nations, the conference was sponsored by the
    World Meteorological Organization, the International TJnion of
    Geodesv and Geophysics, and the Committee on Space Research
    of the International Council of Scientific Unions. It was hoped
     that the symposium would lead to an international sounding
    rocket program during the International Year of the Quiet, Sun
    in 1964-65.
60     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

April 23: National Council of the Federation of American Scientists
    adopted a policy statement that space activities should be classi-
    fied only when there are compelling military reasons.
 ∞ In Voice of America broadcast, Dr. Leo Goldberg of the Harvard
    College Observatory reported that the accumulation of knowledge
    in solar physics is proceeding “at a fantastic rate, due to the
    inherent importance of the subject coupled with a sudden fusing
    of new instrumental techniques and theoretical ideas.” Dr.
    Goldberg noted that sun spots in the photosphere have been the
    object of intense study since Galileo but that “observations have
    not yet been synthesized to provide even an accurate description
    of their physical nature, let alone the mechanism of their origin.”
    Crediting high-altitude rockets for initial detection and occasional
    study of hidden solar radiation, detailed study requires continous
    observation of the sun on a 24-hour basis, which “can only be
    accomplished with the aid of one or more satellite observatories.”
 ∞ National Academy of Sciences awarded the J. Lawrence Smith
    Medal for outstanding achievement in the investigation of
    meteoric bodies to Dr. Harold C. Urey of the University of
    California of San Diego. The award was based upon Dr. Urey’s
    many publications on the chemical composition of meteorites,
    only one of his most recent fields of interest. He received the
    Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1934. After World War I1 he
    launched into speculations concerning the origin of the solar
    system, the cosmic abundance of the elements, the compo-
    sition and structure of the moon and the planets, the latter work
    depending upon his chemical analysis of meteorites.
April 24: Joint US-Japanese sounding rocket launching a t Wallops
    Station, Va., was postponed because of high winds.
 ∞ U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS 111, identified by Tass as another of the
    scientific satellites in a series to study weather, communications,
    and radiation. Orbital data: apogee, 448 mi. (720 km.); perigee,
    142 (229 lua.); period, 93.8; inclination, 48’59’.
 ∞ DOD removed secrecy classification from the satellite Anna, a
    joint geodetic satellite designed to enable measurement of inter-
    continental distances and the shape of the earth.
 ∞ First transmission of T V pictures in space, made via orbiting
    ECHO I. Signals beamed from MIT’S Lincoln Laboratory a t
                                                                           I
    Camp Parks, Calif., bounced off ECHO I, and received at Millstone
    Hill near Westford, Mass. Picture telecast was that of the
    initials “M.I.T.” and travelled a distance between 3,000 and           I
    4,000 miles, using equipment built for USAF Project Westford           I
    experiment. Since test used misshapen ECHO I, scientists felt
    that experiment should increase interest in passive satellites for
    communications once Echo I1 is orbited.
 ∞ President Kennedy gave the order to resume nuclear testing in the
    atmosphere, to be conducted by Joint Task Force 8 under the
    command of Maj. Gen. A. D. Starbird.
                                                                    61
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

April 25: Saturn   (SA-2) booster rocket was successfully launched
    from AMR in its second flight test. Like the first Saturn vehicle
    launched on October 27,1961, the Saturn fired only the first-stage
    engines, generatin 1.3 million Ibs. of thrust. Dummy second
                       h
    and third stages      ed with water were detonated at 65 miles
    altitude (Project High Water) and the water ballast formed an
    artificial cloud. Maximum velocity was slightly more than 3,700
    mph. Modifications to decrease the slight fuel sloshing en-
    countered near the end of the previous flight test were apparently
    successful.
  ∞ Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aero-
    nautics and Space Council, stated that the US. program for
    peaceful development of space was not inconsistent with mili-
    tary space development, in a speech before the National Capitol
    Section of the ARS. “The true mission of our military strength
    is to protect the peace,” he said. “If we do not take adequate
    care of our national defense, we will not have a chance to do any
    of the other things in space-at least as free men.”
  ∞ D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA’s      Director of Manned Space Flight,
    speaking before the American Management Association in New
    York, said: “We believe that the soundness of our present engi-
    neering program can be illustrated by the correlation between
    predicted events and time of occurrence in John Glenn’s recent
    flight. Indeed, the time from lift-off to impact in this mission
    was within one second of the pre-flight calculations.”
 ∞ US. resumed atmospheric nuclear testing in Operation Dominic
    with the detonation of a medium-yield device dropped from
    an aircraft near Christmas Island in the Paczc.
∞ American Newspaper Publishers Association meeting in New York,

    set up a scientiik advisory committee to make a year’s stud of
                                                                   T
    possible application to newspapers of space technology, nuc ear
    energy, computer technology, and other developments. Members
    appointed were: Dr. Athelstan F. SpiIhaus, Dean of U. of Min-
    nesota’s Institute of Technology, chairman ; Trevor Gardner,
    President of Hycon Manufacturing Co.; and Dr. John R. Pierce
    of Bell Telephone Lab.
April 26: A very eventful day in space exploration: launched into
    orbit were ARIEL I, COSMOS IV, and two unidentified USAF satellites;
    RANGER IV impacted the far side of the moon; and a US.-Japa-
    nese probe was launched from Wallops.
∞ RANGER LV impacted on the moon a t 7:49:53 AM EST, ending a
    231,486-mi. journey from AMR that began with its launching on
    April 23. Goldstone Tracking Station maintained contact with
    the 50-milliwatt transmitter in the lunar landing capsule until it
    passed behind the left edge of the moon. Impact velocity was
    5,963 mph, point of impact 229.3” E, 15.5OS, on a part of the moon
    never seen by man. RANGER IV’S instrumentation, which ceased
    useful operation some ten hours after launch, never functioned
    again. About the same time as the lunar impact, the Agena B
    2nd stage passed to the right of the moon and went into orbit
    around the sun.
62     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1983

April 26: ARIEL I (S-51), the first international satellite, launched into
    orbit from Cape Canaveral by Thor-Delta booster. The 132-lb.
    spacecraft was built by GSFC of NASA and carried six British ex-
    periments to make integrated measurements in the ionosphere.
    Three experiments measured electron density, temperatures,
    and composition of positive ions in the ionosphere, while two
    experiments were designed to monitor the intensity of radiation
    from the sun in the ultraviolet and x-ray bands of the solar
    corona. The sixth experiment was designed to measure cosmic
    rays, supported by simultaneous experiments from ground and
    by aircraft and balloon flights.
∞ U.S. and Japan launched a joint sounding rocket from Wallops
    Station, Va. NASA furnished the Nike-Cajun rocket, launch
    facilities, data acquisition, and a langmuir probe to measure
    electron temperature. Japan furnished instrumentation, a de-
    vice designed to measure electron temperature and density simul-
    taneously, functions which up to now have required two separate
    instruments. Height of the flight was 75.6 mi.
 ∞ U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS IV, presumably another in the recent
    series of scientific satellites. Orbital data: apogee, 206 mi.;
    perigee, 186 mi.; period, 90.6 min.; and inclination, 65”. No
    other details were announced.
  ∞ In address at Tulane University, Dr. James R. Killian, President
    of MIT, stated that the Soviet ITnion had placed “their first rate
    people” in their space program and thus weakened their high-
    energy physics program. “We must be very careful in space
    exploration that we do not tend to draw strength from other
    technological areas. We need balance,” he said.
 ∞ NASA deadline for proposals invited from 15 companies for detailed
    design, manufacturing, and test plan for the Nova concept.
 ∞ X-15 flight was canceled because of an engine malfunction seconds
    before the research aircraft was to be dropped from the B-52
    mother aircraft. Pilot was Major Robert White (USAF).
 ∞ NASA graduated first group of Project Mercury tracking personnel
    completing new course at Wallops Station, the seven graduates
    representing personnel from NAS \ and DOD contractors. Directed
    by GSFC, the Mercury Network Training Program consists of
    specialized courses to support the nian in space mission, one
    requiring that the subsystems at all 18 sites in a global network
    are continuously monitored and provide precise data concerning
    the spacecraft’s location, altitude, and operational status as well
    as the astronaut’s condition. Real-time data must flow between
    the sites, the Computer Center at GSFC, and the Mercury Control
    Center at Cape Canaveral.
 ∞ Reported that NASA had drafted for review by other Government
    agencies a policy statement on measures being studied for the
    prevention of rocket booster parts surviving re-entry, possibly
    injuring life and property on earth. Fragments of MA-6 booster
    had surprisingly survived re-entry. Measures, as reported, in-
    cluded programed booster destruction, perhaps at the cost of
    payload weight.
 ∞ Maj. Gen. 0. J. Ritland (USAF), formerly Commander of AFSC’S
    Space Systems Division, was named Deputy to the Commander,
     AFSC, for Manned Space Flight. Gen. Ritland would be in
                                                                      63
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    charge of liaison with and USAF support of NASA’s    manned space
    flight program.
April 26: The Senate Committee on Commerce concluded its hearings
    on S. 2814 to establish a commercial communications satellite
    system.
 ∞ Separation of the disciplines of geology and geophysics in U.S.
    universities is “nothing short of an intellectual outrage,” Dr.
    Lloyd V. B e r b e r told the American Geophysical Union in
    Washington when that organization presented him with its first
    John Adams Fleming Award. Only three American universities
    were moving toward broad programs in geophysical study, he
    said. He urged the NAB and universities to work toward programs
    that would recognize that geology and geophysics are now ‘(in-
    timately intertwined.”
 ∞ USAF launched two unidentified satellites, one boosted by a four-
    stage Blue Scout, the other by an Atlas-Agena B, both from
            U.N. Public Registry stated Blue Scout did not attain
    PMR.
    orbit.
 ∞ USAF was awarded the Bendix Trophy for its record-breaking B-58
    transcontinental flight in two hours and 56.8 seconds a t average
    speed of 1,214.71 mph on March 5, 1962.
 ∞ U.S.S.R. is encoura ing “do-it-yourself” science in some 2,000
                       %
    laboratories locate in plants and factories, according to Yevgeny
    K. Fedorov, chief secretary of the Academy of Sciences, speaking
    in Moscow. Some 30,000 eople with amateur scientific inter-
                                 P
    ests were making use of the aboratories, he said, and more would
    use them as the Soviet work week was reduced in length.
April 27: Press conference held a t NASA Hq. on the first international
       
    satellite, ARIEL I, with U.K. and U.S. participants. Orbital data
    was reported: 100.9 min. period; 242.1 st. mi. perigee; 745.4 st. mi.
    apogee; and 53.87’ inclination to the equator. All experiments
    were reported as functioning. Dr. Robert Seamans, Associate
    Administrator, outlined NASA’s      International Program, and
    pointed to the initiation of the joint U.K.-U.S. s-51 satellite
    effort in 1959 and the international tracking network (8 non-U.S.
    stations) participating in the readout of ARIEL I. Sir Harrie
    Massey, chairman of the British National Committee on Space
    Research, pointed out the demands of science and space research
    for international cooperation.
∞ Langley Gold Medal of the Smithsonian Institution was awarded to
    Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA’s      Deputy Administrator, a t the an-
    nual meetin of the American Philosophical Society in Philadel-
    phia. Cite$ for his “important applications of experimental
    science to the problems of flight and for his wise and coura eous
                                                                  5
    administration of much of America’s research and technica de-
    velopments that now make possible the conquest of air and
    space,” Dr. Dryden was the tenth recipient of the 54-year-old
    award.
 ∞ Details of Project Anna, flashing-light geodetic satellite, were given
    to the international Committee on Space Research (COSPAR)
    meeting in Washington by Mark M. Maconiber of ONW. Pre-
    viously classified, two Anna satellites have been built and when
    placed i t orbit will provide means to calibrate three different
             no
    satellite tracking systems and provide accurate reference points
64 ’   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

     in space (flashing light photographed a t precise times against
     known star background). NASA will now not have to develop
     a geodetic satellite to provide open scientific information.
April 27: Dr. Launor F. Carter was appointed Chief Scientist, USAF,
     to take ofice in July succeeding Dr. Leonard S. Sheingold. Dr.
     Carter, Vice President and Director of Research for System Devel-
     opment Corp. of Santa Monica, Calif., has been a member of the
     USAF Scientific Advisory Board since 1955. A psychologist,
     Dr. Carter has done much work on leadership, perception, and
     group behavior.
 ∞ George C. Barnhart, pioneer airman and inventor, died in Pasadena.
     Barnhart held 70 alrcraft patents, including one for wing tanks.
     In 1942, he had turned over his patent for split-edge wing flap,
     a landing brake used on conventional and jet aircraft, to the
     Army Air Forces for the duration of the war, thousands of planes
     being built 1946-51 using the Barnhart flap for which he received
     no royalties as World War I1 had‘:not been officially ended. He
     had intended to sue the Government for $10 million.
April 28: USAF launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena
     booster, the fourth unidentified satellite reported launched from
     Vandenberg APB in ten days.
∞ Second NASA Nike-Cajun probe with Japanese payload was can-
     celed for third time because of high winds a t Wallops Island.
∞ First details of an orbital space station underlfeasibility study, one

     shaped like a doughnut and inflated once in orbit, revealed a t
     Langley Research Center. Design of space stations had be un
     in November 1960 a t Langley. Paul Hill, chief of the Appted
      Materials and Physics Division, stated that structures were now
      under study which could hold from four to thirty people.
April 29: COSMOS IV, Soviet satellite launched on April 26, was success-
     Iully landed in a predetermined area, according to Tass announce-
     ment. All equipment for research into the upper atmosphere and
     space worked well during the 1,250,000-mileflight, Tass said.
∞ Spokesman at British tracking station at Winkfield Row said that

     ARIEL 1’s “signals are good and everything seems satisfactory.”
∞ Melvin N. Gough, former director of NASA’s        AMR operations and
     recently chief of the CAR’S Bureau of Safety, was named as direc-
     tor of the Federal Aviation Agency’s new Aircraft Development
     Service.
∞ Cosmonaut Gherman Titov arrived in New York City for %day
     visit to the U.S. in conjunction with COSPAR sessions in Washing-
     ton.
∞ U.S.S.R. was considerably’behind the U.S. in facilities and equip-

     ment for biological and medical research, Dr. A. N. Studitsky
      complained in an article in Vestnik Akademii Nauk, organ of the
     Soviet Academy of Science.
April 30: X-15 No. 1 flown to an altitude of approximately 246,700
     ft. (46.7 mi.) with NASA’s  Joseph A. Walker a t the controls. The
     record altitude was achieved in a climbing attitude of about 38’;
      top speed attained was 3,443 mph. Previous altitude record was
     217,000 ft., achieved on October 11, 1961, by Major Robert White
      (USAF). The speed record of 4,093 mph was set on November 9,
      1961, by Major Robert White.
∞ In Voice of American broadcast series on Space Science, Dr. Edward

      R. Dyer, Jr., of the Space Science Board Secretariat, stated that
                                                                      65
                         AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962
        ASTRONAUTICAL

      the history of astronomy is an alternation between major tech-
     nological and theoretical advances. “The stage is set,” he said,
     “for the next two big steps.” The first will be the space-age tech-
     nology enabling observation of the stars, nebulosities and galaxies
     using new devices capturing practically all octaves in the scale of
     radiation ranging from the very high-frequency gamma rays to
     the slow undulations of the longest radio waves. The second of
     the anticipated major advances will be a theoretical revolution,
     the nature of which will depend on results of improved observa-
     tion techniques. These new findings “will either explain the
     universe on classical evolutionary grounds or demand a revision
     of fundamental physical theory at least as f u r reaching as the
     Theory of Relativity or the Quantum Theory.”
April 30: I n address to IAS meeting in St. Louis, George M. Low, NASA
        
     Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, concluded with a
     statement of basic organizational concepts: “We believe that we
     must obtain the very best efforts of the very best people we can
     h d , both in Government and industry, if we are to achieve our
     National goal. We believe that our organizational concepts and
     management techniques must be no less excellent than our tech-
     nical efforts. We believe that with constant attention to these
     concepts, and with the hard work and dedication of the people
     involved, we will be able to carry out our responsibility to our
     Country to be second-to none in man’s conquest of space.”
∞ Report released by White House of study committee examining
     nonprofit research grou s. Report stated that Government must
     continue to rely heavllp on private institutions, including non-
                              y
     profit research groups, to carry out Federal research programs.
     At the same time, the committee recommended that steps be
     taken to improve the competence of the Government’s own
     scientific staffs and laboratories to direct research programs.
During April: FAA awarded first seven contracts, totaling $2.66 million,
    for commercial supersonic transport aircraft. FAA Administrator
     N. E. Halaby said the action was “the first step leading to the
    development of a safe, practical, economical airplane to carry
     the traveling public beyond the speed of sound.”
During April: Dr. John C. Houbolt, of NASA’s           Langley Research
    Center, writing in the April issue of Astronautics, outlined the
       ossible advantages of lunar-orbit rendezvous for a manned lunar
    knding as opposed to direct flight from earth or earth-orbit
    rendezvous. Under this concept, an Apollo-type vehicle would
    fly direct to the moon, go into orbit around the moon, detach a
    small landing craft which would land on the moon and then
    return to the mother craft, which would then return to earth.
    Advantages would be the much smaller craft having to perform
    the difficult lunar landing and take-off, the possibility of optimiz-
    ing the smaller craft for this one function, the safe return of the
    mother craft in event of a landing accident, and even the possi-
    bility of using two of the small craft to provide a rescue capability.
 ∞ Mach 2.2 windowless supersonic transport A-60 design announced
    by the College of Aeronautics, Cranfield, England, which featured
    si. buried turbojet engines and 73’ sweep slender delta wing.
    The A-60 design differs from the Sud Super Caravelle being
    studied as a joint Anglo-French project.
66       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

During April:      NASA awarded: $447,000 contract to MIT for research on
       organizational and management concepts suitable for large scale
       technology-based enterprises with particular application to NASA ;
       and $500,000 contract to Univ. of Calif. (Berkeley) for interdis-
       ciplinary space-oriented research in physical, biological, and
       engineering sciences.
  ∞  TIROS IV continued in operation and, to an extremely great extent,
0

       provided excellent data. Over 20,000 pictures have been received.
       217 nephanalyses had been prepared up to March 26, and 199
       transmitted over national and international weather circuits.
       Nineteen special storm advisories were issued to such countries as
       the Malagasy Republic, Mauritius, New Zealand, and Australia.
       I n more than seven cases, the Tiros data led to significant read-
       justments in the analyses of the National Meteological Center.
       TIROS IV nephanalyses have been used a t both Australia and
       McMurdo Sound in connection with forecasts for Antarctic
       operations .
  ∞  General Electric announced that a laser beam of narrow, coherent
       light had been used to punch holes in diamonds, the hole being
       cut in 200 millionths of a second, generating temperatures in the
       100,OOOoF range and without causing structural damage.
   ∞ British Broadcasting Corp. announced that 30% of Britain’s
0

       population-15,000,000 people-listened to its radio coverage of
       Astronaut Glenn’s three-orbit space flight on Feb. 20, comparable
       to the size of the audiences that listened to Sir Winston Churchill’s
       wartime broadcasts.
 ∞   United Technology Corp. fired 35-ton segmented solid booster for a
0

       duration of 130 seconds, developing thrust of slightly more than
       100,000 lbs for the entire burning time.
  ∞  Reported that Electro-Optical Instruments Inc., had developed an
0

       ultra-high speed Kerr cell framing camera capable of taking six
       frames at a rate of 100,000,000 frames per second with exposure
       times as brief as five nanoseconds. Designated KFC-600, the
       camera may have wide applications in aerospace studies of
       physical phenomena such as arc and plasma gas discharge, ex-
       plosive detonation, hypervelocity impact, shock wave studies, and
       nuclear instrumentation.
∞    TIROS II was turned on late in April from unknown spurious source.
       An engineering investigation was run in early May before turning
      it off again. An analysis of the data indicated that a t least some
      usable IR data was obtained. It was interesting to note that
       the IR electronics and tape recorder are still running after 17
      months in orbit. Continued operation of the satellite was not
       feasible because of power problems.
  ∞  Tass reported that Soviet astronomers of the Crimean Astrophysical
0

       Observatory discovered molecular oxygen in the outer atmosphere
       of Venus, using 157.6-in. solar telescope and a special spectograph.
       Also reported were indications of the presence of nitrogen.
                             MAY 1962
May 1: International Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) meeting
    in Washin on received summary reports of accomplishments of
               T
    1961 and p ans for 1962 by the US.and U.S.S.R. A. A. Blagon-
    ravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences reported that the
    U.S.S.R. planned to send more men into orbit this year as well
    as several more unmanned scientific satellites, including one to
    study “the distribution and production of cloud systems in the
    atmosphere.”
        Dr. Richard W. Porter of the US. delegation specified that
    NASA planned to launch 22 instrumented satellites and space
    probes during the year. During 1961, Porter reported, the US.
    had launched : over 300 high-altitude research balloons; 866
    weather rockets; more than 70 larger rockets not meant to carry
    payloads into orbit; and 31 instrumented satellites and deep-space
    probes.
  ∞ British scientists protested US. plans to explode “rainbow” bombs
     500 miles above the Pacific test area (called “rainbow” bombs
    because high-altitude nuclear explosions light up the sky thou-
    sands of miles away). Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell
    Bank Radio Observatory, Martin Ryle, radio-astronomer, and
    Sir Mark Oliphant, Australian nuclear physicist, all protested
    the “probable” distortion of the Van Allen radiation belt by the
     forthcoming U.S. tests.
  ∞ Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of the U.S. delegation to COSPAR
     meeting in Washington, reported that the moon emits x-rays as
     a result of solar and cosmic ray bombardment. Rockets shot
     of October 24, 1961, detected x-radiation from the lunar surface.
     By future studies of these energies it is hoped to determine the
     composition of the surface of the moon.
  ∞ Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced in London
     that the US. would contribute over $30 milIion for the develop-
     ment of the STOI,/VTOL fighter aircraft, the P-1127, originated by
     Hawker Siddeley Aviation Co., as part of the US.-British-West
     German cost-sharing agreement of February. This is the first
     agreement to develop NATO weapons jointly.
  ∞ In television interviews in New York, Cosmonaut Gherman Titov
     denied reports that any Russian cosmonauts had been killed
     prior to the orbital flight of Gagarin as reported in the American
           . Titov said he also saw the tiny “fireflies” reported by
     $g
     “s
     id     Glenn.
∞ In speech to IAS-NASA          Manned Space Flight Conference a t St.
     Louis, General Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of AFSC, said
     that if the Soviets attain a “really significant breakthrough
     in space technology, they may be able to deny other nations
                                                                     ..
      access to s p a c e e v e n for purposes of scientific research. .
     We must have necessary strength to ensure that space is free
      to be used for peaceful purposes.” Schriever said that “both the
                                                                67
68    ASTRONAUTICAL                         EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2
                       AND AERONAUTICAL

   military and civilian aspects of our space program are vital, and
   both must be pursued with urgency. They share a common aim-
   the security and well-being of the United States.”
May 1 : The Television Academy announced annual Emmy Award
   nominations. The orbital flight of Astronaut Glenn and Mrs.
   John F. Kennedy’s tour of the White House-regarded as top T V
   events-were not considered because they had been cooperatively
   covered by the three major networks.
May 2: Dr. James A. Van Allen termed the planned U.S. hydrogen
   bomb explosion high over the Pacific Ocean as a “magnificent
   experimen t,” one which should bring new knowledge concerning
   the origin of the inner belt of high-energy protons. He disagreed
   with scientists abroad who object to the test as a unilateral
   military experiment.
 ∞ NASA scientists reported to COSPAR session that data from EXPLORER
   IX indicated that the upper atmosphere was heated by sun spot
   activity. In 1957 and 1958, when solar activity was at the
   maximum of its 11.1-year cycle, air density at a height of 350
   miles was 10 times higher than in 1961 when activity was nearer
   its minimum. This suggests that “with a decrease in solar ac-
   tivity the upper atmosphere becomes cooler and shrinks to the
   earth, so that the air density at a given altitude decreases.”
   Report on EXPLORER IX, the 12-ft. inflated satellite sensitive to
   density changes, was made by William J. O’Sullivan, Claude W.
   Coffee, Jr., and Gerald M. Keating.
 ∞ House of Representatives defeated by voice vote a bill sponsored
   by Rep. William F. Ryan which would have provided for Gov-
   ernment ownership of the U.S. portion of a communications
   satellite system.
 ∞ In news conference at the Soviet Embassy in Washington,
   Gherman Titov forecast cooperative flights to and around the
   moon if world leaders could come to an agreement on disarma-
   ment. He also stated that Soviet Cosmonaut No. 3 was ready
   to go.
 ∞ Royal Aeronautical Society announced that John C. Wimpenny
   had made first extended manned flight under his own power in
   his pedal-powered Puffin. A design engineer, Wimpenny flew
   993 yards a t an average speed of 19)I mph and an altitude of
   5 to 8 feet.
May 2-5: First AFSC Management Conference held a t Naval Post
   Graduate School, Monterey, Calif., to provide exchange of views
   among leading representatives of industrial, scientific, academic,
   and financial management areas on the theme of “Systems Ac-
   quisition and Management in Today’s Environment.”
May 3: Two GSFC scientific sounding rockets launched from Wallops
     
   Station. An Iris research rocket launched with test instrumenta-
   tion did not achieve programed altitude and landed 175 statute
   miles downrange. A four-stage Argo D 4 launch vehicle carried
   78-lb payload to an altitude of almost 530 statute miles to record
   the intensity and distribution of radio noise above the ionosphere
   a t extremely low frequencies.
∞ Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov
   visited the White House and toured the Mall in Washington,
   D.C. At joint press conference a t the National Academy of
                                                                    69
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

     Sciences, Glenn and Titov both spoke about possible international
     cooperation in manned space flight, Titov suggesting that the
     diplomats would first have to reach agreement on disarmament.
     Titov said that the Soviet press conference on August 14, 1961,
     held at Ludnicki, a t which the President of the Soviet Academy
     of Sciences Matislav Keldysh discussed the rocket boosters of
     VOSTOK 11, contained all useful information available on the
     Soviet rockets. Titov also said that the released photograph
     of VOSTOK 11 was of a mockup.
May 3: House of Representatives passed the Communications Satel-
     lite Act of 1962 by a vote of 354 to 9, one creating machinery to
     operate the US.portion of a worldwide communications satellite
     system. Act (H.R. 11040) declared that it is the policy of the
     US. “to establish as soon as practicable a commercial communica-
     tions satellite system . . . in conjunction and cooperation with
                       .
     other countries . . to be responsible to public needs and na-
     tional objectives, serve the communications needs of the United
     States and other countries, and contribute to world peace and
     understanding.” Act created a private corporation, one half of
     whose stock would be public owned, the remainder by communica-
     tions companies. Three directors are to be appointed by the
     President, six elected by public stockholders and six by industry
     stockholders.
  ∞ Soviet Academician Anatoli A. Blagonravov told the press in Wash-
    ington that U.S.-U.S.S.R. talks on space cooperation would be
    resumed a t Geneva during the meeting of the subcommittee of the
    U.N. Committee for the Yeaceful Uses of Outer Space on May 28.
  ∞ Prof. Vassily V. Parin of the Soviet Academy of Sciences reported
    that fruit flies carried aloft in Soviet spacecraft had shown a
     “considerable increase in gene mutations,” in a report on space
    biology to COSPAR meeting in Washington. Evident to some
    observers was that the Russians have conducted a wide range of
    biological experiments in their satellite program.
May 4: Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and Mercury team went
    through complete simulated MA-7 mission exercise.
∞  NASA announced appointment of Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff,
    Professor of Aeronautical Engineering a t MIT, as Director of
             Office of Advance Research and Technology (OART),
    NASA’s
    effective in July. Dr. Bisplinghoff, who succeeds Ira H. Abbott
    who retired in January, has been a t MIT for 16 years, has served as
    a consultant to more than a dozen industrial firms, and as a
    member of numerous DOD and NACA advisory committees.
∞ Optical and radar observations of Project Highwater experiment,

    23,000 gallons of water bursted from upper stages of Saturn test
    launch at 65-mile altitude on April 25, showed tJhatthe burst took
    2-3 seconds to expand to about 10 times the size of the moon in a
    roughly circular pattern, and lasted about 10 seconds. A second
    fainter trail, about one lunar diameter, followed along the trajec-
    t,ory from the burst and lasted a few minutes, presumably caused
    by venting out of the incompleteIy destroyed second stage. Proj-
    ect Highwater was an MSFC responsibility, a bonus experiment to
    the Saturn test conceived by Dr. Charles Lundquist.
 ∞ New York Academy of Sciences conference revealed disagreements
    on evidence presented on extraterrestrial life. Dr. Bartholomew
70     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

     Nagy of Fordham University, Dr. George Claus of NYuMedical
     Center, and Dr. Warren G. Meinchein of Esso Research pre-
     sented evidence, first reported last year, that they had found
     “orgttnized elements’’ in the Orgueil meteorite. Dr. Frank W.
     Fitch and Dr. Edward Anders of the University of Chicago re-
     ported that the Fordham group found “prohahlv nothing more
     than earthly contaniinants such as ragweed pollen and starch
     grains.” Dr. Harold Urey of the University of California (La
     J o b ) stated that the U.S. is spending $25 hillion to go to the
     moon t o answer this and other questions. All agreed that the
     question of extraterrestrial life was of basic scientific significance.
May 4: NASA’s     MSFC completed negotiations with Aerojet-General
     Corp. for the design and development of the M-1 engine, two or
     more of which will power the second stage of the Nova.
 ∞ “Dynamic model” stud on one-fifth-scale Saturn rocket at NASA’s
     Langley Research 8enter offered useful concept for testing
     structural characteristics of the future Nova rocket. As reported
     by Homer G. Morgan, application of varying frequencies to the
     “Baby Saturn” while suspended as if in free flight rovided clues
                                                         P
     on structural vibration capable of transmitting fa se indications
     into the vehicle’s guidance system. The two successful test
     firings of the Saturn demonstrated value of this research. After
     test of a “Baby Nova” for structural efficiency, Morgan said,
     construction of an operational booster could be expedited. A
     full-scale Saturn model had been similarly tested at MSFC.
  ∞ Launch of USAF Titan I on 5,000-mile flight down PMR marked the
      100th missile fired from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., launchings
     which included 21 Thor IRBM’S, 32 Atlas ICBM’s, Titan ICBM’s,
                                                        five
     and 42 satellites.
May 5: 117 members of the International Committee on Space
      Research (COSPAR) toured Cape Canaveral, and a delegation also
      toured NASA’s   Wallops Station.
May 6: USAF Cambridge Research Lab reported record ten-day flight
      of superpressurized balloon a t a constant altitude of 70,000 feet
     with a 40-lb. payload. Launched from Chico, Calif., on April 26,
      development ballon landed on command near Cedar City, Utah,
      and will lead to 20-day balloon flight experiments at a constant
      altitude later this summer.
 ∞ In the Third International Space Science Symposium sponsored by
      COSPAR, Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists W. K. Victor and
      Robertson Stevens reported that radar soundings of Venus
      suggest that its surface material and roughness are comparable
      to that of the earth. Radar probes of Venus have demonstrated
      that UHF signals can be used for space communications over
      distances of 50-75 million miles.
 ∞ Astronaut John Glenn and Cosmonaut Gherrnan Titov appeared
      on ABC-TV program, “The Nation’s Future.” Col. Glenn
      pressed Major Titov on possible Soviet space mishaps, but no
      new information was forthcoming.
∞ AFCRL scientists launched a second artificial meteor by means of
      a multistage rocket fired from Wallops Island. The meteor
      traveled at a re-entry speed of 12 kilometers per second, exceeding
      that attained in the previous experiment of April 21, 1961.
                                                                    71
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

May 6: “American Roulette 500 Miles Up” was the title of the article
     by Sir Bernard Love11 in the Sunday Observer (London), which
     repeated his arguments against the planned nuclear explosions
     by the U.S. over Johnston Island in June and July.
∞ Cosmonaut Titov a t the Seattle World’s Fair said that he saw “no
     God or angels” during his 17 orbits of the earth.
∞ Full flight test of Polaris missile with live warhead, the fifth U S .
     atmospheric nuclear test in the current Operation Dominic series,
     fired from submerged U.S.S. Ethan Allen in Pacific test area.
     Reportedly the first U.S. firing of a missile with a live nuclear
     warhead, the shot was described by Navy spokesmen as a com-
     plete success.
May 7: In speech in New Orleans, NASA Administrator James E. Webb
       
     reviewed the National Launch Vehicle Program, which “recog-
     nizes all the re uirements of our nation in space, and includes the
     vehicles to ful& them.” Ne pointed out that of the ten launch
     vehicles ([in the National Launch Vehicle Program, the two
     smallest rockets [Scout and Delta], and the four most powerful
     ones [Centaur, Saturn, Advanced Saturn, and Nova], have been,
     or are being, developed by NASA. The four of intermediate size
     are adaptations of Ar Force missile carriers, Thor, Atlas, and
                           i
     Titan.” Mr. Webb pointed out the proximity to New Orleans
     of NASA’s  Michoud Plant and the Mississippi Test Facility.
        “Now that we have crossed the threshold of space,” he con-
     cluded, “the benefits that can be ained for all mankind, the
                                         %
     assurances to our national security t a t can be obtained, and the
     stimulus to our well-being that can be produced, are loomlng
     large on the horizon. . . . The important thing now i to make
                                                              s
     sure we are not behind in any area vital to our national security
     or our national leadership.”
 ∞ NASA announced at Cape Canaveral MA-7 launching, scheduled for
     May 15 or afterward, would be delayed several days because of
     check-out problems with the Atlas booster.
∞ In Voice of America broadcast, Dr. Christian J. Lambertsen of the
     University of Pennsylvania said that there is an increasing
     recognition of the role man can play in space exploration because
     “there are aspects of exploration which no machine yet conceived
     can carry out.” He pointed out that ‘(theonly computer capable
     of. all functions such as remembering, recognizing, learning,
     thinking, reasoning, judging, integrating, reacting, commiinicat-
     ing, and logwally altering a previously programmed sequence .of
     events is man himself.” He then reviewed the medicophysio-
     logical factors to be overcome for manned space flight, and he
     warned that “even the practicability of truly extended flight
     outside the earth’s atmosphere is not yet assured.”
 ∞ Maj. Gherman Titov in San Francisco press conference continued
     to chide US. space program. He said that if he was asked to
     join a U.S. astronaut in a cooperative space mission: “I would be
     a bit afraid becawe there have been quite a lot of failures in your
     program.” And, he remarked, the MR-3 capsule was “not even
     good enough for flying in orbit.”
May 8-10: Second National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space
     s onsored by NASA was held at Century 21 Exposition in Seattle,
     gash.
72     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 6 2

May 8: In message to the Second National Confercnce on the Peace-
     ful Uses of Space at daahtlc, President Kennedy noted that the
     U.S. was already “wor1;ing hand in hand with scientific groups of
     iilty nations.
        “Ours is an open society and the benefits of our space program
     will continue to flow throughout the world. I t is my hope that
     the Soviet Union will cooperate constructively in the proposals
     which we have made so that all peoples will gain in the improve-
     ment of weather observation, communications systems and the
     mariifold output of the peaceful application of space technology.’’
  ∞ X-15 No. 2 flown at 3,511 mph and to about 73,000 feet by Major
     Robert Rushworth (USAF) with 103 scconds of rocket power in
     heat resistance test. Temperature of tail surface was reported to
     have reached near 1,250O I?.
 ∞ First launch of Atlas-Centaur was unsuccessful; vehicle exploded
     55 seconds after launch over Cape Canaveral. Flight plan called
     for starting 16,000-lb.-thrust liquid-hydrogen second stage a t
     300-mile altitude.
  ∞ NASA selected three companies for negotiation of production con-
     tracts for major components of the Apollo spacecraft navigation
     and guidance system in support of MIT’S Instrumentation Labo-
     ratory initial development of the complex Apollo navigation-
     guidance system, a contract let last August. Companies selected
     from 21 bidders, which mill work under Manned Spacecraft
     Center contract were: A.C. Spark Plug Division of General Mo-
     tors Corp. to fabricate the inertial guidance with associated elec-
     tronics, ground support, and checkout system, and to assemble
     and test all components of the system; Raytheon Company to
     manufacture on-board digital computer; and Kollsman Instru-
     ment Corp. to build the optical subsystems including a space
     sextant, sunfinders, and navigation display equipment.
  ∞ NASA scientists Theodore P. Stecher and James E. Mulligan
     reported a t COSPAR meeting that “a complex series of solar
     events” in November 1960 caused the inner Van Allen radiation
     belt to “dump” its captive high energy particles along the earth’s
     magnetic field. This event disrupted a rocket experiment, but
     it detected an ultraviolet aurora with almost no visible counter-
     part. Indications wcre that the inner belt was soon refilled and
     returned to “normal.”
 ∞ Edmond C. Buckley, NASA’s      Director of Tracking and Data Acqui-
     sition, told the Second National Conference on the Peaceful Uses
     of Space meeting in Seattlc that JPL’S successful radar tracking of
     Venus over a two-month period in 1961, which resulted in a 200-
     times improvement in the measurement of the Astronomical
     Unit, was actually a by-product, though an important one, of a
     rigorous systems test of the Deep Space Net and of several proto-
     type pieces of equipment that had been developed for the Net
     by JPL.
 ∞ Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences reported
     out Communications Satellite Bill S. 2814, which was referred to
     the Senate Commerce Committee.
 ∞ U.S.S.R. turned down proposal to show FRIENDSHIP 7 ca sule in
                                                               E
     the “space medicine” section of the Leningrad Medical Ex ibition
                                                                        73
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

     next month. It was stated that the spacecraft would have
     “no purpose in a medicine exhibit.”
May 9: In regular press conference, President Kennedy was asked
     whether “proposed H-bomb explosion 500 miles up” would jeo-
     pardize U.S. policy to restrict outer space for peaceful objectives
     only. He replied that he did not think so and that i t was a
     matter that “we are looking into to see whether there is scientific
     merit that this would cause some difficulty to the Van Allen Belt
                                                           .
     in a way which would affect scientific discovery . .
                                                                    .
        “I want you to know that whatever our decision is . . it
     will be done only after very careful scientific deliberation, which
     is now taking place . . . Generally what we are attempting to
     do is to find out the effects of such an explosion on our security,
     and we do not believe that this will adversely affect the security
     of any person not living in the United States.”
∞ 18-nation 5th COSPAR meeting in final session voted to establish a
     consultative group for determining the potential harmful effects
     of experiments in space. Group of six scientists was charged with
     recommending to COSPAR’S executive council possible action by
     the international scientific community to sanction or condemn
     such experiments. Other closing actions: (1) Maurice Roy of
     the Ecole Polytechnique in Pans was elected President for
     1962-63; (2) expressed “satisfaction a t the intention of the U.S.
     to launch a geodetic satellite carrying a flashing beacon for inter-
     national use”; (3) proposed series of coordinated rocket measure-
     ments of winds in the ionosphere from Oct. 1962 to Feb. 1963;
     and (4) recommended numbering satellites during 1963 by the
     ordinal number rather than Greek letter.
∞ President Kennedy in answering a question on a uniform patent
     policy among governmental agencies said that it was a “difficult
     problem, because you have to balance off the gains on the one hand
     and at the same time the incentives to companies to s end their
                                                               E.
     own funds in order to develop patents . . . so that we ave some
     differences in the space agency problems, the Department of
     Defense and perhaps some other agency of the Government.”
     He said that it was a matter now under review and if changes
     appear warranted that recommendations would be sent to the
     Congress.
  ∞ USAF announced that it had begun negotiation with United Tech-
     nology Corp. for development of solid-fuel motors for use in
     Titan I11 space booster.
  ∞ Army Nike-Zeus test flight from Point Mugu, Calif., a partial
     success in that “missile accepted and correctly executed control
     commands transmitted from a ground guidance center,” although
     third stage did not fire.
  ∞ A Navy advanced Polaris was test-launched from submerged
     nuclear submarine U.S.S. Sam Houston off the Florida coast.
  ∞ Army Pershing missile destroyed in test flight from Cape Canaveral
                3
     when secon stage became erratic, the second failure in last three
     launchings after 13 straight successes.
  ∞ In address to the Operations Research Society, Gen. Bernard
     Schriever said: “Our continuing national security is dependent
     on the rapid advance of technology and its adoption in operational
     a731744
74     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

     systems. The pacing factor in this advance is not technology-
     it is management.
        “. . . two stages occur in the acquisition of new systems-the
     preselection phase and the implementation phase . . . Not
     enough attention has been paid to the more crucial phase-the
     decision to select a specific system from a galloping technol-
     ogy.”
May 9: Cdr. Geor e C Watkins (USN) became the first man to make
                  P
     1,000 aircraft andings aboard a carrier, when he landed an AD-6
     aboard the U.S.S. Constellation.
May 10: MIT scientists, headed by Prof. Louis Smullin, fired 13
     separate bursts of light (using a ruby crystal maser) through 12-
     inch telescope at smooth area of the moon, then “caught” the
     reflection 2>4 seconds later in a 48-inch telescope. Ruby crystal
     rod was about six inches long and the red light would have been
     visible on the moon. Technique demonstrated was hailed as
     promising [‘a means of delivering power over vast distances to
     orbiting satellites .’’
 ∞ Attempt to launch Anna geodetic satellite by Thor-Able-Star rocket
     was unsuccessful.
 ∞ In address at dedication of the NASA Space Exhibit a t the Seattle
     World’s Fair, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said that “our
     entire space program now costs each American about 30 cents a
     week. During the next few years we plan to spend about 50
     cents a week per person on space.
        “However, our space program and its by-products will stimu-
     late a sharp increase in the nation’s productive outpiit which in
     turn will increase our gross national product, our income, and
     the Federal Government’s intake . . .
        “. . . we are hopeful of achieving fruitful cooperation with the
     Soviet Union in such fields as communications, weather fore-
     casting, map ing the earth’s magnetic fields and space medicine.
                 !
        “We feel t at cooperation in outer space may establish a firm
     basis for greater mutual underst,anding-which in turn will help
     in our efforts to obtain disarmament . . .
        “The responsibility to cooperate also lies heavily on the other
     great space power-the Soviet Union. I am able to tell you in
     a s irit of cautious optimism that the Soviet Union appears to
       F
     rea ize that-in outer space, at least-there may be something to
     be gained by cooperatin with the rest of humanity.”
 ∞ In speech to the Oregon Separtment of Planning and Develop-
     ment, NASA Administrator James E. Webb ointed out that “one
                                                 K
     of the dominant features of our age is the s ort time lag between
     scientific discovery and practical applications.” The practical
     benefits of the U.S. space program would, he said, be early de-
     rived in three major ways: (1) satellites will be put to work on
     a global basis to report the weather, transmit messages and world-
     wide television programs, and to serve as electronic lighthouses
     in the sky; (2) in pushing our space program, we are making
     many technological advances which can be utilized to improve
     industrial processes and raise our standard of living; and (3) the
     money we spend on space activities stimulates business in general
     and our industrial pioneering in particular.
May 10: House Science and Astronautics Committee authorized rec-
   ord $3.7 billion for NASA in FY 1963, cutting $116 million from
    NASA’s   request.
∞ Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, a t Wilton, Conn.,

    stated that peaceful uses of outer space was still the National
    goal but that the U.S. would be “ill-advised if we did not hedge
    our bets.” He said that a satellite interception system would get
    serious attention if another nation was developing such a capa-
    bility. “We ought to be ready,” he said in a press conference,
    ‘‘to anticipate the ability of the Soviets a t some time to use space
    offensively.”
∞ Premier Nikita     Khrushchev said in speech to transport workers
    that despite the claims of American scientists no U.S. rocket has
    hit the moon: “The Americans have tried several times to hit the
    moon with their rockets. They have proclaimed for all the world
    to hear that they had launched rockets to the moon, but they
    missed every time. The Soviet pennant on the moon has been
    awaiting an American one for a long time but in vain and is
    becoming lonesome.”
  ∞ In answering Premier Khrushchev, Dr. William Pickering, Director
    of JPL, stated: “On April 26, at 4:47.50 AM, Pacific standard
    time, RANGER IV was tracked by the Goldstone receiver as it
    passed the leading edge of the moon. At 4:49.53 it crashed on
    the moon a t a lunar longitude of 229.5 degrees East and lunar
    latitude of 15.5 degrees South.” After 64 hours of tracking, the
    trajectory of RANGER IV was precisely known and it was only 110
    miles from the surface when it vanished behind the moon.
∞ NASA X-15 pilot, Joseph Walker, said that film taken during recent
    record altitude flight of 246,700 feet showed five or six mysterious
    objects. Other space pilots on the panel at the National Con-
     ference on the Peaceful Uses of Space at Seattle, all of whom have
     flown above 100,000 feet, were Cdr. Malcolm Ross (USNR) Capt.
    Joseph Kittinger (USAF), Col. David Sirnons (USAF), Neii Arm-
    strong (NASA), Cdr. Forrest Petersen (USN), Maj. Robert White
     (USAF), and Lt. Col. John H. Glenn (USMC).
 ∞ In session on the impact of space exploration on society a t the Second
     Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, President Lee Du-
     Bridge of the California Institute of Technology said that man is
     limited as a butterfly: “Man is out of his cocoon [in space] . . .
     his life span is too short to get very far from home.” DuBridge
     pointed out that a flight to the nearest star would take a t least
     40,000 years and that a trip to Mars at present speeds would
     take six months, “but months would run into years even reaching
     other planets of the earth’s system. We are not going to accom-
     plish space travel except to nearby planets for many generations
     to come.”
∞ In talk at National Conference on Peaceful Uses of Space, William

     E. Meckling, RAND Corp. economist, stated that space-age
     economic payoffs are being exaggerated: “The exploration of
     space is a very exciting affar, indeed. . . . I glamour displaces
                                                      f
     science in guiding national policy, however, the results may be
     disa pointing. . . .
             communications satellite system that charges prices not
     very much different from present prices and that must be con-
    stantly subsidized and protected from competition, is not much
                               .
     of an accomplishment. . .
     76     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

                                      . . . to have improved weather fore-
            “HOWmuch is it worth
         casts? I n the absence of a market in which weather forecasts or
          weather information is sold, it is nearly impossible to answer
         such questions. . . .
            “Who is it in foreign nations that is impressed by our space
         accomplishments? How are their attitudes changed as a conse-
         quence? How does that change in behavior affect me as a citizen
         of the United States? . . .”
     May 10: In address to the House of Representatives, Congressman
         Emilio Q. Daddario pointed to a need for a common patent policy
         for inventions arising out of research and development financed
         by Federal funds and cited President Eennedy’s statement at his
         press conference the day before.
       ∞ DOD announced that Perkin-Elmer Corp. was completing a new
         36-inch airborne telescope with 3-5 times as much resolution as
         any telescope on the ground. New instrument should finally
         answer the speculation about the so-called canals on Mars, the
         mysterious red spot on Jupiter, and perhaps the hidden surface
         of Venus. “This historic enterprise is only one more step
         forward, leading to large telescopes orbiting the earth in satellites
         and eventually constructed on the moon.”
       ∞Sparrow I11 fired from an F4H-1 scored a direct hit in head-on
         attack on a Regulus I1 missile while both were a t supersonic
         speed. The interception, made in Pt. Mugu test range, was
         first successful attack made by an air-launched weapon on a
         surface-launched uided missile.
                           f
       ∞ Plans of a non-pro t Washington Planetarium and Space Center
         Corp. were reported at the National Capital Planning Commission
         by Father Francis J. Heyden, S.J., of Georgetown University
         Observatory. They called for the construction of a $1.5 million,
         85-foot-diameter dome on Daingerfield Island, south of the
         Washington National Airport. The planetarium would “provide
         the public with a much needed space education facility” and
         would be operated by the National Park Service.
     May 11: NASA announced establishment of an on-site management
         unit of some 100 persons at the Space and Information Systems
         Division Plant of North American Aviation at Downey, Calif.
         It will be an element of the NASA Western Operations Office of
         Santa Monica. The Downey office is to expedite NASA con-
         tractor decisions and actions essential to development contracts
         such as the Apollo lunar-landing spacecraft and the second
         stage for the Advanced Saturn booster.
     ∞ Problems with space capsule control system could delay MA-7
         launch attempt a t least until May 19, it was reported from
         Cape Canaveral.
     ∞ NASA Inventions and Contributions Board made awards of less than
         $1,000 to the following NASA employees: Wade E. Lanford,
         Langley Research Center; Billy C. Hughes, John R. Raskin,
         Robert J. Schwinghamer, Wilhelm Angele, and Hans G. Martin-
         eck, Marshall Space Blight Center.
I
      ∞ USAF Atlas ICBM launched from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., launching
I        conducted by 12-man combat crew of SAC’S 565th Strategic
         Missile Squadron from Warren AFB, Wyo.
I

      ∞ USAF Minuteman launched from silo a t Cape Canaveral in successful
II       test flight.
                                                                      77
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

May 12: OSO I, the Orbiting Solar Observatory launched March 7,
     completed 1,000 orbits; approximately 900 telemetry data tapes
     were acquired and forwarded to all experimenters.
                Propulsion Co. test-fired 120-inch diameter solid-
∞ Lockheed
     propellant, segmented motor for more than 120 seconds and pro-
     duced a thrust of almost 400,000 lbs. Direction of exhaust jet
     was repeatedly varied by injection of fluids into the sides of the
     nozzle.
 ∞ Panel of the Federal Council for Science and Technology, headed
     by Allen V. Astin, submitted report to White House. Report
     said that Federal laboratories are in imminent danger of losing
     their best scientists and engineers because present salary scales
     are not competitive. In a memorandum to Federal depart-
     ment and agency heads, President Kennedy stated that the
     Administration’s proposal for pay increases met one of the recom-
     mendations of the panel’s report: “With the increasing impor-
     tance of science and technology in developing our military defense,
     in achieving our foreign policy objectives, and in sustaining the
     health and welfare of every citizen, the Federal Government must
      attract and retain its share of talented scientists and engineers at
      all levels.”
 ∞	 Report at American Assembly-British Institute for Strategic Studies
     forum that Western Europe was planning 440 sounding rocket,
                                              r
      22 satellite, and 2 moon probe launchin
∞ Army Nike-Zeus successfully intercepte          simulated target over
                                                   by 19’0*
     White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico.
 ∞ In speech at Lubbock, Texas, Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M.
     Zuckert said that Armed Forces Day 1962 has a special meaning:
      “It means John Glenn and our rising capabilities in space. It
     means our desire to share space for peaceful purposes. with the
     rest of the world. And it underscores our determinatlon to see
      to it that no nation is disfranchised in space . . .
         “The primary purpose of our arms has always been peace, not
     war . . .
         ‘(Space is the new measure of our problems as well as our oppor-
     tunities. The principal responsibilities for the nation’s space
     program are vested in the National Aeronautics and Space Ad-
     ministration and the Air Force. We work together as a team,
     not rivals. And together we are doing the spadework for the
     space technology of tomorrow.
         “Today, space is still free and open. It must stay that way.
     We can not allow it to be pre-empted tomorrow for use as a mili-
     tary staging area by those who hope to dominate the world.
         ‘(1believe with President Kennedy that space is a great oppor-
     tunitv as well as a great task. . . .”
May 13: In address before joint American Assembly-British Insti-
     tute for Strategic Studies conference a t Brighton, England, John
     J. McCloy urged Western Europe to forego its aspirations to be-
     come a third space power and to cooperate with the US. in the
     exploration of space. Mr. McCloy, chairman of the General
     Advisory Committee to the US. Arms Control and Disarmament
     Agency, appealed to the 70 delegates that once the leaders of the
     Soviet Union “sensed a united position on the part of the West,
        78    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S OF 1962

           they are prepared to moderate their views accordingly.” When
           dealing with the Soviet Union on space issues, McCloy stated:
           “Questions of international prestige quickly emerge and we are
           still plagued with the almost frenetic antipathy of the Soviet
           Union to inspection.”
        May 13: MSFC Ad Hoc Evaluation Team was established for design
           review of tho Centaur vehicle.
        May 14: In NAS broadcast for Voice of America, Dr. Colin S. Pitten-
           drigh, Professor of Biology, Princeton University, said that bio-
           logical engineering for manned space flight will have an influence
           on theoretical physiology, but that “space technology holds far
           less promise of any revolution in biology than in physics.” The
           possibility of extraterrestrial life, he described as (‘the most ex-
           citing scientific question of the day.”
              Optimum conditions for a manned spacecraft with regard to
           temperature, moisture, oxygen, and carbon dioxide can be speci-
           fied. But “we have difficulty in bein precise about anything
                                                    k
           else.” He pointed to the possible exc usion of heavy radiation
           by means of an intense magnetic field, but “can man perform
           normally in such intense magnetic fields?” Little is known about
           the reliability of algae, and new studies of photosynthesis and
           techniques of algoculture are needed. Rhythmic innate oscilla-
           tions, previously considered superficial to t8hephysiological archi-
           tecture of organisms, are a highly significant parameter of physio-
                                     ((

           logical organization.” And the possible effect of the earth’s grav-
           itational field on normal physiological function is not fully known.
           Dr. Pittendrigh concluded : “Clean questions and clean answers
           are going to be difficult for some time. When we put organisms
           into space at present and detect deleterious effects, we are simply
           unable to disentangle the many variables that exist there and
           decide which has been responsible.”
      ∞   U.S. delegate to the 17-nation disarmament conference, Charles
           C. Stelle, urged early action to ban outer space for nuclear arma-
           ments: “This conference could lead to measures designed to
           insure that outer space can become an impetus to man’s peaceful
           progress and not a battle ound in the future.”
       ∞  Testimony of Peb. 27 by ProTJames A. Van Allen before the Houso
I
            Committee on Appropriations on the relative worth of instru-
            mented unmanned stitellites versus manned satellites was re-
I
           leased. Van Allen was misquoted on the wire news services to
            the effect that manned space flight wits of limited scientific
I
            value in the future.
      ∞   FRIENDSHIP 7 capsule went on exhibit a t the Science Museum in
            London in beginning of its tour of European cities.
                                                                             “I
       ∞  Cosmonaut Titov wrote in Pravda on his arrival in MOSCOW:
I

            returned home, heaved in a breathful of clear spring air, and
I

            told the comrades welcoming me: Despite all the comforts of
            America, there is no land on earth better than our dear, wonderful
            Soviet homeland.” He indicated that American astronauts
I
    I
            Alan Shepard and John Glenn have been invited to visit the
            Soviet Union.
      ∞   Drew Pearson referred to Cosmonaut Titov’s recent denial of
    ~




            Pearson’s report of February 23, 1962, that five Russian cosmo-
    I
            nauts had been lost in previous manned space flight attempts.
                                                                   79
                                                      OF 1903
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS

    He pointed out that the unsuccessful attempts were not orbital
    shot, rather were suborbital “rocket rides” such as that of C rd.
    Alan Shepard.
May 15: In testimony before Subcommittee of the Houso Science and
    Astronautics Committee, Dr. Homer E. Newell reviewed history
    of NASA’s  geodetic satellite project, which had been requested in
    the FY 1960 budget. In mid-1960, DOD recommended the geo-
    detic satellit.e program be classified, which w s approved by the
                                                   a
    Unmanned Space Panel of the NASA/DOD AACB in August 1960.
    Thus was created Project Anna, declassified at the COSPAR
    meeting in Washington on April 27, 1962.
  ∞ NASA witnesses testified before a subcommittee of the House Science
    and Astronautics Committee that Centaur rocket development
    administration had in recent months been streamlined. Problems
    in the program were attributed to too austere a budget at the
           (T  owing pains” of a new organization, and unexpected
    start,
    technica difficulties in utilizing high-energy liquid hydrogen as
    a rocket fuel.
  ∞ Dr. Knox Millsaps, Executive Director of the USAF’S Office of
    Scientific Research, stated that 547 basic research projects in
    North America, South America, and Europe have been funded
    by OSR at more than $23.3 million so f a r this fiscal year.
  ∞ Astronaut Scott Carpenter flew simulated MA-7 mission in “Aurora
    7” capsule mated to Atlas booster.
  ∞ USAF announced that an unidentified statellite using a Thor-Agena
    B booster was launched from Vandenberg AFB.
  ∞ Prof. Pierre Auger, executive secretary of the Preparatory Com-
    mittee of the European Space Research Organization (ESRO)
    and the European Launcher Development Organization ( ELDO),
    stated that plans called for the expenditure of $100 million a
    year. Program headquartered in Paris would parallel the work of
    the U.S.’s NASA, sans man-in-space activity. An important part
    of its program would be cooperation with other international and
    national organizations, especially NASA, from which satellites and
    launchers might be obtained. A new firing range at Kiruna,
    Sweden, is envisaged for firings in the northern auroral zone.
  ∞ Naval Ordnance Laboratory announced use of Loki launch tube
    attached to the barrel of a &inch154 naval rifle to launch the
    Hasp (high altitude sounding rocket) for weather soundings from
    ships anywhere at sea.
∞ USAF announced transfer of AFSC’S Ballidc Systems Division this

    summer from West Los Angeles to Norton AFB, San Bernardino,
    Calif., to be completed by summer of 1963.
May 16: Second and third joint Japanese-U.S. space probes success-
    fully launched from NASA Wallops Station, the second Nike-
    Cajun reached 76-mh altitude and the third and last, a night
    shot, reached 80-mile altitude.
 ∞ U.S.delegate to the 17-nation disarmament conference in Geneva,
    Charles C. Stelle, urged the Soviet Union to divorce the question
    of preserving space for peaceful uses from its demands for elimina-
    tion of foreign military bases and rockets designed to deliver
    nuclear weapons. The Soviets have insisted as a first step of
    disarmament the total elimination of vehicles capable of carrying
    nuclear bombs and of foreign bases.
    development programs now approaching expenditures of $12
    billion per year.
 ∞ Proposals to ban orbiting of nuclear weapons, and to seek inter-
    national agreement on space activities irrespective of other
    disarmament measures were included in the final report of the
    second American Assembly-British           Institute for Strategic
    Studies at Brighton, England.
 ∞ Reported that the Soviet Union was seeking through diplomatic
    channels to establish a space satellite tracking station in Austra-
    lia, offering assurances that the station would not be used for
    military purposes or for the introduction of weapons.
May 17: NASA postponed MA-7 fight attempt until a t least May 22,
    1962, because of modification of altitude-sensing instrumentation
    in the parachute deployment system. Project Mercury Astro-
    naut M. Scott Carpenter was pronounced in “excellent condition”
    for his orbital flight after a 5-hour physical examination.
∞ I n an address to the Duke University Symposium on “Regional
    Implications of Space Research,” NASA Administrator James E.
                                                                    81
       ASTRONADTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1902

    permits a number of universities to pool resources for research
    and to plan complementary programs directed to the needs of the
    region. Industry, too, has much to gain from regional coopera-
    tion . . . beginning, more and more, to look to the universities
    of their region for the most important resources of the age-ideas,
    scientific brainpower, and advanced technological skill and
    experience.
       “It is not a question today of whether a region can already
    qualify. . . . The question is whether the region is creatively
    doing what it can to equip its citizens to serve their area and
    their Nation in a period when our prosperity and our very exist-
    ence as a free people depend on scientific and technological leader-
    ship. . .”
May 17: First of a series of 80 rocket probes to determine wind
    patterns over Cape Canaveral initiated by NASA with launch of
    a single-stage Nike to 80,000 ft. where it laid down a white
    smoke screen for subsequent photographic study.
∞  NASA announced that John Stack, Director of Aeronautical Re-
    search, would retire June 1 after 34 years of Federal service with
    NACA and NASA.      No successor was announced. Mr. John Stack
    achieved world-wide eminence for his wind-tunnel research and
    conception of the rocket airplane as a research tool, beginning
    with the X-1 and the D-558, and culminating with the X-15.
    He was awarded the Collier Trophy in 1951 for solution of the
    transonic wind tunnel problem. In 1947, he shared the Collier
    Trophy with Maj. Charles Yeager and Lawrence D. Bell for the
    X-1 which made the first ffight through the speed of sound.
    Stack also received many other awards, including the Sylvanus
    Albert Reed Award of the IAS and the annual medal of the Swedish
    Society of Engineers. He was a fellow of the IAS and the Royal
    Aeronautical Society (England).
∞ In a speech to the American Ordnance Association, Dr. Glenn Sea-
    borg, AEC Chairman, said that nuclear energy provided the most
    feasible means of accomplishing long voyages in space: “To per-
    form long-range, manned missions, it is essential that we increase
    the specific impulse (amount of thrust per pound of propellant)
    of the propulsion system well beyond the values that can be
     achieved with chemical combustion. . . .” He stated that a
    hydrogen-fluorine rocket system, now in research phase, can pro-
    vide up to approximately 475-lbs. thrust per pound of propellant
     (kerosene-oxygen-300 lbs.) . A nuclear rocket, which utilizes
    hydrogen (through its heat exchanger system) could provide high-
    est specific impulse of 800 and above. He reviewed progress of
    Project Rover and Nerva.
  ∞ USAF C-130 transport en route with emergency recovery unit for
     scheduled Mercury MA-7 launching crashed west of Nairobi,
    Eenya. Thirteen airmen were killed.
  ∞ NASA announced that Lockheed Missiles and Space Company had
    been selected for negotiation of a contract for the design, develop-
    ment, fabrication, and testing of the Rift (reactor-in-flight-test)
    stage. The Rift vehicle is intended to flight test the Nerva
     (nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application) being developed
    jointly by NASA and AEC.
82                                             EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL

May 17: USAF announced award of a supplemental contract to General
     Dynamics, San Diego, for work on a global tracking network
      (GLOTRAC) ground system.
∞ Reported that White House hdd endorsed a proposal to abolish

     the five-man AEC, replacing the Commission with a single ad-
     ministrator.
May 18: NASA launched 76-lb. payload to %-mile altitude with
     Nike-Cajun from Wallops Station, a University of Michigan
     experiment to measure air density and composition.
 ∞ In statement before the House Space Subcommittee, Grant L.
     Hansen, Vice President of the Astronautics Division of General
     Dynamics and Director of the Centaur program, stated that
     preliminary data on May 9 explosion indicated that structural
     failure was caused by the “design of the weather shield between
     the nose fairing and the Centaur itself” and the design of weather
     shield “was tin engineering mistake.” Design of the weather
     shield was based, he said, upon assumptions that “turned out to
     be false . . ., very difficult to define by laboratory analysis and
     without full-scale wind-tunnel tests.” In spite of program delays,
     Hansen said that bhe Centaur program had been subjected to
     “unwarranted criticisms.”
∞ In answer to question on Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter’s history of

     motion sickness, John Powers, Mercury information officer,
     said that Carpenter had no such history. He noted that Cos-
     monaut Titov had reported that he had only 350 hours of pilot
     flight time before his space flight, which compares to at least 1,000
     hours for each of the seven Mercury astronauts. “Titov never
     saw his space capsule until 60 days before he flew it,” Powers
     said, “whereas the astronauts have become familiar with their
     capsules over a period of three years.”
 ∞ NASA selected General Dynamics/Convair to design and manu-
     facture “Little Joe 1 ” launch vehicle to be used to boost the
                             1
     Apollo spacecraft on unmanned suborbital test flights. Little
     Joe I1 will be powered by solid-fuel motors in a cluster.
∞ Australian National Observatory announced that it would install

     40-inch telescope on top of Sidney Smith Mountain a t Coona-
     barabran, New South Wales, one which would have three times
      the efficiency of its 74-inch telescope at Mount Stromlo near
     Canberra.
∞ The Geophysics Corp. of        America reported receipt of Weather
     Bureau contract to study and explain the formation of vast
     bands of cloud patterns in the upper atmosphere, a phenomenon
     first revealed in photographs relayed from TIROS I.
 ∞ USAF Minuteman ICBM launched from silo at Cape Canaveral in
     3,600-mile test flight.
May 19: MA-7 launch attempt postponed to May 24 because of
     irregularities detected in temperature control device on a heater
      in the Atlas flight control system.
 ∞ Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA’s       Manned Spacecraft Center
      a t Houston, Texas, received an honorary Doctor of Science degree
      from Indiana Institute of Technology, Fort Wayne, Ind. I n
      address, Dr. Gilruth pointed out that the “American people and
      the free world would not stand for it, if in 10 years the Russians
      were flying through space and we were sitting on the gound.”
                                                                      83
       ASTROhtAtFPICAL AND AERONAU’PICAL EmmS O$ 1962

   At press conference he disagreed with Dr. James A. Van Allen’s
   recent comment about manned space flight: ‘(1respect Dr.
   Van Allen’s talents but I do not agree with him that manned
   orbital flights have no value.”
May 19: An estimated 7,000 persons visited the opening of the Space
   Museum a t the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center.
May 20: Dr. John F. Clark was appointed Associate Director and
   Chief Scientist for NASA Office of Space Sciences. He was form-
   erly Director of Geophysics and Astronomy Programs.
 ∞Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin visited Japan, the 30th country Major
   Gagarin had visited since his space flight.
 ∞Reported that hundreds of Soviet mathematics textbooks are being
   published in English, and that many of them are being used in
   American universities.
May 21: In concluding lecture in a Forum series on Space Science
   broadcast on the Voice of America, Dr. Carl E. Sagen of the
   Institute for Basic Research in Science at the University of Cali-
   fornia (Berkeley), explained that “extraterrestrial life and the
   origin of life are questions intertwined.” Recent study on these
   issues related to four topics: (1) the origin of life on earth; (2) the
   physical environment of the moon and planets; (3) the present
   evidence of life beyond the earth; and (4) prospects for future
   ex loration.
      &e discussed the chemical reactions which must have existed in
   the primitive terrestrial environment and produced organic
   matter. The critical event was the origin of a molecular system
   capable of synthesizing itself, and “this event-which occurred
   some 4,200 million years ago-can be identified with the origin
   of life on Earth.’’ From then on the long evolutionary sequence
   from molecule to Man was under way.
      Dr. Sagen asserted that “through the interaction of organic
   molecules life must arise on countless other worlds, in our solar
   system, and other solar systems . . . [but] the forms of living
   organisms on other planets must be intriguingly diverse.”
      Dr. Sagen reviewed the improbability of life on Venus, the
   possibility of life on the moon, and the “favorable” environmental
   features for life on Mars. It is not, he said, a closed question
   with regard to life on Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
   The presence of extraterrestrial organic matter in meteorites
   “greatly substantiates the belief that organic matter is an abun-
   dant constituent of the solar system.” Detailed characteriza-
   tion of extraterrestrial organisms likely to be found in exploration
   of the moon and the planets “mill open up a new era, not only in
   biolog but in all fields of human endeavor.”
           
∞ William  H.    Evans was appointed by NASA as Director of the Pacific
   Launch Operations Office, Lompoc, Calif. I n this assignment
   he represents NASA in its relationships with PMR, coordinates use
   of range facilities, and provides necessary services and support
   for NASA technical programs and projects at PMR. Prior to his
   association with NASA since January 1961, Evans was Head of
   the Satellite and Space Vehicles Division of PMR, and before
   1957 had served with the Naval Air Missile Test Center a t
   Point Mugu since 1946.
84                                                     OF 1962
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S

May 21: Senate Commerce Committee tentatively approved the
     space communications satellite corporation bill after adopting 32
     amendments, one virtually identical to the bill passed by the
     House on May 3.
∞ Supreme Court of the State of New Jersey ruled unanimously that

     Thiokol Chemical Corporation, producer of the rocket engines
     for the X-15, was liable for property damage caused in testing the
     engine. The Court ordered $25,605 damages to be paid to 15
     home owners near the Picatinny Arsenal, Rockaway Township,
     for cracked foundations, floors, walls, chimneys, and fireplaces.
     Thiokol stated that it would have to pass these costs on to the
     Federal Government, since it had a cost-plus contract.
May 22: OSO I ceased transmission after 1,138 orbits (launched March
     7), having produced for 77 days and provided 200 miles of scien-
     tific data tape. It observed and measured over 75 solar flares
     and subflares.
  ∞ X-15 No. 1 flown in air flow study to an altitude of 97,000 ft. and
     a top speed of 3,477 mph (mach 5.1), piloted by Maj. Robert A.
     Rushworth (USAF).
  ∞ Combined U.S.-U.S.S.R. proposal for $100 million world-wide
     weather research program, including the use of earth satellites,
     was presented to a panel of the World Meteorological Organiza-
     tion (WMO) by Harry Wexler, Research Director of the U.S.
     Weather Bureau, and Viktor Bogayev, Ass’t. Director of the
     Soviet Hydrometrical Service, in Geneva, Switzerland. Pro-
     posed plan, if approved by the WMO Executive Committee, would
     then be considered by UNESCO.
  ∞ Navy Astronautics Group established a t PMR its first space satellite
     command, to operate the Transit navigational satellite system.
     In addition to the headquarters a t Point Mugu, the command will
     eventually encompass a satellite command and ejection station,
     computer center, operations control center, and satellite tracking
     facility a t Point Mugu, and other tracking facilities a t Winter
      Harbor, Maine; Minneapolis, Minn.; and Wahiawa on Oahu,
     Hawaii.
∞  First display of FRIENDSHIP 7 capsule in Belgrade, Yugoslavia.
0

     When President Tito viewed it he said: “I was under the impres-
     sion when I saw the documentary film that the capsule was
     larger but it’s fantastic . . .”
∞ National Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy made public the
      request of eleven scientists who had petitioned President Kennedy
      to postpone the projected explosion of a hydrogen device in space.
      They had urged that the project be deferred until it could be
      reviewed by the Consultative Group on Potentially Harmful
      Effects of Space Experiments of COSPAR.
 ∞ The Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories launched a 150-foot
      balloon made of .OOl-inch-thick plastic. The test, intended to
      provide data for better research balloons, would send the balloon
      to an altitude of 117,000 feet for a fifty-hour period.
May 23: NASA and the Swedish Committee on Space Research an-
      nounced signing of a memorandum of understanding for a co-
      operative program in space research. Four Nike-Cajun sounding
      rockets were scheduled for launching during the coming summer
      from the Vidsel Range in Sweden with scientific payloads to
                                                                       85
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1982

   make direct samplings of noctilucent clouds (clouds of unknown
   origin, faintly luminous, which appear in certain regions of the
    auroral zone).
May 23: May 24 was declared a day safe from major solar flares for
      
   Mercury-Atlas 7 launch attempt by the Sacramento Peak Ob-
   servatory of the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories.
 ∞ In regular press conference, President Kennedy answered a question
    on the possible US.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space because of
    recent progress in formulating a joint proposal for the use of
   satellites for weather analysis: (‘We felt the best place to start
    was on weather, and any progress we can make on that would be
    very welcome. I must say that we strongly support any cooper-
    ative effort we could make on weather, predictions of storms, and
    all of the rest, and I hope it will lead t,o other areas of cooperation
    in space.”
 ∞ In testimony on proposed Federal salary reform before the House
    Post Office and Civil Service Committee, NASA Administrator
    James E. Webb stressed the requirements of the national space
    program for adequately paid scientific and technical personnel in
    government. He pointed out that one third of NASA’s           personnel
    were professional scientists and engineers, one third skilled crafts-
   men and research mechanics and their supervisors, one eighth
    were engineering and scientific technicians, and one sixth were
    clerical and secretarial. The remainder were professional-level
   specialists in management, legal counsel, librarians, editors, etc.
       Mr. Webb said that in considering pay raise legislation (H.R.
    10480) the Federal Government must be able to compete favor-
    ably in the nation-wide labor market and that present salaries
   must be raised to have ‘(reasonable comparity” outside of Gov-
   ernment .
∞ USAF launched a satellite with a Blue Scout booster, from Point
   Arguello; according t o U.N. Public Registry, did not achieve
   orbit.
∞ Congressman John J. Rhodes (Ariz.) polled his district, receiving
    5,000 replies to a series of current questions. To the question-
    “Are you in favor of United States-Russian space cooperation?”-
   the response was: 19% said “Yes”; and, 70% said “No.”
May 24: AURORA 7 with Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., USN)
    as pilot, launched on MA-7 orbital mission by Atlas booster from
    Cape Canaveral, the second U S . manned orbital flight and the
   fourth US. manned space flight. Almost faultless countdown,
   launch was delayed only briefly by ground fog, and Mercury
   spacecraft was placed into orbit a t 17,532 mph (apogee: 167.4
   miles; perigee: 99 miles; period: 88.3 minutes). Astronaut
    Carpenter performed series of space science and technical de-
    velopment experiments including visual and photographic ob-
   servations of star fields and “white particles,” consumption of
   solid foods, release of tethered multi-colored balloon to test
   sighting, and observation of separated Atlas booster. 81,200-
   mile flight featured attitude stabilization and control pilotage for
    completion of three orbits, and monitoring of control-systems
   fuel for proper r e t r o h attitude. Re-entry caused landing im-
   pact point over 200 miles beyond intended area and beyond
   radio range of recovery forces. After landing, Carpenter egressed
86                     AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 Q 62
       ASTRONAUTICAL

   through top of capsule and climbed on inflated raft awaiting
   rescue, to be joined by two USAF paramedics, Airman John T.
   Heitsch and S/Sgt. Ray E. McClure, who inflated Stulken col-
   lar to prevent capsule from sinking. After three hours on
   water, Astronaut Carpenter was picked up by a helicopter from
   U.S.S. Intrepid, and his capsule was retrieved by the destroyer
   Pierce. Astronaut Carpenter was reported in good physical
   condition, and flown to Grank Turk Island in the Bahamas for 48-
   hour debriefings and medical examinations.
May 24: President Kennedy personally congratulatcd Astronaut M.
   Scott Car enter by telephone shortly after the AURORA 7 pilot ar-
   rived by !elicopter aboard the carrier Intrrpid,saying: ‘(. . . 1
              l
   wanted to tell you ‘we are relieved and very proud of your trip.
   I am glad that you got picked up in good shape and we want
   to tell you that we are all for you and send you the very best of
   luck to you and your wife.”
      Carpenter said: “My apologies for not having aimed B little
   bit better on re-entry.”
      President Kennedy: “Oh, fine and good. We want to con-
   gratulate you and I look forward to seeing you in Washington
   sometime soon . . . .11
 ∞ Saturn SA-3 launch vehicle was static test-fired a t MSFC for 119
   seconds, producting near 1.3 million pounds of thrust.
 ∞ The House of Representatives (342-0) approved the NASA author-
   ization for FY 1963 of $3.67 billion. This was almost three
   times the NASA budget for BY 1962.
 ∞ Research Center for Celestial Mechanics a t Yale University an-
   nounced by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research and the
   Office of Naval Research, to be headed by Dr. Dirk Brouwer,
   Director of the Yale Observatory. The facility, to be opened
   on July 1, will seek new approaches for problems involving earth
   satellites, lunar and interplanetary probes, and the predetermina-
   tion of trajectories for interplanetary vehicles.
 ∞ X-15 flight postponed so that radar tracking systems would not
   interfere with the flight of AURORA 7.
 ∞ In speech a t Cleveland, Miss., General Bernard A. Schriever said:
    ‘(As long as the Soviets remain committed to their goal of world
   domination, their accomplisl~ments space can be a potential
                                          in
   source of danger to free men everywhere. In their efforts to
   bring about the complete victory of their system, they have not
   hesitated to use any means. There is no reason to believe that
   space will be an exception. . . .
      “Xational defense missions in space have certain unique
   requirements, but in many ways they are closely related to other
   aspects of the national space program. There has been and
   continues to be close cooperation between the Air Force and
     NASA.
       “The rate of progress in our space program will be determined
    by two factors. The first of these is research. Development of
    space technology urgently calls for new knowledge. . . .
       “Research alone IS not enough. The knowledge we acquire
    must be applied in timely fashion. The key to this application
    is management. . . . ? J
 ∞ USAF Titan ICBM destroyed in fueling test a t Chico, Calif.
                                                                     87
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

May 24: Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was selected as the National
     Father of the Year. Earlier this month, his mother had been
     selected as World Mother of the Year.
∞ Air Force announced the award of a contract to Pan American
   
     World Airways for operation and logistic sup ort of a Rocket
                                                     i
     Range Test Facility a t Fort Churchill, Cana a. Operated by
     the U.S. Army for the past five years, the Fort Churchill Test
     Range will transfer to USAF operational contract on July 1 of
     this year and will be managed by the Office of Aerospace Research.
     The facility was originally established as a joint Canadian-U.S.
     project to support the International Geophysical Year.
May 25: NASA launched Aerobee research rocket with 213-lb. ayload
       
     containing four scientific experiments from wallops Lation.
     Reaching an altitude of almost 125 statute miles, the nose cone
     was recovered by an S-62 helicopter some 52 miles down range.
∞ In speech before the Aviation and Space Writers Association meet-

     ing in San Francisco, Dr. Harry Goett, Director of GSFC, reviewed
     the events in the life of scientific satellites after they are placed
     into orbit. Once in orbit, he said, a scientific satellite “does not
     have striking news value. . . .
        “Except for manned space projects there is no single per-
     sonality on whom the spotlight can be concentrated; the job of
                                         Ir
     putting together the cosmic jigsaw uzzle of space from the bits
     and pieces obtained from our sate ites is one that engages the
     effort of many people throughout the scientific community; and
     this jigsaw puzzle goes together so gradually that there are no
     singular events which merit a headline. I suspect that there are
     Nobel prizes in the making, but it is going to be difEcult to
     determine who should get the medal.”
        Dr. Goett, reviewing the scientific accomplishments in space,
     said that the general public needs to understand this part of the
     space effort “on the basis of its real accomplishments and poten-
     tialities.” He said that this was a real challenge to the space
     writers.
∞ In speech a t the Seattle World’s Fair, Secretar          of State Dean
                                                     d
     Rusk urged that activities in space be subjecte to international
     law and supervision before it is too late. Without international
     regulation, he said, “the frontiers of space might be pierced by
     huge nuclear-propelled dreadnaughts, armed with thermonuclear
     weapons. The moon might be turned into a military base.
     Ways might be found to cascade radioactive waves upon an en-
     emy. Weather control might become a military weapon. . . .>,
∞ One year ago, President Kennedy      in his address to Congress declared
     the national space goal of “randing an American on the moon
     in this decade.”
∞ Velery Lutsky, Soviet astronomer of the Moscow Planetarium,
     said in English-language Radio Moscow broadcast to North
     America, that the flight of AURORA 7 made it “more urgent”
     that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. cooperate in s ace exploration.
 ∞ Consolidation Steering Committee of the Boarcfof the American
     Rocket Society (ARS)and the Council of the Institute of the
     Aeros ace Sciences (IAS) completed preliminary “Principles of
     Conso%dation” for a proposed new society to be known as the
     American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA).
88     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

May 26: NASA’s F-1 rocket engine first fired at full power (more than
    1.5 million pounds of thrust) for full duration at Edwards, Calif.
  Army Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully test-fired all three
    stages a t PMR.
May 27: I n special ceremony a t Cape Canaveral, Astronaut M. Scott
    Carpenter and Walter Williams, Director of Operations for
    Project Mercury, were both awarded NASA Distinguished Serv-
    ice Medals by NASA Administrator Webb at the direction of
    President Kennedy.
∞ At NASA news conference a t Cape Canaveral, Astronaut M. Scott

    Carpenter gave a detailed chronological account of his three-
    orbit flight in AURORA 7. He quoted Mercury training psy-
    chologist Dr. Robert B. Voas, who had told Carpenter that data-
    collection is the “heart and soul of science.” Carpenter said:
    “And that’s true. Isolated data points mean nothing. We
    now have two data points on nearly everything. His [John
    Glenn’s] flight confirms Imine [and imine confirms his . . . .    11


       Carpenter said of weightlessness that “there was the sensation
    of floating . . . Every function is easier when you are weightless.
    It’s the only time I’ve ever spent in that [space] suit that was
    comfortable.”
       He reported briefly on his launch into orbit, his scientific
    observation, re-entry, and recovery, full scientific reports of
    which would be forthcoming in future weeks.
∞  Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin in Tokyo said: “The U.S.S.R. is a t present
    constructing a giant spaceship which cannot be compared to
    those I and Titov rode in size.”
 ∞ DOD announced establishment of the Defense Industry Council to
     provide a focal point for the review and discussion of the findings
     of industry study groups as well as a forum for mutual exchange
     of logistics management objectives and views.
May 28: I n speech on the floor of the House of Representatives,
     Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of the Committee on
     Science and Astronautics, paid tribute to Astronaut Scott
     Carpenter, stating in part:
        “Science is the beneficiary of his operation. . . . Commander
     Carpenter’s success is a compliment to the pro ram; it is a trib-
     ute to American ingenuity and American abzity to solve the
     mysteries of outer space. . .
        “To Scott Carpenter, to Alan Shepard, to Gus Grissom, and
     to John Glenn, this House and the American people owe a great
     debt of gratitude. From a scientific standpoint, I am happy to
     announce to you today the great success of this orbital flight.”
 ∞ Senator Howard W. Cannon of the Committee on Aeronautical and
     Space Sciences spoke on the floor on the short supply of scien-
     tists available to NASA and to its private industry contractors.
     He proposed a closer relationship between NASA and the univer-
     sities: “We need to develop and develop from the beginning,
     space-oriented physicists, space engineers, space chemists, a?d
     space biologists.” He cited NASA’s      cooperative program m t h
     universities established without the benefit of legislation, and
     said that he proposed to introduce legislation to amend the NASA
     Act for the purpose of: “(1) to increase the number of under-
     graduates who will make space science and space engineering-
                                                                      89
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

     their primary field of work; (2) to provide NASA with clear direc-
     tive and the necessary funds to establish an integrated and
     intimate program of research, fellowships, grants and curriculum
    specialization with universities . . .; and (3) to establish one or
     more university-operated space laboratories which will stimulate
     basic research and train professionals. . . .jJ

May 28: Metal fragments resembling top of gasoline drum, thought
        
     to have fallen from the MA-7 Atlas booster, were discovered near
     Barkly East, South Africa.
 ∞ U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS v (apogee: 1,000 miles; perigee: 126
     miles; inclination: 49”; period: 103 minutes), and said that it
     was an instrumented payload. Weights of the payloads of the
     Cosmos series initiated on March 16 have not been announced,
     presumably to veil the reported new launch rockets being used.
∞ In an impromptu speech at opening of an Italian industrial exhibi-
     tion in MOSCOW,   Soviet Premier Khrushchev acknowledged that
     the U.S. had achieved “notable successes” in space and
     saluted the courage of Mercury astronauts Glenn and Car-
     penter. Commenting on M. Scott Carpenter’s MA-7 flight
     in AURORA 7, Khrushchev declared:
        “I congratulate him especially because he gave proof of great
     courage in a situation in which he could have been burned in
     his s h p or drowned i the sea. All the scientists could do from
                            n
     the earth waa to advise him t o drink water and to land. But
     he had the presence of mind and the courage to continue his
     flight.”
May 29: M. Scott Carpenter Day in Boulder, Colo. Presented with
     an engineering degree from the University of Colorado, Astronaut
     Carpenter said that he hoped the degree, which he missed in
     1949 because he failed a course in heat transfer, could be justified
     by the “unique” education in the subject received during his
     re-entry in AURORA 7. At a news conference, Carpenter said:
     “All mankind stands to gain more as a result of these fights-
     and mark my words, man will be going to the moon and neigh-
     boring planets in the near future-than in any previous explora-
     tion in the history of the world.”
  ∞ Before the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the U.N.
                                                                     Dr.
     Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, NASA’s
    Homer E. Newell of the U.S. delegation proposed that an inter-
    national launching site for space research be established near the
    Equator. Such a launching site would allow study of the equa-
    torial electrojet (electric current in upper atmosphere .which
    follows the geomagnetic E uator) and of the ionosphere wlthout
    interference from the Van Ill en radiation belts.
  ∞ Joint DOD-NASA Agena D Agreement signed which would authorize
    the DOD to develop a standardized Agena D stage for joint use
    with the Atlas and Thor first stages. Agena D is designed to
    use present fight-proven e uipment, to emphasize simplification
                                1
    in vehicle design, to empoy production techniques that will
    allow adaptability to advanced components without basic design
    change, and to permit lower cost and firm scheduling of space
    shots. Agreement supplemented bpsic DOD-NABA a eement
    effective Feb. 23,1962, on the National Launch Vehicle gogram.
    97317-667
90     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

May 29: NASA announced that ARIEL I, the U.S.-U.K. ionosphere
    satellite launched on April 26, was functionin well except for one
                                                  f
    experiment, the solar ultraviolet detector. Te emetry signals were
    being received by fifteen ground stations around the world, and
    the tape recorder, which recorded on each orbit, was being
    commanded successfully about twelve times a day.
∞ At opening session of the Legal Subcommittee of the United Nations

    Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, US. delegate,
    Leonard Meeker, proposed that all members of the U.N. under-
    take to aid space vehicles or astronauts in distress, and to return
    to the launching countries any that are forced to land elsewhere.
∞  USAF announced launching of an unidentified satellite from Vanden-
    berg AFB, Calif., using a Thor-Agena B booster.
 ∞ FRIENDSHIP 7 space capsule arrived in Ghana in its global exhibition
    tour.
 ∞ Sir Bernard Love11 of England described the high-altitude nuclear
    tests (Project Fishbowl) as a “black moment for humanity and
    an affront to the civilized world . . .”
May 30: M. Scott Carpenter Day in Denver as an estimated 300,000
       ersons witnessed the Memorial Day parade honoring the
     fhercury Astronaut from Colorado.
∞ An Australian rocket with five cameras was launched from Woomera

     as TIROS IV assed overhead. The rocket’s camera took photo-
                 f
     graphs of couds from 80-mile altitude while TIROS IV made
     simultaneous photography of cloud cover from 400-mile altitude.
 ∞ The Science Minister of France, Gaston Palewski, outlined plans
     for orbiting a satellite at a Cabinet meeting. The date had been
     set “almost to the hour” for the launching of the f i s t French
     space satellite, although the actual date was kept secret, accord-
     ing to Information Minister Alain Peyrefitte.
∞ Pioneer naval aviator, Vice Admiral Patrick N. L. Bellinger, died.

     In 1915, Bellinger became the second American flier to be launched
     b catapult, established flying boat distance record, established
      9
     a titude record of 10,000 feet, and participated in aerial spotting
     for artillery fie. In 1916, he made naval tests of live bombing
     and practical tests of air-to-ground radio communication. In
     1917, he made machine-gun firing tests from seaplane and first
     night seaplane flights using floodlights. In May 1919, he com-
     manded the NC-1 in transatlantic flight to the Azores, damage to
     aircraft ended the fli h t there. During World War 1 , he was
                                                               1
                          K
     commander of the At antic Fleet Air Force.
May 31: Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter returned to work a t Langley
     AFB facilities of the Manned Spacecraft Center after a four-day
      trip to Colorado. All seven Mercury astronauts were scheduled
      to receive Peninsula Distinguished Service Awards, a tribute
     from several civic groups on Virginia’s lower peninsula, on June 1.
  ∞ AEC announced that U.S. would begin “rocket borne” nuclear tests
      at an altitude of “tens of kilometers” shortly after nightfall on
     June 1 a t the Johnston Island test area.
  ∞ Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories announced series of
     three high-altitude balloon astronomy experiments-Star Gazer,
      Sky Top, and Balast-to be conducted later this year. The
     primary objective would be to obtain more and complete infor-
     mation about the space environment with emphasis on the moon,
     Mars, and Venus.
                                                                    91
           ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

May 31: A Blue Scout booster combination space probe was launched
   from Point Arguello, Calif., by the Air Force. No details were
     released.
         superpressure balloon made a record-breaking nineteenday
   ∞ USAF
0
    flight a t a constant altitude of 68,000 feet in a test conducted by
     Cambridge Research Laboratories. The balloon was launched
     from Kindley AFB, Bermuda, and landed by radio command in
     the Pacific, near Iwo Jima, 3,600 miles west of Hawaii, covering
     a total of 9,300 miles.
During May: Checkout was completed and the University of Alaska
     assumed responsibility for the Alaska Data Acquisition Facility
     near Fairbanks. Part of the GSFC system, the Alaskan facility is
     an 85-ft. dish and its associated electronics system will be used on
     tracking and data acquisition of polar-orbiting Nimbus, Ego
     (Eccentric Geophysical Observatory), and Pogo (Polar-Orbiting
    Geophysical Observatory) satellites of GSFC.
 ∞ Announced that the Nippon Electric Co. of Japan (NEC)was con-
    structing several mc-1 active repeater communications s:itrellites
    to be launched by NASA Scout or Thor-Delta boosters during the
    Olympic Games in Japan in 1964.
 ∞ NASA Langley Research Center announced contract with Space-
    General Corp. for the development of an inflatable paraglider to
    measure micrometeroid flux in the lower regions of space up to
    700,000 feet. Inflatable Micronieteroid Parxglider (IMP) will
    test new sensor system consisting of alternate layers of mylar and
    aluminurn and will determine suitability of inflatable re-entry
    paraglider.
 ∞ Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru of India visited the tracking stw-
    tion built by GSFC and located at Ahineclabnd, 300 miles north of
    Bombay.
 ∞ High interest in the Rogallo-wing concept among amateur aircraft-
    builders reported to have concerned NASA developers since appar-
    ent simplicity of the flexible wing offers serious trouble.
 ∞ Rep. Edgar Hiestand asked citizens of the 21st Congressional Dis-
    trict of California--“Do you consider scientific information
    resulting from a U.S. moon flight worth its $40 billion cost?”
    Results of the poll were: 44% replied “no”; 35% replied LLyes”:
    and 2 1% replied “undecided .”
 ∞ Project 60 established by Secretary of Defense to improve field oper-
    ations involved in management of DOD and N A ~ A     contracts.
 ∞ Awards for 1961 announced by the American Helicopter Society:
    first Igor I. Sikorsky International Trophy to Mikhail L. Mil of
    the Soviet Union; Dr. Alexander Klemin Award to Brig. Gen.
    Robert R. Williams, US. Army Aviation Center Commander;
    Capt. Wm. J. Kossler Award to Air Rescue Service, MATS; Fred-
    erick L. Feinberg Award to Lt. Col. Francis M. Carney (USAF) ;
    and the Grover E. Bell Award to the engineering organization of
    Sikorsky Aircraft.
∞ The FA1 certified that a Soviet E-166 jet fighter piloted on October

    7, 1961, by A. Fedotov had set a new world speed record of
    1,491.9 mph over a 100-km. closed course. Thie record was pre-
    viously held by the McDonnell F4H-1 Phantom T which flew the
                                                         I
    course a t 1,390.24 in September 1960. The FA1 also certified
92    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    several speed, altitude, and altitude-with-payloads records the
    Russians had claimed for the Beriev M-10 jet seaplane.
During May: Swedish industrial group formed in Stockholm with aim
    o! studying peaceful applications of space research, a branch of
    Sveriges Mekanforbund, a general industrial organization.
    Among those participating are Saab Aircraft Go., Telefon AB
    LM Ericcson, Svenska Flygmotor AB, and Svenska AB Gasac-
    cummulator (Aga) .
 ∞ National Society of Professional Engineers Award of 1962 announced
    for Dr. Charles Stark Draper of MIT for his “outstanding contri-
    butions to the military affairs of the country . . . 1’
 ∞ The FBdBration Aeronautique Internationale (FAI) received the
    Edward Warner Award granted every second year by the Inter-
    national Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Council, for “out-
    standing contributions to the development of international civil
    aviation.”
 ∞ IAS awarded its Flight Test Engineering Fellowship to Raymond P.
    Boyden, Director of Engineering, U.S. Army Hq., St. Louis.
    Gene J. Matranga of NASA’s     Flight Research Center and Maj.
    James C. Wayne (USAF) were named runnerups. All will attend
    Prince ton’s Aeronautical Engineering Department.
                             JUNE 1962
June 1: x 1 No. 2 flown in evaluation test of an alternate stability
         -5
     augmentation system and returned to earth’s atmosphere a t a
     23’ an le of attack, Maj. Robert White (USAF) as pilot. Flight
           f
     reache maximum speed of 3,750 mph (mach 5.53) and a peak
     altitude of 129,000 feet.
  ∞ USAF launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena B booster,
     from Vandenberg AFB, Calif.
  ∞ Deadline for applications for NASA’s astronaut positions; NASA
                                         new
     began screening the more-than-250 applications received. The
     armed services supplied 53 of the applications while more than
     200 civilians submitted applications. Once selected, the new
     astronauts would undergo intensive training at Manned Space-
     craft Center for Projects Gemini and Apollo.
 ∞ First African showing of FRIENDSHIP 7, Astronaut John Glenn’s
     space capsule, drew record crowds. USIA reported that over
     40,000 persons had viewed the capsule in Accra, Ghana, in three
     days, more than a t previous showings in London, Paris, Madrid,
     and Belgrade.
∞ The seven Mercury astronauts were presented with Distinguished
     Service Awards from the Lower Vir inia Peninsula in ceremonies
     a t the Manned Spacecraft Center I q. a t Langley AFB, Va.
                                         ?
June 2: USAF announced that OSCAR 11 satellite had been launched
    piggyback on an unidentified satellite on June 1, on behalf of the
    American Radio Relay League. With a 92-minute period, the
     10-lb. satellite broadcasts “Hi” in Morse code on 144.993 mega-
    cycles for use by amateur radio operators. Unlike OSCAR I
    launched on December 10, 1961, advance notice was not given
     the Project Oscar Association on the launching of OSCAR 11.
 ∞ Navy successfully fired a Polaris missile from submerged nuclear
    submarine U.S.S. Thomas Edison, off Cape Canaveral. The
    Polaris flew some 1,500 miles.
∞ Scientists of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, a t
    Boulder, Colo., after intensive interviews with Astronaut Scott
    Carpenter, concluded that the layer of “haze” reported on the
    horizon by both Carpenter and Glenn was in reality the phenom-
    enon known as airglow-the emission of light of various colors
    and wavelengths, caused by chemical reactions in gas molecules
    in the upper atmosphere.
 ∞ NASA reported it had received more than 700 requests for personal
    appearances by the Mercury astronauts for the July 4th holiday,
    but there was little likelihood that any would be accepted. AS-
    tronaut John Glenn had received more than 8,000 requests for
    appearances since his orbital flight on Feb. 20, 1962.
                                                             93
94     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

June 3: Soviet Government issued a statement which warned that
     high-altitude nuclear tcsts by the U.S. would “carry the nuclear
     arms race into outer space.” Addressed to “all states and
     peoples,” the statement said that the test could disrupt radio
     communication, endanger future flights by cosmonauts, and
     “change the weather.” The statement further warned that the
     U.S. would not be permitted to gain any military advantages
     from the tests.
 ∞ Worst single-aircraft disaster in commercial aviation history, when
     Air France Boeing 707 crashed and burned on takeoff at Orly
     Field, Paris, killing 130 passengers and crew.
June 4: High-altitude nuclear test over Johnston Island in the Pacific
     failed when Thor rocket and the thermonuclear device were de-
     stroyed by the safety officer “because the tracking system was
     malfunctioning.” Debris fell into the ocean well within the 520-
     mile-radius safety area around Johnston Island.
 ∞ Polaris missile launched from AMR was destroyed 90 seconds after
     launch when it veered off course.
 ∞ U.S.S.R. charged in newspapers and radio broadcasts that purpose
     of U.S. high-altitude nuclear tests over the Pacific was to prepare
     for a surprise nuclear attack against the Communist bloc, con-
     tended the tests were designed to perlect ways of blacking out
     radio and radar communication, thereby preventing a retaliatory
     strike at the U.S.
 ∞ Boeing-Vertol was selected by the Air Force to build long-range
     helicopter capable of carrying a payload of at least 5,000 lbs. for
     200 nautical miles or 2,400 lbs. for 700 miles. Modification of
     Vertol 107 helicopter, now in production for civil use, would
     satisfy USAF’S Specific Operational Requirement 190.
 ∞ Army fired Pershing missile from AMR. The 200-mile flight was a
     severe test of the missile’s guidance, with the launch made in the
     teeth of 50-mph winds; the missile rose w-ith a “definite tilt”
     before the guidance corrected its attitude.
 ∞ House of Representatives passed a bill (H.R. 10618) granting the
     consent of Congress to the Southern Interstate Nuclear Compact,
     which would establish a regional cooperative effort to acquire
     nuclear resources and facilities. NASA is one of the Federal
     agencies authorized under the bill to cooperate with the Compact.
June 4-5: Thirty-fifth anniversary of the second nonstop trans-
     atlantic flight, by Clarence C. Chamberlin and Charles A. Levine.
     Taking off from Roosevelt Field, L.I., on June 4, 1927, they
     followed much the same route taken in May of the same year by
     Charles A. Lindbergh, but flew on to Eisleben, Germany, for a
     nonstop distance record of 3,911 miles. Mr. Chamberlin, now
     68, recalled in an interview that they ran into bad weather over
     England, climbed their single-engine Wright-Bellanca to over
     20,000 ft., although “now they tell you you must have oxygen
     above 10,000 feet.”
June 5: Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and his family were received
      by President Kennedy at the White House, then flew to New
     York for the city’s reception and to receive New York City’s
     highest award, the Gold Medal. The reception committee
     included, in addition to Mayor Wagner, former Presidents
     Herbert C. Hoover and Harry S. Truman.
                                                                     95
       ASTBONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1983

         NASA explained the reasons for the 250-mile overshoot of the
June 5:
    landing by AURORA 7, attributing most of the overshoot to a 25’
    error in the capsule’s yaw attitude at the time the retrorockets
    were Ced. This caused the thrust of the retrorockets to be
     exerted on the capsule at an angle rather than in line and resulted
    in less slowin of the capsule and consequently a shallower descent
                  7
    curve than p anned. This accounted for some 175 miles of the
    250-mile overshoot as well as a deviation of 15 miles to the north
    of the orbital track. Other factors that contributed t o the over-
     shoot were the retrorockets delivered about three per cent less than
     the specified thrust, and the retrorockets fired about three
    seconds late.
  ∞ A cooperative program for testing Relay and Telstar communica-
     tions satellites by NASA and communications organizations in the
    US., Europe, and South America was announced by NASA. Pro-
     viding ground stations and conducting the communications
    experiments would be AT&T, I T ~ T ,British General Post Office,
     French National Center for Telecommunications Studies, West
     German Post Office, Brazilian Department of Posts and Tele-
     graphs, and Telespazio of Italy. The foreign organizations would
    participate on a voluntary basis with no exchange of funds by the
       overnments. NASA would provide ground stations with orbital
     5ata on the satellites.
  ∞ U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, meeting in
     Geneva, set up a ten-nation working group under the Scientific
     and Technical Subcommittee to examine international exchanges
     of scientific information on outer space. Takeo Hatanaka of
    Japan was named chairman; other nations represented were the
     US., U.K., U.S.S.R., Belgium, Chad, France,Hungary, Romania,
     and the United Arab Republic. Another group, chaired by W. A.
    Sarabhai of India, was set up to examine the U.S. proposal of an
    international research rocket) range to be established near the
    Equator.
  ∞ Space Vehicle Panel of the President’s Science Advisory Committee,
    headed by Dr. Jerome V. Wiesner, visited MSFC.
∞ Greenhut Construction Co. was awarded $903,158 contract for mod-
    ification of a Saturn static test stand a t MSFC, Huntsville, Ala.
    Built in 1956 for Redstone and Jupiter missile test-firings, the
    stand was later altered to accommodate the huge Saturn S-I
    stage. Under this contract, the test stand would be modified to
    provide two test positions capable of holding the Saturn stage,
    with work to be completed by February 1963.
June 6: Three sounding rockets were launched from NASA’s        Wallops
    Station, Va.: The first, a Nike-Apache, was launched a t 7:40
    PM (EDT), with a 70-lb. payload containing a Pitot-static probe,
    reaching 78 miles altitude; the second, a Nike-Cajun, was launched
    a t 8:05 PM, consisted of 11 e losive charges and a balloon,
    released from 25 miles to 64 m’ es altitude; the third, a Nike-
                                      ? l
    Asp, was launched at 8:56 PM, consisted of sodium vapor clouds
    to measure atmospheric winds and diffusion, ejected a t about 20
    miles and extending to a peak altitude of about 100 miles.
 ∞ NASA announced that a contract would be negotiated with the Linde
    Co., a division of United Carbide Cor ., to supply liquid hydrogen
                                          f
    for use on the West Coast, particular y for development of RL-10
96     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    engine and for the 1.2-million-pound-thrust M-1 engine under
    development by Aerojet-General. Linde would build a plant at
    Sacramento, Calif.
June 6: U.S. patent (No. 3,008,154) was granted to Dr. Vladimir K.
    Zworykin for a rocket to be used in detecting strength and polarity
    of electric fields in clouds. Such data could then be used in control
    of cloud movements and in effecting weather changes. Patent
    was first applied for in 1948 but until now was kept secret at,
    request of DOD. Dr. Zworykin is a consultant to the Princeton
    Laboratories of RCA and honorary vice president of RCA.
June 7: X-15 No. 1 flown to 3,716 mph by NASA pilot Joseph Walker
    and put through a series of high-speed sharp-angle maneuvers
    involving banks and testing a t three angles of attack. Skin tem-
    peratures may have reached l,OOOo; the rocket engine developed
    some roughness in the course of the flight.
  ∞ Nike-Cajun vehicle with an experiment to measure winds and
    temperatures in the upper atmosphere was launched from NASA’s
    Wallops Station. In the ni h t flight, 12 special explosive charges
                                c?i
    were ejected and detonate at intervals from about 25 st. mi.
    altitude up to about 58 st. mi.
 ∞ Pakistan made its first space experiment, the launching of a Rehbar
    I sounding rocket from a site near Karachi. Part of a coopera-
    tive program between NASA and the Pakistan Upper Atmosphere
    and Space Research Committee, the Rehbar I was a Nike-
    Cajun rocket supplied by the U.S., carrying a sodium vapor pay-
    load to an altitude of about 80 miles to measure upper-altitude
    winds. Several more such launches are programed for the next
    few months. Prior to the launches, Pakistani scientists and
    technicians were given training in NASA research and launch
    centers.
 ∞ NASA announced selection of Bendix Corp.’s Radio Division, Tow-
    son, Md., for contract to operate five of NASA’s  worldwide Project
    Mercury tracking and communications stations. Two-year, $10
    million contract also called for engineering and operations serv-
    ices for all Mercury stations, beginning January 1, 1963. Under
    incentive contract, Bendix would have opportunity to earn bonus
    payments above its fixed fee by demonstrating superior per-
     formance; this contract probably first awarded by any agency to
     provide monetary incentive for outstanding performance in
     service-type work.
 ∞ USAF Titan I1 ICBM launthed from AMR on a planned 5,000-mi. test
    flight, the missile falling short of its target but achieving most
     of its test objectives).
  ∞ USAF B-52H claimed a world record for nonstop, non-refueled
     distance flight over n closed circuit, having flown 11,400 miles
     in 22 hours, 38 minutes, 41.8 seconds, with an average speed of
     510 mph. The closed-circuit course ran from Seymour Johnston
     AFB, N.C. , to Bermuda; Sondrestrom, Greenland ; Anchorage,
     Alaska; Los Angeles, Calif.; Key West, Fla.; and back to Sey-          ~




    mour Johnson. Yilot was Capt. William M. Stevenson (USAF);
     copilot was Capt. Floyd J. Schoendiest (USAF). Present record
    is held by Lt. Col. J. R. Grissom (USAF), who on December 14,
     1960, flew a B-52G a distance of 10,078.84 miles.
                                                                      97
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

June 7: NASA announced the a pointment of Dr. Richard B. Morrison
    as Director of Launch Vebcles and Pro ulsion Programs, Office
                                              d?
    of Space Sciences, in NASA Hq., succee mg Col. Donald Heaton
    (USAF). Dr. Morrison was previously professor of aeronautical
    engineering and supervisor of the Aircraft Propulsion Laboratory
    at the University of Michigan.
∞ ONR’S 85-ft.) steerable radiotelescope dedicated a t Hat Creek Radio
    Astronomy Facility, Hat Creek, Calif. Designed for extensive
    mapping of the galax -and particularly the hydrogen-gas clouds
                           I?           Philco-built telescope would be
    of the galactic nuceus-the
    operated by University of California.
 ∞ U.S. Embassy in Warsaw announced withdrawal of U.S. offer to
    display the FRIENDSHIP 7 capsule in Poland during its inter-
    national goodwill tour. Reason given was that the “Polish
    authorities are unable to give a positive reply to our offer.”
June 8: Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA,
    announced jointly with Soviet representative Anatoly Blagan-
    ravov in Geneva that a U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement had been
    reached to coordinate launchin s of weather satellites to provide
                                     %
    information for the “world weat er watch” of the World Meteoro-
    logical Organization (WMO). Also announced was a eement on a
                                                            Y.
    joint effort to map the earth’s magnetic field; ta ks were con-
    tinuing on joint cooperation in the field of communications
    satellites. Announcement was made after two weeks of talks on
    U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation in Geneva, which grew out of
    the exchange of letters between President Kennedy and Premier
    Khrushchev in March.
 ∞ White House Reorganization Plan No. 2 became effective, estab-
    lishing the Office of Science and Technology in the Executive
    Office of the President. Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner was appointed
    Director, retaining duties of the special assistant to the President
    for science and technology and receiving certain functions
    transferred from the National Science Foundation.
∞ Chimpanzee “Zena” ejected in capsule from USAF B-58           flying a t
     1,060 mph. a t 45,000 feet in escape capsule test, over Edwards
    AFB, Calif. W/O E. J. Murray (USAF) had been first man ejected
    in the capsule on February 28, a t speed of 565 mph.
∞ DOD announced that it was consolidating all military basic research
    overseas. The first step would be the openin of a Defense
                                                        5
    Research Office in Rio de Janiero, Brazil, on uly 1, 1962, to
    coordinate the military basic research program throughout Latin
    America. NSF and NIH would open offices in the same building
    for their independent programs, with all efforts coordinated by
     the State Department.
 ∞ USAF fired a Minuteman ICBM from a silo at AMR and sent it 3,000
    miles downrange. In an associated test, a single-stage Nike was
    fired to trail the Minuteman up to 12 miles to chart wind patterns.
 ∞ In address at Ohio State University, General Curtis E. LeMay
     (USAF) said: “It is in the fields of science and technology that the
    greatest explosion of problems is occurring. We are in the midst
    of an age of technological change that will make the industrial
    revolution seem dull indeed. The problems associated with
     technical chan e are producing opportunities in greater abundance
                   f:
     than ever be ore. Opportunity is not only knocking at the
                                                            .
     door, it is beating gongs all around the house. . .
98     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

        “In science and technology, there is no ceiling. We are oing
                                                                P
     into space. This will be man’s greatest adventure-not on y for
     the men who crew the ships and make the journey, but for the
     people on the ground who support the effort. . . .
        “The free world faces a grave threat. In rapidfire fashion,
     new discoveries and developments are being made almost daily
     that prevent us from relaxing our vigilance. Our future is
     directly dependent on having an educated and informed people
     who are in tune with the world tempo and dert to the myriad
     applications and possibilities in all fields of human en-
     deavor. . . .,,
June 8: The Rev. Theodore M. Hesburgh, President of the University
     of Notre Dame, speaking at the commencement exercises a t MIT,
     urged scientists to develop greater moral awareness and a greater
     use of science and technology “for the true service of mankind.”
     He told the science graduates: “You should be concerned, you
     should lead, but the beginning of significant human leadership
    involves a deep respect for the totality of man’s intellectual and
    moral heritage, an active cultivation of the wide areas of wisdom
     above and beyond your science and technology.”
June 9: Titan I liquid-fueled engine strapped to the side of a 175-ton
    solid-fuel rocket engine and the configuration test-fked by
    Aerojet-General Corp. to evaluate the compatibility of liquid
    and solid engines for the USAF’S Titan I11 space booster. The
    configuration generated 700,000 lbs. of thrust.
  ∞ Joseph A. Walker, Chief Research Pilot for NASA’s    Flight Research
    Center, was awarded an honorary Doctor of Aeronautical Sciences
    degree from Washington and Jefferson College, Washington, Pa.
    Walker had been graduated from Washington and Jefferson in
     1942 with a major in physics.
∞ Astronaut Scott Carpenter received a B.S. degree in aeronautical
    engineering from the University of Colorado, a degree he missed
    in 1949 by not taking the final examination in a course in heat
    transfer. He also received the school’s Norlin Award, given
    annually to an alumnus for outstanding achievement.
June 10: Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was awarded an honorary
    Master of Arts degree by Dartmouth College.
June 11: Rehbar I1 sounding rocket launched from site near Karachi,
    a continuation of U.S.-Pakistan joint program. First launching
    of Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying sodium vapor payloads
    was June 7.
∞ DOD announced reassignment of responsibilities for the DOD Com-
    munications Satellite Program. The Air Force was assigned
    responsibility for the development, production, and launch of all
    space devices, consistent with the general policy for the develop-
    ment of military space systems announced in March 1961. The
    Army was assigned responsibility for the development and opera-
    tion of the ground environment except for that portion of the
    ground environment associated with launch and control of
    satellites themselves. Defense Communications Agency (DCA)
    was assigned task of inte rating ground and space components.
                              f
    First effect was the trans er to the Air Force of overall systems
    management of Project Advent, a responsibility of the Army
    since September 1960 when it was transferred from ARPA.
                                                                       99
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

June 11:          Office of Scientific Research Summer Seminar in Geo-
           USAF
     physics, in which some 200 scientists participated, convened a t
      C,oudcroft, N.M, the seventh annual such review of progress in
      the theoretical and technical aspects of geophysics.
June 12: X 1 No. 3 research airplane flown to an altitude of 180,000
             -5
     ft. and a speed of 3,445 mph. (mach 5 ) by Maj. Robert White
      (USAF). Primary objective of flight was checkout of X-15 with
      adaptive control system.
 ∞ Piloting a NASA F-106 supersonic jet airplane from Pope AFB,
      N.C., Astronaut Virgd I. Grissom notified Jacksonville, Fla.,
      air route traffic control center that his Tacan radio navigation
      aid had one out. Flying above clouds and around thunder-
      storms, 6rissom began operating an emergency radio beacon
      signal and was directed to a safe landing under a thunderstorm
      at Patrick AFB by Miami air traffic control center.
  ∞ FAA disclosed that a tiny cotter pin and a bolt less than an inch long
      may have caused the March 1 disaster-95 people killed in
      Boeing 707 jet airliner seconds after takeoff from Idlewild
      Airport.
  ∞ USAF C-123 transport fitted for aerial spray operations returned
      to Langley AFB, Va., after spraying 17,000 acres of Iran and
      Afghanistan to bring locust pla e under control.
  ∞ Egypt President, Gama1 Abdel &ser was among those visitors
      “intrigued” by Mercury capsule FRIENDSHIP 7, on display in
      Cairo. “How do you get out of the thing?” President Nasser
      reportedly asked.
June 13: United Nations’ scientific and technical subcommittee of
       the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space agreed on a
      world-wide technical pro ram in Geneva. Program prepared by
                               5
      28-nation meeting provi ed for the exchange of scientific data,
      encouraged a series of international space research projects
       (world-wide survey of earth’s magnetic field, polar cap experi-
      ments, cooperation in fields of space communications and weather
      satellites, and the IQSY program), and established international
      launching ranges for sounding rockets near the equator.
 ∞ In testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and

       Space Sciences, NASA Administrator James E. Webb indicated
       that decision on the number of orbits, three or six, planned for
       the next Mercury flight had not been decided and that the selected
       pilot-astronaut would also be announced soon. On the relation-
       ship between civilian and military space activities: “President’s
       [space] policy has been, in accordance with the law, to develop
       the space rogram as a civilian peaceful effort to the fullest extent
       possible, gut always pressing with the kind of technology that
       would permit us to move rapidly in the military field if we were
       required to do so. It is a little bit like ‘keep your powder dry’
       with respect to the military side . . .”
         Deputy Secretary of Defense Rosmell L. Gil atric stated to
                                                         P
       the Committee that DOD “was interested in deve oping the tech-
       nology” but we [DOD] have as yet no approved program for the
       development of a manned orbital system.” Gilpatric said that
       DOD was “very conscious of the need to take out technological
       insurance” so that the U.S. could be “prepared and not sur-
       prised” in the event that the U.S.S.R. attempted to make
       “hostile use of space.”
100    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

June 13: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $1 million contract
    to North American Aviation, Inc., for a paraglider development
    program.
  ∞ Reported that Neil Armstrong, NASA x-15 test pilot, was studying
    approaches and abort maneuvers for Dyna Soar project by flights
    in an F5D aircraft.
  ∞ Full-scale model of Mercury spacecraft dropped into Trinity Bay
    in parachute system design test.
  ∞ Capt. Richard 11. Coan (USAF) established a new world’s record for
    a helicopter distance flight over a closed course, flying an H 4 3 R
    Huskie 656.258 miles on a 25-mile course near Mono Lake, Calif.
    Previous record of 625.464 miles had been held by a Russian
    military helicopter Mi-1 (June 1960).
  ∞ Army Transportation Command awarded a contract to Ryan Aero-
    nautical Company of San Diego for the design of a flexible wing
    cargo glider capable of carrying heavy payloads when being towed
    by a helicopter.
  ∞ James V. Bernardo, Director of NASA’s         Educational Programs
    Division (AFE), was awarded the Frank G. Brewer Trophy for
    1961 by the National Aeronautic Association, for the development
    of a plan for national spacemobile demonstration units to supple-
    ment high school science programs and for organizing 32 aviation
    education workshops in 21 U.S. colleges prior to his joining NASA.
June 14: In regular press conference, President Kennedy was asked
    for his assessment of the U.S. space effort and “whether you plan
    any major realignments, such as a military role?” I n answer,
    he said: I ‘ . . . the military have an important and significant
    role, though the prime responsibility is held by NASA and is
    primarily pertce, and I think that that proportion of that mix
    should continue. I think the American people have supported
    the effort in space, realizing its significance, and also that it
    involves a great many possibilities in the future which are still
    almost unknown to us and just coming over the horizon.
       “AS far as where we are, I don’t think that the United States
    is first yet in space, but I think a major effort is being made,
    which will produce important results in the coming months and
      FarS*,’
  ∞ In Paris, delegates from 10 nations-France, Britain, West Germany,
     Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, Austria,
     and Sweden-signed a convention creatin the European Space
     Research Organization (ESRO). Denmar% and Norway have
     indicated their intention of joining later. Prof. Pierre V. Auger
     of France was named Director-General of the new organization.
     With an eight-year budget of $300 million, ESRO plans to carry
     out some 500 space experiments beginning with 10 sounding
     rockets in 1963, and the first European satellites in 1967. Launch-
     ing vehicles will be sup lied by another organization, the Euro-
     pean Council for tshe 8onstruction of Spatial Vehicles, which
     was created last March.
  ∞ TIROS IV weather satellite was no longer transmitting pictures usable
     for global weather forecasting, although TIROS IV was still taking
     “direct” pictures on command which were suitable for limited
     US. weather analysis. Infrared instrumentation was still pro-
     viding information on the earth’s heat balance. Launched on
                                                                     101
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1902

    February 8, 1962, TIROS IV had exceeded its designed performance
    and clarity of pictures from the new (Tegea) lens was outstanding.
    It had transmitted some 30,000 pictures to date.
June 14: Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was awarded the Aero
    Club’s Godfrey L. Cabot Award in Boston, as America’s first man
    in space.
 ∞ Astronaut Gus Grissom was awarded an honorary Doctorate of
    Space Science degree by the Brevard Engineering College,
     Melbourne, Florida.
 ∞ House Committee on Science and Astronautics reportedly ordered
    an investigation of alleged government discrimination against
    women, naming in executive session Congressman Victor L.
    Anfuso as chairman of a special nine-man, two-woman investiga-
     tion subcommittee.
 ∞ Army Pershing test missile destroyed itself shortly after second-
    stage ignition following launch a t AMR.
 ∞ Army announced the activation of the first Pershing missile bat-
    tazon at Fort S l ,Oklahoma.
                     il
June 14-September 15: GSFC Test and Evaluation Division conducted
     “simulationJJsummer workshop to promote exchange of technical
    information between scientists and the GSFC staff. Selected
    subjects on space environment simulation w i l l be presented by
    GSFC scientists before professorgraduate-student teams.
June 15: Two-stage Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from
    Wallops Island with 95-lb. payload to 89-mile altitude with GSFC
    experiment to measure electron density and electron collision
    fre uency in the ionosphere under undisturbed conditions.
∞ NASA launched first two of s k tests of the performance of the
    Canadian Black Brant sounding rocket. The first carried a
    payload to an altitude of 58 miles above Wallops Station, the
    second reached 62 miles altitude.
∞ U.S. Weather Bureau announced that the formation of the season’s
    first hurricane would be detected by one or all of its battery of
    ships, planes, radar, and Tiros weather satellites. Last year
    TIROS 1 1 discovered Hurricane Esther as it was forming in the
            1
    Atlantic Ocean. Altogether, the Weather Bureau said, TIROS 111
    had seen 5 hurricanes and one tropical storm in the Atlantic,
    two hurricanes and a tro ical storm in the eastern Pacific, and
                               f)
    9 typhoons in the centra and western Pacific. In preparation
    for 1962 season, the Weather Bureau arranged to transmit satellite
    cloud-photographs by photo-facsimile to warning centers in
    San Juan, New Orleans, and Miami, where they will be used in
    forecasting and tracking tropical. storms.
∞ At Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearing

    on the Administration’s FY 1963 budget request for the space
    program, Dr. Harold Brown, DOD Director of Research and
    Engineering, testified that DOD is “developing the technologies
    which contribute to military and unmanned orbital systems able
    to rendezvous with satellites and then land a t pre-selected locations
    on earth.” Dr. Brown assured the committee that DOD has “no
    intention to pre-empt those areas which are within the proper
    purview” of NASA.
∞ President Kennedy congratulated labor and management a t U S .
    missile sites for achieving a new low in work stoppages. Ac-
102                                                          1 9 62
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF

    cording to the President’s Missile Sites Ilabor Commission, only
     1 man-day per 1,100 man-days worked was lost during the year
    ending this date, while 1 man-day per 96 man-days worked was
    lost during the 1956-1961 period. The President expressed
    confidence that the commission would continue to receive co-
    operation of labor and management “in making sure that our
    missile and space programs go forward . . . as economically as
    possible. ”
June 15: Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences
    unanimously approved authorization for NASA in BY 1963 of
     $3,749,515,250. Also authorized was $71 million supplemental
     authorization for FY 1962, including $55 million for expansion of
    Cape Canaveral and $16 million for real estate at the Mississippi
    test facility .
  ∞ NASA announced appointment of Bob P. Helgeson as Chief of the
    Nevada Extension of NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propulsion O 5 c e
     (SNPO-N), effective August 1. As Chief of the Nevada Extension,
     Helgeson will direct construction and operation of Nuclear
     Rocket Development Station (NRDS), national site for testing
    nuclear rockets.
  ∞ Astronaut Donald K. Slayton underwent physical examination
     by heart specialist Dr. Paul Dudley White in Boston.
  ∞ Static testing of U.K.’s Blue Streak was completed after more than
     400 tests since August 1959.
June 16: Virgil I . (Gus) Grissom Day in Mitchell, Indiana, the home-
     town of the second Mercury astronaut into space.
  ∞ Senate debate on legislation to permit private ownership of com-
     munications satellite systems began, with Sen. John 0. Pastore as
     floor manager of the White House-backed bill.
  ∞ Sir Robert Watson-Watt, British radar pioneer, said: “Even in
     physics, it is undesirable that technological fools should rush in
     where scientific angels fear to fly,” referring to the high-altitude
     nuclear test planned by the U.S. Sir Robert was speaking to
     the 3-day “Scientists for Survival” meetiny in New York.
June 17: Testimony by NASA Administrator Webb before House Ap-
     propriations subcominittee was released in which he declared
     that the U.S. has given far more than it has received in exchanges
     of space flight findings with the Soviet Union. By publicly
    releasing information gained from space flights, the U.S. is ‘ I . . .
     cooperating with them, but not getting very much in the way
     of return cooperation,” he said. Webb defended U.S. policy
     of making space research results generally available :
        “We are, in this open way, exposing the problems just ahead
     of us to the largest number of able minds all around the world.
     This is really the way mankind has made its forward advance.
     No one can tell from which mind comes the solution to a problem.
        “I think the progress which can come from this can never be
     matched by Russia and the nations which do these things in
     secret. ”
 ∞ USAF announced launching of an unidentified satellite with an Atlas-
    Agena booster from Point Arguello, Calif.
 ∞ In an address at Northeastern University in Boston, NASA Adminis-
     trator James E. Webb told the graduating class that “change and
     the accelerating rate of change will be the dominant features of
    your existence.” In discussing NASA’s       program, he pointed out
                                                                   103
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1902

     that in 1961 the nine lar est contractors, who received 62 per cent
                            5
     of NASA contracts, actua y purchased or subcontracted well over
     half this work to 10,989 first-tier suppliers or subcontractors lo-
     cated in 46 states and the District of Columbia. While 56 per
     cent of NASA direct purchases and contract awards ($25,000 or
     more) went to states west of the hllississippi, the award of sub-
     contracts so shifted the distribution that 53 per cent of the dollars
     were actually spent east of the Mississippi. All regions of the
     nation can contribute to “the full development of the possibilities
     inherent in the application of scientific and technical advances,”
     and share in “the potential for a period of economic growth that
     will bring a flowering of human progress, education, and culture.”
June 17: Senator Hubert Humphrey spoke on the floor on the coordi-
     nation of information between DOD, NASA, and AEC, and inserted in
     the record a memo of June 13, 1962, in which he criticized NASA’s
     information exchanges. He stated: ‘ ~ N A S Ahas developed highly
     advanced blueprints, so to speak, for information exchange. . . .
     The blueprints are a long way from realization. . . . [NASA]
     possesses, moreover, in-house personnel and a principal informa-
     tion contractor with a very high degree of professional com-
     petence. l f
  ∞ Through the official Soviet newspaper Pravda, the U.S.S.R. asserted
                                                          r
     that the U.S. was endangering an international pro am for co-
     operation in the use and exploration of outer space y failing to
     accept the Soviet drafts of codes to regulate activities in space,
     and by planning to undertake a program for the military use of
     space.
        Praeda reported: The “United States thus had left the door
     open for carrying the armament race into outer space. It seems
     that American representatives have come to Geneva not so much
     to negotiate on the peaceful exploration of space as to justify by
     legal pettifogging the Pentagon’s militaristic plans in space and
     these plans already are too well known.”
 ∞ Dr. Wernher von Braun, MSFC Director, presented cash invention
     awards totaling $1,750 to 5 employees on behalf of the NASA Inven-
     tions and Contributions Board. Award of $750, highest at MSFC
     to date, went to engineer Billy C. Hughes for feeder restrictor for
     gas-bearing gyros to be used for Saturn guidance platform. Other
     inventors honored were John R. Rasquin and Robert J. Schwin
                                                                     5-
     hamer ($500 jointly) for device that electronically measures ro 1
     during rocket assembly; Wilhelm Angcle and Hans G. Martineck
      ($400 jointly) for an electrical cabling system; and Martineck
      ($100 singly) for plug and connector for miniaturized circuits.
  ∞ In address to Loyola University in Los Angeles, Gen. Bernard A.
     Schriever (USAF) said: “For the first time in history, scient&
     and engineering knowledge gives man a realistic means of world
     wide attack on the age-old problems of hunger, poverty, and
     disease . . . Now science has opened the way to space.
        “There is every reason to be grateful for this new knowled e
                                                                    K
     and power. But some have gone too far. Instead of merey
     accepting and using the fruits of scientific discovery, they have
     made a religion of science. This, in essence, is what has happened
     under Communism-and it has turned out to be the most false,
     deceptive, and cruel religion the world has ever known. It means
104   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

      that men and women are treated the way a biologist treats plants
      and animals. It is power without principle . . .”
June 17-August 10: Space Science Summer Study, sponsored by
     National Academy of Sciences Office of Space Sciences (funded by
     NASA grant), held a t State University of Iowa, Dr. James Van
     Allen as chairman. Scientists represented NASA, DOD, AEC, NSF,
     private industry, and research organizations. Review of NASA’s
     space science program was contained in a detailed NAS report
     released January 1963.
June 18: NASA selected Hughes Aircraft Co. for negotiating a $2.5
     million, 6-month study contrctct on advanced Syncom satellite.
     The contract covered satellite subsystems which would require
     long leadtime developmental and feasibility work. Second-
      generation Syncom would be 500-lb., spin-stabilized satellite ca-
      pable of relaying hundreds of telephone calls or several TV chan-
     nels. (First-generation Syncom, for which Hughes is prime
     contractor, is limited to single telephone channel relay.)
     Syncom project is under technical direction of GSFC.
  ∞ USAF announced the launching of an unidentified satellite with a
     Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg AFB, Calif.
  ∞ NASA’s OSO I, launched March 7, 1962, had provided 60,000 minutes
           
     of data on its solar-pointed experiments prior to failure of its
     real-time telemetry on May 22, 1962. On May 15 the tape-
     recorded playback system had malfunctioned. Data received
     from os0 I included information on more than 75 solar flares
     and subflares.
 ∞ I n extended action on the floor of the Senate, Senators Russell B.
     Long, Albert Gore, Estes Kefauver, and Wayne Morse opposed
     the passage of the Administration’s amended communications
     satellite system bill (S. 2814) previously brought out of the
     Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Senator Long
     charged that the Senate had been subjected to lobbying “the
     like of which the Congress had never seen before” on the private
     ownership of the proposed communications satellite system, and
     he was questioned by Senator John 0. Pastore, the bill’s floor
     manager.
  ∞ In an address before the American Management Association Forum
     in New York, Maj. Gen. Robert J. Friedman, AFSC Comptroller,
     spoke on ‘(Management of the Decision-Making Process.” H e
     pointed out that the Air Force Systems Command was an organi-
     zation of 60,000 employees with an annual budget of seven
     billion dollars to administer. AFSC has, he said, over 33,000
     active contracts involving companies of all sizes and in all states.
        Gen. Friedman discussed the “boundaries” within which AFSC
     must manage its decision-making processes: (1) actions of the
     military competitors of the U.S. ; (2) the constraints of limited
     funds; ( 3 ) the number of alternative courses available in the
     solution of technical, strategic, and tactical military problems;
      (4)limitations of time; and (5) the availability of information and
     competence a t various organizational levels within one juris-
     diction.
  ∞ Aerobee sounding rocket launched to 140-mi. altitude at White
     Sands Missile Range (WSMR), N.M., by USAF Cambridge Research
     Laboratories, with objective of studying x-radiation from the
                                                                    105
                                                        OF 1962
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS

    moon. X-rays expected from the moon were blanketed by much
    stronger source in general +inity of constellation Scorpius.
    Analysis of data from sensors indicated the radiation is in form
    of soft x-rays that do not penetrate earth’s atmosphere below
    50-mi. altitude. Data also seem to indicate the sensors may have
    detected a second x-ray source on the galactic rim. AFCRL
    planned a second rocket flight for October to verify results of
    this experiment.
June 18: Aerospace Research Pilot School began a seven-month course
    to train seven A r Force and one Navy officers for future space
                      i
    missions and projects. This was the second space-training course
    given at Edwards AFB,Calif., but the first for potential “opera-
    tional” gersonnel.
 ∞ At Seventh Military-Industry Missile and Space Reliability S p -
    posium at San Diego, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (USAF)stated
     that it had become clear that “performance has outstripped
    reliability in a number of areas” and that this “imbalance”
     needed correction since “overaU systems effectiveness implies
     considerably more than performance.” He pointed out that
     AFSC had attacked this problem by setting up reliability offices in
     AFSC headquarters, in each of the four development divisions, and
    in the three contract management regions. Representatives
    from each of the offices serve on the Reliability Task Force to
     achieve AFsc-wide focus and action. The publication of Military
                                         on
     Specification ( ~ 1 ~ - ~ - 2 7 5 4 2 ) “Reliability Requirements for
    Aerospace Systems, Sub-systems, and Equipments” replaced
    previous documents and as a standard section in all new systems
    contracts ensures the “greatest possible understanding between
     the Air Force and industry with regard to specific reliability re-
    quirements.” Gen. Schriever ointed out that quantitative
                                      P
    reliability figures were being inc uded in system ince tion docu-
                                                            E
    ments (SOR’S and OSR’S). Over the long term, researc and train-
    ing of personnel include reliability considerations.
June 19: TIROS v launched into orbit by Thor-Delta booster from
    Cape Canaveral, faulty guidance system placing it into elliptical
    orbit (apogee: 604 mi.; perigee: 367 mi.; period: 100.5 min.)
    instead of 400-mi. circular orbit. Cloud-cover pictures trans-
    mitted to tracking station a t Wallops Station on early orbits were
                                                                    f
    of excellent quality. TIROS v was expected to chart the ori n,
    formation, and movement of hurricanes, typhoons, and 04 er
    storms during the August-September peak tropical storm penod.
  ∞ In speech to the National Rocket Club in Washington, George LOW,
     NASA’S Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, outlined the
     three methods of manned lunar missions (direct, earth-orbit
    rendezvous, and lunar-orbit rendezvous) and indicated that a
     NASA decision would shortly be forthcoming as to which would be
    used in the Apollo rogram.
  ∞ Mercury Astronaut Virgil I. (Gus) Grissom was presented the
     General Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Secretary of the
    Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, at the National Geographical
    Society in Washington.
                                                                .
       In his presentation remarks, Secretary Zuckert said: “. . The
    National Aeronautics and Space Administration carries responsi-
    bility for the development of space technology and, in company
     9731f7-63---8
106   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

    with like-rrindcd Feoyles of the world, the utilization of space
    for the benefit of mcn. C’aFtein Grixsom and the other astro-
    nauts are ylrying a xitcl role in the nationel s p c e tffort. NASA’s
    progrcm is of xitcl imyortrnce to the Air Force. We must build
    the nction’s defcnse carability in space on the foundation which
    NASA lays . . .
       “The f e a t for which he [Capt. Grissom] is recognized,” said
    Secretary Zuckert, “is one step, a very, very early step, toward
    mastery of space for constructive purposes. The American
    people have launched a tremendous program to acquire the capa-
    bility to master the aerospace just as we have mastered the seas
                                       .
    and the air, and kept them free . .”
June 19: USAF broTight down a research balloon after a record 19-day
    fliyht 9,300 miles from Bermuda to near Iwo .Jima. Launched at
    Kindley AFB, Bermuda, on May 31, the balloon carried instru-
    ments measuring wind direction and velocity, humidity, pressure,
    and temperature. One of a series of high-altitude flights, the
    34-ft.4iameter balloon flew at a constant altitude of 68,000 ft.
  ∞ OSCAR 11 (Orbital Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio) re-entered
    earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated, after 295 orbits since launch
    June 1.
  ∞ AFSC cnnounced devclorment of “self-maneuvering unit” (SMU),
    a 160-lb. pack which converts a pressure-suited spacemen into a
    one-man space vehicle. Designed to position and stabilize an
    astronaut or crewn’cn outside a spacecraft and to give him
    mobility in an orbiting assembly area, SMU contains its own sta-
    bilization, control, propulsion, and power systems.
 ∞ Position of Special Assistant for Astronaut Affairs created by
    NASA under the Director, Manned Spacecraft Center. Tem-
    porarily filled by Ford Ecstman, the position provides central
    coordination of commitments t o extra-program activities of the
    astronauts.
June 20: Aerobee 150A launched from Wallops Station with 271-lb.
    payload boosted to 97-mile altitude; carried camera to study
    behavior of liquid hydrogen under conditions of symmetrical
    heating and zero gravity. Lewis Research Center payload was
    recovered 25 minutes after liftoff.
  ∞ Legal Subcommittee of the 28-nation United Nations Committee
    on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space concluded its first session of
    three weeks’ duration with a factual report. The report indicated
    that ‘(no agreement has becn reached on any proposals” but that
    a “most useful exchange of views” had been held.
 ∞ Thor missile with nuclear warhead launched for high-altitude nuclear
    test (Operation Dominic), destroyed over Johnston Island two
    minutes after launch.
∞ Army Corps of Engineers issued a call for bids to modify Launch
    Complex 19 at Cape Canaveral to accept the Gemini manned
    spacecraft. The Corps estimated that work would cost about
    $1.5 million and bids would be opened August 16.
 ∞ Radarastronomy observations of the moon taken by Millstone radar,
    MIT Lincoln Laboratory, revealed unusually strong echo from
    region of crater Tycho. G. H. Pettengill and J. C. Henry, who
    reported on experiments in Journal of Qeophysical Research, con-
    cluded the enhanced radar reflectivity may be explained by un-
                                                                      107
       ASTRONAUTICAL 1 W b AERONAD‘I‘ICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    usually rough crater floor and by crater walls consisting of ma-
    terial characteristic of lunar subsurface.
June 21: X-15 No. 3 was announced to have been flown by Maj.
    Robert M. White (USAF) to 250,000 ft. (47.3 mi.) altitude, a new
    unofficial world record for manned aircraft (later revised to
    247,000 ft. or 46.8 miles). Goal of the flight, which attained
    speed of 3,682 mph (mach 4.99), was to check the adaptive con-
    trol system at design specifications, and Maj. White said the
    plane performed as expected.
 ∞ NASA announced that Dr. George L. Simpson, Jr., University of
    North Carolina sociologist, had been named Assistant Adminis-
    trator for Public Affairs, effective September 1. Dr. Simpson
    had been Executive Director of the Research Triangle Committee
    of North Carolina, a regional development organization since
    1956. As a representative of the social sciences, he would bring
    them into working relationship to NASA’s       physical science effort,
    and underline NASA’s     awareness of the social and economic impact
    of the space program. Dr. Simpsm succeeds Dr. Hiden T. Cox
    who resumed his post as Executive Director of the American
     Institute of Biological Sciences on July 1.
 ∞ Neil A. Armstrong, NASA research pilot, awarded the 1962 Octave
    Chanute Award by the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (IAS),
    as the pilot who had contributed most to the aerospace sciences
    during the year. He was cited for “outstanding contributions in
    both engineering and piloting capacity in the develo ment of an
                                                             B
    experimental adaptive control system and in the flig t testing of
     that system in the X-15, No. 3 aircraft.”
                     Manned Space Flight Management Council held
June 22: NASA’s
    meeting a t NASA Headquarters.
∞ Plans for first live transatlantic T V programs in midJuly announced.

    To be produced by 3 U.S. networks and the 16-nation European
    Broadcasting Union (EBU) , the programs would be transmitted
    by A T ~ T ’ STelstar satellite.
∞ Last USAF B-52 strategic bomber, produced by t,heBoeing Company,
    left final assembly area a t Wichita, Kansas. The B-52H model
     was the 744th in the series since the first B-52 came from Boeing
     plant on November 29, 1951. With numerous improvements
     throughout its production, B-52 had eight versions-from B-52A
     to B-52H (speed of 650 mph and unrefueled range of 12,500
     miles). Models G and H were capable of carrying Hound Dog
     500-mile-range missile and Skybol t 1,000-mile-range missile.
∞ Jacqueline Auriol set a new women’s international air speed record
     for 100 kilometers (62.10 miles) at Istres, France, flying a French-
     built Mirage I11 jet at 1,149.23 mph. Previous record, held by
     American aviatrix Jacqueline Cochran, was 783.02 mph.
                                                      to staff of Wallops
∞ NASA Group Achievement Award presented

     Station by Thomas F. Dixon, NASA Deputy Associate Adminis-
     trator, in ceremony at Wallops. Award scroll signed by Admin-
    istrator James E. Webb cited the 400 employees for:
        “Service of the highest order in providing rescue services,
     communications, transportation, food, lodging and medical care
     to the people of Chincoteague, Virginia, during the storms of
     March 6 to 9, 1962;
            108    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

                    “For alertness and attention to their obligations in carrying
                 out the mission of the Wallops Station despite emergency
                 conditions;
                    “For courage and fidelity in protecting and restoring facilities
                 and equipment of Wallops Station to operable condition with
                 such speed and efficiency as to permit scheduled launchings to
                 be met.”
            June 23: Langley AFB celebrated its 45th anniversary with the TAC
                 Thunderbird team, a band concert, displays of aircraft and
                 missiles, and displays of NASA’S Langley Research Ccnter high-
                 lighting the “open house” day.
              ∞ USAF launched from Vandenberg A F B , Calif., a satellite employing
                 a Thor-Agena R booster combination. N A S A Satellite Situation
I                Report indicated this satellite attained orbit and decayed on
I
                 July 7 , 1962.
            ∞  Pravda announced opening of exhibition ‘(in honor of the designer
I
                 of the U-2.” No relation to U.S. high-altitude Lockheed airplane,
                 Soviet U-2 was a trainer plane designed in 1927 by Nikolai N.
I
                 Polikarpov.
           ∞   Virginia State Exchange Clubs awarded Distinguished Virginian
                 Award to William J. O’Sullivan, head of the Space Vehicle Group
                  at Langley Research Center. Representative Thomas N.
                  Downing, member of House Committee on Science and Astro-
    I
                 nautics, made the presentation to O’Sullivan in recognition of
                 his concept, design, and development work with the Echo
                 satellite.
            June 24: OSO I began transmitting real-time data on solar observation
                  after five weeks of intermittent transmittal. NASA scientists
                 speculated that the cause of the reduction in the satellite’s rate
                 of spin from 50 rpm to 42 rpm, which caused the transmitter to
                 restart, was either a result of bearing friction within the turning
                 wheel or the slowing down of the satellite’s rotation because of
                 its position with respect to the Earth’s magnetic field.
            June 25: NASA announced appointment of Walter L. Lingle, Jr., as
                 Special Assistant to the Administrator and, temporarily, as
                 Deputy Assistant Adniinistrator for Public Affairs. Formerly
                 executive vice president of Proctor and Gamble, Mr. Lingle
                 served three months as Deputy Administrator of AID just prior
        I
                 to NASA appointment.
        I
             ∞ NASA Hq. requestled MSFC to redirect the Centaur program toward
                 primary mission of Surveyor lunar landing.
             ∞ USAF Office of Aerospace Research announced establishment of a
                 basic research laboratory at the Air Force Academy at Colorado
                 Springs, to provide in-house OAR research capability and enable
        ~




                 teaching faculty and honor students to conduct research.
            June 26: USAF 564th Strategic Missile Squadron of SAC successfully
                 launched an Atlas ICBM from Vandenberg AFB.
            ∞  USAF designated Dyna Soar manned space glider as the X-20.
             ∞ In speech to the ARS Capital Section, Rear Adm. J. P. Monroe (USN)
                 stated that the Navy had an interest in space exploration and
                 operations as essential as its need for aircraft was in the past.
                 He pointed out that DOD’S responsibility for developing a military
        I
                  capability in space was not inconsistent with the nation’s peaceful
                 objectives.
                                                                  109
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

June 26: Dr. Frank E. Bothwell, Chief Scientist of the Center of
    Naval Analysis, Franklin Institute, received the Navy’s highest
    civilian award, the Distinguished Civilian Service Award, for his
    work on design and development of the Polaris ballistic missile.
June 27: X-15 No. 1 flown to unprogramed but record speed of
                                        Joseph A. Walker at Edwards,
    4,159 mph (mach 6.09) by NASA’s
    Calif. Record speed was achieved a t 96,000 ft. on climb to an
    altitude of 120,000 ft. In test of X-15 re-entry stability, Walker
    glided in a t 23-degree angle of attack, highest angle flown to
    date, and placed X-15 into 80-degree bank.
 ∞ NASA announced that flight of X-15 No. 3 on June 21 by Major
    Robert White (USAF) reached an altitude of 247,000 feet (46.8 mi.)
    instead of the 250,000 feet as first announced.
  ∞ Thor-Agena D booster launched USAF satellite from Vandenberg
    AFB, Calif.
  ∞ NASA Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmea,
    announced that Mercury-Atlas 8 manned flight would be pro-
    gramed for as many as six orbits late this summer. Astronaut
    Walter M. Schirra (Cdr. USN) was announced as prime pilot,
    with Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (Major USAF) as backup pilot.
    Capsule No. 16 was scheduled as the mission spacecraft.
       Holmea said : “We believe that another three-orbit mission will
    increase considerably our growing knowledge of space light.
    An thing more than three orbits should be considered a bonus.”
    A gur-orbit mission would bring the spacecraft down about 2QO
    miles east of Midway Island in the Pacific, whde a five or s1x
    orbit fight would cause it to land 300 miles northeast of Midway.
  ∞ “DOD-NASA Guide: PERT Cost System Design,” a joint set of man-
    agement principles for common use by NASA and DOD contractors,
    was issued. The basic PERT (program evaluation and review
    technique) was first introduced for governmentindustry use m 1958
    and has been applied largely to evaluation of schedules and time-
    related problems with wide success. Since NASA and DOD use
    virtually the same industrial base, adoption of a sin le approach
                                                         2
    as contained in the NASA-DOD Guide will minimize ifferences in
    application of PERT techniques to cost applications.
  ∞ NASA named Charles H. Zimmerman as Director of Aeronautical
    Research in the Office of Advanced Research and Technology.
    Zimmerman, who had joined NACA in 1929 and served as asso-
    ciate head of the Aerospace Mechanics Division of Langley Re-
    search Center since August 1959, succeeded John Stack who
    retired last month. Zimmerman would be responsible for the
    expanding NASA aeronautical program, which supports and con-
    ducts research for national goals in milit?ry and commercial air-
    craft, including V/STOL aircraft, supersonlc transports, long-range
    flight a t hypersonic speeds, technical support of the USAF X-20
    (Dyna Soar) and full responsibility for the X-15 research airplane
    program.
         a
∞  Dr. Eugene B. Konecci appointed NASA’s     Director of Biotechnology
    and uman Research in the Office of Advanced Research and
    Technology. Dr. Konecci will be responsible for directing re-
    search and development of future life support systems, advanced
    systems to protect man in the space enmonment, and research
    to assure man’s performance capability in space.




                                                    1
              I
110   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

        I n announcing the appointment, Associate Administrator
    Seamans said: “Our success and progress in manned space flight
    in the next 10-20 years depend on the human research we do
    today. The human, man-machine and man-system requirements
    must be determined through research prior to the design of any
    manned system. The human capabilities and limitations will
    directly influence various subsystems of the space vehicle. It is
    therefore important that work in Biotechnology and Human
    Research be conducted a t an accelerated rate, in order to have
    the necessary answers for the design of future aero-space vehicles.”
        The Life Sciences Research Group a t Ames Research Center
    will have a major role in carrying out the programs of Dr.
    Konecci’s office, along with the other NASA centers and full
    utilization of the Nation’s military, research, and industrial
    resources and personnel.
        Dr. Iionecci was Chief of the Life Sciences Section of the
    Missiles and Space Systems Division of Douglas Aircraft Co.
    and had previously served as a research scientist at the USAF
    School of Aviation Medicine and as Chief of Physiology and
    Technology in the USAF Directtorateof Flight Safety before 1957.
June 28: DOD announced successful static firing of the Thiokol-
    developed acceleration rocket for USAF’S X-20 manned space
    glider. X-20 previously known as Dyna Soar.
June 29: X-15 No. 2 was flown by NASA pilot John B. McKay in a
    relatively low-level flight to obtain information on aerodynamic
    heating. Maximum speed was 3,204 mph (mach 4.85) at 73,000
    ft.; maximum altitude was 82,000 ft.
  ∞ First USAF Minuteman ICBM launched by military crew from Cape
    Canaveral, successfully reaching intended target area downrange.
  ∞ Navy fired a Polaris missile from AMR and sent it 1,400 miles down-
    range. The missile featured a new nose cone in shape and
    substances of construction as well as parts that would be used
    in more advanced models.
  ∞ Two Aerobee 150A sounding rockets with Johns Hopkins spec-
    trophotometric instrumentation for measurement of day and
    night airglow successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station,
    reaching 129- and 131-mile altitudes.
  ∞ USAF awarded a contract for two high-speed X-19 VTOL aircraft
     which would be used to explore VTOL characteristics on behalf of
     the triservice V/STOL Transport Development Program. The
    X-19 is a twin-engine, tandem, high-wing aircraft with four
     tilting propellers mounted in nacelles a t the wingtips, and is
     designed to cover a range of speed from 0 (hovering) to 400 knots
     in conventional flight.
June 30: University of California’s sixty-inch cyclotron, basic research
     tool that led to construction of the first atomic and hydrogen
     bombs in the U.S., was closed down and dismantled to make
     room for more modern equipment. Invented and first operated
     by Ernest 0. Lawrence in 1939, this cyclotron was instrumental
     in the discovery of neptunium, plutonium, astatine, curium,
     berklium, californium, nnd mendeleevium. I n addition to these
     seven transuranium elements, the machine also contributed to
     the discovery of carbon-14 and produced radioisotopes for a
     variety of medical experiments.
                                                                        111
                          AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S OF 1 9 6 2
       ASTRONAUTICAL

June 30: U.S.S.R. announced launching of COSMOS VI into earth orbit
    (apogee : 250 mi. ; perigee : 126 mi. ; period : 90.6 min. ;inclination :
           As with other unmanned satellites in the Cosmos series
    49’).
    which began on March 16, 1962, COSMOS VI was stated to be n
    scientific satellite instrumented to explore radiation and other
    hazards to manned space flight.
∞ AEC and Columbia University announced the discovery of               the
    existence in nature of two different type of neutrinos (the smallest
    atomic particle) , one connected with mu-mesons, the other with
    electrons. Neutrinos were first proposad to explain a loss of
    energy not otherwise accounted for.
∞ By this date, 57 nations had joined the U.S. to support the develop-
    ment of peaceful uses of outer space, uniting with NASA in joint-
    flight, flight-support, or training rograms.
                                         B
∞ An estimated 23,000 visitors toure      Marshall Space Fli h t Center
                                                                (f
    during the “Family Da ” observance of MSFC’S secon birthday.
                               9
∞ Article in Soviet periodica Ekcnomicheskaya Gazeta stated U.S.S.R.
    had 84 All-Union and centralized professional organs, 94 central
    offices of technical information at the Councils of the National
    Economy, more than 4,000 offices of technical information, 3,000
    “homes” and “rooms” of technology a t industrial enterprises,
    and more than 16,000 scientific and technical libraries. More
    than 60,000 eople were employed in this network.
∞ During Fiscal gear 1962, ending this date, North American Avia-
    tion, Inc., received highest dollar-value contracts from NASA-
    $199.1 million worth of contract awards. Other top contractors
    were McDonnell Aircraft Corp., with $68.4 million; Douglas
    Aircraft Co., $68.3 million; and Aerojet-General Corp., $66.3
    million.
During June: FAA proposed a regulation to restrict firings of the
    5,000 amateur rocket clubs in the U.S. Beyond firing safety
    precautions, FAA is concerned with airlane safet . Reportedly
                                                           2
    some amateur rockets weigh up to 75 lbs. an can reach an
    altitude of over five miles.
∞ Series of full-scale wind-tunnel tests of VTOL fan-in-wing model

    vehicle a t NASA Ames Research Center for Army lift-fan flight
    research program. Part of General Electric (Cincinnati) re-
    search contract, model and test hardware were fabricated b
    NASA, while GE fabricated and tested propulsion s stems i n c h 2
    in two lift fans, two diverter valves, and two $585 engines.
    d n d - t u n n e l tests proved acceptability of inlet temperature,
    control characteristics, transition capability, and aircraft stability.
∞ Analysis of       six photographic emulsion blocks carried aloft by
    DISCOVERER XVIII on December 7, and recovered on December 10,
     1960, revealed that inner Van Allen radiation belt dips as low as
     180 miles. According to Herman Yagoda of the USAF Cambridge
    Research Lab., the production of star tracks and “enders”
                                                                          bh
    energetic protons of the inner belt increased exponentially wit
    altitude from 180 up to 340 miles. Thus manned space opera-
    tions would probably be restricted to lower latitudes rather than
    high inclination orbits because it is not feasible to shield against
    the energetic protons of the inner belt with present payload
    limitations.
112   ASTRONAUTICAL A N D AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S OF 1 9 6 2

During June:  NASA reportedly called a “tempest in a teapot” the
   U.S.S.R. criticism of U.S. scientists for not crediting Soviets with
   discovery of the maximum electron flux in the earth’s outer radi-
   ation belt. U.S. scientists freely credit U.S.S.R. for determining
   experimentally that maximum flux was lo-’ particles per square
   centimeter per second, but Soviet conclusion was based on uncon-
   h m e d assumption which was not authenticated until U.S.
   scientists analyzed definitive measurements from EXPLORER XII.
 ∞ United Technology Corp. experimented with hypergolic ignition
   system, spraying highly reactive fluid into nozzle end of solid-
   propellant rocket motor. Fluid immediately ignited the motor,
   which developed more than 1OO1OOO-lbs.thrust in the test.
 ∞ Bell Aerosystems engineers, John N. Cord and Leonard M. Seale,
   recommended in paper to the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences
   meeting in Los Angeles that a U.S. astronaut be landed upon the
   moon with the means of survival, perhaps for as long as three
   years, until an Apollo vehicle could be sent to return him to
   earth. The astronaut could do valuable scientific work and would
   be on “a very hazardous mission but it would be cheaper, faster,
   and perhaps the only way to beat Russia.”
 ∞ Air Force Ofice of Scientific Research (AFOSR) began negotiating a
   new type of three-year contracts for basic research with Westing-
   house Electric, IBM, and RCA in the solid-state field. This was
   the first time that basic research had been contracted on any
   other basis than one year a t a time, is designed to provide more
   continuity and certainty of completion of research projects. As
   under the previous system, osn and industry each bear roughly
   half of the costs of the research.
 ∞ An astronautics ship together with a floating drydock has been pro-
   posed as a launching platform for ICBM’s large space boosters,
                                              and
   including Saturn. LCdr. Burton Edelson (USN), writing for the
   Bureau of Ships Journal, contended that a 10,000-ton ship, such
   as the seaplane tender Curtiss, could be specially outfitted as an
   integrated astronautics ship and could handle all solid-fuel launch-
   ings, including Minuteman. An accompanying floating drydock
   could handle large liquid-fuel rocket launchings up to and includ-
   ing Saturn.
 ∞ New camera developed for space usc by the National Bureau of
   Standards can be operated at a rate of more than one million
   frames per second. Camera was developed to record luminous
   phenomena of shock waves in the upper atmosphere as they pass
   through the so-called “plasma” (highly ionized gases). Such
   plasma, said the report, has been produced at the Bureau of
   Standards by sending high-velocity shock waves through helium
   gas.
 ∞ NASA Wallops Station awarded contracts over $1 million during the
   month for essential services and construction work.
 ∞ Cost Reduction Task Force of the National Security Industrial As-
   sociation concluded that D O D was paying more for its procure-
   ment because of “cost-oriented” practices. Undertaken a t the
   request of the Secretary of Defense, the released report recom-
   mended that fixed-price contracts be used more often and earlier
                                                                 113
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    in the procurement cycle, and that price analysis rather than cost
    analysis be emphasized in buying.
During June: Twentieth Anniversary of Army aviation was high-
    lighted by a two-week celebration in St. Louis, Mo.
∞ GE’s 5-93 turbojet engine, being developed for the B-70 aircraft,
    completed its preliminary flight rating test (PFRT) on schedule.
    The engine will propel B-70 to speeds greater than 2,000 mph
    and altitudes higher than 65,000 ft.
                                 JULY
July 1: os0 I was transmitting continuous signals and 20% of real-
       lime data wats being acquired from each 95-min. orbit. During
       11 weeks of near-perfect operation from launch on March 7 to
       May 22, os0 I transmitted 1,000 hours of scientific information.
       Before os0 I, less than an hour of solar phenomena data had been
       collected above the earth’s atmosphere by all previous rocket-
       flight observations. os0 I had begun transmitting again on June
       24, 1962.
   ∞ State Department announced plan to incorporate its o a c e of the
       Science Advisor into the main policy-making elements within the
       department. Based on recommendations by scientist Lloyd V.
       Berkner in his report “Science and Foreign Relations,” the
       reorganization would make science a more important factor in
       the formulation and execution of US. foreign policy.
   ∞ DOD opened Defense Research Office in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, to
       coordinate basic scientific research throughout Latin America.
       Col. Leonard M. Orman (USA) headed the office and the Army
       Element, and Lt. Col. Charles J. Lyness (USAF) headed the Air
       Force Element. Also established, near the Defense Research
       Office, were NSF and NIH offices. U.S. Department of State
       would coordinate all the offices’ activities.
   ∞ About 350,000 undergraduates and graduate students attended
       college through the benefits of the National Defense Education
       Act during its 4-year program, Secretary of Health, Education,
       and Welfare Abraham A. Ribicoff announced.
July 2: NASA signed three letter contracts with NAA’S Rocketdyne
       Division for further development and production of the F-1 and
       5-2 rocket engines. The contracts provided: (1) $1 million for
       long lead-time items in F-1 engine R ~ D (2) $3.4 million for early
                                                   ;
       production effort on 55 F-1 engines; and (3) $1.7 million for early
       production work on 59 5-2 engines. Ultimate value of the final
       contracts, extending through 196ii, would be about $289 million.
   ∞ House Committee on Science and Astronautics issued report based
       on NASA’s   authorization hearings and two days of specific testi-
       mony on the Centaur program.
   ∞ NAA announced that the 1961 Robert J. Collier Trophy, U.S.
       aviation’s highest honor, was awarded to four test pilots of the
       x-15 rocket research airplane: Scott Crossfield (NAA), Joseph
       Walker (NASA), Major Robert White (USAF), and Cdr. Forrest
       Petersen (USN). Co-sponsors of the annual award, National
       Aeronautic Association and Look magazine, said the Collier
       Trophy was awarded to the pilots “for invaluable technological
       contributions to the advancement of flight and for great skill and
       courage as test pilots of the X-15.”
   ∞ House of Representatives passed a bill (H.R. 9485) to amend the
       Space Act of 1958 to designate March 16 as National Goddard
       Day, commemorating the date in 1926 when Dr. Robert H.
      114
                                                                     115
                                                        OF 1962
       ASTRONAUTICAL Ahtb AERO~AU’I’ICAL EVE”l!s

       Goddard launched the fwst successful liquid-fuel rocket. The bill
       was then referred to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and
       Space Sciences.
July 2: Lt. Col. John A. Powers, addressing the Texas Associated Press
       Broadcasters Association, said that the next manned space
       flight (MA-8) mi ht be as many as seven orbits. “We’ll go for
                      i
       the full seven if a systems work perfectly,” the Project Mercury
       spokesman stated.
  ∞ Reported that the Air Force Logistics Command (AFLC) civilian
       retrainin program begun in October 1957 has proved to be highly
       successf3. According to AFLC program director Eric W. Jordan,
       80,000 civilian employees, whose skills have become obsolete in
       today’s rapidly changing technology, will have been retrained
        and placed in new jobs by the end of 1962.
July 2-5: Spacecraft FRIENDSHIP 7 was publicly displayed in Rangoon,
       Burma; it left Rangoon on July 5 for Thailand.
July 3: Stratoscope II balloon failed to reach planned altitude and
        ejected dummy payload prematurely. Sponsored by NASA, Na-
        tional Science Foundation (NSF), and the Office of Naval Research
        (ONR), the 77-story-high balloon was on its final test launching
        for use as a carrier of a 36-in.-lens telescope to an 80,000-ft.
        altitude to photograph stars and the planets.
   ∞ ARIEL 1’8 discovery of a new ion belt, a t an altitude of 450 to 500
        miles, was announced at the International Conference on the
        Ionosphere, London, by Prof. James Sayers of Birmingham Uni-
        versity. Previous measurements had led physicists to believe
        that the ionization levels declined gradually above 200 miles.
   ∞ NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced establishment of
                  Northeastern Operations Office, to be located in the
        NASA’s
        Boston, Massachusetts, area. The office will coordinate NASA’s
       liaison with university and business contractors in the northeast
        United States.
   ∞ Reported that the U.S. would send a Mariner B spacecra.ft to Mars
       in late 1964. to land on the red Dlanet in early 1965. The
       launching of’ this heavily instrumented probe would mark the
        beginning of the scientific search for extraterrestrial life.
July 4: American Meteorolo ’cal Society issued statement on the
                               ff
        implications of the contro of weather and climate, which endorsed
        the resolution adopted in the United Nations on December 20
        1961. U.N. resolution called for a cooperative internationai
        effort to improve weather prediction and to explore the possibili-
        ties of weather control and climate modification.
July 5: H 4 3 B Huskie helicopter piloted by Capt. Chester R. Rad-
        cliffe, Jr. (USAF), set world’s distance record in a 900-mi. flight
       from Hill AFB, near Salt Lake City, to Springfield, Minnesota.
        Previous world’s record of 761.027 miles had been set by U.S.S.R.
        helico ter in September 1960.
          E
   ∞ Poet Ro ert Frost, in speech to the students of Middlebury College’s
        Bread Loaf School of En lish in Vermont, said: “I’ve been think-
                              f
       ing in a scientific way ately. Someone in Washington wants
       me to do something about glorifying America-something about
       the space age.
           “The glory of it is that we’re making Promethean defiance
       against the unknowablespace. That’s glorious-and               that’s
       a9 f a r a9 I go.
  6
11      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

       “I don’t know what will come of it. Maybe better communi-
    cations between the stock markets of the world.”
July 6: Civil Service Commission ruled that NASA was authorized to
    hire an “aerospace engineer and pilot,” one whom NASA would
    designate an astronaut, a t maximum salaries for Government
    service grades GS 13, 14, and 15.
∞ Last of 4 solid-fuel Arcas rockets fired at White Sands in NASA

    Langley Research Center photographic study of deployment
    characteristics of 15-ft.-diameter parachute for use in measuring
    atmospheric winds a t altitudes from 100,000 to 240,000 ft.
    Other 40-nii.-high Arcas shots were on June 30, July 2, and July 5,
      1962.
July 7: U.S. detonated a low-yield nuclear device in the first aerial
    test within continental U.S. since 1958. AEC and DOD said the
    purpose of the explosion, which occurred a few feet above ground
    a t the Nevada test site, was to test the effects of nuclear wea-
    pons.
 ∞ Bell Telephone Laboratories (BTL) announced that Telstar, first
    privately owned communications satellite, would be launched
    July 10 from Cape Canaveral. BTL built the satellite, purchased
    the Thor-Delta launch vehicle from NASA, and would reimburse
    NASA for launching and tracking costs.
 ∞ Ryan project engineer Willis F. Everest was slightly injured in
    crash of Ryan Flexwing aircraft undergoing flight-test research
    at Langley Research Center (Lam). 40-ft.-wingspan aircraft
    based on the Rogallo concept had completed aerodynamic tests
    in Langley Research Center’s full-scale wind tunnel and was to
    be flight tested by L a w and the Army Transportation Research
    and Engineering Command.
 ∞ DOD released a report indicating that underground nuclear explosions
    were more easily detected than had been known previously. This
    new knowledge was based on seismic studies of current US.
    underground tests in Nevada.
 ∞ Soviet E-166 aircraft was flown an average speed of near 1,660
    mph in a two-way flight at 47,000 ft. over a 15-to-25-km. course
    near Moscow, by Lt. Col. Georgy Mosolov according to Tass.
    I confirmed by FAI, the flight would break record set in Nov-
     f
    ember 1961 by McDonnell F4H of 1,606.342 mph flown by Lt.
    Col. Robert G. Robinson (USMC).
July 8: Megaton-plus hydrogen device exploded at more than 200-mi.
    altitude, lofted by carrier Thor rocket from Johnston Island in
    the Pacific as a part of Operation Dominic. It was the highest
    thermonuclear blast ever achieved and lighted up the Pacific
    sky from Wake Island to New Zealand, causing some communi-
    cation disruption but less than predicted. Success followed
    two previous attempts on June 4 and June 19. It was expected
    that TRAAC satellite launched in November 1961 would be in
    a position to measure the influence of the blast upon the Van
    Allen belt.
July 9: TIROS v stopped transmitting pictures from the Tegea-lens,
    medium-angle camera. The Tegea camera system transmitted
    4,701 pictures of which 70% were considered excellent quality.
    The wide-angle Elgeet-lens camera, which is still functioning,
    had transmitted 5,100 pictures to date, some of which aided in
    the analysis of Typhoon Joan over the Western Pacitic.
                                                                     117
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1063

July 9:   NASA scientists concluded that the layer of haze reported by
    Astronauts Glenn and Carpenter was the little-understood
    phenomenon called “airglow.” Using a photometer and other
    instruments, Carpenter was able to measure the layer as being
    %degrees wide. Airglow accounts for much of the light of the
        .    -

    night sky.
∞ MIT’S Lincoln Laboratorv announced develoDment of the gallium
    arsenide diode, capable of generating light ‘at wave lengths in the
    near-infrared region. Use of this diode was expected to be useful
    in closed-circuit television and in communication with re-entering
    spacecraft, since the infrared beam may be able to penetrate the
    ionized plasma sheath built up around a spacecraft as it re-enters
    the earth’s atmosphere. Development was reported by R. J.
    Keyes and T. M. Quist of the Lincoln Laboratory’s applied
    physics group.
 ∞ General Thomas D. White, former USAF Chief of Staff, wrote in
    Newsweek article: “There are military requirements in space
    which this nation can fail to fulfill at its grave peril. . . . I wish
    we would move faster on the satellite inspector and interception.
    We soon may need to verify what the Soviets have put into
    space; we may someday want to shoot it down. . . . Another
    intriguing concept . . . ought to have more steam and money
    behind it. This is the true ‘space plane.’ ”
July 9-14: Communist-led World Peace Congress opened in Moscow
    with more than 2,000 delegates from 101 countries attending.
    Purpose of the Congress was to line up as much world opinion as
    possible behind U.S.S.R. foreign policy, particularly in the area
    of disarmament.
July 10: TELSTAR, the first privately financed satellite, launched into
    orbit from AMR by NASA Delta booster. TELSTAR (apogee: 3,503
    mi.; perigee: 593 mi.; inclination: 44.79 degrees; period: 157.8
    min.) was funded by the American Telephone and Telegraph Co.
     (AT&T) under a NASA-AT&T agreement of July 27, 1961: Bell
    Telephone Laboratories design and build satellites a t own
    expense; ATLT reimburse NASA for Delta launch vehicles, launch,
     and tracking services (approximately $3 million per launch) ;
     Bell System conduct the communications experiments and NASA
    provide telemetry; and both NASA and AT&T analyze data and
    results, to be made available by NASA to the world scientific
    community.
∞ First commercial transmission of live TV via satellite and first
     transatlant.ic TV transmission, when TELSTAR experimental com-
    munications satellite of AT&T demonstrated vast new capabilities.
     Pictures were telecast from A T ~ T   center near Andover, Me., to
     TELSTAR, then received and placed on all three major TV net-
     works in the U.S. TV signals also were relayed from Andover,
     Me., to TELSTAR, and then relayed to French antenna a t Pleu-
    meur-Bodou on the Brittany peninsula and the British station a t
     Goonhilly, Cornwall.
        In American relay experiment via TELSTAR, ATLT Board Chair-
     man Fred Kappel in Maine called Vice President Johnson in
     Washington.
        In the first successful transatlantic TV transmission, picture of
     waving American flag was transmitted via TELSTAR to both
I 18     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 Q 6 2

    France and Britain, while transmission was also picked up at both
    Andover and Holmedel, N.J., and relayed to American TV net-
    works.
       First voice transmission from space was the Christmas message
    of President Eisenhower which was broadcast from USAF Project
    Score satellite on December 18, 1960. ECHO I, passive communi-
    cations satellite, provided a reflector for a host of communication
    experiments after its launch on August 12, 1960. The moon also
    had becn used as a reflector in communications experiments,
    the first being a radar reflection on January 11, 1946, by the Army
    Signal Corps.
July 10: President Kennedy nominated Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner to be
     director of the Office of Science and Technology.
 ∞ Launching of TELSTAR marked tenth straight successful flight of the
    3-stage Delta rocket. The history of Delta goes back to the
    Thor-Able and the earlier Vanguard, from which it acquired its
    upper stages. Originally designed as an interim booster when
    NASA ordered twelve Deltas from Douglas Aircraft in April 1959,
    it achieved what NASA Administrator Webb called “the greatest
    level of reliability of any of our launch vehicles . . . .” The
    following satellites were orbited by Delta boosters: ECHO I, TIROS
    11, 1 1 IV, and v; EXPLORERS x and XII; os0 I; ARIEL I; and
         1,
    TELSTAR.
  ∞ NASA Langley    Research Center            announced plans to build
                                    (LRRC)
       a cyclotron laboratory on 1,300 acres of usAF-owned land, a
    former Bomarc missile site, halfway between LaRc and Williams-
    burg, Va. The laboratory will include two accelerators to
    generate electrons and protons of the energies spacecraft will
    encounter on deep space flights.
 ∞ A U.S.S.R. Tu-1 14, world’s largest commercial airplane, left
    Moscow on a survey flight for direct air route to Havana, Cuba.
    When begun, the Moscow-Havana commercial service would
    mark the first regularly scheduled flights of Soviet aircraft into
    the Western hemisphere.
July 11: NASA press conference explained basic decision on Apollo
    manned lunar exploration program: to base the next phase of its
    planning, research and development, procurement, and space
    flight program on the Saturn (C-5) to accomplish the initial
    manned lunar landing and recovery, using the lunar orbit rendez-
    vous as the prime mission mode. Based on more than a year of
    intensive study, the basic decision on the lunar orbit rendezvous
    (LOR) mode enables immediate industrial consideration of the
    lunar excursion vehicle and firm planning on early employment
    of two-stage Saturn (C-IB) to test-flight the Apollo configura-
    tion in earth orbits.
       It was also announced: (1) an in-depth study of an unmanned
    lunar logistic vehicle would be undertaken; (2) continued feasi-
    bility studies would be made of the earth-orbit rendezvous
    mode using Saturn (C-5) with a two-man spacecraft, with the
    possibilities of a direct flight with this spacecraft; (3) continued
    study would be made of the Nova vehicle (two to three times
    capability of C-5).
       NASA Administrator Webb said: “We are putting major
    emphasis on lunar orbit rendezvous because a year of intensive
                                                                   119
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

    study indicates that it is most desirable, from the standpoint
    of time, cost and mission accomplishment. I n reaching this
    decision, however, we have acted to retain the degree of flexi-
    bility vital to a research and development program o this magni-
                                                          f
    tude . . .”
       LOR was unanimously recommended by NASA’s        Manned Space
    Flight Management Council because it : (1) provides highest
    probability of mission success with essentially equal mission
    safety; (2) provides mission success months earlier than other
    modes; (3) will cost 10 to 15 per cent less than other mode; and
    (4) requires least amount of technical development beyond
    existing commitments.
July 11: Second successful test of USAF Titan I1rocket, 5,000-mi. flight
    from AMR. Second generation ballistic missile with storable liquid
    fuels will be used as a booster in NASA’s Project Gemini.
∞ First east-to-west transatlantic TV transmission, French station a t

    Pleumeur-Bodou reflecting eight-minute telecast off 170-lb.
    TELSTAR satellite in 15th orbit to AT&T facility a t Andover, Me.
    Program featured the French Communications Minister Jacques
    M. Marette and several entertainers.
       British Broadcasting Company announced that French trans-
    mission violated agreement with Britain and other European
    Broadcasting Union nations.
∞ White House Press Secretary, Pierre Salinger, said that successful
    performance of TELSTAR indicated that a full study of international
    communications involving all concerned governmental agencies
    would be initiated by the White House. He said that a pre-
    liminary working paper by Tedson J. Meyers, administrative
    assistant to FCC Chairman Newton N. Minow, was already under
    study by the State Department and other agencies.
∞ The Senate passed NASA authorization for FY 1963 (H.R. 11737) of


                                                                           7
    $3,820,515,520. Amendments submitted by Senator William
    Proxmire to require competitive bidding on space projects and to       ‘
    establish a presidential commission to study the impact of the
    space program upon the nation’s manpower were both defeated
    by lopsided votes. Senate authorization restored $116 million
    cut by the House.
 ∞ NASA announced that Mercury Astronaut Donald K. Slayton
     (Major USAF) would assume new operational and planning
    responsibilities. Extensive medical observation and examina-
    tion of Slayton’s irregular heart action (atrial fibrillation) by
    MSC medical staff, by groups of Air Force specialists, and Dr.
    Paul Dudley White agreed that he should not be considered for
    solo space flights.
∞ NASA awards of less than $1,000 for inventions were made to the

    following NASA employees: D. H. Buckley, R. L. Johnson,
    Earl W. Conrad, R. J. Weber, F. D. Kochendorfer, John C.
    Nettles, Glen E. McDonald, Gerald Morrell, L. A. Baldwin,
    V. A, Sandborn, C. J. Blaze, C . G . Richter, and Marcus F. Heid-
    mann of Lewis Research Center; and David H. Schaefer of
    Goddard Space Flight Center.
          Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes,
 ∞ NASA’s
    briefed the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on
    the lunar-orbit rendezvous (LOR) procedure which NASA announced
    as the prime mission mode for the initial manned lunar landing.
120    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S OF 1 9 6 2

July 11: Record altitude flight attempt by X-15 canceled for a second
     time because of technical difficulties.
  ∞ USAF superpressure balloon brought down 1,200 miles northwest
    of Honolulu after remaining aloft for a record-breaking 30 days
    since launch by AFCRL from Kindley AFB, Bermuda. 34-ft.-
    diameter mylar research balloon had been under constant sur-
    veillance by FCC tracking and data network, and had maintained
    more than 66,000-ft. altitude day and night since June 10 with
     50-lb. payload.
July 12: USAF Titan I1flown 5,000 miles down AMR on third test flight.
  ∞ Leading editorial of N w York Times said, “The tendency of man’s
                          e
     technological progress to outdistance his institutions for coping
    with that progress is strikingly indicated by current developments
    in space. . . .” Pointing to the “brilliant initial successes”
    of TELSTAR, it stated: “The clear lesson of these technological
    accomplishments is that space is now a full-fledged area of human
     activity for a wide variety of purposes, and will increasingly be
     employed for men’s ends in the years immediately ahead. Yet
     the cosmos today is a lawless dimension and there is no universal
     agreement even on so elementary a question as where Space
    begins-no boundary line between the region in whwh existing
    national and international law holds sway and the region in which
     it doesnot. . . .J l
        Editorial called for fulfillment of the responsibility resting on
     the space law committee of the United Nations’ Committee on
     the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space since “the cosmos bears some
    resemblance to a jungle.”
  ∞ Walter C. Williams, associate director of NASA Manned Spacecraft
     Center, defended orbital flights by astronauts that apparently
     are duplicates of previous flights, saying that the only way the
    U.S. can have a space program in depth is to repeat some of the
     operations. He stated that new data were gathered from each
    flight, replying to critics of the second manned 3-orbit spaceflight
    mission (MA-7).
  ∞Statement issued by the European Broadcasting Union declared
     that France had “contravened” an international agreement by
     transmitting the first television broadcast from Europe to the
     United States via TELSTAR. Under an agreement including the
     French, “no television material of entertainment or informative
     character’’ was to be broadcast to the U.S. before the joint
     “Eurovision” program scheduled for July 23. The appearance
     of Yves Montand and two other singers on the French trans-
     mission on July 10 was considered the case in point. I n response,
     French officials said they had not transmitted a program but
     merely some experimental sequences.
  ∞ Reported that at NASA meeting of lunar scientists the view presented
     by astronomers, a geologist, and geophysicists that scientists can
     learn to become astronauts as well as an astronaut can make
     scientific observations. Which scientific discipline should be
     represented as a member of the &man Appollo crew did not
     receive a unanimous endorsement.
  ∞ Atlas ICBM launched by USAF squadron from Vandenberg AFB, two
     Polaris A-2 IRBM’S successfully launched from submerged U.S.S.
     John Marshall off Cape Canaveral, and a USAF Minuteman ex-
     ploded 50 seconds after launch from silo a t Cape Canaveral.
                                                                  121
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

July 13: Transatlantic telephone conversation via    TELSTAR satellite,
    from AT&T President Eugene McNeely to Jacques Marette,
    French Communications Minister. On next ‘orbit, McNeely
    spoke with Sir Ronald German, director-general of the British
    Post Office. Technicians had unofficially talked on transatlantic
    circuit via TELSTAR the day before, July 12.
∞ United Aerospace Workers and the International Association of
    Machinists served a notice of intention to strike on July 23
    “unless an honorable settlement is reached by that time” against
                                                     h orth American,
    five major space companies-Lockheed,
    Douglas, General Dynamics, and Aerojet. Fifty-one plants,
    test sites, and missile bases would be affected by walkout of
    125,000 union members.
 ∞ Indian Government concluded agreement with the U.S.S.R. for
    the manufacture in India of jet aircraft engines (Soviet RD-9).
    Engines will be used to power Indian-designed HF-24 supersonic
    jet fighter now being developed at the state-owned Hindustan
    aircraft factory at Bangalore. Indian Government had pre-
    viously planned to equip the HF-24 fighter with the British
    Orpheus engine.
∞ USAF Atlas E successfully test-&ed from PMR to impact near Wake
    Island, the second successful firing of an Atlas E from Vanden-
    berg AFB.
July 14: NASA launched large balloon from site near Goose Bay, Lab-
    rador carrying bioscience payload including two rhesus monkeys
    and /our hamsters for primary cosmic radiation experiments
    Balloon was expected to reach maximum altitude of 128,000 feet
    and to float some 2,000 miles to a landing near Edmonton, Al-
    berta, Canada.
 ∞ At Hyannis Port, Mass., President Kennedy issued a statement on
    disarmament calling for the Soviet Union to join in a “creative
    search for ways to end the arms race and to devote our common
     skills and resources to the enlargement of the peaceful opportuni-
     ties to mankind. . . . In a nuclear a e, all nations have a com-
                                           k
    mon interest in preserving their mutua security against the grow-
    ing peril of the arms race. . .”
∞ Navy Hydrographic Office accepted delivery of modified Lockheed

    Super Constellation WV-2 to be used in Project Magnet, a world-
    wide survey for the improvement of sea and air navigation charts.
    Rear fuselage section was demagnetized and electrical circuits had
    been required to eliminate magnetic fields.
∞ Cleveland educators pointed out that the new transatlantic com-
    munications prompted by TELSTAR and other satellites would be a
     tremendous incentive to foreign language study. Supervisor of
     Foreign Languages Eugene K. Dawson said: “I can think of
     nothing more exciting for our students than to hear direct broad-
     casts in the language they are studying.”
 ∞ Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin was promoted from major to It. colonel
    in the Soviet Air Force.
July 15: First NASA balloon carrying bioscience payload of two rhesus
     monkeys and four hamsters traveled faster and higher than
     planned after launch from Goose Bay, Laborador, requiring al-
     ternate plan for early jettisoning to effect daylight recovery.
     Payload was recovered 45 miles north of Prince Albert in Sas-
     97317-63---9
122     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    katchewan, all animals reported dead upon recovery. Conducted
    by Ames Research Center Life Science Laboratory, experiment
    was designed to check primary cosmic radiation.
July 15: Reported from Stockholm, Sweden, that NASA team had
    arrived to launch four Nike-Cajun rockets for cooperative investi-
    gation with the Swedish Committee for Space Research of high-
    altitude, bright night clouds. Rockets would be launched from
    Jokkmokk in northern Sweden.
  ∞ NASA announced that two technical notes propose new concept on
    the mechanics of solar heating of the upper atmosphere. Dr.
    Isadore Harris (TN-D-1443) and Dr. Wolfgang Priester (TN-
    D-1444) of Goddard Space Flight Center proposed that cor-
    puscular radiation (i.e., solar wind) in association with hydro-
    magnetic waves may be the energy source required to explain the
    results obtained from orbiting satellites. Harris’ note provided
    for the first time a diurnal picture of the thermosphere (120 to
    2,050 kilometers above the earth’s surface). Priester’s note
    postulated the physical properties scientists are likely to en-
    counter during a complete ll-year solar cycle when upper atmos-
    pheric conditions change according to solar flare activity.
  ∞ Resumption of 17-nation Disarmament Committee session meetings
    in Geneva. Appeal of President Kennedy for Russians to “join
    in a creative search for ways of ending the arms race” was rejected
    in Tass statement published in Moscow-the U.S. was attempting
    to “conceal its rejection of general disarmament.”
  ∞ NASA announced that nine selected college graduates had begun a
    year of intensive training in NASA’s     first Management Intern
                                        eriods of three months (3 in
    Program. After four trainin
                                   E?
    Headquarters offices and 1 a t e d center), successful interns will
    be offered permanent NASA employment in administrative
    positions.
  ∞ Radio Corporation of America announced that its Radar Division
    had developed a new technique applying the doppler effect to
    monopulse radar, to allow for velocity measurements of a space
    vehicle up to 100 times more precise than by conventional
    methods. Developed for the Army Signal R&D Lab a t Fort
    Monmouth, the new technique could be applied to radars already
    in service.
  ∞ Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Captain, USAF) promoted to Major,
      USAF.
  ∞ Pioneer flight surgeon, Dr. Bernard L. Jarman, who was appointed
    the first medical examiner of the Civil Aeronautics Agency in
     1927, died in Washington.
July 16: X-15 No. I flown to 107,000 feet a t speeds up to 3,733 mph
    by Joseph A. Walker, in series of seven “roller-coaster dips” i  n
    test of the alternate stability augmentation system.
 ∞ British transmitted first transatlantic color television during two
    orbits of TELSTAR, twice transmitting still photographs to Andover
    facility of ATBT.
 ∞ Aviation Week reported that NASA had delayed announcement of its
    lunar-orbit rendezvous (LOR) decision for a week to allow for its
    study by the President’s Science Advisory Committee.
∞ In Cleveland ARS meeting, Associate NASA Administrator Robert
    Seamans stated that decision on the lunar-orbit rendezvous (LOR)
                                                                    123
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    would allow time to develop a larger Nova booster than previously
    contemplated.
July 16: Douglas Aircraft Co. reached separate agreement with two
    labor unions on a three-year contract, thus avoiding threatened
     strike of aerospace workers.
                                                   t
 ∞ In an interview with fourteen American newspa er editors, the text
    of which was released, Premier Nikita &us chev asserted that
    showing of documentary film on the Soviet antimissile missile to
     the Communist-sponsored Peace Conference last week had been
     overruled by those who felt its showing “might have been mis-
     understood” as a warlike gesture. “Had the people been shown
     this film,” Khrushchev said, “they would have seen what kind
     of a machine it is. You can say our rocket can hit a fly in outer
    space. ))

July 17: X-15 No. 3 flown to record altitude of 58.7 miles (314,750
    feet) by Major Robert White (USAF). Flight was programed for
    only 282,000 feet but maximum speed of 3,784 mph was 284 mph
    faster than planned. White’s flight made him eligible for astro-
    naut wings, reserved for those who have flown over 50 miles
    high, previously held only by four Mercury astronauts. Flight
    was a s 0 the first to achieve the original design altitude of the
    X-15 of 59 miles.
∞  NASA Ames Research Center reported that a number of beetles had
    survived the 25-mile-high balloon flight in which the monkey
    and hamster passengers in the bioscience payload perished
    because of a failure in the life-support system supplying oxygen
    and heat.
 ∞ In reviewing technical considerations leading to NASA’s    selection of
    the lunar orbital rendezvous mode (LOR) for Pro’ect Apollo,
    D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of Manned Space blight, told
    ARS lunar conference in Cleveland:
        “The mission I have described has been widely reported in the
    newspapers and technical journals, with a liberal use of super-
    latives in assessing its magnitude and complexity. In this case,
    resort to superlatives is well-advised-this is truly a staggering
    undertaking. Entirely new concepts of component and system
    reliability must be developed and proven. Extensive tests must
    be carefully planned and conducted, and results must be ex-
    haustively studied. Crew capabilities must be developed and
    meshed with proven automatic systems so that the two work
    together with Swiss-watch precision.
       “It is a challenging task, studded throughout with difficult
    decisions which must be soundly based and properly made. . . .
       “With the decision as to the method by which we w i l l go to the
    moon we think we have taken a giant step forward. Essentially,
    we have now ‘lifted off’ and are on our way. . . .”
                                                    Deputy Director of
 ∞ In Cleveland, Dr. Joseph E’. Shea, NASA’s
    Manned Space Flight for Systems, told ARS conclave that the
    manned lunar landing was greatly dependent upon information
    acquired by the unmanned Ranger and Surveyor payloads.
    The landing zone for Apollo flights (strip 20’ wide along lunar
    equator) is about the size of Alaska. Ma s of two-fifths-of-a-
                                                  i
    mile to an inch are required, which must be ased on photographs
    which can identify five-or six-ft. objects for navigational fixes and
124    ASTRONAUTICAL A N D AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

     initial exploration. Smallest objects now discernable in the
     photographs of the moon’s surface by the test telescopes on earth
     are about the size of a football field.
July 17: In address to ARS lunar meeting in Cleveland, Dr. James A.
     Van Allen said that protons of the inner radiation belt could be a
    serious hazard for extended manned space flight, and that nuclear
     detonations might be capable of cleaning out these inner belt
    protons, perhaps for a prolonged period, for making manned
    orbits about aOO-mi.-high above the earth. Van Allen said that
     the recent shot over Johnston Island was far too small and too
    low to have such an effect.
 ∞ Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics,
    headed by Rep. Victor AnCuso, opened hearings on the role of
    women in the space program. Jane B. Hart and Jerrie Cobb,
    representing the 13 women who completed unofficial space quali-
    fication tests a t the Lovelace Foundation, testified that women
    had a real contribution to make and were qualified as astronauts.
    Jacqueline Cochran, well-known flier, said that (‘there is no doubt
    in the world that women will go into space.”
 ∞ British astrophysicist, Zdenek Kopal, suggested in ARS lunar con-
    ference at Cleveland that the moon may have an abundant water
    supply, including geysers and under surface glaciers or permafrost.
 ∞ In remarks referring to the editorial in the NASA issue of Awiation
     Week and Space Technology, Representative George P. Miller,
    Chairman of the Committee on Science and Astronautics, said
    that (‘the national space program continues to fire the imagina-
    tion of the American people. The spectacular space achieve-
    ments are but the top of the iceberg. Underneath is a rapidly
    growing base of solid scientific knowledge which will benefit the
    Nation in thousands of different ways. The agency spearheading
    the massive scientific effort is the National Aeronautics and
    Space Administration . . .”
∞ In speech to the National Rocket Club, Senator Barry Goldwater
    said: “I am convinced that the American people fully endorse
    space preeminence for the United States. This is our long-range
    goal as a nation. . . . Space superiority in all its scientific,
    technological, and military aspects is fundamental to the future
    well-being, security, and prosperity of the United States . . .
       “As a new agency, NASA has picked up a momentum, a direction
    and a purposefulness directed toward long-range research and
    development which is one of impressive merit . . .
       “From all I can observe, the relationship between NASA and the
    Air Force in the space program has proceeded fairly well to date.
    But I would point out that the Department of Defense is re-
    sponsible for military affairs, not NASA. NASA is not a military
    service, and its broad-based program will undoubtedly contribute
    greatly to our own national military requirements. . . . The
    point I am trying to make is that the requirements of the United
    States for military programs in space should not be neglected in
    any vital aspect . . .”
∞ France announced plans to establish rocket launching facility along
    the Atlantic coast near Mont-de-Marsan in southwestern France.
    Station will be ready by 1967, when France has agreed to evacuate
    the rocket research center a t Colomb-Bechar in Algeria.
                                                                   125
                        AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2
       ASTRONAUTICAL

July 17: Wash. Evening Star reported that NASA’s   Director:ofjManned
    Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, had announed in Cleveland
    that NASA X 1 pilot Neil A. Armstrong would become the first
                 -5
    civilian astronaut as a part of the new selection of astronauts for
    Projects Gemini and Apollo.
July 18: NASA launched rigidized Echo-type balloon on Thor booster
    to 922 mi. in inflation test. Nicknamed “Big Shot,” the 13-story
    balloon was inflated successfully and was visible for 10 minutes
    from Cape Canaveral. Movie film capsule parachuted into sea
    northeast of San Salvador was recovered by three pararescue men
    of the A r Rescue Service. This was the largest manmade object
            i
    sent into space, the previous record being held by the 100-ft
    ECHO I.
 ∞ President John F. Kennedy presented the Robert J. Collier Trophy,
     aviation’s most distinguished award, to four X-15 pilots: Major
     Robert M. White (USAF), A. Scott Crossfield (NAA), Joseph A.
     Walker (NASA), and Cdr. Forrest S. Petersen (USN). Following
     the White House ceremony, the pilots received personal minia-
     tures of the Collier Trophy a t a luncheon co-sponsored by the
     Aero Club of Washington and the National Aeronautic Asso-
     ciation.
 ∞ I n x 1 awards ceremony before distinguished guests and Head-
        -5
     quarters personnel, a t NASA Headquarters, tribute was paid to
     the team of governmental and industrial persons responsible for
     the contributions of the X-15 program to aeronautics and space
     flight. Associate Administrator Seamans reviewed the objec-
     tives and achievements of the X-15 program. NASA Outstand-
     ing Leadership Awards were presented to Paul F. Bikle (Director
     of the NASA Flight Research Center) and Hartleg A. Soul6 (Lang-
     ley Research Center X-15 project manager) by Administrator
     Webb. After a short address on the pride of the nation concern-
                  achievements, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson
     ing NASA’s
     (Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council and
     a key figure in the Congressional enactment of the National Aero-
     nautics and Space Act of 1958) awarded NASA Distinguished Serv-
     ice Medals to the X-15 pilots Forrest Petersen (Cdr., USN), Robert
     M. White (Major, USAF), and Joseph A. Walker (NASA).
 ∞ Astronauts John Glenn and Scott Carpenter, and George M. Low,
     NASA Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, testified before
     House Subcommittee on qualifications for astronauts. Low testi-
     fied that qualifications would be raised rather than lowered for
     Project Apollo, that the sex of pilots had never been a require-
     ment, but that if any resources were diverted for a woman i n
     space effort “we would have to slow down on our national goal
     of landing a man on the moon in this decade.” Astronaut Glenn
     said on women astronauts: “I couldn’t care less who’s over there
     [in the next seat] as long as it’s the most qualified person. . . .
     I wouldn’t oppose a women’s astronaut training program; I just
     see no requirement for it.”
        NASA had not found one woman to date who met all astronaut
     requirements: American citizenship; excellent physical condition;
     degree i physical or biological sciences or engineering; and ex-
              n
     perimental jet flight-test experience.
126                                          EVENTS OF 19 0 2
      ASTRONAUTICAL A N D AERONAUTICAL

July 18: USAF launched unidentified satellite with an Atlas-Agena B
    booster from Point Arguello, Calif.
∞ DOD canceled construction of      Navy's 600-ft.-diameter radiotele-
    scope at Sugar Grove, West Virginia, because major and unfore-
    seen scientific advances provided better methods to acquire
    information. Initiated in 1954 and costing $17 million to date,
    the Sugar Grove dish had as its primary purpose military re-
    search in ionospheric physics, space communications, navigation,
     and radio astronomy. Since then, parametric amplifiers and
    masers revolutionized space communications, while more in-
    expensive acquisition methods had been developed for ionospheric
    data. DOD decision did not affect National Science Foundation's
     140-ft. steerable radiotelescope at nearby Green Bank, W. Va.,
     which would be used to scientifically map radio and thermal
     sources with greater efficiency.
∞ Senate confirmed Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner as Director oi the Office

     of Ecience and Technology.
July 19: NASA test pilot John B. McKay flew X-15 No. 2 in sustained
    heat test, reaching peak altitude of 84,500 feet and speed of
     3,375 mph (mach 5.11) in flight which created an estimated tem-
     perature on the leading edge of the wings of 1,100" F for more
     than a minute, and 1,290' F for a few seconds when leaving and
    re-entering the atmosphere.
∞  First known antimissile missile interception of ICBM nose cone
     announced by DOD, the interception of an Atlas nose cone launched
    from Vandenberg AFB high over the Pacific by a 3-stage Nike-Zeus
    fired from Kwajalein. Interception of 16,000-mph nose cone by
     experimental Nike-Zeus was regarded as comparable to a bullet
    hitting a bullet, although DOD did not state whether physical
    contact had been made.
∞ Newsmen in London and New York exchanged news items and

    conversations in the first two-way transatlantic telephone con-
    nection via TELSTAR communications satellite. Reuters trans-
    mitted its first news report to the world press via satellite.
∞ In Izvestia, Soviet correspondent V. Matveyev said that the back-

    ground of U.S. satellite TELSTAR showed that progress in the
    development of productive forces in the U.S. was being usurped
    by the modern capitalist states in the interests of the monopolies.
 ∞ In Pentagon ceremony, USAF Chief of Staff LeMay pinned astronaut
    wings on Major Robert M. White, the first man to fly a winged
     aircraft, the x-15, into space.
July 20: NASA Administrator Webb announced that the Mission
     Control Center for future manned space flights would be located
     a t Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC), Houston, Tex. The Center,
    including its computer complex, communications center, flight
    simulation facility, and flight operations displays, would be
    operational by 1964 for Gemini rendezvous flights and later
    Apollo lunar missions.
 ∞ USAF launched an unidentified satellite employing a Thor-Agena
    B booster from Vandenberg AFB.
 ∞ U.S. Weather Bureau transmitted TIROS v photographs to Australia
    from Suitland, Md., the first time that Tiros photographs had
    been transmitted abroad for current weather analysis by a
    foreign country. Photographs were of cloud formations west of
    Australia.
                                                                   127
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

         USAF-NASA 30-member ad hoc committee established to plan
July 20:
    a “joint hypersonic research program for the next couple of years.”
    The committee would consider two primary missions for the Aero-
    space Plane (ASP), or hypersonic aircraft: (1) vehicle system to
    provide earth-to-orbit-and-returncapability; and (2) earth air-
    craft capable of 5,000-mi. unrefueled flight. ASP would be
    follow-on program to x-15 research aircraft pro ram.
July 21: NASA selected design for the Advancef Saturn launch
    complex northwest of Cape Canaveral, featuring a 2,500-ton
    crawler-mode vehicle recommended by the Launch Operation
    Center (LOC). Saturn C-5 launch vehicles (350 ft. high) would
    be erected and checked out vertically and then transported to
    the Complex 39, consisting of 4 launch pads about 9,000 f t .
    apart. Managed by LOC, Complex 39 construction supervision
    had been assigned to the Army Corps of Engineers.
 ∞ President Kennedy sent telegram to aerospace unions and industries
    stating that a strike would “substantially delay our vital missile
    and space programs and would be contrary to the national
    interest.” The International Association of Machinists, one
    union involved in threatened strike of 150,000 workers in major
    aerospace companies, immediately accepted the President’s
    request to postpone strike for 60 days.
 ∞ From Hyannis Port, President Kennedy announced that Dr. Robert
    R. Gilruth was one of the five Federal career officials who
    would receive the highest Government award, the 1962 Presi-
    dent’s Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service. Di-
    rector of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and of Project Mercury
    since its inception, Gilruth, the announcement said, “successfully
    carried out one of the most complex tasks ever resented to man
    in this country-the achievement of mannea flight in orbit
    around the earth.” The awards would be presented later a t
    White House ceremony.
 ∞ Launch of NASA Venus probe (Mariner) postponed because of
    malfunction in command destruct s stem of the Atlas-Agena B.
 ∞ Reported that Premier Khrushchev gad witnessed test firing of
    Soviet Polaris-type missile from submerged submarine in the
    Arctic Ocean, believed by Western observers to be the first such
    Soviet test.
  ∞ Soviet News Agency T s announced that the U.S.S.R. was again
                          as
    resuming nuclear tests in the atmosphere, quoting an official
    Soviet Government statement, in part: “The explosions of the
    American nuclear bombs above Christmas and Johnston Islands
    have roduced their echo-they have made Soviet nuclear tests
           P
    in rep y inevitable.”
  ∞ Egyptian armed forces test-fired four single-stage rockets, which
    witness President Nasser said could hit any target in Israel.
    Two of the rockets, named (‘ElZahir” (Victorious), had a reputed
    range of 222 miles; the other two, named “El Eaher” (Con-
    queror), were claimed to have a range of 360 miles. Rockets were
    launched from a secret base 48 miles north of Cairo, and were
    built entirely by Egyptian technicians, according to President
    Nasser. After the firings, Cairo Radio announced: “The U.A.R.
    has entered the space age.”
 ∞ NASA said by press to have ( p u t alphabet in orbit” with abbreviated
    names such as woo (Western Operations Office), PLOO (Pacific
128   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

     Launch ODerations Office). and recentlv NEOO (Northeastern
                               I,             .
                                              I


     Operation; Office).
July 22: NASA Mariner Venus probe launched bv Atlas-Agena B from
    “AMR, the booster deviating from course at 312 seconas and com-
     manded to be destroyed by the range safety officer of 290 seconds
     and nearly 100 miles high. Work immediately began to launch
     another Mariner spacecraft before the end of the 50-day Venus
     window on September 10, 1962, hopefully within several weeks if
     difficulty with the Atlas could be ascertained. Mariner had been
     planned to reach the vicinity of Venus about December 8 and to
     pierce the dense cloud layers hiding the surface of Venus from
     observation.
  ∞ Chairman of FCC, Newton N. Minow, said on “Meet the Press”
     TV program : “There are some optimists who think we can see the
     Japanese Olympics in 1964. I would personally think that is
     stretching it a bit, although the technology certainly will permit
     us to have a working communications satellite system within
     three or four years. This is the reason why we are are pushing to
     have legislation passed-it has passed the House and is now pend-
     ing in the Senate-to determine national policy as to how the
     communications system will work. As always in this country
     technology is ahead of public policy. This time we want t o keep
     our national legislative polic abreast of science.”
 ∞ United Auto Workers (UAW) orNorth American and Ryan Aviation
     voted to delay walkout for 60 days as requested by the President,
     thus joining International Association of Machinists (IAM) which
     had previously accepted the 60-day delay in planned strike
     against General Dynamics (Convair) and Lockheed.
July 23: TELSTAR relayed two 20-minute live TV shows, the first
     
     formal exchange of programs across the Atlantic. The first US.
     program to the Eurovision network of stations in 18 nations
     included sequences on the Statue of Liberty, a major league
     baseball game in Chicago, President Kennedy’s news conference,
     Astronaut Walter M. Schirra from Cape Canaveral, and the
     Mormon Tabernacle Choir from Mt. Rushmore. Three hours
     later on another orbit, the Eurovision program was beamed to
     the U.S. where it was carried by all three networks. It included
     scenes of Big Ben in London, the Colosseum in Rome, the Champs
     Elys6es in Paris, reindeer in the Arctic Circle region of Sweden,
     Sicilian fishermen tending their nets, and a scene in the Sistine
     Chapel of Vatican.
  ∞ In regular press conference, President Kennedy said: “I understand
     that part of today’s press conference is being relayed by the
     Telstar communications satellite to viewers across the Atlantic,
     and this is another indication of the extraordinary world in which
     we live. This satellite must be high enough to carry messages
     from both sides of the world, which is of course a very essential
     requirement for peace, and I think this understanding which will
     inevitably come from the speedier communications is bound to
     increase the well-being and security of all people here and those
      across the ocean. So we’re glad to participate in this operation
     developed by private industry, launched by Government, in
     admirable cooperation. ”
                                                                        129
                          AND                    EVENTS OF 1962
        ASTRONAUTICAL           AERONAUTICAL

July 23: NASA supplemental appropriation for FY 1962 was approved
   by the House and the Senate. It carried $82,500,000for research
        and development and $71,000,000 for construction and facilities
        at Cape Canaveral.
 ∞ USIA reported that the U.S.S.R. had been invited to participate in
        the TELSTAR broadcasts but had never answered the invitation.
 ∞ Atomic Support Agency’s Project Banshee balloon carried payload

        of instruments and 500 lbs. of high explosives to 15-mile dtit,ude
        over White Sands, explosion four hours after launch providing
        test of high-altitude effects of large explosions; t,he 200-foot-long
        string of instruments which parachuted to earth was recovered.
 ∞ In interview with Science Service, Dr. John O’Keefe of NASA said

        that pattern of re-entry of pieces of MA-6 booster rocket rein-
        forced the theory that tektites originate from the moon. Tektites
        are black, glossy rocks scattered on the earth’s surface, and the
        wide area covered by MA-6 rocket pieces was a similar pattern.
  ∞  Report by Dr. James R. Killian, Jr., released by the National Civil
        Service League, stated that the U.S. Government is “unusually
        desperate” for more and better scientists and engineers. Educa-
        tion is not keeping pace “with the growing size of our national
        commitments in. science and technology” and Government is
       being outbid by industries and even some universities for scarce
        talent. Greatest need, said the former scientific adviser to
        President Eisenhower and now President of MIT, is for scientists
        and engineers “with managerial ability.” ((Already there is a
        dangerous weakening of supervising technical leadership.”
∞ U.A.R.       held three-hour parade in Cairo celebrating the tenth
        anniversary of the Egyptian revolution. Twenty of the new
       Egyptian rockets were displayed.
July 24: USAF Blue Scout, Jr. space probe launched from Point
       Arguello Calif.
∞ Senate and House space committee conferences approved com-
       promise legislative authorization for NASA in FY 1963 of $3,-
       744,115,250. Bill provided $43,160,750 less than NASA requested.
       NearIy $1.3 billion was assigned to manned space flight, including
       the lunar program.
             major US. TV networks telecast separate five-minute
∞ Three
       newscasts via TELSTAR, each featuring their respective Paris news
       correspondents.
∞ Edward R. Murrow, Director of USIA,          quoted on floor of the House
       by Con ressman.Ryan as stating that the Voice of America
       cannot Lancially afford to use TELSTAR satellite for its overseas
       transmissions if the rates charged were the same as rates charged
       for use of undersea cables.
 ∞  AFSC announced that Colonel Charles E. (‘Chuck” Yeager (USAF),
       fist man to fly faster than the speed of sound (X-1, October 14,
       1947), was named Commandant of USAF Aerospace Research
       Pilot School a t AFFTC, Edwards AFB, Calif.
July 25: NASA Wallops Station launched Aerobee sounding rocket
       with GsFc-University of Colorado 208-lb. payload to an altitude
       of 68 miles, experiment orienting an ultraviolet spectrophotom-
       eter in the direction of the sun to study wave-length rofile as
                                                                 P
       a function of attitude and to calibrate instrumentation or future
       satellite Q h t s .
130    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

July 25:   NAS Committee on Atmospheric Sciences submitted three-
     volume report on “The Atmospheric Sciences, 1961-70” to Dr.
     Jerome Wiesner, Special Assistant for Science and Technology to
     the President. Prepared under Dr. Sverre Petterssen of the Uni-
     versity of Chicago and Dr. C. Gordon Little of the National
     Bureau of Standards, the report recommended: (1) a tripled
     funding of scientific research in the atmospheric sciences over the
     next 10 years; (2) university output of doctorates in the atmos-
     pheric sciences be increased by a factor of a t least four or five;
      (3) universities must broaden and strengthen their programs to
     become national centers of academic and scientific excellence;
     and (4) Government research agencies must develop more rigorous
     research and educational programs.
  ∞ Two-stage Caleb rocket successfully air-launched over PMR from
     Navy F4H Phantom jet piloted by Lt. A. Newman (USN), Caleb
     reaching an altitude of 1,000 miles with 120-lb. NRL payload
     designed to measure ion composition of the earth’s upper atmos-
     phere. Project Hi-Hoe, of which this shot was a part, was a
     series of inexpensive air-launched high-altitude probes under
     development by the Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake.
  ∞ NASA Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston invited eleven firms
     to submit research and development pro osals for the lunar
                                                 7
     excursion module (LEM) intended for use in unar orbital rendes-
     vous (LOR) flights of the multimanned Apollo spacecraft.
  ∞ Thor booster carrying nuclear warhead for atmospheric test (Opera-
     tion Dominic) was destroyed on pad a t Johnston Island; report-
     edly there were “no injuries to personnel” and “no hazard from
     radioactivity.”
  ∞ Lockheed Propulsion Co. announced successful static firing of
     12-inch-diameter1 solid-propellant (polycarbutene) motor at
     -75’.    Spokesman said: “In more than 100 firings of poly-
     carbutene motors ranging from 4 inches to 120 inches in diameter,
     and under environmental conditions from plus 200’ to minus
     100’ we have a record of 100 percent success.”
  ∞ In speech to the 1962 Boys Nation, NASA Administrator Webb
     spoke of the future of the space age: “There is an intimate
     connection between the space effort and the future of this nation.”
     Mr. Webb was made an honorary member of Boys Nation and
     was presented a plaque for his “interest in the youth of the
     nation.”
  ∞ Senator John L. McClellan addressed the Senate on S. 2631, de-
     signed to prevent strikes which would “obstruct our vital missile,
     space, and other programs, the success of which are indispensable
     to national prestige, security, and well-being.”
 ∞ Pope John XXIII at Vatican summer palace stated to several
     thousand pilgrims that U.S. TELSTAR satellite had “helped
     strengthen brotherhood among peoples,” its use “marked a new
     stage of peaceful progress.”
  ∞ President Game1 Abdel Nasser formally opened a jet aircraft factory,
     according to official Egyptian sources.
July 25-26: NASA witnesses testified before the House Committee on
     Science and Astronautics on the subject of economies in the space
     program.
                                                                 131
        ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

July 26: Acting mayors of New York and West Berlin, Paul R.
    Screvane and Franz Arnrehn, exchanged greetings during six-
    minute transatlantic telephone call via TELSTAR on its 152nd
    orbit. Call had been arranged by USIA in cooperation with
      AT&T.
   ∞ AFSC established permanent Research and Technology Division,
0

    located at Bolling AFB, to provide centralized planning and
    direction of applied research and advanced technology programs.
    Provisionally activated on April 4, 1962, the new division would
    be headed by Maj. Gen. Marvin C. Demler and, in addition to
    supporting development of advanced aerospace systems, it would
    be the AFSC central point for scientific and technical liaison with
    universities, the USAF Scientific Advisory Board, NSF, AFOAR,
    and the scientific community; and in maintaining liaison with
    Army, Navy, and NASA installations.
July 27: x1 No. 1 flown to near 100,000 feet to begin descent
            -5
                              r
    maneuvers with yaw dam er off, NASA’s Armstrong as pilot,
                                              Neil
    in test of re-entry contro with electronic equipment turned off.
    X-15 No. 1 was grounded after this flight for installation of
    telescopic cameras for future research flights.
 ∞ NASA-JPL-USAF Mariner R-1 Post Flight Review Board determined
    that the omission of a hyphen in coded computer instructions
    transmitted incorrect guidance signals to Mariner spacecraft
    boosted by two-stage Atlas-Agena from Cape Canaveral on
    July 21. Omission of hyphen in data editing caused computer
    to swing automatically into a series of unnecessary course correc-
    tion- signals which threw spacecraft off course so that it had to
    -
    be destroyed.
 ∞ GSFC awarded contract to IBM Corporation’s Federal Systems Divi-
    sion for computer support servhes for Project Mercury flights,
    nonrendezvous Gemini, and unmanned lunar flights scheduled
    for Project Apollo.
∞ USAF launched unidentiiied satellite (AIpha Theta) from Vandenberg
                                       .-                             -
    AFB with Thor-Agena booster.
 ∞ Reported that Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory was estab-
    lishing a midwestern network of 16 observing stations with four
    automatic cameras to photograph the night sky to locate meteo-
    rites quickly after they fall. Located in 7 midwestern states, the
    stations will scan a total possible recovery mea of two and one
    half billion acres.
∞ NASA Administrator Webb named Franklyn W. Phillips, Assistant
    to the Administrator (October 1, 1958-present), to establish and
    direct NASA’s   Northeastern Operations Office in Boston, M s .as
    Phillips served as Acting Secretary of the National Aeronautics
    and Space Council from January 1959 to February 1960.
July 28: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS VII into orbit (apogee: 299 miles;
      
    perigee: 130 miles; period: 90.1 minutes; inclination: 65’ to the
    equator), announcing that satellite would gather data on the
    “radiation hazards for long space flights.”
 ∞ In address at Wheeling, West Virginia, Thomas F. Dixon, NASA
    Deputy Associate Administrator, pointed out that NASA and DOD
    “cooperate closely. For example, we have established a national
    launch vehicle program to provide the rocket power that both
132    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 0 2

    civilian and defense activities require. United States policy
     demands that every possible effort be made to perserve space as a
    peaceful resource for all mankind. We must not lose sight,
    however, of the fact that manned space flight involves facilities,
    vehicles, and techniques that may well be significant for national
    defense. . . .
       “Our landing on the moon will be a 240,000-mile step forward
    in the great adventure of space conquest. No.one can say how
    far we will ultimately go, but I assure you of this-we are on our
    way to making the United States pre-eminent in space as well
     as on earth.”
July 28: National Science Foundation issued ((Providing U.S. Scien-
    tists with Soviet Science Information,” a publication which listed
    seven firms in Chicago, New York, and Washington which offer for
    sale the bulk of openly published Soviet scientific and technical
    literature, including 120 journals available in translation.
∞  Day-long procedural quorum calls in the U S . Senate prompted by
    filibuster tactics of liberal opponents of the Administration’s com-
    munications satellite bill.
 ∞ James H. “Dutch’) Kindelberger, President of North American
    Aviation (1928-48) and chairman of the Board (1948-date), died
     in California. After Armistice in 1919, he joined Glenn L.
     Martin plant in Cleveland with Donald W. Douglas, later follow-
    ing Douglas and supervising the engineering of the DC-1 and
     DC-2, the first Douglas Aircraft passenger planes. During
     World War 11, NAA built 14% of the U.S. military aircraft includ-
    ing the B-25 and P-51, later the famed F-86 Sabre, and more
    recently the X-15. Under Icindelberger, NAA’S Rocketdyne Divi-
    sion pioneered the rocket propulsion development for Navaho,
    Atlas, Jupiter, Thor, and Redstone engines. NAA is presently
    prime contractor on NASA’S Apollo program and the S-11.
 ∞ Maj. Robert M. White (USAF) was awarded the Flying Tiger Pilot’s
    Trophy in recognition of his record 314,000-ft.-altitude flight in
    the X-15 rocket research aircraft.
July 29: UCLA scientists reported that they had developed training
    devices to allow men to contract individual muscles, which during
    the stresses of liftoff or re-entry in space flight would permit
    trained astronauts to operate controls by twitching single muscles.
 ∞ Reported that NASA’s      two-man Gemini spacecraft would probably
    begin flying and making landings in West or South Texas in 1963,
    using Rogallo wing and landing skids.
 ∞ Disclosed that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. differed on the total width of
    microwave bands to be assigned to communications satellites.
    U.S. proposed two bands with total width of about 3,000 mega-
    cycles, but U.S.S.R. favored a much narrower band of frequencies
    which would include those used by military and would be subject
    to considerable interference. To date, only informal proposals
    were made, and the negotiations to work out frequencies for
    satellite communications were still in the future.
 ∞ Soviet Navy Day, Admiral of the Fleet Sergei G. Gorshkov declar-
    ing in article in Pruvda that rocket-firing atomic submarines are
    the backbone of the Soviet Navy; “The Soviet fleet is now more
    modern than the navy of any capitalist country.”
                                I‘

                                                                   133
                        AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962
       ASTRONAUTICAL

July 30: House of Represe tatives passed compromise NASA authori-
                           ’5
    zation bill for $3,744,1 5,250, accepting a nearly $22 million in-
    crease voted by the Senate for lunar and planetary exploration.
    Bill was sent to Senate for final action.
∞ Sky Shield I11 would ground more than 1,800 airplanes for 5%hours
    on Sunday, September 2, it was announced. For the military
    exercise to test US. air defense, DOD selected middle of a three-
    day holiday period as the date having the least effect on civil air
    traffic.
July 30-31: Filibuster against Administration satellite bill continued
    on the floor of the Senate.
July 31: Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Scientific Advisor to the President,
    testified before the House Committee on Government Operations
    subcommittee that getting better scientists in government ap-
    peared to be the “most important single problem as I’ve tried to
    understand why so many of our programs go badly.” Declining
    to comment on specific failures, Dr. Wiesner pointed out that the
    Administration sought “to redress unbalances between Federal
    and general industrial salary scales. . . . Such reform is essential
    if we are ever to reverse the present deterioration in the quality
    of the technical force in the government service.”
 ∞ In testimony before House Science and Astronautics Committee,
    Richard B. Morrison, NASA’s     Launch Vehicles Director, testified
    that an error in computer equations for Venus probe launch of
    Mariner R-1 spacecraft on July 21 led to its destruction when
    it veered of€course.
 ∞ Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower spoke on the people-to-
    people benefits to be gained by live international communica-
    tions, broadcast televised to US. via TELSTAR from Stockholm,
    Sweden.
∞ British Postmaster General Reginald Bevins told Parliament that

    Britain would spend $1,960,000 in the coming year on develop-
    ment of satellite communications.
 ∞ Replying to a charge that U.K. was playing a declining role in
    development of satellite communications, Postmaster General
    Reginald Bevins told Parliament: “I assure you that the British
    Government is fully alive to the possibilities of satellite com-
    munications and when it comes to an operational system, we
    shall not be left out in the cold.” He predicted a global system
    of satellite communications within this decade.
∞ Donald F. Conaway, national executive secretary of American Fed-

    eration of Television and Radio Artists, announced he had re-
    quested a conference with European counterparts to discuss
    minimum pay scales for performers appearing on future Telstar
    satellite relays. He added: “Telstar is a great challenge. We
    cannot realistically set an international rate for performers until
    many problems are settled with the countries.”
134   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

During July: Outfitted in pressure suits in a simulated space environ-
    ment, five NASA scientists of MSFC and MSC completed study
    determining how an astronaut could work on 5-2 rocket engine
    during actual space flight, at Rocketdyne. Maintenance, repair,
    replacement, and adjustment of components of the hydrogen-
    fueled 5-2 were performed along with research on the design of
    special tools and pressure suits.
 ∞ NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced first static test of
    P&W liquid-hydrogen engine. In first k i n g of series, which was
    run in vttcuuiii chainber to simulate space environment, RGlO
    ran nine seconds and generated a rated 15,000 pounds of thrust.
 ∞ First successful reactor tests using liquid hydrogen as coolant
    were perforrned by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory at the
    Nuclear Rocket Development Station (NRDS), Jackass Flats,
    Nev. “Cold flow” series of reactor tests involved operation of
    Kiwi-B reactor, previously conducted only with gaseous hydro-
    gen. Liquid hydrogen as a propellant is planned to power the
    Nerva nuclear engine being developed for Projects Rover and
    Rift.
 ∞ NASA announced that it was establishing computer center a t Slidell,
    La., to service the Michoud Operations by November.
                                                                   tT
                                                              Facili
    will be one of the nation’s largest computer centers and w i l
    perform engineering calculations arising in the development,
    fabrication, and static testing of the Saturn S-I and S-IC first
    stages.
 ∞ Research Institute for Advanced Study of the Martin Company
    was awarded contracts by NASA, AFOSR, and ONR for basic re-
    search in nonlinear mathematics, an area relating to problems
    in space flight, long-range communications, and automation.
 ∞ Samuel K. Hoffman, President of Rocketdyne Division, NAA,
    received the Spirit of St. Louis Medal from the American Society
    of Mechanical Engineers for his “contributions to aviation, aero-
    space and rocket industries through the development of the first
    major long-range rocket engine.”
 ∞ Karel J. Bossart of General Dynamics/Astronautics received the
    Astronautics Medal of the British Interplanetary Society for his
    “individual contribution to the science of astronautics, parti-
    cularly in the engineering sciences.”
∞ The Messerschmitt factory, Augsburg, Germany, celebrated the
    20th anniversary of the construction of its Me-262, the world’s
    first operational jet aircraft.
∞ U.S.S.R.’s Aeroflot inaugurated two-hour helico ter sightseeing
                                                     f
    flight over Moscow on Sundays, the PO ularity o which required
    advanced bookings of passengers for tYlis “fashionable form of
    transport .’’
 ∞ SRN.2 Hovercraft was publicly demonstrated at the Isle of Wight,
    a 27-ton watercraft powered by four- aired Blackburn Nimbus
    gas-turbine engines. SRN .2 researct vehicle developed by
    Hovercraft Development Ltd. has already traveled more than
    8,000 miles and up to 62 knots speed. Four-ton SRN.l Hover-
    craft has operated for more than 300 hours and the speed range
    has been increased from 25 to 65 knots.
                                                                  135
        ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1963

During July: USAF announced that largest chimpanzee science research
      center was under construction at Aeromedical Research Labora-
      tory, Holloman AFB, a doubling of facilities and professional st&
      possible through funds ($500,000) made available by NASA. 50
      anthropoid apes are currently in various stages of training,
             g from space veterans Ham and Enos to preschool
      IanY
      ado escents.
 ∞   FAA awarded seven additional contracts for research on supersonic
0
      transport aircraft, bringing the total of supersonic transport
      study awards to $6.1 million.
 ∞   North American Aviation expected to pass its peak World War I1
      employment figure of 93 000 persons within the next 90 days,
      its current co orate empioyment now being a t 90,000. Rocket-
                   ?
      dyne Division as grown from 11,000 to 13,000 employees within
      the past year.
                           AUGUST 1962
August 1: Senate voted NASA FY 1963 authorization of $3,744,115,250,
    representing $5,400,000 less than the amount originally agreed
    to by the Senate and about $2 billion above the amount authorized
    for NASA in FY 1962. The bill (H.R. 11737) was sent to the
    White House for the President’s signature.
 ∞ House passed Independent Offices Appropriation Bill for 1963
     (H.R. 12711) containing an amendment providing for 25% indi-
    rect costs on research grants made by the 26 executive agencies of
    the bill, including NASA. Appropriation for NASA was
    $3,644,115,000, representing $143,161,000 less than budget esti-
    mates.
  ∞ USAF launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena booster from
    Vandenberg AFB.
 ∞ Five-day filibuster in Senate against Administration-supported
    communications satellite bill was shelved under compromise
    agreement between bill’s supporters and opponents. Bill was
    referred to Foreign Relations Committee, which was ordered to
    report it back to the Senate not later than August 10.
 ∞ Rocketdyne Division o€ NAA announced plans to expand its Canoga
    Park, Calif., facilities to manufacture 5’-1 and 5-2 rocket engines
    for NASA’s Advanced Saturn launch vehicle.
∞  Four American scientists led by Dr. William A. Cassidy, research
    scientist a t Lamont Geological Observatory of Columbia
    University, left New York on three-month expedition to Argen-
    tina, where they hoped to find and unearth a 13j6-ton meteorite.
    Supported by National Science Foundation grant, the expedi-
    tion would seek the huge meteorite which was reported in late
    1700’s by Indians of north central Argentina.
 ∞ Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, AFSC Commander, told House Military
    Operations subcommittee that the Midas early warning satellite
    would “take longer to develop than initially forecast.” He said
    that USAF and DOD had been overly optimistic about the reli-
    ability that could be expected from components and about
    technical features of the system.
 ∞ USAF Atlas E” ICBM was launched from a silo a t Vandenberg A 4           ~   ~
    in successful 5,000-mi. flight t o vicinity of the Marshall Islands
    in the Pacific, the first Atlas F launch from an underground silo.
 ∞ AEC-DOD jointly announced that repair work on launch facilities a t
    Johnston Island mould delay further high-altitude nuclear tests
    for some weeks. Damage occurred July 25 when Thor rocket
    and its nuclear warhead were deliberately destroyed on the pad.
 ∞ Recent Soviet article discussed various methods the U.S.S.R. has
    been studying for sending a man to the moon in the current
    decade. The earth-orbital rendezvous method was reported as
    considered the most reliable, but consideration also has been
    given to the direct ascenb method, using the “Mastodon” rocket.
    No decision has been made public.
     136
                                                                    137
                                               EVENTS OF 1962
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL

August 1: Soviet instrument ships observin U.S. nuclear tests for
                                               5
    weeks had left the Pacific test area on uly 10 or 11, following
    US.high-altitude test of July 9.
∞ Newly-created Army Materiel Command took over t’he Army
    Missile Command (formerly Army Ordnance Missile Command),
    responsible for management of 19 missile systems.
August 2: Joseph A. Walker (NASA) flew X-15 No. 3 in test of the
         
    research aircraft’s ability to automatically correct undesired
    yaw. I n nine-minute flight, the X-15 reached maximum altitude
    of 147,000 ft. and speed of 3,445 mph (mach 4.99).
  ∞ First full-scale research model of an inflatable space station was dis-
    played a t NASA Lewis Research Center. Developed by Goodyear
    Aircraft Corp. for NASA, the doughnut-shaped, three-story-high
    structure was made of rubberized fabric and equipped to accom-
    modate three to ten astronauts.
∞ Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Sen. John J. Sparkman of
    Alabama as acting chairman) announced plans for hearings on
    international aspects of the communications satellite bill. Plans
    called for testimon by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, other State
                        9
    Department officia s, and representatives of Defense Department,
    Commerce Department, and Justice Department, as well as
    NASA.
∞ British Parliamentary Secretary for Science, Denzil Freeth, said
   that ARIEL I had produced interesting and valuable information
   about the ionosphere and the higher atmosphere. He added:
    “ARIEL at k s t behaved almost perfectly but recently transmission
   of data has been interrupted irregularly. The reason is not
   known but is being investigated.”
 ∞ U.K. Defense Minister Peter Thorneycroft announced that Thor
   missile bases in Britain would be abolished by October 1963.
   British long-range defense would be assumed by U.S. fleet of
   Polaris-firing submarines and, later, by Skybolt air-to-surface
   missiles carried on British bombers.
 ∞ When questioned at press conference regarding the British decision
   to discontinue Thor missile bases, President Eennedy stated:
   “Our ability to meet our commitments to the defense of Western
   Europe in the conventional and in the nuclear field remain
   unchanged . . ., and the United States’ commitment remains
   unchanged.”
 ∞ Aerojet-General Corp. proposed a booster two to three times larger
   than Nova, to be launched from the sea. Two-stage Sea Dragon
   with takeoff wei h t of 20 to 100 million pounds would be assem-
                    &
   bled in existing ydocks, towed to point of launch, and launched
   from the water without gantry cranes or launch pads. Both stages
   would be recovered in the water by hydrodynamic deceleration.
 ∞ FAA announced its airport aid program for FY 1963, a record $74.2
   million to be spent on improvement or construction of 419
   airfields.
∞ French physicist Duke Armand de Gramont, founder of the Insti-
   tute of Theoretical and Applied Optics and president of Opti ue
   et Precision de Levallois, died in his chateau near Paris. %e
   had helped develop the electronic microscope.
138    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

August 2-3: In meeting a t NASA Langley Research Center, Langley
    and MSC personnel presented reports on space station studies to
    officials from NASA Hq. and other interested agencies.
August 3: NASA radiation-research balloon released biological payload
    near Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, after 130,500-ft.-high, 51-hour
    flight from Goose Bay, Labrador. Two monkeys survived the
    flight in good condition, but four hamsters could not survive
    the day-lon recovery operation in the Canadian wilderness;
                 d
    fate of the our beetles was not yet known. The animals and
    insects were flown to the University of California at Berkeley
    for scientific study. This was the second in a series of four
    balloon experiments conducted by NASA Ames Research Center.
∞ Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy and FCC Chairman Newton N.
    Minow testified before Senate Foreign Relations Committee on
    the Administration-backed communications satellite bill. Urging
    prompt passage of the bill, Kennedy said it was “one of the most
    important pieces of legislation offered by this Administration”
    and that he was “perfectly satisfied it will protect the public
    interest.” This was the eleventh time Minow had testified for
    the bill, which the House had passed on May 3 and which pre-
    viously had been approved by two other Senate committees.
∞ Advanced Syncom satellite, being developed for NASA by Hughes
    Aircraft Co., probably would carry four radio signal repeaters
    and could provide up to 300 two-way telephone channels or one
    TV channel. In 24-hour stationary orbit, one Advanced Syn-
    com would be sufficient to link four continents (North America,
    South America, Europe, and Africa) ; three such satellites would
    provide worldwide coverage.
 ∞ USAF Cambridge Research Laboratories announced that it would
    conduct a series of high-altitude balloon astronomy experiments
    during 1962 and early 1963. Primary objective would be to get
    more complete and accurate information about the moon, Venus,
    and Mars. Scientific director of the project would be Dr. John
    Strong of Johns Hopkins University.
August 4: Senators Joseph S. Clark of Pennsylvania and Wayne Morse
    of Oregon, leaders of the Senate opposition to pending communi-
    cations satellite bill, stated on radio and television interview that
    they still insisted the communications satellite system must be
    owned and controlled by the Government. However, they added
    that they were not committed to Government operation, and that
    they were “perfectly willing to consider working out a lease or a
    license” with AT&T, RCA, or any other communications company.
∞ NASA General Counsel John A. Johnson, speaking before the Ameri-
    can Bar Association’s Section on International and Comparative
    Law in San Francisco, stated: “It appears that the existing state
    of the law is that we have an area of space extending upward
    from the surface of the earth for an indefinite distance which is
    exclusively controlled by the underlying State, and above that,
    beginning at some undefined point, lies the ‘free’ realm of outer
    space. Whether there is or should be an intermediate third realm
    to which the exclusive power of the underlying State does not
    extend, but in which the full freedom of outer space may not be
    enjoyed, is an interesting item for speculation. . . .”
       The problem is of practical significance, “because all spacecraft,
    before injection into orbit, must be launched through the air
                                                                     139
                                                        OF 1962
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS

   space. Likewise, all space missions involving re-entry and land-
   ing require that the spacecraft move back through the air space
   on their return to earth. . . .
       “It now appears that the manned vehicles which will be
    developed over the next five to ten years will enter the atmosphere
   rather steeply, level out, and glide a t altitudes ranging from
    about 25 to 60 miles for distances perhaps as great as 7,000 to
    10,000 miles before landing. Inevitably, it will become necessary
    to know in advance whether any portion of the re-entry phase
    of a manned space flight violates the territorial air space of
    another State because of the altitude at which its land or terri-
    torial waters may be overflown. . . .
        “It would be most unwise to attempt to reach a solution to the
    so-called ‘boundary’ problem on the basis of the difference
    between the regimes of aerial flight and space flight. But even
    if it were possible to define a boundary between those regimes on
    scientific and technical grounds, it would bear no necessary
    relationship to the national interests which the principle of
    territorial sovereignty is designed to serve.
       “I think it is evident that if this problem is to be solved it will
    be done on the basis of an accommodation of the political interests
    of the States concerned, and not on the basis of scientific or
    technological criteria.”
August 4: James A. Martin, NASA X-15 Program Manager, in letter to
     the Washington Evening Star clarXed the method of computing
    mach number in high-speed flight. “Mach number is a direct
    function of atmospheric temperature a t the altitude a t which the
    vehicle is 0ying. This temperature varies from day to day for
    the same altitude. Because of this, it is possible that the same
    number of feet per second a t the same altitude can be more or
    less than a given Mach number.”
       He pointed out that on November 9, 1961, Major Robert
    White 0ew the X-15 to speed of 6,005 feet per second; on June
    27, 1962, Joseph Walker flew to 6,020 feet per second, a t about
    the same altitude as Major White. However, because of differ-
    ences in atmospheric temperatures for the two days, Major
    White attained higher mach number (M 6.04) than Walker
    (M 5.94).
August 4-5: Thousands of teen-agers toured NASA Lewis Research
    Center and witnessed special lecture-demonstrations during
    “Youth Da 5,” co-sponsored by LRC and the Cleveland Press.
                 9
August 5: USAF launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg
    AFB, using an Atlas-Agena launch vehicle.
 ∞ Soviet Cosmonauts Gherman S. Titov and Yuri A. Gagarin hinted
    in a press interview that the U.S.S.R. would attempt prolonged
   manned orbital flight some time during 1962. Colonel Gararin
   remarked: “Recently in Japan I said that new flights through
   space are not far off and expressed confidence that they would
   certainly take place this year.”
       Major Titov then added: “I also am of the same opinion and
   want to add that the time already is past when the length of
   cosmic flights will be only hundreds of thousands of kilometers.
   I think that flights of future cosmonauts will be more prolonged
   and the route of their cosmic ships will measure millions of
   kilometers.”
140    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

August 5: The World’s Fair Corp. announced it was developing plans
    for a unified space exploration exhibit called “Aerospace Island,”
    as part of the U.S. exhibit in the 1964-65 World’s Fair.
∞ U.S.S.R. resumed nuclear tests with a high-altitude blast in the 40-

    megaton range, hhe first Soviet test since November 4, 1961.
∞ Michael Friedlander, associate professor of physics at Washington

    University, St. Louis, was preparing to send up a series of huge
    balloons for cosmic ray experiments, beginning about August
    15, from Calvina, South Africa.
  Dr. Clarence P. Oliver of the University of Texas zoology depart-
    ment suggested to the House Space Committee that ast,ronauts
    traveling through space “for any extended period” should refuse
    to have any more children. Radiation exposure exceeding normal
    dosage on earth would pose a “genetic risk,” he testified.
August 6: Testifying before Senate Foreign Relations Committee on
    communications satellite bill, Secretary of State Dean Rusk
    stated: (‘Most of the discussion of the foreign policy provisions
    of the bill has centered on whether they delegate to the corpora-
    tion a part of the President’s authority to engage in international
    negotiations on behalf of the United States Government. Let
    me state most empbatically that they do not. . . .
       “I can assure the committee that we in the State Department
    are fully aware of the broad range of questions involving foreign
    policy interests that may arise in connection with this satellite
    communications system.”
  ∞ Edward R. Murrow, Director of USIA, testified before the Senate
    Foreign Relations Committee : “Having contributed to develop-
    ing the [communications satellite] system, Government should
    not be on a parity of payment with other commercial users. We
    strongly believe that affordable rates for our agency’s use is an
    appropriate partial repayment for that national investment.”
    He replied, in answer to question, that he would endorse the bill
    as it was.
  ∞ NASA announced signing of $215,502,744 contract with Chrysler
    Corp. for production of Saturn S-I stages. Chrysler would de-
    liver the 21 units (instead of 20 as originally planned) between
    early 1964 and late 1966, beginning with the S-I for Saturn SA-9.
    NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, with development respon-
    sibility for Saturn, would fabricate boosters for first eight vehicles.
    Chrysler would build the S-I stages at NASA Michoud Operations
    plant near New Orleans.
∞ Announced that Boeing had received $15,954,096 supplementary

    contract from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for work lead-
    ing to design, development, fabrication, and test of Saturn C-5
    first stage (S-IC).
∞ Col. Daniel McKee, Project Gemini director in NASA’s           Office of
    Manned Space Flight, reported as saying that two-man Gemini
    spacecraft might be used for the next four or five years, and
    describing it as ‘(a reliable and flexible spacecraft which has a
    lot of potential for scientific investigations of space. I additional
                                                              f
    applications develop, it would be used for various purposes.”
    At present, primary goal of Project Gemini is one-week-long,
    two-man mission with testing of orbital rendezvous operation.
                                                                       141
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

August 6: Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, writing in the
     General Electric Forum, said that there were unique military
    problems in space that a civilian space program never could
    solve. “The Air Force will make orbital flights much sooner
    than previously planned,” he wrote.
∞ Reported by Aviation Week that NASA was considering use of area

    near Corpus Christi, Texas, for landing two-man Gemini space-
    craft after its re-entry from first orbital flight, in 1963. Landing
     mode for the spacecraft would include RogaUo wing and skids.
∞  MIT ordered a HoneyweU 1800 electronic computer from Honeywell
    Electronic Data Processing, for work on Project Apollo naviga-
     tion system. After installation in 1963, the computer would aid
    in circuitry desi n of Apollo spacecraft’s guidance computer and
     also would simI f full operation of spaceborne computer during
                        ate
    ground tests.
 ∞ Sweden launched U.S. Nike-Caiun sounding. rocket, f i s t of series
    of U.S.-Swedish cooperative Grogram for 5eaceful’ exploration of
    the upper atmosphere, the rocket reaching 68-mi. altitude after
    launch from Kronoggrd range in northern Sweden. Fifteen
    minutes after launch, canister containing sample cloud particles
    was recovered; particles would be analyzed to provide informa-
    tion on composition and origin of noctilucent clouds.
∞ Gen.    Bernard A. Schriever (USAF), addressing the Society of
    Photographic Instrumentation Engineers, declared development
    of the laser may prove more important to the world than
     “development of the ballistic missile, the discovery of the
    transistor, or the realityof TELSTAR. . . . As a new method for
    transmission of energy, the Laser has almost infinite potential.
    The Laser can direct a concentrated beam of light across great
    distances with extreme precision. It is therefore ideally suited
    for application in space. In addition, it appears to have many
    practical applications in research, industry, medicine and
    communications. . . .
        “In the Air Force, our current funding for Laser technology is
    about six million dollars. Our efforts range from instrumentation
    development to the search for means of using Laser beams in
    support of our military space objectives. Our budget for Fiscal
    Year 1964 should include an increase for Laser research and
    development.
        “The Laser is a striking example of the potential to be found
    in todav’s advanced technolom. We must make full use of its
    possibilities for national securi”t$ purposes. . . .1 )
 ∞ Senator John L. McClellan recommended establishment of a Senate
    commission on science and technology to study Government’s
    growing scientific programs, including the desirability of a
    Cabinet post for science and technology.
 ∞ Dr. Melvin Calvin, 1961 Nobel Prize winner for his biochemical
    research on photos thesis, said in interview that he was investi-
    p t i n g effects of z a v i o l e t light on chemical elements basic to
      iving organisms, in effort to discover the chemical evolution of
    life from lifeless matter. H e stated that results of his experi-
    ments with those of Dr. Stanley Miller (whose earlier research
    produced simulated amino acids) implied that “any planet with
    an appropriate temperature and an atmosphere similar to that
142    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    of the primitive earth will, in time, develop the very things
    which we now recognize as the essential molecules of living
    organisms. . . .’ 1
       He further indicated that, considerin the numerous planets
    within our galaxy that have existed muc% longer than the earth,
    it was logical to conclude that some forms of intelligent life
    elsewhere in the galaxy are more advanced scientifically and
    technologically than man.
August 6: First task of ONR’S 85-ft. radiotelescope a t H a t Creek, Calif.,
    would be mapping the visible galaxy, with emphasis upon
    studies of gaseous galactic nucleus, according to Missiles and
    Rockets.
∞  NAA Rocketdyne’s Propulsion Field Laboratory, near Los Angeles,
    completed its 150,000th test in 12 years of engine development.
∞ Reported that Sikorsky helicopters of Okanagan Helicopters, Ltd.,
    had been used in British Columbia, Canada, to replant telephone
    poles for the British Columbia Telephone Company.
During August: USAF awarded one-year study contract to Aero-
    nutronic Division of Ford Motor Co. to isolate, identify, define,
    and code tasks and skills required of members of future aerospace
    crews. Study would be conducted a t Behavioral Science Labora-
    tory, Wright-Pat terson AFR.
August 7: President Kennedy, in ceremony at the White House, pre-
    sented the President’s Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian
    Service to Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Space-
    craft Center, and five other recipients of the award for 1961.
 ∞ Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, writing on the US. space
    program in The Saturday Evening Post, stated that he did “not
    see the need for continuing this effort of such a fantastically ex-
    pensive crash program. . . .
       “Why the great hurry to get to the moon and the planets?
    We have already demonstrated that in everything except the
    power of our booster rockets we are leading the world in scientific
    space exploration.
       “From here on, I think we should proceed in an orderly, sci-
    entific way, building one accomplishment on another, rather than
    engaging in a mad effort to win a stunt race.”
∞ House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved a bill to
    revise space research patent laws. Bill allowed private companies
    to retain title to patents earned under Government contract, with
    Government retaining a license to use such inventions without
    cost.
∞ House Committee on Science and Astronautics recommended that
    Project Anna mapping satellite program be transferred from
    jurisdiction of DOD to NASA. The satellite was designed to give
    extremely accurate measurements of the shape of the earth, its
    magnetic field, and distances from one point to another on earth.
∞ Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, testified before
    the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the US. “can be
    the leader in the establishment of a communications satellite
    system to serve the communications needs of the world, thus
    demonstrating our technical capabilities and our desire to utilize
                                                               .
    these capabilities for the benefit of all mankind. . . I urge
    that the Committee report the bill favorably.”
                                                                    143
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

August 7: Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara told the Senate
       
    Foreign Relations Committee that the Department of Defense
    “stxongly su ports the objective of establishing a civil communi-
    cations s a t d t e system as expeditiously as practicable.”
∞ Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA’s       Marshall Space Flight
    Center, said in an interview in General Electric Forum that the
    U.S.space program would be paying for itself within another 10
      ears. “The real payoff does not lie in mining the Moon or in
    tnnging gold back from the Moon, but in enriching our economy
    and our science in new methods, new procedures, new knowledge,
    and advanced technology in general.”
 ∞ General Electric announced that control system for first Orbiting
    Astronomical Observatory (OAO) had successfully completed its
    first simulated space flight test.
 ∞ USN launched h t flight model of advanced Polaris missile (A-3)
    ca able of 2,880-mi. range. Among innovations in A-3 were
    b3et-shaped nose (rather than rounded shape of earlier models),
    and guidance system about one third the size and weight of the
    ones in earlier Polaris models and the smallest and lightest yet
    developed for U.S. ballistic missiles. Launched from land pad
    at Cape Canaveral, the missile fell short of its planned range
    (“in excess of 1,975 miles”) because of second stage malfunction.
    Test was termed ‘‘partially successful.”
∞ Announced that        Georga Nuclear Laboratories’ nuclear reactor
    had been licensed by AEC to operate a t one megawatt. Labora-
    tories would participate with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co.
    in development of NASA’s rocket stage.
                                  Rift
                                           Relations Committee on the
∞ Testifying before the Senate Forei
                                      R
      ending communications sate ’te bill, Washington lawyer
    foseph L. Rauh, Jr., stated that the bill would “give away not
    only billions of taxpayers’ money already s ent to develop both
                                                 B
    space and space communications, but also t e vast unknown dis-
    coveries of the future.” Another Washington lawyer, Benjamin
    V. Cohen, testified that the bill was “filled with pitfalls” and ad-
    vised that its enactment now would be “premature.”
August 8: NASA launched Aerobee 1508 sounding rocket from Wallops
    Station, ita 256-1b. payload lofted to 92-m. altitude and 60-mi.
    distance. Efforts to recover the payload were not successful,
    but scientists were able to analyze data telemetered durin
                                                                      fi
    flight about performance of an attitude control system as we
    as four scientific eyeriments: to measure solar flux in two ultra-
    violet s ectral reglons; to measure radiation emerging from the
                                                                r
    top of t! e earth’s atmosphere; to obtain ultraviolet photo aphs
            I
    of Venus from outside the earth’s atmosphere; and to stu y dis-
    tribution of atmospheric atomic hydrogen and Lyman Alpha
    radiation. Also flight-tested was an experimental, transistonzed
    telemetry system.
∞ Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF) piloted X-15 No. 2 in flight to


           s
    record attern of aerodynamic heating at moderately low speeds,
    relative y low altitudes, and moderate angle of attack, the steel-
    skin craft withstanding temperatures up to 900’ F. Maximum
    altitude was about 90,000 ft., maximum speed about 2,898 mph
    (mach 4.39) in series of maneuvers near Hidden Hills, CaM.,
    to build up heat on airplane’s surface. After successful 8-min.
144    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 62
   I


  &
      flight, Maj. Rushworth reported observing particles of insulation
     floating between twin panes of X-15’s windshield, while climbing
      a t 70,000-ft. altitude.
 August 8: Special subcommittee of the House Committee on Science
     and Astronautics conducted hearings on solid propellants. Chair-
     man David King of Utah was quoted as saying he wanted the
     hearings to be detailed enough to commit DOD and NASA to a
     definite plan for solid-propellant rockets.
         Testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on
     Science and Astronautics, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator
     Thomas F. Dixon said that NASA was “giving solid rockets equal
     consideration with liquid rockets in decisions on future launch
     vehicle designs. . . . We have provided the Air Force with our
     requirements for an advanced technology or feasibility demon-
     stration program on large solid rocket motors pertinent to the
     development of solid rocket-powered launch vehicles.
         “To make an informed choice of propulsion between liquid
     propellant engines (where the technology is fairly well in hand)
     and solid propellant motors (where it is not), it is necessary to
     advance the technology of large solid motors to the point of
     actual demonstration firings. The demonstration program we
     have proposed will allow us to make a wise choice between the
     two types of propulsions because a better understanding of costs
     and schedules as well as developmental problems will be
     available.”
∞ U.S. Senate passed S. 2771 to establish a Commission on Science

     and Technology, which would coordinate Government research
     and development programs with those of business and industry
     and would establish coordinated systems of information storage
     and retrieval.
∞  NASA Flight Research Center released photographs of a mysterious
    floating object taken during Maj. Robert M. White’s July 17
    record-breaking flight of the X-15. Pictures, extracted from
    film taken by movie camera in tail of x-15, showed gray-white
    object of undetermined size tumbling above and behind the
    aircraft. NASA officials reported that it was “impossible to
    identify or explain the object’s presence at this time.”
∞ National Geographic Society and Lowell Observatory announced

    preparation of an atlas, “A Photographic Study of the Brighter
    Planets,” containing “the most detailed and revealing pictures
    obtained since telescopes were perfected especially for observing
    the planets rather than the distant stars.”
 ∞ Bidders’ conference held a t NASA Hq. NASA requested proposals
    from field centers and industry for two lunar logistics studies-
    one of a spacecraft bus concept which could be adapted for initial
    use on the Saturn C-1B and later use on Saturn C-5 launch ve-
    hicles; and one of a variety of payloads which could be soft-
    landed near manned Apollo missions, the latter study to deter-
    mine how man’s stay on the moon might be extended, how man’s
    capability for scientific investigation of the moon might be in-
    creased, and how man’s mobility on the moon might be increased.
    Contract proposals were requested by August 20.
 ∞ NASA had awarded $141.1 million contract to Douglas Aircraft Co.
    for design, development, fabrication, and test of Saturn S-IVB
                                                                    145
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

      stage to be used as upper stage of three-stage Advanced Saturn
      (C-5). Contract called for eleven S-IVB units, including three
      for ground tests, two for inert flight, and six for powered flight.
      S-IVB uses NAA’S J-2 liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen engine gen-
      erating 200,000 lbs. of thrust.
August 8: NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced contract
      award to Pratt and Whitney, to investigate the feasibility of
     variable thrust in RGlO rocket engine. The study was not
      directed toward any specific mission but would have wide appli-
      cation in future space flights.
∞ AEC and Westinghouse Electric Corp. announced a joint study pro-
      gram to determine technical feasibility of a 1,000,000 kw nuclear
      power plant using a single, closed-cycle water reactor.
 ∞ Reported that RCA had proposed unification of all U S . international
     communications carriers into a single privately owned and inde-
     pendently operated company, to expedite development of a
     global communications service.
∞ Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru told          Indian Parliament that
     India had agreed to have a rocket launching station on her terri-
     tory under TJ.N. auspices for international use.
August 9: Third balloon in radiation-experiment series conducted by
     Ames Research Center was launched from Goose Bay, Labrador.
     In two hours, the balloon had carried its payload of two monkeys,
     four hamsters, and instruments to an altitude of 85,000 feet,
     where it was to catch prevailing winds and drift westward across
     Canada.
∞ USAF launched two Atlas. D missiles in quick succession from
     Vandenberg AFB toward mpact area 5,000 miles away. Officials
     said the tests, the first demonstration of a multiple countdown
     capability, were successful.
 ∞ Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of Air Force Systems Com-
     mand, testified before a subcommittee of the House Committee
     on Science and Astronautics that the revised USAF solid-propellant
     development program would cost considerably less than the $60
     million originally planned. He said that current program review
     ordered by Secretary of Defense and NASA Administrator had
     shown that solid-fuel program was larger than necessary to
     demonstrate the feasibility of the boosters. Once approved by
     the Secretary and the Administrator, the new master plan for
    solid-propellant boosters would limit the program to feasibility
     study, since neither DOD nor NASA had specific mission require-
    ments for their application.
 ∞ Speaking on the Senate floor, Senator Estes Kefauver reiterated his
    belief that the communications satellite bill (H.R. 11040) “pro-
    posed the most gigantic giveaway in the history of this countr .
                                                                      i?
    I t would turn over to a governmentally created private monopo y
    the benefits of hundreds of millions of dollars of taxpayers’ money
    which have been invested in the development of space and
    satellite communications technology. . . .”
∞  Establishment of NASA Industrial Applications Advisory Committee
    announced, with Earl P. Stevenson (former president and chair-
    man of the board of Arthur D. Little, Inc.) as chairman. The
    committee would assist in transferring new scientific knowledge
                  research and development programs to industry.
    from NASA’s
146   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

August 9: USAF announced awarding of Distinguished Service Medals
    to Lt. General Thomas P. Gerrity (USAF), formerly commander of
    Air Force Systems Command’s Ballistic Missile Division (AFSC/-
    AFBMD) and now Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems and Logistics;
    and Maj. General Osmond J. Ritland (USAF), formerly head of
    AFBMD and AFSSD and currently Deputy for Manned Space
    Flight, AFSC.
∞  Congressional Record reprinted monograph on “US. Space Legal
    Policy-Some Basic Principles,” by Robert D. Crane, director
    of the Space Research Institute a t Duke University. Mr. Crane
    urged US. initiative in the formulation of space law, which “can
    serve not only to promote scientific research and economic
    progress and to facilitate the growth of a free and peaceful world
    order, but to implement on a higher moral level American military
    and political stra.tegies . . .”
August 10; Senate Foreign Relations Committee returned the com-
    munications satellite bill (H.R. 11040) to the Senate floor, after
    defeating amendments sought by opponents of the bill. Senate
    filibuster against the communications satellite bill was resumed.
 ∞ NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking before a subcommittee
    of the Senate Committee on Appropriations, said that 32 candi-
    dates for astronaut positions had been selected from the 200
    applicants, and that by September 1 NASA would select 10 of
    these men to enter astronaut training.
 ∞ USAF Atlas F ICBM was destroyed by the range safety officer a few
    seconds after launch from Vandenberg AFB.
  ∞ Advanced model of Navy’s Polaris A-2 missile was successfully
    test-fired from a land pad at Cape Canaveral, in 1,700-mi. flight
    downrange.
 ∞ Reported that NASA had selected Aerojet-General’s Algol solid-
    propellant motor to power Little Joe I1 booster, which would
    be used to flight-test the command and service modules of Apollo
    spacecraft. -
 ∞ NASA announced appointment of Dr. Robert L. Barre as Scientist
    for Social. Economic, and Political Studies in the Office of Plans
    and Program Evaluation. Formerly a private consultant for
    both Government and industry, Dr. Barre would be responsible
    for developing NASA’s     program of understanding, interpreting,
    and evaluating the social, economic, and political implications
               long-range plans and accomplishments.
    of NASA’s
 ∞ DOD announced fist flight of Army’s new VTOL, turbojet airplane,
    the Lockheed VZ-10 “Hummingbird,” a t Lockheed-Georgia’s
    plant, Marietta, Ga. After further tests to prove Humming-
    bird’s aerodynamic and handling features in conventional flight,
    Lockheed would begin vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL)      tests
    with the twin-jet research aircraft.
 ∞ British Blue Water missile development was canceled, after British
    Government had spent $84 million on the 75-mile-ran e, surface-
                                                           7
    to-surface missile. Defense Ministry said that B ue Water
    program was canceled because of the increasing number and yield
    of other tactical weapons available to NATO.
August 11: U.S.S.R. launched VOSTOK 111 into orbit a t 11:30 AM
    Moscow time, the spacecraft piloted by Maj. Andrian G. Niko-
    layev. Initial orbital data: apogee, 156 miles; perigee, 113 miles;
                                                                   14’7
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    period, 88.5 min. Cosmonaut Nikolayev remained in orbit
    throughout the day and night.
August 11: Soviet space expert Anatoly Blagonravov, writing in
    Izvestia, said that U.S.S.R. was “leaving far behind everything
    that has been attained by America in carrying out manned orbital
    flights,” and that, contrary to the U.S. program, Soviet space
    flights were “of an exclusively peaceful nature.”
 ∞ Second joint US.-Sweden sounding rocket launched from Kronogkd
    site in project to gather data on noctilucent clouds, the Nike-Cajun
    rocket sending instrument-packed nose cone 43.4 miles (70 km.)
    high before it pxachuted back to earth.
 ∞ NASA Ames Research Center announced its high-altitude radiation-
    research balloon was flying at 135,000-ft. altitude over eastern
    Manitoba and that the balloon’s payload capsules containing two
    monkeys, four hamsters, and instrumentation would be released
    early August 12.
 ∞ Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield, on behalf of himself and
    Minority Leader Everett M. Dirksen, filed tt cloture petition
    intended to break the Senate filibuster against Administration-
    backed communications satellite bill.
 ∞ Senator Thomas Kuchel of California, speaking in the Senate, said
    that the bill to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act
    of 1958 (H.R. 12812) would provide NASA a needed flexibility i     n
      atent regulations, including authorization to secure royalty-free
    gcense or complete title for Government-sponsored research, and
    he recommended that the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and
    Space Sciences hold hearin on the bill.
                               If!?
 ∞ Representative Joseph E. Karth, chairman of a subcommittee
    of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, announced
    that hearings on four communications satellite systems would
    begin August 15, to determine whether duplication existed among
    the projects (Relay, Syncom, Advent, and Telstar).
∞ Evidence that atmosphere of Saturn contains molecular hydrogen
    was announced by astronomers Guido Munch of Mt. Wilson
    and Palomar observatories and Hyron Spinrad of JPL. Previ-
    ously, only the trace substances of methane and ammonia
    had been detected on Saturn. Munch and Spinrad also found
    evidence that winds blow many hundreds of miles per hour on
    Saturn, stated that such winds could sweep the gases into Saturn’s
    bands.
∞ Winners of the 1962 Harmon International Trophies were announced

    as follows: Aviator’s Trophy-Lt. Col. William R. Payne (USAF),
    for his May 1961 non-stop, record-speed flight of B-58 from
    Carswell AFB, Texas, to Paris, via Washington and New York;
    Aviatrix Trophy-Jacqueline Cochran, for setting 8 world class
    records with T-38 jet trainer and for flying F-104 jet fighter
    at twice the speed of sound, between August 24 and October
     12, 1961; Aeronaut’s Trophy-Cdr. Malcolm D. Ross (USN)
    and the late LCdr.Victor A. Prather (USN), for their record-alti-
    tude balloon flight of May 4, 1961, over the Gulf of Mexico.
∞  Dr. Harry Wexler, meteorological research director of US. Weather
    Bureau since 1955, died unexpectedly. Holder of distin ished
    service citations from the Air Force, Navy, Commerce R p a r t -
    ment, and National Civil Service League, Dr. Wexler had been
148    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    with the Weather Bureau since 1934. With Col. Floyd Wood
    as pilot, he made the first aircraft penetration of an Atlantic
    hurricane, in September 1944. I n June 1961, Dr. Wexler and
    Prof. Viktor A. Bugaev of the U.S.S.R. were principal figures in
    drafting plans for cooperative use of satellites to improve weather
    forecasting.
August 11: Reported that USAF had offered to train NASA’s        “second
    generation” astronauts a t its Aerospace Research Pilot School,
    Edwards AFB, California.
 ∞ Reported that NASA was conducting a study to determine what
    effect Soviet nuclear test series might have on forthcoming orbital
    flight (MA-8) of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Final evalu-
    ation was expected within a week.
∞ A modified B-17 (Flying Fortress) was being used by Denmark’s
    Geodetic Institute to photograph northern Greenland.
August 12: Lt. Col. Pave1 R. Popovich, piloting VOSTOK IV spacecraft,
    was launched into orbit (157-mi. apogee, 112-mi. perigee) a t
    11:02 AM Moscow time by U.S.S.IZ. Within about an hour,
    Cosmonaut Popovich made radio contact with Cosmonaut Niko-
    layev, traveling in nearly the same orbit in VOSTOIC 111 launched
    the previous day. Nikoleyev reported shortly thereafter that
    he had sighted VOSTOK IV, and within three hours after VOSTOK
    IV’S launch the two spacecraft had completed two orbits of the
    earth in adjacent flight. Moscow radio announced that objec-
    tive of orbiting the two spaceships close to each other was “to
    obtain experimental data on the possibility of establishing con-
    tacts between the two ships, coordinating the actions of the pilot-
    cosmonauts and to check the influence of identical conditions of
    space flight on human beings.” Tracking by Sohio Research
    Center (Cleveland, Ohio) placed the two spacecraft at 75 miles
    apart during VOSTOTC 111’s twenty-second orbit and VOSTOK IV’S
    sixth orbit, and at 385 miles during later orbital passes. This was
    the first launching of two manned space flights within a 24-hour
    period.
 ∞ Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev, pilot of VOSTOK 111, broke three
    records when he entered his eighteen orbit of the earth at 5:49
    AM Moscow time, completing 25 hours and 19 minutes of flight
     time in space and more than 440,000 miles distance. Previous
    records-number of orbits, time aloft, and distance covered-
     had been set by second Soviet cosmonaut, Maj. Gherman S.
    Titov, August 6-7, 1961.
       By 1O:OO PM Moscow time, Nikolayev had completed 24 orbits
    of the earth (602,370 mi.) and Popovich had completed 8 orbits
     (186,300 mi.). Tass reported orbital data of VOSTOK 111: apogee,
     141.3 mi.; perigee, 109.7 mi.; period, 88.2 min.; inclination, 64.59
    degrees to Equator; VOSTOK IV: apogee, 145.8 mi.; perigee, 110.5
    mi.; period, 88.3 min.; inclination, 64.57 degrees to Equator.
    Both spacecraft remained in orbit throughout the night.
 ∞ TV pictures of Soviet Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich orbiting
     the earth in spacecraft VOSTOK 111 and IV were viewed by the pub-
    lic in Russia, Western Europe, England, and the U.S. The
     pictures were put on videotape or kinescope film during London
    broadcast for TV viewing in America.
                                                                   149
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

August 12: Second birthday of   ECHO passive communication “balloon”
    satellite. Since launch, the mylar balloon had orbited the earth
    9,000 times and traveled 277,257,677.67 miles; it had been used
    for approximately 150 communication experiments. ECHO proved
    that inflatable structures would survive for long periods in space,
    despite sensitivity to aerodynamic drag and solar radiation.
    Initial orbit was 1,049-mi. apogee and 945-mi. perigee; before first
    birthday, orbit was 1,350-mi. apogee and 580-mi. perigee; solar
    pressures caused orbit to become nearly circular again; then, on
    second birthday, orbit was 1,175-mi. apogee and 704-mi. perigee.
 ∞ NASA Ames Research Center said that its high-altitude, radiation-
    research balloon with cargo of four hamsters and two monkeys
    had been lost in a storm over Manitoba. The balloon was last
    seen nearing the end of its 1,900-mi. flight as it entered a storm
    over God’s Lake, in northeastern Manitoba. This was the third
    in Ames’ series of balloon flights and the first loss of payload.
 ∞ Five NASA scientists, led by Ozro M. Coverington of GSFC, arrived
    in Australia to inspect proposed sites for new tracking stations.
 ∞ Four German scientists, including Eugen Saenger, former director
    of Stuttgart Institute of Physics, West Germany, were reportedly
    employed by E ptian government to direct Egypt’s new rocket
                    7
    design and deve opment program.
 ∞ Reported that Soviet technicians “probably have their craft in
    preparation” for a flight toward Venus within the next two
    weeks.
August 13-17: Lunar Exploration Conference of more than 250
    teachers and scientists conducted at Blacksburg, Va., by Virginia
    Polytechnic Institute in cooperation with National Science
    Foundation and NASA Langley Research Center. Major dis-
    cussion topics were “The Moon as an Earth Satellite,” “Studies
    of the Lunar Surface,” and “Lunar Flight Exploration.”
August 13: Cosmonaut Nikolayev, by 1O:OO PM Moscow time, had
    orbited the earth 40 times and had passed the million-mile mark
    in VOSTOK 111. At this time, his companion Cosmonaut Popovich
    in VOSTOK IV completed 24 orbits of the earth and logged 621,000
    miles of space flight. Sohio Research Center calculated the two
    spacecraft were separated by 1,793 mi. at about 8:OO PM EST.
  ∞ President John F. Eennedy, in nationally televised address, com-
     mented on the “extraordinary achievement of the Soviet Union”
     in double manned flights of VOSTOK 1 1 and IV. He stated that
                                            1
     the U.S. was behind the U.S.S.R. in space exploration, and that
     it would “be behind for a period in the future. . . . [But]
     we are making a ma‘or effort now, and this country wl be heard
                                                            il
     from in space as weli as in other areas in the coming months and
     years. ”
  ∞ Congressman George Miller, Chairman of the House Committee
     on Science and Astronautics, spoke on the House floor in acknowl-
     edgment of successful Soviet space flights of VOSTOK 1 1 and IV.
                                                              1
     Senator Alexander Wiley acknowledged the event on the Senate
     floor and pointed to need for advancing the US.space pro ram.
  ∞ Dr. Eberhard Rees, Deputy Director of NASA Marshall gpace
     Flight Center, was quoted as stating that Soviet dual-flights
     VOSTOK 1 1 and IV came “six months to a year” earlier than he
               1
     had expected.
150    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

August 13: Soviet scientist Ram Bayevsky, writing in Pravda, said
    that miniaturized equipment was recording brain and eye reac-
    tions of Cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Pave1 Popovich.
    Other instruments reported were two recorders to register infor-
    mation when radio transmissions ceased (during re-entry) and
    when the spacemen left their cabins; microphones, in the form of
    thin rubber tubing, to register breathing; electrodes on the skin
    to record heart reactions and to follow eyeball muscles.
 ∞ John Hodges, director of Canada’s Regina Observatory, said in
    an interview that VOSTOK 111 and IV were orbiting in space at a
    time when millions of meteorit,es were bombarding the earth’s
    atmosphere in an unusually heavy concentration, and that scien-
    tists and astronomers were keenly interested in the outcome of
    meteorites colliding with the Soviet spacecraft.
 ∞ Despite Soviet announcement that U.S.S.R. had developed i~ “new
    calculation technique” for launching space vehicles as “a matter
    of routine,” U.S. space experts were reported to agree that the
    U.S.S.R. had not surpassed the U.S. in application of electronic
    comput,ers to space technology.
 ∞ NASA Manned Spacecraft Center officials commented that flights
    of Soviet spacecraft VOSTOK 111 and IV would not affect pro-
    graming of U.S. Project Gemini two-man orbital flights, scheduled
    to begin in 1964.
 ∞ U.S.S.R. had declined the offer of U.S. networks to use TELSTAR
    satellite for relaying live telecasts of orbiting Soviet cosmonauts,
    said Russell Tornabene, Chairman of the U S . joint network
    committee coordinating transatlantic TELSTAR programs.
 ∞ In an interview with Tass, Soviet medical scientist Dr. Georgi
    Arutyunov stated that Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich were
    supplied with sandwiches, pastries, cutlets, roast veal, chicken
    filets, fruit, water, coffee, and various fruit juices-in addition
    to special foods in tubes similar to those supplied on earlier space
    flights.
 ∞ Filibuster on communications satellite bill (H.R. 11040) continued
    in Senate, with opponents filing between 75 and 100 amendments
    by noon. ,4n amendment submitted by Senator Wayne Morse
    would permit (‘the enlargement of NASA so we can apply to the
    satellite system the contract, lease, and license system which has
    permitted the Department of Defense to do such a remarkable
    job with defense contracts. . . .1 1
 ∞ USAF Atlas F missile flown 5,000 miles from Vandenberg A FB carry-
    ing a special package of cameras to help locate and correct
    propulsion problems encountered in previous tests, the missile
    meeting all test objectives.
∞ Reported that responsibility for all U.S. space bioscience programs,
    including animal flights, would be given to NASA as result of
    informal agreement between Secretary of Defense Robert S.
    McNamara and NASA Administrator James E. Webb.
 ∞ India’s first satellite-tracking station had been opened a t Uttar
    Pradesh State Observatory, Nainital, one of 12 such stations
    established by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory.
∞ Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (USAF) stated in interview with Space
    Business Daily that the U.S. was ahead of t h e U.S.S.R. in basic
    space sciences, but that U.S.S.R. led in space boosters and in
   bioastronautics.
                                                                   151
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1963

August 13: Ten Air Force pilots emerged from simulated space cabin
    in which they had spent the last month, participating 111 sycho-
                                                              up
    lo ‘cal test to determine how 1ong.a team of astronauts co d work
    ei? ciently on a prolonged mission in space. Project director
    Earl Alluisi said the experiment had “far exceeded our expecta-
    tions.”
∞ University of Maryland announced its Institute for Fluid Dynamics
    and Applied Mathematics had received $18,179 grant from NASA,
    for work on an interplanetary space probe to measure solar
    winds and study interplanetary plasma (mixture of ions and
    electrons).
 ∞ Reported that USAF had contracted with Westinghouse Research
    Eaboratories for modifkation for a solid-state fuel cell to deter-
    mine its technical feasibility for aeros ace applications and to
                                             !
    evaluate the cell in comparison with ot er space power systems.
 ∞ Construction of a new institute of medical radiology in the U.S.S.R.
    was nearing completion, it wasgeported. Institute’s purpose was
    to study the biological effect of ionizing radiation, the potentially
    poisonous effect of radioactive substances, possible means of
    protecting human beings and animals against radiation of all
    types, ways of using radioactive isotopes and other radiation
    sources for diagnosis and treatment of various diseases, and effects
    of radioactive fallout.
 ∞ Speaking before the Lunar Exploration Conference in Blacksburg,
    Va., Nobel physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey said that modern space
    science indicated the moon and the earth originated independ-
    ently. It appeared likely that the moon was drawn into earth
    orbit early in the history of the solar system, some time after both
    bodies had been essentially formed in their present sizes and
    massw. He said that science now tended to disprove two
    widely accepted theories on the moon’s origin: (1) that the moon
    had been broken from the earth by tidal action, and (2) that the
    moon and earth had originated together in one gaseous cloud.
August 14: Soviet Cosmonauts Nikola ev (VOSTOK 111) and Popovich
     (VOSTOK IV) continued to orbit tyh e earth, their flight paths re-
    ported by Sohio Research Center as ranging from 1,382 mi. to
     1,793 mi. apart. Radio Moscow reported the cosmonauts were
    maintainin radio contact with earth and between themselves.
    By 4:lO f M Moscow time VOSTOK 111 completed 52 orbits;
    VOSTOK IV, 36 orbits. Soviet government remained silent on
    plans to land the pair. Cosmonaut Popovich, orbiting the earth
    in VOSTOK IV, passed the million-mile mark shortly after retiring,
    about 9:00 PM Moscow time.
∞ X-15 No. 3 flown by NASA pilot Joseph A. Walker to 197,000-ft.
    altitude and 3,784 mph speed (mach 5.13), in 9-min. flight near
    Delamar Lake, Nev., to evaluate new re-entry technique. Auto-
    matic roll damper ceased operating a t 100,000-ft. during descent,
    causing X-15 to o into a simultaneous rolling and yawin
                                                                      7
                        K
    motion. Pilot Wa ker regained stability with manual contro
    and landed safely.
 ∞ Senate voted (63-27) to invoke cloture rule on communications
    satellite debate, cutting off the filibuster against the bill and l m
                                                                       i-
    iting each Senator to an hour of speaking time.
152    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 19 6 2

August 14: Radiotelescope operators a t Jodrell Bank Experimental
    Station, England, reported VOSTOK 1 1 and IV were orbiting within
                                          1
    about 1,600 mi. of each other, as they continued their extended
    flight in space.
∞ Reported from Moscow and confirmed by Goddard Space Flight
    Center that pilots of VOSTOK 1 1 and IV were using radio frequen-
                                    1
    cies of 19,990 megacycles, 20,006 megacycles, and 143,625
    megacycles.
∞ Announced that U.S.S.R. Ministry of Communications had already
    issued postage stamp honoring double space flight of VOSTOK 111
    and IV.
∞ Five live telecasts   of Cosmonauts Nikolayev (VOSTOK 111) and
    Popovich (VOSTOK reportedly were received and relayed by
                         IV)
    Moscow television when the spacecraft passed within range.
    Soviet heart specialist Prof. Alexander Myasnikov, speaking on
    Moscow television, said heart activity data received from Cosmo-
    nauts Nikolayev and Popovich gave no cause for apprehension.
    Pulse and breathing rates, accelerated during the launchings,
    were normal, and the cosmonauts had not complained of any dis-
    turbing cardiovascular activity.
 ∞ British astronomer Zdenek Kopal of the University of Manchester
    said the gravitational pull of the earth might have heated the
    interior of theJmoon to nearly 2,000° C. He ascribed the moon’s
    growing diameter and its rising temperature to constant push-and-
    pull action of the earth’s gravitational force, causing tidal friction
    within the lunar interior. The friction generates heat faster than
    the heat can escape from the moon, thus contributing to the addi-
    tion of tens of thousands of sq. mi. to the moon’s surface and
    1,832’ of temperature over the last 4.5 billion years. Kopal was
    speaking before the Conference on Lunar Exploration, Blacksburg,
    Va.
∞ Announced that 1962 Daniel Guggenheim Medal for achievement in

    aviation would be awarded posthumously to James H. Kindle-
    berger, late board chairman of North American Aviation, Inc.
∞  Soviet scientist A. Prokhorov, writing in Soviet labor organization’s
    publication Trud, stated that study of structure of living organ-
    isms would provide reat opportunities for their utilization in
    space exploration. &e stated that the “general reliability of
    modern automation systems is less than the reliability of each of
    their components taken individually. Living organisms, on the
    other hand, having developed over millions of years, are much
    more reliable than their component organs.”
August 14-17: Construction projects a t NASA Marshall Space Flight
    and Army Missile Command, Huntsville, Ala., halted when 1,500
    workers refused to cross picket lines of Local 588, International
    Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, protesting employment of
    nonunion electricians by Baroco Electrical Construction Co.
    District Court injunction ordered 5-day stop of strike, effective
    August 18, and set hearing for August 22.
August 15: I n early morning broadcast, Radio Moscow announced
    Cosmonaut Nikolayev (VOSTOK 111) had completed 61 earth
    orbits and Cosmonaut Popovich (VOSTOK had finished 45
                                                    IV)
    orbits.
                                                                     153
        ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

August 15: Landing safely in Kazakhstan, U.S.S.R., Cosmonauts
    Andrian G . Nikolayev and Pave1 Popovich had broken all records
    for number of orbits, miles traveled, and time in flight. Maj.
      Nikolayev in VOSTOK 1 1 had completed 64 earth orbits; 1,645,000
                              1
      miles; and 95 hours, 25 minutes flying time. Lt. Col. Popovich in
      VOSTOK IV had completed 48 earth orbits; 1,242,000 miles; and
      70 hours, 29 minutes flying time.
   ∞ President John F. Kennedy, in message to U.S.S.R. Premier


      Nikita Ehrushchev, said: “I send to you and to the Soviet
      people the heartiest congratulations of the people and the Gov-
      ernment of the United States on the outstanding joint flights of
      Maj. Nikolayev and Col. Popovich. This new accomplishment
      is an important forward step in the great human adventure of
      the peaceful exploitation of space. America’s astronauts join
      with me in sending our salute to Maj. Nikolayev and Col.
      Popovich.”
 ∞   NASA press conference a t NASA Hq. on the tandem Russian orbital


      flights of VOSTOK 111 and IV. Participants: NASA Administrator
      James E. Webb; Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden;
      Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director,
      Office of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes. Mr. Webb
      paid tribute to the Russian accomplishment as “demonstrations
      of a very real technological capacity, an ability to plan and
      engineer and build and fly vehicles that can carry man for ex-
       tended periods of time. . . . They do have significance.”
       Dr. Dryden felt that the flights essentially conformed to the
      stated Russian objective, “to subject two men to identical space
      exposures, and weightlessness . . . plus . . . longer duration,
      which is needed to do this.” Dr. Seamans noted that “as far as
      guidance accuracy is concerned, what they achieved is roughly
       comparable to what we achieve in our Mercury flights. To me
       the significant element here is that on the second flight they were
       able to take off within a limited period of time . . . countdowns
       can be protracted for one reason or another.’’ Mr. Holmes said
      he was not surprised at the Russian flights: “I think we would
       be selling the Russians pretty short if we didn’t feel that a year
       after they launched a Vostok on a booster that could lift that
       kind of a weight, something of the order of 10,000 pounds, that
       they couldn’t indeed perform in this fashion.’’
          Asked whether the NASA manned space flight program could
       be accelerated, Mr. Webb answered that the booster program
       could be accelerated with a crash program spending another $1
       to $2 billion a year. “You can get more done. It will be done
       inefficiently. We believe we have a program [now] that marries
       all of the considerations in an effective way . . .”
          To the question of who would first land on the moon, Mr. Webb
      replied, “I think we will make the manned lunar landing and
      return before they do.”
         As to future Russian capability, Dr. Dryden said: “there is a
       possibility that the Soviets can do circumlunar flight before we
       can. I once said there is a fifty-fifty chance, certainly no better
       than that, that we could do that as early as they can. I t is for
       this reason, in fact, that our national goal was set a t the lunar
       973174L11
154    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    flight because this does require another booster on the part of the
    Russians as well as ourselves.
        “Ever since the Space Agency has been formed we have been
    waiting for this other shoe to be dropped. People have told us
    every month, the Russians are going to produce this big booster
    in the next few months. Now four years have gone by and they
    have not yet shown us this big booster. To the best of our knowl-
    edge they have developed lighter-weight nuclear weapons and
    ballistic missiles rather than bigger space boosters. This is not
    to say that they may not be doing this. All I am saying is that
    they will require a bigger booster to land men on the moon.”
August 15: Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, in London press
    conference, said he did not believe the U.S.S.R. was leading the
    U.S. in space exploration.
        “We have been putting all kinds of satellites in the air for
    meteorological readings and other scientific information, . . .”
    but the U.S. has not been indulging in “the same kind of spec-
     tacular” as the U.S.S.R.
        “I think we should develop achievement upon achievement
    until it should be almost a matter of course for us to go to the
    moon, rather than indulge in the spectacular.”
 ∞ Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight
     Center, said in Blacksburg, Va., that dual space flight of VOSTOK
     111 and IV “was impressive from the standpoint of the whole
     operation, . . . [but] it does not look like the Russians used any
     new equipment. I don’t think there was a technical break-
     through. . . .”
        When asked to comment on U S . prospects of being first to
    reach the moon, Dr. von Braun said that manned lunar flights
     would require rockets bigger than any used either by the U S . or
     U.S.S.R. so far. “We have such rockets under development,
     and the Russians also have to develop a new rocket to do this
    job . . . . Therefore I don’t think we have any serious handi-
     caps to overcome so far as the lunar program is involved.”
 ∞ Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station,
    England, said that flights of VOSTOK 111 and IV indicated “the
     Russians have a clear space superiority in the military, if not the
     scientific, sense.” He urged that the U S . and U.S.S.R. join each
     other in a cooperative attempt to explore the solar system with
     manned space ships.
 ∞ Congratulating the U.S.S.R. for success of its VOSTOK 111 and IV
     space flights, Prof. Hermann Oberth, leading German space
     scientist, added: “I am convinced that the Americans will soon
     come up with something similar.”
 ∞ NASA announced that a second attempt to send a Mariner probe
     towards Venus would be made within the next few days. The
     spacecraft and its mission would be identical to that of the f i s t
     Mariner probe, which had to be destroyed shortly after launch
     on July 22, 1962, because of a deviation from planned flight path.
 ∞ Soviet press agency Tass said that the cosmonauts traveling in
     weightless state could not depend on their sensory organs for
     correct signals. The cosmonauts had to rely on instruments to
     determine whether they were upside down or not, Tass added.
∞ Prof. G. V. Petrovich, Soviet rocket specialist, wrote in Komsol-

     skaya Pravda that within a few decades the solar system will
                                                                   155
       ASTRONAUTICAL A N D AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    seem no more forbidding than once-formidable Antarctica does
    today. When the solar system is conquered, man will be abIe to
    undertake interstellar flights. Noting that the rockets boosting
    VOSTOIC111 and VOSTOK IV into orbit were 20,000,000 horsepower,
    he predicted that during the Twentieth Century rocket liners
    would be built with engine capacity greater than 1,000,000,000
                              -           .-
    horsepower.
August 15: Walter L. Lingle, Jr., was appointed Assistant Adminis-
    trator for Management DeveloDment. NASA.
  ∞ NASA announced thvat its GoddardaSpaceFlight Center had awarded
    three three-month study contracts for design of an Advanced Os0
    (orbiting solar observatory) satellite, to be launched into polar
    orbit during 1965. Advanced Os0 would aid development of
    method of predicting solar flares. Contractors were Republic
    Aviation Corp., Space Technology Laboratories, and Ball Brothers
    Research Corp.
∞ Announced that NASA had awarded contract to Rocketdyne Division
    of NAA for two-year continuation of H-1 engine research and
    development. Preliminary letter contract of $700,000 was
    signed toward estimated $9,000,000 total cost.
                                                              enye
    used in clusters of eight to power S-I stage of Saturn C-1 aunch  is
                                                        =-l
    vehicle.
                       Chandler Ross, Aerojet-General Corp. Vice
During August:
    President, told House Committee on Sciences and Astronautics
    that two Aerojet concepts of recoverable/reusable boosters com-
    pared favorably to cost and capability of Saturn C-5. One con-
    cept was Sea Dragon two-stage unmanned vehicle with payload
    capability “well in excess” of a million pounds; and the other was
    Astroplane single-stage manned vehicle with payload capability
    of about 550,000 pounds. “In each case the incremental cost
    savings is of sufficient magnitude to warrant continued feasibility
    studies of these systems,” Ross said.
August 16: Adlai E. Stevenson, U.S. Ambassador to the U.N., stated
    in letter to the Senate that the communications satellite bill
    “provides the President and t,he executive branch of this Govern-
    ment with adequate control and influence to ensure that the in-
    strument proposed here can be fitted or adapted to an intwna-
    tional system when we learn enough to design one.”
 ∞ D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA Director of Manned Space Flight, said
    that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., probably would make his
    orbital flight (MA-8) the middle or end of September. Speaking
    a t the Lunar Exploration Conference in Blacksburg, Va., Mr.
    Holmes made it clear that the success of recent Soviet prolonged
    manned space flights would not change the six-orbit mission of
    Commander Schirra.
 ∞ H.R. 12812, bill to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act
    of 1958 regarding property rights in inventions by private com-
    panies under NASA contract, was reported from the House Com-
    mittee on Science and Astronautics.
∞ DOD activated NRL’S huge radar system near Chesapeake Beach,
    Md. Central feature of system was 150-ft.-diameter antenna,
    capable of obtaining signals from small aircraft or satellites from
    as far as 1,200 miles away ?nd of receiving very strong signals
    from the moon (240,000 mdes away). Radar would be used
    soleIy for research purposes.
156    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 19 6 2

August 16; Soviet Defense Minister, Marshal Rodin Malinovskg,
      declared in message to Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich
      published in Krasnaya Zoezda: “Let our enemies know what tech-
      niques and what soldiers our Soviet power disposes of.”
∞ S-IV stage of Saturn C-1 launch vehicle was successfully static-
      fired for first time in 10-sec. test a t Sacramento, Calif., facility
      of Douglas Aircraft Co. First flight test of the liquid-hydrogen/
      liquid-oxygen-powered upper stage would be made in 1963.
August 17: U.S. Senate passed Administration communications satel-
      lite bill (66 to 11 vote), ending 20-day debate and liberal bloc
      opposition which had invoked seldoni-used anti-filibuster rules.
      Bill was returned to the House, which had previously passed a
      slightly diff went version.
  ∞ NASA selected Dalmo-Victor Co. and Amelco, Inc., t o negotiate for
      R&D and production services for initial systems of Satan (satellite
      automatic tracking antenna). New antenna system would orient
      itself automatically to orbiting spacecraIt and would be a major
      improvement in NASA’s     worldwide Minitrack system.
  ∞ NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced appointment of Dr.
      Howard S. Turner to the Industrial Applications Advisory Com-
      mittee. Dr. Turner was vice president for R ~ of Jones & Laugh-
                                                        D
      lin Steel Corp. and formerly president and a director of Industrial
      Research Institute.
  ∞ DOD spokesmen considered there was nothing in the space flights of
      VOSTOK 1 1 and IV that DOD had not anticipated, and that the
                  1
      double flight appeared to have no immediate military significance.
  ∞ In joint interview of Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich pub-
      lished in Soviet newspaper Izvestia, Major Nikolayev stated:
       ‘(In an unstrapped condition in the cabin I carried out communi-
       cations and ate. I n a condition of weightlessness one can live
       and work completely. . . . I n accordance with the schedule, we
       got up, conducted scientific work, maintained communications
      with the earth, made new entries in the flight log. We also had
       a special time for rest. I n general, we worked and lived just as
       we do at home.”
         Lt. Col. Popovich said that there had been a lot of work to do
       in collecting the maximum amount of scientific data. . . . ((We
       were not idle.”
  ∞ Reported that launch of NASA’s second Mariner Vcnus probe would
       be delayed until August 26 or later, because of (‘unusual” failures
       in rocket’s guidance equipment revealed during prelaunch check-
       out a t Cape Canaveral.
  ∞ Navy’s Polaris A-2 missile, testing components for A-3 version,
       exploded a few scconds after launching a t Cape Canaveral.
  ∞ Seven newspaper pages were transmitted by facsimile from Westrex
       Corp. laboratories, New York; to Andover, Maine; to TELSTAR
       satellitc ; and back in successful 12-minute communications ex-
       periment.
 ∞ Announced that American Cable & Radio CorD., subsidiary of
       IT&T, would conduct the first experiments in lsdnding tel&ype
       messages betwecn the U.S. and Great Britain via TELSTAR com-
       munications satellite. Tests would be made between August 20
       and September 7, in cooperation with AT&T and British Post
       Office Department,
                                                                   157
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

August 17: British Air Ministry announced that three U.S. Lockheed
    U-2 aircraft would be stationed a t R - ~ F
                                              station a t Upper Heyford,
    England, to conduct high-altitude weather research and atmos-
    pheric sampling for radioactive dust in flights over international
    waters in the North Atlantic area. Announcement said that
    results of studies would be published and would contribute to the
    work of technical committees of the United Nations.
August 18: Massive celebration in the Kremlin on Soviet Air Force
    Day as the new Russian space heroes, Cosmonauts Major Andrian
    Nikolayev and Lt. Colonel Pave1 Popovich, were feted. I n round
    of speech making, Premier Nikita Khrushchev welcomed the
    cosmonauts and their families, awarded them “Hero of the Soviet
    Union” medals, and said: “We are gathering new strength t o
    surprise the world with our discoveries and victories.” He also
    demanded that the Western Allies get out of Berlin.
 ∞ U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS VIII into orbit. Reported preliminary
    orbital data: perigee, 159 mi.; apogee, 375 mi.; inclination, 49’
    to Equator; period, 92.9 min.
∞ Norway, in cooperation with Denmark and the US., launched its
    f i s t ionosphere probe from Andoeya, Norway, the probe reaching
    altitude of about 100 km. to measure electron density and collision
    frequency in the ionosphere. Under arrangements between the
    Norwegian Committee for Space Research, NASA, and the Royal
    Technical University of Copenhagen, Denmark, the Norwegian
    Defense Research Establishment designed and fabricated the
    instrument equipment. For this and future launchings, Norway
    was assembling and launching Nike-Cajun rockets, purchased in
    US. under NASA sponsorship. NASA personnel and equipment
    supported telemetry operations. Results of flight would be com-
    pared with data obtained from past and future probes launched
    a t NASA Wallops Station in Norway-US. cooperative program.
∞ Reported that Secretary of Defense McNamara was not surprised
    by the Soviet double-orbiting of VOSTOK 111 and IV, and that he
    did not consider the fiights as cause for changing the US. military
    space program.
 ∞ Senator Wiley of Wisconsin urged that Congress before adjourn-
    ment conduct hearings on the military implications of U.S.S.R.
    two-man orbital space. flights.
 ∞ Dr. Carl Sagan, University of California astronomer, warned scien-
    tists a t the Lunar Exploration Conference, Blacksburg, Va., of
    the need for sterilization of lunar spacecraft and decontamina-
    tion of Apollo crewmen, pointing out that LUNIK 11 and RANGER
    IV probably had deposited a million terrestrial micro-organisms on
    the moon, possibly contaminating areas around the impact points.
    Even more serious, he said, was the possibility that lunar micro-
    organisms might be brought to earth where they could multiply
    explosively.
∞ Washington Evening Star reported that USAF had orbited or at-
    tempted to orbit 24 unmanned, unidentified satellites since
    autumn 1961 when DOD adopted its policy of not issuing details
    of satellite launchings.
158    ASTRONAUTICAL A N D AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

August 19: National Aviation Day, commemorating the birth in
    1871 of Orville Wright in Dayton, Ohio.
 ∞ NASA launched Scout vehicle from Wallops Island in flight experi-
    ment to make direct measurements of radiative heating during
    atmospheric entry.
 ∞ Project to beam U.S. messages from New York to Soviet Union via
    TELSTAR failed when relay station a t Pleumeur-Bodou, France,
    malfunctioned.
 ∞ In NBC T V interview, Dr. F. J. Krieger, specialist of the RAND
    Corporation on Soviet space affairs, pointed out that the 50th
    anniversary of the Communist Revolution in Russia was in 1967,
    and that that year may be the political target date for the accom-
    plishment of a Soviet lunar landing mission.
August 20: Senator Howard W. Cannon spoke on the Senate floor
                                                                   . . the
    on the need for an enlarged military space program.        [(.

    major emphasis being placed by present US. space efforts has
    been on the purely scientific exploration of space and on its civilian
    applications, in priority above and indeed to the detriment of
    development of vitally needed military capabilities in space. If
    continued, this could prove to be a fatal mistake . . . . Unfor-
    tunately the present direction of our national efforts in space
    gives little or no assurance that attention is truly directed to the
    development of our military capabilities . . . . Clearly, we
    ought to have an energetic development program underway,
    adequately supported with funds, to find means to defend our-
    selves against attacks that could come from hostile orbiting space
    vehicles.”
       Senator Cannon listed several ‘[minimum essential required
    space capabilities :” (1) near-space operations using manned
    maneuverable vehicles “capable of self-defense and having the
    capability of conducting offensive, defensive, and passive sup-
    port missions;” (2) a standard military-civilian space launch
    system; (3) unmanned satellites for military communications
    missions; (4)improved tracking, control, and detection facilities
    (5) space-located facilities for R & D ; (6) space-located bio-
    astronautics research by means of a manned orbiting satellite.
 ∞ X-15 No. 2 flown to 3,433 mph speed (mach 5.22) and 87,000-ft.
    altitude by Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF), the roll damper failing
    three times and forcing pilot Rushworth to rely on the backup
    system. Electronic malfunction did not interfere with flight’s
      rimary mission: to chart aerodynamic heating rates at relatively
    k g h airspeeds and moderate angles of attack.
∞ DOD-AEC jointly announced they were making a detailed study with

    NASA to determine possible effects of new radiation belt created
    by U.S. high-altitude nuclear blast on July 8, 1962, on manned
    orbital space flights. Preliminary study showed new belt was
    400 mi. wide and 4,000 mi. deep, stretching around the earth
     above the geomagnetic equator. Government scientists stated
    the belt had lost half its radioactivity over a 2-3 week period and
    predicted the decay would be more rapid at lower altitudes
     than at higher ones.
 ∞ D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA Director of Manned Space Flight, stated
     in press interview that the recently-created radiation belt had
     not altered plans for Project Mercury manned flight MA-8. “We
                                                                 159
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    don’t have enough data on this. We are looking at this thing,
   but until we have looked a t it a lot more completely, I would
   not like to see us change our. plans.”
August 20: DOD announced plans to develop Titan I11 launch vehicle
   powered by both solid and liquid rocket fuels and capable of
   thrust greater than 2.5 million pounds. To become operational
   by 1965, Titan I11 would be used primarily to launch X-20 (Dyna
   Soar) manned spacecraft as well as heavy military satellites.
    Martin-Marietta Corp. was selected as prime contractor for
    Titan 111, to cost between $500 million and $1 billion.
∞ Soviet scientist A. Mikhailov, writing in Pravda, reported twin
    space flights of Maj. Andrian Nikolayev and Lt. Col. Pave1
    Popovich apparently proved that “normal and corpuscular radia-
    tion” presented no danger to space travelers unless it was
    “catastrophically intensified” and that the chances of harm from
   large meteorites were “rather slight.”
August 21: Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, in news
   conference, stated that U.S.S.R. was “substantially ahead” in
   some phases of military space development but the U S . was
   acting to overtake the lead. Confirming reports that DOD space
   budget would not be increased, McNamara added: “Lest you
   interpret that as an indication that the Russian flight was not a
   great one, or lest you interpret it as my belief that the Russians
   didn’t do anything we couldn’t do, let me hasten to add that we
   have not accomplished what they have accomplished to date.
       ‘‘We are behind in certain space developments, particularly
    those associated with large booster capabilities.”
       He cited development of Titan I11 booster as a major step
    toward overtaking the Soviet Union. Titan I11 would have
   between two and three times the thrust of the Soviet boosters
   used to launch manned Vostok satellites. Secretary of Defense
   McNamara stated that DOD FY 1964 funding would include
   increases for development of 120-in., 156-in., and 260-in. solid-
      ropellant rocket motors. 120-in. motors would be used in
   Fitan I11 launch vehicles.
∞ Secretary of Labor Arthur Goldberg, in telegram message, told
   unions involved in strike at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center
   it was “im erative” that union members “return to work imme-
   diately an$ remain at work.”
∞ Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center
   conference on Project Mercury flight MA-7, stated that his
   May 24 orbital space flight demonstrated there wm no problem
   associated with prolonged drifting flight, a procedure necessary
   in future long-duration space flights. Reporting on re-entry and
   landing, he said that his preoccupation with floating particles
   in space consumed time available for stowing loose gear, so that
   his attention to last-minute stowing and to difficulties in horizon
   pitch scanner circuit, coupled with shift to manual control of
   retrofire, resulted in 3-sec. delay of retrofire and 250-mi. over-
   shoot of target landing point.
∞ Soviet cosmonauts held news conference in MOSCOW,     revealing they
   had parachuted to earth from their space capsules, landing about
   124 mi. apart. Maj. Nikolayev reported that he and Col.
   Popovich had unstrapped themselves and floated weightless in
1601 ASTRONAUTICAL      AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

   their cabins for an hour, maintaining communications with each
    other at the same time. He also stated that the flight program
    had not called for rendezvous of VOSTOK 111 and IV, and that the
    closest the two capsules had come to each other was 5 kilometers
    (a little over 3 mi.).
       Col. Popovich reported they both had observed the glowing
    particles seen by Cosmonauts Gagarin and Titov and by U S .
    Astronaut John Glenn. Popovich said they believed t,he particles
    had been “merely the exhaust of the rocket motors.”
       It was stated that the results of the cosmonauts’ flights would
    be published after the collected data had been processed.
August 21: In response to statement by Col. Gen. Pyetr Braiko, Soviet
      
    Air Force chief of staff, regarding U.S.S.R. lead over U.S. in air-
    craft records, National Aeronautic Association president Martin
    M. Decker announced that Soviet claim was based on January 1,
    1961, figures. At that time, U.S.S.R. held 176 world records-
    113 aircraft, and 63 parachute; U.S. held 106 world records-all
    aircraft. By July 20, 1962, U.S.S.R. still led U.S. in total world
    records (including parachute), but U.S. held more aircraft
    records than U.S.S.R. Parachute records: 83 U.S.S.R. to 8 U.S.;
    aircraft records: 112 U.S.S.R. to 161 US.
August 22: In regular press conference, President Kennedy announced
    that the U.S.S. Skate and U.S.S. Seadragon, nuclear-powered
    submarines based in different oceans, had made underwater
    rendezvous beneath the ice at the North Pole.
       In answer to questions on the present and future significance
    of the flights of VOSTOK 111 and IV, President Kennedy said:
    “Well, we are second to the Soviet Union in long-range boosters.
    I have said from the beginning-we started late; we’ve been
    behind. It’s a tremendous job to build a booster of the size
    that the Soviet Union is talking about, and also of the much
    larger size which we’re presently engaged in in the Saturn
    Proqram.
       “So we are behina. We’re going to be behind for a while.
    But I believe that before the end of this decade is out, that the
    United States will he ahead. But it’s costing us a tremendous
     amount of money. We’re putting a tremendous effort in research
    and development; but we just might as well realize that when
    we started-we started late.
        “Last year, as you h o w , we made a decision to go to the moon,
    with bipartisan support, and it’s going to take us quite a while to
     catch up with a very advanced program which the Soviets are
     directing . . . there’v no indication the Soviets are going to
     quit . , . .
        “But we’re in for some further periods when we’re going to be
    behind. And anybody who attempts to suggest that we’re not
     behind misleads the American people-we’re well behind-but
     we are making a tremendous effort.
        “We increased, after I took office, after four months, we in-
     creased the budget Tor space by 50 per cent over that of my
     predecessor. The fact of the matter is that this year we sub-
     mitted a space budget which was greater than the combined
     eight space budgets of the previous eight years . . . .
        ((. . . we are spending for military purposes in space three
     times what we were in 1960-about $1,500,000,000. The two,
                                                                     161
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    a t least a t present, the two important points that should be kept
    in mind are the ability to build a large booster which can put a
    large satellite into atmosphere. That is being done. NASA is
    doing that, though there has been, of course, under Titan I11
    contract, a booster program for the military.
        ‘‘In addition, the guidance, navigation, etc., that’s extremely
    important. That we are making a major effort in. And so
    that I recognize that there are those who oppose this program and
     then suddenly a month later say we ought to suddenly go ahead
    on a different basis.
        “The fact of the matter is that 40 per cent of the R and D funds
     in this country are being spent for space. That’s a tremendous
     amount of money and a tremendous concentration of our scien-
     tific effort.
        “I’m not saying that we can’t always do better. But I think
     the American people ought to understand it’s billions of dollars
     we’re talking about which I believe a month ago a prominent-
     mentioned as a great boondoggle.
         “I think it’s important, vital and there is a great interrelation-
     ship between military and peaceful uses of space. But we’re
     concentrating on the peaceful use of space which will also help
     us protect our securit if that becomes essential. . . .”
August 22: U.S. District Judge Clarence W. Allgood ordered striking
     electricians back to work a t Marshall Space Flight Center,
     Huntsville, Ala. President of the AFL-CIO International Brother-
     hood of Electrical Workers, Gordon Freeman, also directed the
     workers to return to their jobs.
∞ French government announced first satellite, wei hing           150 lbs.,
                                                         %
     would be launched in March 1965 and would e followed by
     others three and four times as large.
∞ National Aeronautic Association announced that U.S. Astronaut

     Alan B. Shepard would receive FAI medal on September 28 for
     his suborbital space-flight records May 5, 1961. Also to receive
     medals: U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Yuri A. Gagarin and Gherman S.
     Titov, for their record-setting orbital flights in 1961. Another
     American, Lt. Col. R. G. Robinson (USMC), would receive award
     for closed-course, aircraft speed record of 1,606.5 mph in F4H
      over Edwards AFB, Calif., November 22, 1961.
∞ IAS announced the 1962 Guggenheim International Astronautics
      Award would be made to Dr. James A. Van Allen, head of State
      Univ. of Iowa physics and astronomy department and discoverer
      of earth’s radiation belts.
August 23: Nike-Apache launch vehicle carried 63-lb. payload to
           
      approximately 80-mi.-altitude from NASA Wallops Station, in
      experiment to measure ion concentration and composition in the
      upper atmosphere. Impact occurred approximately 67 mi,
      from the launch site, and no attempt was made to recover the
      payload. Experiment was conducted by NASA Goddard Space
      Flight Center in cooperation with Lockheed Missile and Space Co.
 ∞ USAF launched an unidentified satellite with a Blue Scout booster
      from Point Arguello, Calif.
 ∞ Electricians began to return to work at NASA Marshall Space Flight
      Center, Huntsville, Ala., after a ten-da walkout. Estimated
                                                 T
      70% of total construction work-force, inc uding workers of other
162    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

    trades who had refused to cross electricians’ picket lines, had
    returned to work. Hearing on the strike by President’s Missile
     Sites Labor Commission was scheduled for August 27.
August 23: International Edition of New York Times contained articles
     (about 5,000 words) transmitted from New York to Paris via
    ‘ ELSTAR satellite.
     I
 ∞ First attempted live radio broadcast between U.S. and Europe via
     TELSTAR satellite was unsuccessful because of failing radio con-
    nections between Boston broadcasting station and Andover,
     Maine, relay station. Boston station received, but could not
    understand, Swedish message; Sweden station did not receive
    message from Boston. TELSTAR performed perfectly, however.
 ∞ Two new sources of radiation in the Milky Way had been discovered
    by USAF Aerobee probe on June 18, physicist Riccardo Giacconi
    announced a t Third International Symposium on X-Ray Optics
    and X-Ray Microanalysis, Stanford University. Giacconi said
     that knowledge of x-ray emissions was valuable because this kind
    of radiation was “intimately connected with the creation and
    behavior of cosmic rays and the properties of a galaxy. . . .”
    Discovery and investigation of such x-rays would “further under-
                                                               .. . and
    standing of the origin and dynamics of the universe
    may have a bearing on the study of communication of matter
    between galaxies.” A second probe was planned for launch on
    October 2 , to investigate the discoveries.
∞ Soviet Cosmonaut Pave1 R. Popovich, in an interview on Moscow
    television, was asked if he had seen God in space during his recent
    orbit’al flight in VOSTOK IV, and he replied: “Yes, I can confirm
    this. I have seen God. I asked his surname and he replies,
    ‘Nikolayev, Andrian Grigorevich.’ ”
August 24: Speaking on the floor of the Senate, Senator Thomas
    Dodd supported statements by Senator Cannon on August 20,
    and added: “The primary goals of our foreign policy, as I see it,
    are fist, the protection of our Nation; second, the maintenance
    and extension of freedom ;and third, the preservatlon of peace. . . .
    Our ability to protect our freedoms and preserve the peace
    depends . . . on our military power in-being-on land, on sea,
    in the air and, tomorrow, in space. . . .
       “I earnestly hope that it will prove possible to maintain our
    scientific space program and our moon program intact while
    instituting an immediate program to bolster our flagging military
    effort in space. . . .
       “The reorganization of our space effort will require a number
    of changes. First, and preceding everything else, there must be
    a change in policy, which clearly and publicly assigns a greater
    emphasis to the military potentialities of space. . . .
       “Second, there must be a specific directive to the Defense
    Department to proceed as a matter of the utmost urgency with
    the development of military space systems, in particular of
    manned space vehicles . . .
       “Third, I believe that while proceeding with the development
    of specialized military spacecraft, our Military Establishment
    should be authorized to embark immediately on a launching
    program of its own for manned space vehicles, perhaps employing
                                                                   163
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    modified versions of the equipment now under development by
            ...
    NASA.
          “Fourth, to support the establishment of military launching
     and vehicle development programs, our astronaut training pro-
    gram will have to be stepped up, and military personnel will
    have to be trained in the use of the complex monitoring and con-
     trol systems that constitute the brain of our entire space vehicle
     effort.
          “Fifth, our defense program in space will have to be provided
     with whatever money may be necessary to achieve its objectives,
     and to overtake the Soviet lead in manned space vehicles.
          “Sixth, the machinery of cooperation between NASA and
     Defense will have to be overhauled in a manner which gives due
     consideration to the requirements of defense as well as to the
     requirements of science. . . .”
August 24: NASA issued proposal requests to 23 industrial firms for
     research, development, delivery, and installation of two separate
     shock-heating, free-flight wind tunnel structures and gun devel-
     opment facilities. Proposals were due a t NASA h e s Research
     Center by September 17.
 ∞ Balloonist Don Piccard set new altitude record in ascent of 17,000
     f t . during two-hr. and two-min. balloon flight from Sioux City to
     Kennebec, Iowa.
 ∞ Laser (narrow and intense beam of light) had been sent through 28
    miles of haze over the Chesapeake Bay, from Tilghman’s Island
     to Patuxent, Md., in recent nighttime experiment by USN scien-
     tists.
August 25: Launch of NASA’s        Mariner Venus probe, scheduled for
    August 26, postponed until August 27 because of technical diffi-
     culty encountered during prelaunch countdown on Atlas-Agena
    launch vehicle.
∞ Astronomers released photographs of the Humason comet in recent
    collision with solar wind of magnetic particles. Jesse L. Green-
    stein of Mt. Wilson and Palomar observatories said: “When
     comets are close to the sun, the disintegrating effects of solar
    radiation can be observed on them. This is the first time such
     effects have been observed a t anywhere near this distance from
     the sun.” Humason comet was about 240 million miles from the
    sun, traveling in a solar orbit billions of miles long.
 ∞ Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on
    Science and Astronautics, said in press interview that the greatest
     accomplishment of Soviet VOSTOK 1 1 and IV flight was putting
                                           1
     two men in orbit and bringing them close together. “They’re
    well ahead in that respect. But we can meet that in a couple of
    years. We’ll be ahead when Titan 3 is ready.”
 ∞ AEC announced two U.S.S.R. nuclear tests in the atmosphere had
    been detected, one with a yield of several megatons in the Novaya
    Zemlya area and the other test of low yield a t the Semipalatinsk
    test site in central Siberia, the sixth and seventh Soviet tests re-
    ported by AEC in the current series.
∞ U.S.S.R. made unsuccessful attempt to launch Venus probe, the
    launch vehicle failing to achieve escape trajectory and remainin
    in arking orbit, NASA Administrator James E. Webb reportef
       8
    in ept. 5, 1962,letter to Congress.
164   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

August 27: Atlas-Agena €3 vehicle boosting MARINER 11 Venus probe
   launched from Cape Canaveral a t 2 :53 AM EDT, the Atlas boosting
   its load to about 115 mi. and then the Agena B ignitin to project
                                                           ?
    it into parking orbit. About half an hour after aunch the
    Agena B engines reignited, accelerating the probe’s speed from
    18,000 mph to 25,551 mph, when it escaped earth’s gravitational
    pull and flew into deep space.
       Shortly after launch, scientist,s reported that “normal disper-
    sions” in launch vehicle engines would cause the probe to fly not
    more than 600,000 mi. from the planned point of intersection
    with orbit of planet Venus. Later calculations pinpointed the
    deviation a t 250,000 mi., a distance that could be corrected by
    radio signals within a few days. After 109-day flight covering
     180,200,000 mi., MARINER 1 would come within 10,000 mi. of
                                   1
    Venus on fly-by mission. Instrumentation aboard the 447-1b.
    craft included a microwave radiometer to determine the surface
    temperature of Venus and details of its atmosphere; an infrared
    radiometer to determine fine structure of cloud layers; a mag-
    netometer to measure changes in Venusian and interplanetary
    magnetic fields; ion chamber and particle flux detector to measure
    charged-particle intensity and distribution in interplanetary
    space and vicinity of Venus; cosmic dust detector to measure
     density and direction of cosmic dust; and solar plasma spectrom-
     eter to measure intensity of low energy protons from the sun.
∞  House approved Senate version of communications satellite bill
     (H.R. 11040) in vote of 371-10, under suspension of House rules
     to permit neither further changes nor conference on the measure.
     The bill, which would establish a corporation responsible for
     U.S. commercial communications satellites, was sent to the
     White House.
 ∞ Senate Committee on Appropriations reported H.R. 12711, Inde-
     pendent Offices Appropriation Bill for PY 1963, restoring $77.5
     million to NASA authorization for FY 1963. Committee recom-
     mendations: $2,917,878,000 for research, development, and
     operation; $786,237,000 for construction of facilities; and $35,000
     for general provisions. (Total $3,704,150,000.)
 ∞ Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of England’s Jodrell Bank Experi-
     mental Station which was tracking MARINER 11, reportedly said
     that the Venus probe appeared destined to become the world’s
     most successful space effort to date.
 ∞ Subcommittee on construction of President Kennedy’s Missile Sites
     Labor Commission conducted closed hearing on recent 10-day
     work stoppage a t NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville,
     Ala. Although electricians and other construction workers had
     returned to work, the basic labor dispute-union members’ stop-
     ping work on vital U.S. missile and space projects because of
     employment of nonunion members-remained to be settled.
 ∞ Announced that Anna 1-B geodetic satellite would not be launched
     until October because recently-created radiation belt might ad-
     versely affect Anna’s solar cells. Previously scheduled for August
      14 launch, satellite would orbit in 600-mi. circular path where
     radiation of new belt reached peak intensity. Also reportedly
                                                                  165
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    postponed was launching of Canada’s S-27 Alouette satellite,
    planned for 625-mi. circular polar orbit. Center of peak electron
    intensity in the new belt had shifted from 16,000 mi. above the
    earth to 700 mi. Since its creation, the belt had decreased in
    intensity by about one half; scientists expected the radiation
    would soon be dissipated.
August 27: DOD announced that TELSTAR was being used to syn-
    chronize master clocks in England and the U.S. Accuracy of 10
    millionths of a second was obtained in first demonstration when
    stations at Andover, Maine, and Goonhilly Downs, England,
    simultaneously sent time-check signals via TELSTAR, on August 25.
∞ Soviet Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev, interviewed on Moscow
    television, indicated that although he and Cosmonaut Pave1 R.
    Popovich had parachuted to earth from VOSTOK 111 and VOSTOK
    IV, “if we had been ordered to land in the ship we would have
    done this. I t is very easy to land in the ship.” When asked
    why they and Cosmonaut Gherman Titov (VOSTOK had all    11)
    landed by parachute, Maj. Nikolayev replied that they all were
    very fond of parachute jumping.
 ∞ NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) announced it was train-
    ing Italian scientists and engineers for the launching of Italy’s
    first satellite. The 165-lb. satellite would be launched by 1965
    from platform in Indian Ocean off eastern coast of Africa.
 ∞ Reported that DOD was “taking steps toward developing the Nike-
    Zeus antimissile missile into an antisatellite weapon capable of
    shooting down any hostile space craft.”
 ∞ USN test-fired Polaris missile in 1,400-mi. flight from Cape Ca-
    naveral.
August 28: USAF announced launch of an unidentified satellite with
    Thor-Agena D vehicle from Vandenberg AFB.
 ∞ NASA reported that power output of orbiting satellites ARIEL I,
    TRANSIT IV-B, and TRAAC dropped after U.S. high-altitude nu-
    clear blast on July 8, the energetic particles created by explosion
    damaging the satellites’ solar cells and thereby reducing their
     ability to convert sunlight into electricity. Many satellites, in-
    cluding TELSTAR, showed no signs of damage from radiation.
     TELSTAR’S solar cells survived because they were specially de-
    signed to withstand radiation in the Van Allen belts.
 ∞ Speaking at meeting of American Institute of Biological Sciences i  n
     Corvallis, Ore., James C. Finn, Jr., of North American Aviation,
     predicted a permanent moon base would be established before
     1990. He said the base would be dug at least 40 ft. underground
     to protect crew from bombardment by meteors and radiation and
     from temperature extremes between day and night.
August 29: Radio signals from Johannesburg, South Africa, activated
    four observation instruments on the MARINER 11 space probe.
    Transmitted data would be evaluated by Cal Tech’s Jet Propul-
    sion Laboratory (JPL).
 ∞ X-15 No. 2, piloted by Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF), reached
     3,443 mph (mach 5.21) and 97,000-ft. altitude in 9-min. flight
     near Hidden Hills, Calif., to obtain data on heat transfer rates
     a t moderate airspeeds and high angles of attack
166    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 0 6 2

August 29: British scientist Sir John Cockcroft, addressing the British
    Association for the Advancement of Science in Manchester, said
    the British had a “good deal to learn from some American organi-
    zations who have a consistent record of success in developing
    new products by objective basic research and applied research.”
    H e cited three discoveries of Bell Laboratories of New Jersey as
    ((among the principal promoters of economic growth today”:
    extraction of pure crystals of the metal germanium; creation of
    strong magnetic fields in tin-and-niobium alloy; and development
    of the maser (molecular amplification of stimulated emission of
    radiation).
 ∞ Dr. Fred Singer, Director of National Satellite Weather Center,
    testifying before subcommittee of House Committee on Science
    and Astronautics, confirmed reports that Nimbus meteorological
    satellite system was 6 to 12 mo. behind schedule. Dr. Singer
    recommended the U.S. keep a t least two Tiros satellites in orbit
    until Nimbus was ready.
 ∞ Official Yugoslav news agency Tanjug announced that US. Astro-
    nauts John Glenn and Alan Shepard would join U.S.S.R. Cos-
    monauts Yuri Gagarin, Glierman Titov, Andrian Nikolayev, and
    Pave1 Popovich a t International Astronautical Congress in
    Bulgaria, September 23 to 29.
August 30: Dr. Brian O’Brian, State University of Iowa physicist,
    predicted in interview that the new rndintion belt created by
    July 5 high-altitude nuclear blast could last for many months-
    possibly as long as a year. He added that only a major sun-spot
    storm would eradicate all traces of the band before mid-1963, and
    such a storm was unlikely. An associate of Dr. James A. Van
    Allen, Dr. O’Brian based his prediction on data from orbiting
    Injun satellite which he had been studying for the past month.
∞ Dr. Morris Tepper, NASA Director of Meteorological Systems, told
    subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics
    that he doubted the launch schedule €or first Nimbus satellite
    could be accelerated and stated that the Nimbus program had
    never been considered ‘(urgent.”
 ∞ National Aeronautic Association announced John Stack, former
    NASA Director of Aeronautical Research, would receive 1962
    Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy. Stack was cited for his
    major contributions to aeronautical research and for “his leader-
    ship and vision” during 34 years with N A C A and NASA.
August 31 : NASA launched four-stage Scout from Wallops Station
    with re-entry heat-shield experiment, two stages carrying payload
    to near 80-mi. altitude while other two stages fired payload back
    to earth near speeds of 15,000 mph.
 ∞ President Kennedy signed into law the communications satellite
    bill, which would establish a private corporation in charge of U.S.
    portion ol future global cominuiiicatioiis satellite network.
    Satellite corporation board of directors would include six named
    by communications industry, six elected by public stockholders,
    and three selected by the President.
                                                                    167
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

August 31: James E. Webb,             Administrator, was awarded the
                               NASA
    McCurdy Medal, honoring NASA for “outstanding contributions
    to the world in the field of science,” a t the Canadian International
    Air Show, Toronto.
∞ Senate passed FY 1963 appropriations bill (H.R. 12711) as amended,
    giving NASA $3,704,115,000 for FY 1963. This amount repre-
    sented $60,115,000 restoration of funds cut by House in its appro-
    priation of $3,644,115,000 for NASA i FY 1963.
                                             n
 ∞ Soviet Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Pave1 R. Popovich
    described their re-entry in VOSTOK 111 and IV, in Pruvda article.
    Their experience was “probably one of the most tremendous
    impressions in life. . . . Our antennas charred, the [radio] con-
    nection between the earth and the spaceships stopped. We did
    not close the shields over the portholes and watched with curi-
    osity, from behind the heat-proof glass, flames that raged in
    different colors alternating from blue to dark red.”
 ∞ NASA-supplied Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by Swedish
    Committee of Space Research at Kronogh-d, Sweden, in experi-
    ment to study auroral event in progress, the rocket performing
    as predicted but payload failing to separate.
 ∞ Levitt Luzern Custer, pioneer balloonist and member of the Early
    Bird Club, died a t 74 in Dayton, Ohio. In 1909, Custer’s f h t
    balloon ilight set record for longest flight of free balloon in an
    hour’s time, from Dayton to Middletown, Ohio.
∞ Vincent Johnson, NASA Centaur program manager, reportedly said
    NASA would spend an additional $33 million to accelerate slipping
    Centaur launch vehicle development. NASA would divert funds
    from other programs rather than request supplemeat from
    Congress.
During August: First full-scale model of 3-man Apollo spacecraft
    underwent preliminary ocean drop-testing off California coast
    and was shi ed to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center for further
    testing. J. yhomas Markley, Apollo project engineer for NASA,
    described all spacecraft structural tests thus far as “successful.”
 ∞ Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center,
    presented details of Apollo spacecraft at Institute of the Aerospace
    Sciences (IAS) meeting in Seattle. During launch and re-entry,
    3-man crew would be seated in adjacent couches; during other
      hases of flight, center couch would be stowed to permit more
    freedom of movement. Apollo command module cabin would
    have 365-cu. ft. volume, with 22-cu. f t . free area available to
    crew. ‘(The small end of the command module may contain an
    airlock; when the lunar excursion module is not attached, the
    airlock would permit a pressure-suited crewman to exit to free
    space without decompressing the cabin. Crew ingress and egress
    while on Earth will be through a hatch in the side of the command
    module.”
168   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S OF 19 6 2

During August: Under Secretary of the Air Force Joseph V. Charyk
    told Seventh Symposium on Ballistic Missile and Space Tech-
    nology that USAF had flight-tested two Agena D upper-stage
    vehicles, the first firing occurring in June. Agena D would
    accommodate a variety of payloads, whereas earlier models
    Agena A and B had integrated payloads.
 ∞ Congressman Bob Wilson of House Armed Services Committee,
    addressing the Institute of World Affairs, recommended establish-
    ment of a U.S. Military Space Academy. He said he was “deeply
    concerned over the tendency of our space program to emphasize
    the experimental and scientific and de-emphasize the military
    aspects of space. . . . The Air Force has started a limited
    program t o train spacemen for the future. It should be expanded
    into a full-fledged space manpower program. Perhaps a ‘fourth
    service’ should be set up to train men in astronautics, hypersonic
    aerodynamics, the physiological and psychological aspects of
    flight. ”
∞ American Rocket Society gave Congressman George Miller of
    House Committee for Science and Astronautics a special award
     for his ‘(outstanding leadership in space.”
                          SEPTEMBER 1962
September 1: NASA Venus probe MARINER 11 passed the million-mile
    mark on its interplanetary journey. JPL scientists said that
     they would send signals Sept. 3 to alter the trajectory and swing
     MARINER 11 on path that would come within 10,000 mi. of the
     planet Venus.
 ∞ U.S.S.R. made another unsuccessful attempt to launch Venus probe,
     the launch vehicle failing to achieve escape trajectory and remain-
     ing in parking orbit. (See Sept. 5).
 ∞ U.S. sources disclosed that U.S.S.R. had unsuccessfully attempted
     to launch a Venus probe on August 25, and that three fragments
     of the spacecraft were orbiting the earth. In accordance with
     its policy, U.S.S.R. made no announcement of unsuccessful
     launch.
 ∞ USAF launched an unidentified satellite with a Thor-Agena B booster
     from Vandenberg AFB.
 ∞ AEC-DOD jointly announced that the man-made radiation belt
     created by U.S. hi h-altitude nuclear explosion was stron er
                                                                      K
     than anticipated an$ mi h t last for many years. The blast a so
     intensified natural Van h e n radiation belt more than anticipated.
     AEC-DOD added that the new radiation belt had completely
     knocked out communications from satellites TRANSIT IV-B, TRAAC,
     and ARIEL, but i t would “not constitute any hazard to manned
     satellite launchings that we have planned in the near future.”
     The belt extended from 200 mi. above the earth to 700 mi.,
     where it merged into the Van Allen belts.
 ∞ INJUN satellite was apparently unaffected by artificial radiation
     belt, reported Dr. Brian J. O’Brian, State University of Iowa
     physicist. INJUN orbits earth a t about 500-mi. altitude, near
     center of the new radiation belt which had destroyed trans-
     mission from satellites ARIEL, TRANSIT IV-B, AND TRAAC. Dr.
     O’Brian speculated that INJUN transmission survived because
     satellite used low-efficiency solar cells, not as rapidly affected by
     radiation as high-efficiency cells used in ARIEL.
 ∞ Reginald Lascelles, personal assistant and spokesman for Sir
     Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station,
     said Lovell was afraid the new radiation belt would “seriously
     affect space exploration by radio astronomy.”
September 2: MARINER II, 1.2 million mi. from earth on its voyage
             
     to vicinity of Venus, successfully swung a yard-wide antenna
     around and focused it on earth, sending radio beam back to
     scientists a t Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The antenna maneuver
     was performed on c.ommand of on-board timer and was first of
     two in-flight maneuvers crucial to correcting the probe’s path
     to within 10,000 mi. of Venus; after scientists evaluated results
     of antenna orientation, NASA Goldstone Tracking Station would
      send radio command to fire rocket aboard the 447-1b. craft.
                                                                169
      973174k12
170   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 62

September 2: In editorial noting addition to FCC of 19 specialists to
     plan enforcement of communications satellite bill’s provisions for
     public interest protection, N e w York Times said: “the policy-
     making decisions confronting the FCC will become increasingly
     complex. How well and how wisely it discharges its duties will
     be of crucial importance in shaping the future of this mechanism
     [communications satellite] for bettering life through man’s con-
     quest of space. . . . The march of science is sure to create many
     more situations in which the partnership of private and public
     efforts will entail a need for dependable instruments of Govern-
     ment regulation. This makes doubly urgent the successful
     exercise of the commission’s first test.”
 ∞ More than 1,600 U.S. military aircraft participated in simulated
     attack and defense maneuvers during NORAD’S Operation Sky
     Shield 111, with all civilian aircraft grounded during the 5jh-hr.
     exercise.
 ∞ Tenth anniversary of Livermore Branch of Lawrence Radiation
     Laboratory, University of California. Established to “help cope
     with problems involved in maintaining American superiority in
     nuclear deterrence,” the laboratory devoted about half of its
      effort to weapons research and the remainder to peaceful uses
     of atomic energy.
September 3: MARINER 11 flight-path correction was postponed for
     a t least 24 hours, because scientists could not determine if the
     Venus probe was stabilized on the moon or the earth. JPL
     scientists received moon-reference indication from MARINER 11’s
     earth-sensing system and earth-reference indication from its
     high-gain antenna. I mid-course maneuver were executed with
                            f
     moon-lock instead of earth-lock, the probe probably would come
     within 12,000 mi. of Venus instead of 10,000 mi.
 ∞ Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, interviewed in
      The National Observer, said: “Some people have drawn the con-
     clusion that the Russians are ahead of the United States in the
     endeavor to land men on the moon and return them safely. This
     is based on a misconception that going to the moon is something
     like progress down a one-way street, passing successive street-
     corners.
        “That is far from being the case. The enterprise requires
     mobilization of a large task force with many tasks to be done
     and brought to fruition simultaneously. I n some aspects, it
     makes small difference in what order the tasks are performed.
     The fact that the Russians have done one part of the work of
     going to the moon does not mean that they are ahead in the
     entire enterprise. . . . 11
        When asked about U.S. participation in international space
     programs, Dr. Dryden said: “The United States now has arrange-
     ments with more than 55 countries for space activity. . . . We
     hope to increase the number of countries with which we are
     co-operating. We have been engaged in negotiations with the
     Soviet Union toward that end.
        “Recently, Academician Anatoli Blagonravov and I concluded
     the f3st phase of the negotiations with a joint recommendation
     to our governments that they undertake co-operative efforts in
     meteorology, communications, and the investigation of the earth’s
     magnetic field. . . .2 7
                                                                      171
         ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

September 3: Congressman George P. Miller, chairman of House
      Committee on Science and Astronautics, told the press that
      “since the orbiting of the Soviet twin Cosmonauts, the agitation
      [among members of the Senate, professional military societies,
      and the trade press] borders on panic and constitutes a threat to
               am which is not only very important but complex and
        pr(3i
      caref y planned. . . . I have been a consistent advocate of a
      a
      military capability in space for the United States second to none,
      but I see no reason why our military requirements cannot be met
      without hamstringing or jeopardizing the civil space program. . . .
      There has been so much misinformation and misimpression
      generated about our space program, both the civil and military
      aspects, that I can no longer remain silent. The record has to
      be set straight and I intend to do it.” He said he would deliver
      a major speech on the House floor later this week, when he would
      place the space program into “balanced perspective.”
    ∞ Report outlining NASA’s   manned space flight rojects was published
                                                  i
0
      by Senate Committee on Aeronautical an Space Sciences, with
      cooperation of NASA. Project Gemini two-man flights, planned
      for 1964 and aimed a t orbital rendezvous, might be as much as a
      week long. Three-man Apollo flights would follow, circumlunar
      flights to be followed by lunar landing missions. Advance-
       design Gemini spacecraft would be first designed specifically by
      U.S. to come down on dry land, using Rogallo wing to control
      descent.
  ∞  Preparations for Operation Harp (High Altitude Research Project)
       announced by Dr. D. L. Mordell, Facult of Engineering Dean a t
       Canada’s McGill University. I n the GcGill-initiated project,
       McGill’s 66-in., 470-lb. Martlet missiles would be fired to approx-
       imately 200-mi. altitude from two 16-in., 140-ton guns provided
       by U.S. Navy. With the first launching in October from Barba-
      dos, B.W.I., McGill would become the first university to con-
      duct its own space research rogram. At least 6 firings would be
      made before Christmas. AEo involved in Harp were U.S. Army,
      which transported naval guns from Hampton Roads, Va., to
      Barbados; Florida State University meteorologists; and USN
      wea ther-obser va tion aircraft.
 ∞  P-1127 VTOL jet fighter airplane was publicly demonstrated for first

      time a t Farnsborough, England, Air Show. Developed b
      Hawker Siddeley Aviation, the P-1127 uses single Bristol Si$
      deley Pe asus jet engine whose thrust is directed vertically for
               %
       takeoff, t en directed backward for horizontal flight a t supersonic
      speeds.
  ∞  U.S.S.R. conducted atmospheric nuclear test explosion of inter-

      mediate-ran e yield, between 20,000 tons and one megaton. The
                   7
      firing took p ace near Novaya Zemlya and was the ninth in cur-
      rent Soviet series to be announced by AEC.
 ∞   Prof. Alexander A. Mikhailov, chairman of U.S.S.R. Academy of
      Sciences Council for Astronomy, was reported by U.S. magazine
      as saying that the U.S.S.R. had 36 astronomical observatories in
      operation and 6 new facilities under construction.
   ∞ Prof. Bruce Patton of London’s Institute of Education told British
      Association for the Advancement of Science that English should
      be adopted as the universal language. He gave aa one reason
172    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

     the fact that English was the accepted language of civil aviation
     (except in Communist countries) and as another the fact that
     approximately half the world’s scientific jourrials were in English.
September 3-8: Tenth Conference on Science and World Affairs held
     in London, with more than 200 scientists from 37 countries
     attending. President Kennedy urged the conference to “explore
     fully and objectively the basic reasons for our failure thus far
     to reach agreement” on a nuclear test ban.
September 4: ItCadio signals to Venus probe MARINEIZ 11, nearly 1.5
     million mi. from earth, repositioned the craft and fired an on-
     board rocket to send the probe on desired trajectory toward
     Venus. Launched August 27, the 447-113. interplanetary probe
     would have missed Venus by 233,000 mi. if the mid-course ma-
     neuver had not corrected its path. Signals from JPL’S Goldstone
     Tracking Station were sent after 24-hr. delay for scientists to
     determine that the spacecraft’s antenna mas pointing to earth
     and not the moon. Assuming that its corrected course was
     nominal, it was estimated that MARINER 11 would come within
     9,000 mi. of Venus December 14, covering about 180,200,000 mi.
     through space and relaying scientific data on interplanetary space
     and Venusian atmosphere.
 ∞ In joint letter to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, Chairman of
     Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Robert S.
     Kerr and Chairman of House Committce on Science and Astro-
     nautics George P. Miller said: “The world must of necessity
     admire the remarkable achievements of the Soviet Union in the
     field of space. A shadow is thrown over the entire space effort
     through their refusal t o admit to failures. . . .
        “We feel it is important that if the U.S. Government possesses
     any information relative to unsuccessiul attempts by the Soviet
     Union to launch a spacecraft to Venus, or other planetary probes,
     that this information should be made available to our committees
     and to the American people.”
 ∞ John Rubel, Director of DOD Office of Research and Development,
     testified before subcommittee of House Committee on Science
     and Astronautics that it was “highly doubtful that DOD would
     undertake a new weather satellite program at this time,” and
     stated the military interest in weather satellite development was
     adequately protected by existing NASA and Weather Bureau
     programs.
∞  Dr. S.Fred Singer, director of National Weather Satellite Center,
     said he was recommending an operational Tiros weather satellite
     system by next June because of Tiros’ “quite astounding” ability.
     TIROS v was f i s t to spot five of the ten major tropical storms
     around the world in August. He added that scheduled launch
     of sixth Tiros satellite would not be delayed by the man-made
    radiation belt.
 ∞ U.S.S.R. formally protested L‘provocative flight” of a U.S. U-2
     reconnaissance airplane over Sakhalin Island in the Pacific.
     Replying to the U.S.S.R., U.S. stated that the pilot of the August
     31 flight “has reported he was flying a directed course well outside
     the Soviet territorial limits but encountered severe winds during
     this nighttime flight and may, therefore, have unintentionally
     overflown the southern tip of Sakhalin.” The note reaffirmed
                                                                    173
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

     U S . policy of not permitting reconnaissance flights over Soviet
     territory, established after U-2 piloted by Francis Gary Powers
     was brought down in U.S.S.R. May 1, 1960.
September 4: British physicist Dr. Eric Mendoza of University of
     Manchester explained superconductivity principle a t British
     Association for the Advancement of Science meeting. He stated
     the problem as why several superconducting metals (such as lead
     and aluminum) at extremely low temperatures suddenly lose all
     traces of electrical resistance and are able to conduct currents
     without producing heat. Normal electrical resistance is produced
     when electrons are knocked out of their paths by collision with
     heavy metallic atoms. In superconductors, he said, the electrons
     get past the atoms without being deflected, because “electrons,
     instead of moving as individuals, move in pairs.” Vibrations of
     the metallic atoms in superconductors are so slowed down by
     extremely low temperature (minus 273’ C) that they are unable
     to break the pairs, so current flows without friction.
∞ Reported that U.S.S.R. had invited Dr. Bernard M. Wagner of the

     U S . to visit U.S.S.R. for cooperative exchange of space medicine
     data, including information obtained from VOSTOK III and IV
     manned orbital fights. Dr. Wa,gmer, chairman of Department
     of Pathology, New York Medical College, would leave for Moscow
     October 5.
September 5: NASA Administrator Webb reported that the U.S.S.R.
     had tried to send four probes to Venus and two to Mars since
     October 10,1958. In letter to chairmen of the Senate Committee
     on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and the House Committee on
      Science and Astronautics, Mr. Webb said Venus attempts were
     made on February 4, 1961; August 25, 1962; and September 1,
      1962; and each time the launch vehicle achieved parking orbit
     but failed to send probes on escape trajectory. The one partially
     successful Venus probe, launched February 12, 1961, achieved
     proper flight path but its radio transmission failed when probe
     was 4.5 million miles from earth. Mars attempts were made
     October 10 and 14, 1960, and each time the launch vehicle failed
     to achieve parking orbit.
 ∞ Agreement establishing US.-Italy coo erative space program,
                                             i
     signed in May, was confirmed in Rome y Vice President Lyndon
     B. Johnson and Italian Foreign Minister Attilio Piccioni. The
     Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and the Italian
     Space Commission provided for three-phase program, expected
      to culminate in launching of a scientific satellite into equatorial
      orbit. Generally, NASA would provide the Scout rockets and
      personnel training; Italians would launch the vehicle with its
      Italian payload and would be responsible for data acquisition as
      well as for towable launch platform located in equatorial waters.
 ∞ NASA announced it would negotiate with three companies to conduct
      three-month studies of a lunar logistics system. Negotiations
     with Space Technology Laboratories, Inc., related to $150,000
      study of types of spacecraft which could carry supplies to manned
     Apollo landing site on the moon; negotiations with Northrop
      Space Laboratories and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp.
     related to $75,000 studies and operational analyses of possible
      cargoes for the lunar logistics spacecraft. Various NASA centers
174    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

     simultaneously would study lunar logistics system trajectories,
     launch vehicle adaptation, scheduling, alternate spacecraft pro-
     pulsion concepts, lunar landing touchdown dynamics, and use of
     roving vehicles on the lunar surface.
September 5: White House announced President Kennedy would visit
     military and civilian missile and rocket installations at Cape
     Canaveral, Fla. ; Huntsville, Ala. ; Houston, Tex. ; and St. Louis,
     Mo., on September 11-12. President Kennedy would be accom-
     panied by Vice President Johnson, Secretary of Defense McNa-
     mara, NASA Administrator Webb, BOB director David E. Bell,
     and several Congressmen. Purpose of trip was “to study the
     work being done in this most important area and in connection
     with the preparation of the fiscal year 1964 budget. . . .11
∞ 13-min. radio program relayed from New York via TELSTAR satellite

     to Europe, where it was broadcast by Radio Free Europe and
     Radio Liberty to audiences in U.S.S.R. and Communist-bloc
     countries. Program featured message on U.S.-U.S.S.R. nuclear
     disarmament by Senator Hubert H. Humphrey.
 ∞ Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric, addressing repre-
     sentatives of Midwest industries and universities in South Bend,
     Ind., said:
        “The United States believes that it is highly desirable for its
     own security and for the security of the world that the arms race
     should not be extended into outer space, and we are seeking in
     every feasible way t o achieve this purpose. Today there is no
     doubt that either the United States or the Soviet Union could
     place thermonuclear weapons in orbit. . . .
        ‘(We have no program to place any weapons of mass destruc-
     tion into orbit. An arms race in space will not contribute to
     our security. . . .”
        He added that U.S. military space program has two objectives:
        “First, as part of our overall Defense effort. we have continuing
     programs to-ensure that the United States will be able to cop:
     with any military challenge in outer space. Our programs in
     this area are under constant review, and this review indicates
     that our present rate of effort is entirely adequate.
        (‘Second, as a part of our national space program, we in the
     Defense Department, along with NASA, are actively exploring the
     potentialities of outer space as a useful part of our expanding
     universe. We are developing through activities in space and
     observations from space our ability to improve our capabilities
     in fields such as communications, navigation, meteorology, map-
     ping and geodesy. Many branches of industry are contributing
     to this endeavor by improving propulsion, electronic, photo-
     graphic, communications and other components of systems for
     space research and utilization. These programs have great sig-
     nificance not only for our military forces but for the economic
     and scientific advance of the United States and of thd whole
     world. The progress that they represent, like all scientific ad-
     vances, is neiitral in its political and moral content. . . .,,
∞  NASA announced that nine companies had submitted proposals t o
     develop lunar excursion module (LEM), one of three modules com-
     prising the Apollo spacecraft. After evaluating proposals, NASA
     would award contract “within six t o eight weeks,” according to
     the Wall Street Journul.
                                                                   175
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

September 5: NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of
     $4,673,327-contract to Ets-Hokin and Galvin, Inc., of San Fran-
     cisco, for construction of main structural portion of Advanced
     Saturn test stand at MSFC, Huntsville, Ala. When completed,
     the 405-ft.-high test tower would be used for static-firing the
     7.5-million-lb.-thrust first stage of Advanced Saturn.
∞  Re-entry and disintegration of SPUTNIK IV reported by Edward A.
     Hallbach, director of Milwaukee Astronomical Society. Hall-
     bach and others observed the satellite as it broke into about 24
     pieces, most of which fell from orbit toward Green Bay, Wisc., area
     and Lake Michigan. Law officers in a wide area of northern
     Wisconsin reported seeing flaming objects at about the same time.
     SPUTNIK IV was launched by U.S.S.R. on May 15, 1960.
 ∞ Chunk of metal, too hot to touch, was discovered in Manitowoc,
     Wisc., street by two policemen. Considered as possibly part of
     SPUTNIK IV, the 20-lb. object was sent by local members of nation-
     wide Moonwatch tracking network to Moonwatch hq. a t Smith-
     sonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, Mass., where
     fragment would be analysed.
 ∞ Hughes Research Laboratories announced development of high-
       ower amplifier tube that could eliminate spacecraft radio
     backouts such as those experienced by astronauts during atmos-
     pheric re-entry. Tubes produce about 10 times the continuous
     power output of any previous tubes and could pierce heat-
     induced ion shields to transmit messages.
 ∞ General Mills launched balloon, trailing 315-ft.-long reflectorized
       olyethelene tube in test to improve long-range communications,
     from GM’s research center a t New Brighton, Minn. The
     cylinder, 23 ft. in diameter, was designed as a relay device to
     receive commercial TV signals from WKBT-TV,      La Crosse, Wisc.,
     and relay them 260 mi. to USAF base, Wadena, Minn.
September 6: NASA Aerobee 100 sounding rocket launched a t White
     Sands Missile Range (WSMR) by Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL),
     the rocket reaching 46-mi. altitude in successful experiment to
     measure ultraviolet ray airglow spectrum.
∞ JPL scientists reported that Venus-bound MARINER 11 was success-

     fully transmitting data from nearly two million mi. in space.
     John W. Thatcher, staff engineer of JPL’S Deep Space Instrumen-
     tation Facility (DSIF), said, “We fully expect that we will be able
     to track it and follow it well beyond Venus.” Signals were
     reported coming in relatively “loud and clear” at receiving
     stations in Goldstone, Calif. ; Johannesburg, SO. Africa; and
     Woomera, Australia.
                   Telephone & Telegraph Corp. ( I T ~ T ) , announced
∞ International

     plans for NASA Project Relay satellite communication experiment
     to link North and South America. To be launched into orbit
     from Cape Canaveral this year, the satellite would relay 12 tel-
     ephone calls a t once, from IT&T ground relay station in Nutley,
     N.J., to portable ground station near Rio de Janeiro. The satel-
     lite, built by RCA for NASA, would also transmit TV from North
     America to Euro e via ground stations at Andover, Me.; Goon-
                     P
     hilly Downs, Eng and; and Pleumeur-Bodou, France. I n another
     set of experiments, Relay would establish telephone communica-
     tions between Brazil and England. Relay would radiate micro-
     wave signal of 10 watts, compared to TELSTAR’S 2-watt signal.
176     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

September 6: Congressman George P. Miller, chairman of the House
     Committee on Science and Astronautics, defended the U.S. space
      program in speech or] floor of the House. Arguing that Soviet
      VOSTOK 1 1 and IV manned orbital flights did not justify changes
                 1
      in the U.S. program, he said:
         ‘(Certainly I will not stand here and say that more and better
      military space programs should not be undertaken. What I do
      say is that a considerable effort in this field has long been under-
      way and that the Monday-morning quarterbacks whose teeth
      start chattering after every Russian ‘spectacular’ might exhibit
      a bit more faith in those who have the actual responsibility for
      the defense of the country. . . .
         “[We should not overlook] . . . the fact that the Soviets have
      now demonstrated two important capabilities : First, that they
      have sufficient launch facilities and rocket reliability to launch
      two manned spacecraft within a short time, and second, that
      they have the ability to time launches with great precision.
      These capabilities are an important step toward the development
      of the rendezvous and docking technique which will be of great
      value in achieving many advanced objectives in space explora-
      tion, some of which may have potential military value.
          “These, I think, are the formidable implications of their recent
      feat. But these implications are no reason for us to put our
      program in a constant state of flux, with projects starting,
       stopping, and shifting in response to each new Soviet develop-
      ment. Our undertaking is gigantic, immensely complex. It
       cannot be assembled and disassembled and redesigned and re-
       assembled without losing its direction and momentum, and the
       space contest itself. . . .
          “There is a suggestion that the military services should duplicate
       work now in progress under the civilian agency. There is
      nothing particularly military about solutions to problems involved
      in the effects of long-term weightlessness, radiation, and isolation.
       The capabilities of both civilian and military research agencies
       should be brought to bear on these problems in a coordinated
      manner.
          “On the record, then, it appears that the critics of our space
      program are not asking that we do twice as much-but that we do
       everything twice. I do not think the economy will take that, but
       even if it would-it just does not make sense.
          “And how about the reciprocal use of the knowledge we are
       gaining? Science knows no exclusive applications technologically
       speaking, what is developed by civilians can be used militarily
       and vice versa. . . .
          “It seems farily well established that the real cause of all this
       squabble about the military-in-space stems from an inhouse
       difference of opinion within the military establishment. The
       problem is not that our civil space program is retarding the
       military. On the contrary, it is enhancing it and will continue
       to do so in the future. The problem is that the military space
       enthusiasts have not been able to obtain all the green lights they
       want from their bosses. . . . I am confident the controversy will
       be resolved in time-and expeditiously, I hope.”
                                                                     177
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EV ENTS OF 1 9 6 2

                USIA Voice of America began broadcasting reports of
September 6:
     U.S.S.R. unsuccessful inte lanetary probes and sent the an-
                                 %
                          r
     nouncement to news apers a over the world via its wireless press
     network. Public re ease of information on Soviet space failures
     was made September 5 in form of letter from NASA Administrator
     James E. Webb to Congressmen.
∞ TELSTAR satellite was used to relay exchange of reports of action on

     New York and Pans stock exchanges, in 10-min. test transmission
     of telephom call between Michael W. McCarthy, chairman of
     Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner, and Smith, Inc., to Frederick J.
     Sears, manager of Merrill Lynch’s Pans office.
∞  Weather Bureau announced weather data gathered by Tiros satellite
     was relayed to France via TELSTAR satellite.
 ∞ Ernest Brackett, NASA procurement officer, told American Manage-
     ment Association that about 80% of NASA’s      contracts are made for
     research and development, and outlined NASA procedures of
      awarding R ~ contracts.
                       D
∞ USN launched second Polaris A-3 in partially successful test from
     Cape Canaveral, a malfunction during second-stage flight causing
      the missile to fall far short of its intended 1,950-mi. range.
 ∞ I n response to US. explanation that U-2 reconnaissance plane may
     have unintentionally overflown Soviet territory, Soviet govern-
     ment newspaper Izvestia said U.S. Government spokesmen in the
     U-2 situation were “making clumsy attempts to exonerate them-
     selves, attempts unworthy of responsible politicians.” Soviet
     Communist Party newspaper Pravda claimed U.S. was renewing
      “provocative” reconnaissance flights and said that “such activities
      only intensify the threat of war, heat up the international situa-
      tion and stir up suspicion and hostility between countries.”
 ∞ British Minister of Aviation Julian Amery told London audience
      that Aviation Ministry was studying an “aerospace plane” that
      could be operated either in the atmosphere or in space. London
     newspapers reported that the craft was a “space fighter” that
      takes off in conventional manner but can fly into orbit and back
      a t speeds up to 18,000 mph. Space fighter was reportedly based
      on concept of sustained flight rather than boost-glide principle
      used in U.S. D na Soar.
                    ifl
 ∞ U.S. and Austra ‘an scientists reported in Science that phases of
      the moon affect rainfall on earth. Their studies in both northern
      and southern hemispheres disclosed that heavy rains fall most
      frequently in the first and third weeks of the synodical month-
      the period from one new moon to the next.
September 7: AEC-DOD-NASA announced that results of joint study of
      artificial radiation belt indicated Project Mercury flight MA-8
      could be made with no change of plans and with no fear of harm
      to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., USN). Study showed
      that radiation on outside of capsule during Cdr. Schirra’s 6-orbit
      flight would be about 500 roentgen (R). Shielding, vehicle
      structures, and flight suit would cut this to 8 R on the astro-
      naut’s skin. “This exposure is well below the mission limit
      previously established by NASA for the manned flight program,”
      the report said.
         Other results of the investigation: Soviet Cosmonauts Ni-
      kolayev and Popovich (VOSTOR 111 and IV orbital flights in August)
178    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

    received very small radiation doses on their double-mission
    flight; radio interference caused by new radiation belt constituted
     “a significant problem to radio astronomy”; radiation doses
     caused rapid deterioration of solar cells aboard ARIEL, TRAAC,
                      satellites as previously re orted, but TELSTAR
     TRANSIT IV-B
                                                P
     solar cells were apparently unaffected; uture space missions
    were being reviewed “in light of the present information concern-
    ing the new belt.” It appeared likely that “a substantial num-
    ber” of future space experiments would be changed to avoid
     possible damage from radiation.
September 7: Replying to queries of whether Administrator Webb’s
     public letter of Sept. 5 on Soviet failures marked a reversal of
     NASA policy, NASA said no change had been made in policy of not
     releasing information on unsuccessful Soviet space attempts.
     The September 5 letter to Congressmen was “an exception to a
     continuing policy.”
 ∞ Aerospace Industrial Life Sciences Assn., established to “assist the
    industrial aerospace life scientist through exchange of information
     and to increase his contribution to the nation’s space efforts
     through better professional communication in the industrial life
    sciences field,” with Dr. Charles M. Gel1 of Ling-Temco-Vought
     as president. AILS was accepted as full affiliate of U S . Aerospace
     Medical Association.
 ∞ D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA Director of Manned Space Flight,
     addressed National Advanced Technology Management Council
    in Seattle on the U.S. lunar program. “Although we are still in
     a very early phase of the greatest engineering project that man
     has ever undertaken, the Nation has made four crucial manage-
     ment decisions which clear the way for action. First, the goal
     has been identified. We are to land American explorers on the
     moon. Second, the timetable has been laid down. We are to
     carry out the mission and return the U.S. explorers safely to
     earth within this decade. Third, we have settled on the organi-
     zation to meet the national goal on schedule. Finally, we have
     selected the method which we believe can accomplish the lunar
     expedition on the shortest possible time schedule, wit,h the great-
     est assurance of success, and at the least expense. You do not
     need to be a specialist in management to realize that decisions
     such as these are central to the success of any job-what to do,
     when to do it, who is to be in charge, and how it is to be done.
     I n the United States space program, these fundamental decisions
     have been made. And we have proceeded with the work to
     carry them out at the swiftest pace consonant with other process-
     ing needs of the country and with the resources available . . . .
        “The achievement which stands out [in the manned lunar
     landing program] . . ., in my opinion, has been the launching
     by the people of the United States of a truly national effort to
     demonstrate our determination and our capacity to sail on the
     new ocean of space and to master the technology of the space
     age in all its aspects-for the security of the Free World and the
     good of all mankind.
        “The lunar landing is no stunt. The most important accom-
     plishment will be the development by this Nation of the ability
     to make the landing, and not the landing itself. Achievement
     of such ability is worth the qreat investment in brains and
                                                                    179
                                               EVENTS OF 1062
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTIC&

     industrial capacity and technological advance that we are
     making. The lunar landin is a yardstick-a measure of this
                                 (f
     country’s technological lea ership, a measure of the ability of
     this democracy to ‘manag!,’ if you will, a great engineering and
     technological undertaking m the national interest.”
September 7: I n private audience with Po e John XXIII, Vice Presi-
                                           E
     dent Lyndon B. Johnson presented t e Pope with a small model
     of TELSTAR communications satellite.
September 8: RL-10 rocket engine successfully static-fbed in second
     test at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Cluster of the
     liquid-hydrogen engines would power second stage (S-IV) of the
     Saturn (2-1.
∞ Atlas rocket for manned orbital flight MA-8       was static-fired suc-
     cessfully for 11 seconds a t Cape Canaveral.
 ∞ USAF announced Deputy Chief of Staff for Research and Develop-
     ment would be focal point for space projects within the Air Staff.
     Lt. Gen. James Ferguson, DC/S for RLD, would be responsible for
     such projects as Midas, Titan 1 1 Dyna Soar, communications
                                        1,
     satellites, and NASA liaison and support.
∞ Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, s eaking a t Danish-Soviet Friend-
     ship Advancement Society in Zopenhagen, attacked U.S. space
     projects. He charged U.S. launched satellites which spied on
     other countries, endangered space travel by its atmospheric
     nuclear tests, and put millions of cop er needles in space, making
     space research difficult. He addej: “I also know a certain
     country is considering plans to set up bases on the moon from
     which attacks on other parts of the world can be made.”
September 8-22: First NASA exhibit in Europe was displayed in pavilion
     of Swiss National Trade Fair, in Lausanne.
September 9: Three-man crew ‘(survived” a simulated week-long,
     round-trip to the moon, in simulation chamber a t Martin Co.
     plant, near Baltimore. Crew in the simulator, which resembled
     Apollo spacecraft in size and shape, consisted of 3 NASA civilian
     test pilots: Donald L. Mallick and Harold E. Ream of Lan ley
                                                                   8
     Research Center, and Glenn W. Stinnett of Ames Research en-
     ter. During the simulated flight, made in July, the men took
     turns as pilot, co-pilot, and navigator, and each made a simulated
     landing on the moon’s surface in the special one-man capsule
     designed by Langley scientists.
∞ Plan calling for international sounding-rocket launching site to be

     set up under U.N. auspices would be presented to U.N. General
     Assembly by 28-nation Committee on Outer Space, New York
      Times reported. Originally proposed by U.S. last June, plan
     provided that all member countries would be given access to
     facility for collection of meteorological and other scientific data.
∞ U.N. Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation re-
     leased detailed report warning that any radiation dose, however
     small, can cause biological and hereditary effects. “The Com-
     mittee therefore emphasizes the need that all forms of unneces-
     sary exposure be minimized or avoided entirely.” Adopted unan-
     imously by the 15-nation committee, the 442-page report was the
     most comprehensive in the 7-year history of the Committee.
 ∞ 25-franc postage stamp picturing TELSTAR communications center
     a t Pleumeur-Bodou was issued by France, first nation to so honor
     TELSTAR and its international communications achievements.
180    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

September 10: NASA Project Mercury officials postponed for three days
     thc 6-orbit space flight of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra (MA-?,),
     now scheduled for September 28. Delay was to permit further
     time for flight preparation.
∞  AEC-DOD arinounced that a “few” atmospheric tests would be con-
     ducted with nuclear devices dropped from airplanes, beginning
     late this month. Extension of atmospheric series, originally
     planned to end in July, was expected to end in 60 days. In addi-
     tion to the atmospheric tests, plans called for three more high-
     dtitude explosions, to be conducted with rocket-launched nuclear
     devices and at altitudes below 100 mi. to avoid creation of furthcr
     radiation belts.
    ∞   NASA indicated it would begin series of flights with an inflatable para-
     glider in mid-1963. Flights would provide information on fre-
     quency and size of micrometeoroid particles in space and allow
     post-flight laboratory study of impacts caused by such particles.
     Paraglider would be launched by Aerobee research rocket from
     White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) to height of 700,000 ft., and
     would descend to earth at speed of mach 5. Its re-entry path
     would be almost straight down-at an angle of 82’. Inflated
     paraglider would be 14-ft. long with span of 18 ft.; it would weigh
     170 lbs. during launch and 85 lbs. during re-entry.
 ∞ Fire in simulated space cabin at SAM, Brooks AFB, Texas, caused seri-
     ous smoke-inhalation injuries to Capt. Carl C. Fletchcr, Jr. (USAF),
     one of two men spending 13th consecutive day in cabin; his
     partner, Capt. Dean B. Smith (USAF), escaped serious injury.
     Atmosphere in the sealed cabin was almost pure oxygen when fire
     occurred. Airman l / C Henry W. Hall broke the cabin’s seal,
     quickly depressurized it, and brought out the two men. Cause of
     fire, which badly damaged the cabin, was unknown.
 ∞ Soviet delegate Platon 1 . Morozov demanded that U.N. Com-
                              )
     mittee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space reach agreement on legal
     aspects of space exploration before considering scientific and
     technical program, a t opcning meeting of Committee’s autumn
     1962 session. Morozov argued that US. high-altitude nuclear
     test in July had caused atmospheric radiation that imperiled the
     livcs of Soviet cosmonauts; he also commented that international
     space cooperation would be possible only “in a disarmed world.”
     When U.S. delegate Francis T. P. Plimpton said he hoped Mr.
     Morozov was not trying to “block progress” on technical issues,
     Morozov said U.S.S.R. had accepted “in principle” the rec-
     ommendations of the scientific and technical committee and
     later addcd that his Government would not make agreement on
     international technical cooperation dependent upon acceptance
     of Soviet views on legal issues. Committee finally agreed to con-
     sider the two subcommittee reports jointly. Subcommittee on
     international space law had met in Geneva last summer but had
     failed to reach a reement.
 ∞ David J. Mann of f’hiokol Chemical Corp. told American Chemical
     Society that Thiokol was developing new rocket fuel, oxygen
     difluoride, 15% more powerful than current rocket fuels. Used
     as oxidizer with such substances as diborane or monomethylhy-
     drazine, oxygen difluoride could save 7 ft. in length and 350 lbs.
     in weight on an Apollo-type launch vehicle. Other claimed
                                                                     181
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

     advantages were improved storability and capacity to remain
     in liquid form under wider range of conditions than possible with
     liquid hydrogenfliquid oxygen. New fuel’s density would permit
     large amounts to be stored in smaller volume.
September 10: Communist China announced that U.S.-built “U-2
     plane of the Chiang bandit group intruded int’o the airspace of
     East China on the morning of September 9 and was shot down by
     the air force of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army.” The US.
     confirmed that the U-2 missing over East China was one of two
     sold to Nationalist China by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. in 1960.
 ∞ Tass announced death of Maj. Gen. Vladimir Y. Klimov of Soviet
     Corps of Engineers. General Klimov developed V.K. jet engine
     used in MiG-15 and MiG-17 fighter planes.
September 11: Venus probe MARINER 11 passed the 2.5-million-mile
     mark on its 180-million-mde journey to vicinity of Venus. Speed
     relative to the earth was 6,512 mph. Four of the six scientific
     experiments aboard were sending data back to earth; the other
     two experiments would not be activated until spacecraft ap-
            .   .~
     proached Venus.
 ∞ President Kennedy toured NASA Marshall SDace Flight Center.u
     Huntsville, AIL, and Launch OperationsLCenter, Cape Cal
     naveral, Fla. At MSFC, he inspected a mock-up of the F-1 en-
     gine and a Saturn C-1 launch vehicle, and later witnessed 30-
     sec. static-firing of 1.3-million-lb.-tht S-1 stage for Saturn
     S A 4 launch vehicle. At LOC, he inspected launch complexes for
     Mercury-Atlas vehicle, Titan rocket, and Saturn C-1. He then
     flew to Houston, Tex., to visit NASA Manned Spacecraft Center
     on September 12. Addressing workers a t Cape Canaveral, the
     President said: “I don’t think we can exaggerate the great ad-
     vantage which the Soviet Union secured in the ’50s by being
     first in space. They were able to give prestige to their system,
     they were able to give force to their argument that they were an
     advancing society and that we were on the decline.
        “But I believe that we are an advancing society, and I believe
      that we are on the rise, and I believe that their system is as old
      as time. . . .9’
        He said that, as long as the American system was to be judged
     in a t least one degree by its achievements in space, the United
     States “might as well be fist, and therefore, this country, both
     political parties, have determined that the United States shall
      be first.”
∞ Reported in the New York Times that new radiation belt created by
     July 200-mi.-hi h nuclear explosion in the Pacific was expected
                     9
      to cause cancel ation of U.S. planned 500-mi.-high test in the
      Johnston Island series. Within this new belt, electron intensity
      was about 100 times greater than usual radiation peak i the   n
      outer part of the Van Allen belt; a t higher altitudes the electrons
      could persist for 5 years or more. Before the July test, U.S. had
     predicted any tra ped electrons would disappear “within a few
                         F
     weeks” of the exp osion.
 ∞ US. delegate to U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
     Space, Francis T. P. Plimpton, replying to Soviet criticism of
      U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion, charged that U.S.S.R. had
      secretly conducted at least one high-altitude nuclear explosion
182    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    within the last year. “Although the Soviet Union has never
    announced it, it is a fact that the Soviet Union itself carried out
    high-altitude nuclear tests during its series which began a year
    ago this month.”
September 11: U.S.S.R. delegate to the U.N. Committee on the Peace-
    ful Uses of Outer Space expressed approval of a subcommittee’s
    recommendation to establish an international sounding rocket
    launching base on the gcoinagnetic equator. U.S. delegate
    Pliinpton welcomed the Soviet position.
 ∞ National Research Corp. had determined that certain micro-orga-
    nisms may be able to survive such space environment effects as
    temperature extremes and ultrahigh vacuum, in first phase of
    study program sponsored by NASA. Five known laboratory
    strains of micro-organisms were subjected to simulated space
    conditions for five days, and certain species were found to be
     “highly resistant” to temperature and ultrahigh vacuum effects.
    Future studies would consider heat and ultraviolet solar effects
     and gamma irradiation.
∞ Congressman Victor Anfuso (N.Y.), speaking before the Pan Ameri-

    can Management Club a t Cape Canaveral, said:
       “Recognizing the very significant contrast between our mission
    in space and that of the Russians, we must do three things:
       “1. Convince the world that our venture into space is a peace-
    ful one-to bring back benefits which will create a world of abun-
    dance, making war and strife among nations unnecessary. . . .
       “2. We must, at all costs, achieve dominance in all phases of
    space exploration for our own security and that of all peoples of
    the earth.
       “3. Wp must establish freedom in space and invite all nations
    of the world, having a contribution to make, to join our efforts.
       (‘TO accomplish all these three things requires an all-out effort
    on our part-a mobilization of all our resources-sacrifices on
    the part of Government, business, industry, and labor. . . .’7
∞ AEC reported that KIWI    B-IB reactor had been damaged recently
    during its experimental ground test series with a static-power
    run a t the Nevada Test Site. Further analysis would be re-
    quired to determine exact cause and extent of the malfunction.
∞  United Auto Workers and International Association of Machinists
    unions in Los Angeles announced they had set September 22 as
    strike date against 4 aerospace companies-North American
    Aviation, Inc., Lockheed Aircraft Corp. , General Dynamics
    Corp., and Ryan Aircraft Co. President Kennedy warned that
    such a strike, involving nearly 100,000 workers, “would seriously
    set us back in space exploration and would imperil the Nation’s
    defense.”
 ∞ In interview in Yugoslav Government newspaper Borba, Soviet
    Cosmonaut Gherman Titov said U.S.S.R. was planning fligbt to
    the moon in 1965. “If some problem arises and a solution is not
    found immediately, the time is extended.”
∞ NORAD announced Soviet manned spacecraft VOSTOK 1 1 and IV 1
    crossed the North American continent 70 times during their
    double orbital trips August 11-14. NORAD space detection and
    tracking system tracked the flights for 112 earth orbits.
                                                                   183
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

September 12: President Kennedy toured NASA’s    Manned Space Center,
     after speaking at Rice University, Houston, where he said:
           . . Man, in his uest for knowledge and progress, is deter-
                          1
       ((.

    mined and cannot be. eterred. The exploration of space will go
     ahead, whether we ]om in it or not, and it is one of the great ad-
    ventures of all time, and no nation which expect? to be the leader
     of other nations can expect to stay behlnd in thls race for space.
        “Those who came before us made certain that this country rode
     the h t waves of the industrial revolutions, the first waves of
     modern invention, and the first wave of nuclear power, and this
     generation does not intend to founder in the backwash of the
     coming age of space.
        “We mean to be a part of it. We mean to lead it, for the
     e es of the world now look into space, to the moon and to the
     9
     panets beyond, and we have vowed that we shall not see it
     governed by a hostile flag of conquest, but by a banner of freedom
     and peace.
        “We have vowed that we shall not see space filled with weaDons
     of mass destruction, but with instruments of knowledge *and
     understanding.
        “Yet the vows of this Nation can only be fulfilled if we in
     this Nation are h i t , and, therefore, we intend to be first. In
     short, our leadership in science and in industry, our hopes for
     peace and security, our obligations to ourselves as well as others,
     all require us to make this effort, to solve these mysteries, to
     solve them for the good of all men, and to become the world’s
     leading spacefaring nation.
        “We sail on this new sea because there is new knowledge to
     be ained, and new rights to be won, and they must be won and
         %
     use for the progress of all people. For space science, like
     nuclear science and all technology, has no conscience of its own.
        “Whether it will become a force for good or ill depends on man,
     and only if the United States occupies a position of preeminence
     can we help decide whether this new ocean will be a sea of peace
     or a new, terrifying theater of war.
        “I do not say that we should or will go unprotected against
     the hostile misuse of space any more than we go unprotected
     against the hostile land or sea, but I do say that space can be
     explored and mastered without feeding the fires of war, without
     repeating the mistakes that man has made in extending his
     writ around this globe of ours.
        “There is no strife, no prejudice, no national conflict in outer
     s ace as yet. Its hazards are hostile to us all. Its conquest
     &serves the best of all mankind, and its opportunity for peaceful
      cooperation may never come again. . , . .
        “We choose to go to the moon . . . in this decade and do the
     other things, not because they are easy, but because they are
     hard, because that goal will serve to organize and measure the
     best of our energies and skills, because that challenge is one
     that we are willing to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone,
     and one which we intend to win, and the others, too.
        “It is for these reasons that I regard the decision last year to
     shift our efforts in space from low to high gear as among the
184    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

     most important decisions that will be made during my incumbency
     in the office of the Presidency. . . .
        “We have had our failures, but so have others, even if they do
     not admit them. And they may be less public.
        “To be sure, we are behind, and will be behind for some time
     in manned space flight. But we do not intend to stay behind.
     I n this decade we shall make up and move ahead. . . .),
September 12: NASA announced it would launch a special satellite before
     the end of the year to “obtain information on possible effects of
     radiation on future statellites and to give the world’s scientific
     community additional data on the artificial environment created
     by the [radiation] belt.” The 100-lb. satellite would be launched
     from Cape Canaveral into an elliptical orbit ranging from about
     170-mi. perigee to 10,350-mi. apogee.
 ∞ USAF Titan I1 rocket flew 5,000 miles in its third success of five test
     launchings. All test objectives were met on the 30-min. flight
     from Cape Canaveral to target area near Ascension Island in the
     South Atlantic Ocean.
 ∞ U.K. and Canada supported U.S. request that U.N. Committee on
     Peaceful Uses of Outer Space concentrate on international
     cooperation on space programs rather than on legal matters that
     contained elements of “a highly political and controversial
     nature.”
∞ NASA management meeting held to brief key officials on a manned

     space station program and to discuss possible F Y 1964 funding.
∞ Senate passed bill (S. 3138) to authorize FAA to conduct research

     to ‘‘determine what means and criteria can be employed to reduce
     and, hopefully, eliminate objectionable aircraft noise.” Bill
     was referred to the House.
 ∞ Walter Reed Army Institute of Research dedicated a new, 55,000-
     watt nuclear reactor, to be used in research on “creating a medica-
     tion to ward off radiation.”
 ∞ First “mystery” satellite in history of space exploration was
     launched, according to British magazine Flight International.
     Magazine said satellite orbited a t height of 113 mi. and re-
     entered earth’s atmosphere 12 days later. Satellite was listed
     as belonging to USAF, but spokesman said this was a “scientific
     guess based on our assessment of previous satellite launchings.”
     Launching was not confirmed, and no official U.S. listing included
     such a satellite.
∞ Balloon-borne     Cassegrain telescope was launched from Artesia,
     N.M., to altitude of about 86,000 f t . by USAF Cambridge Re-
     search Laboratories. Besides the telescope, the 850-lb. payload
     included interl‘erometer spectrometer to take spectra of moon
     and planet Venus. Other information obtained on this initial
     Project Skytop flight concerned amount of water vapor present
     in upper atmosphere. Third objective of flight was to obtain
     information required to measure amount of different gases in
     upper atmosphere of Venus. Instrumentation failure prevented
     the telescope from orienting on Venus for sufficient length of time.
 ∞ USAF named first two test pilots of the mach three RS-70: Lt. Col.
     Joseph F. Cotton, of Rushville, Ind.; and Maj. Fitzhugh Fulton,
     of Talladega, Ala.
 ∞ Two USN pilots, in separate flights, officially claimed two world
     flying records held by U.S.S.R. since 1940. LCdr. Fred A. W.
                                                                     185
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    Franke reached 27,380-ft. altitude in UF-2G Albatross amphibian
     with 4,410-lb. load; LCdr. Donald E. Moore reached 29,460-ft.
     altitude in same aircraft with 2,205-1b. load. Both flights were
    made from New York NAS, Floyd Bennett Field.
September 13: Back in Washington after two-day tour of U.S. space
     facilities, President Kennedy held news conference. Asked why
     decision was made to extend U.S. atmospheric nuclear tests, the
     President said :
        “There are two reasons. One is that, as you know, because of
     the blow-up in the pad a t Johnston Island and because of the
     earlier failures of the communication system in the missile, we
     were not able to carry out these tests which were . . . among the
     most important, if not the most important of our series.
        “So we are going. to finish those. In addition, as a result of the
     earlier tests of this Dominic series, there were certain things
     learned which we would like to prove out.
        “So we have agreed to a limited number of tests in concluding
     the Dominic series, and also we have taken some steps to prevent
     a repetition of the incident which caused an increase in the number
     of electrons in the atmosphere, by lowering the altitude and the
     yield so that lunar flights will not be further endangered.”
        Asked whether U.S. position of refraining from competition
    with U.S.S.R. military space vehicles would condemn U.S. to
     second lace in the military field, President Kennedy replied:
            hr.    Alexander. As I said last week, in the first place we
        “No,
     are spending $1.5 billion a year on our military space program.
     What is the key for the success both of peaceful exploration of
     space as well as the military mastery of space are large boosters,
     effective control of the capsule, and the ability to rendezvous,
     and all of the rest, so that there is an obvious usefulness if the
     situation should require, military usefulness for our efforts,
     peaceful efforts, in space.
        “In addition, as you know, very recently we determined to go
     ahead with the Titan 1 1 which gives the United States Air Force
                              1,
     a very strong weapon if that should become necessary. So that
     the work that NASA is doing on Saturn and the work the Air
     Force is doing on Titan and the work being done on the Apollo
     program and Gemini and the others, all have a national security
     factor as well as a peaceful factor. . . .
        “I think the United States is attempting, and this Administra-
     tion, as you know, is making a very massive effort in space. As
     I said, we are spending three times what we spent last year in
     space, and more in this year’s budget than the eight previous
     years, so that this is a tremendous effort, $5.5 billion as well as
     the money that we are spending for the military use of space.
        “As I say, the size of the booster and the capsule and the con-
     trol all would have, if the situation required it, a military use.
     We hope it does not; we hope that space will be used for peaceful
     purposes. That is the policy of the United States Government,
     but we shall be prepared if it does not; and in addition, as I said
     from the beginning, both the Soviet Union and the United States
    have a capacity to send a missile to each other’s country with a
     nuclear warhead on it, so that we must keep some perspective as
     to where the danger may lie. But the United States, in the effort
     973174L13
186    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

     it is making both in the peaceful program and the military pro-
     gram, all of this will increase our security if the Soviet Union
     should attempt to use space for military purposes.”
        Asked if he were hopeful that US-U.S.S.R. cooperative ven-
     tures in space exploration were likely in the near future, he replied:
        “NO. As you know, Dr. Dryden had some conversations in
     Geneva with regard to the matter, and some progress was made,
     but it is limited in its scope and we would hope more could be
     done and more, perhaps, could be done if the atmosphere between
     the two countries should be improved.”
September 13: Paresev (Paraglider Hesearch Vehicle) flown at NASA
     Flight Research Center. First manned vehicle designed to be
     towed aloft and released like a conventional glider, Paresev was
     towed to 6,000-ft. altitude by Stearman biplane. Released, the
     craft was flown back to Rogers Dry Lake bed in 3 min. 44 sec. by
     NASA project pilot, Milton 0. Thompson. Paresev flight program
     provided data on (1) flare and landing capabilities; (2) stability
     and controllability; and ( 3 ) pilot training. Possible uses of the
     paraglider concept included recovery of future spacecraft and
     rocket boosters.
 ∞ NASA-DOD jointly announced undertaking of a joint study to improve
     field operations involved in contract management for both DOD and
     NASA contracts. Under direction of committee chaired by Assist-
     ant Secretary of Defense ( I ~ L )Thomas D. Morris, the study was
     to improve effectiveness of field contract management, to improve
     responsiveness to buying offices and systems project offices, to
     assist N A S A ~ S increasing contract management requirements
     with minimum of additional personnel, and to ensure continued
     contract management efficiency in times of national emergency.
     Combined value of DOD and NASA contracts during FY 1963 would
     be approximately $30 billion.
∞ Hearings on U S . program for atomicTpropulsion held by Joint

     (Congressional) Committee on Atomic Energy, with NASA Admin-
     istrator James E. Webb, AEC Commissioner Leland Haworth,
     MSFC Director Dr. Wernher yon Braun, Los Alamos Scientific
     Laboratory Director Norris Bradbury, and SNPO Director Harold
     Finger all agreeing on need for living facilities near atomic test
     site in southern Nevada. NASA-AEC Nerva. (nuclear engine)
     development would require bet’ween 1,500 and 2,000 employees
     a t the Nevada site. However, the prospect of commuting 180
     mi. daily to and from the nearest town (Las Vegas) was scaring
     away prospective workers, according to testimony.
∞ Dr. Harold B. Finger, Director of joint AEC-NASA         Space Nuclear
     Propulsion Office (SNPO) , told Joint Committee on Atomic Energy
     that first flight date in nuclear-powered space vehicle program
      (Project Rover) had been moved from 1966 to 1967. Over-
     optimism, technical difficulties, organizational problems, and a
     situation in which construction workers have to spend 4 hours a
      day commuting to the Nevada test site have all contributed to
     the delay, he testified.
 ∞ Testimony before the Joint (Congressional) Committee on Atomic
     Energy revealed management difficulties on Project Pluto nuclear-
      powered vehicle, to fly at 2,000 mph within the atmosphere.
      Dr. Leland Haworth, member of AEC, testified that AEC was
                                                                  187
                                             EVENTS OF 1062
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL

     “awaiting a fr decision” from DOD on whether the project
                    im
    would be continued. Reactor for nuclear ramjet rocket, under
    development since 1956, had been successfully gound-tested in
    Nevada. Dr. Harold Brown, director of DOD research and engi-
    neering, said DOD hoped that a decision could be reached “within
    a month.” An estimated $500 million would be required to
    continue the project through flight-test phase.
September 13: President Kennedy urged four major aerospace manu-
    facturers (North American Aviation, Lockheed, General Dynam-
    ics, and Ryan) to accept terms proposed by a special Presidential
     board for settlement of their labor contract dispute with two
     unions (United Auto Workers and International Association of
     Machinists). He also named another special board to try to medi-
     ate a dispute between the International Association of Machinists
     and the Boeing Co., asking the union not to strike but to continue
     work until November 15 so the board could try to work out a
     solution.
∞  Astronaut Walter Schirra, Jr., interviewed on nationally-televised
     CBS program, criticized delayed reporting of Astronaut M. Scott
     Carpenter’s landing during flight MA-7: “We had a lot of
     information there [during the 35-min. period from blackout of
     communications when spacecraft re-entered until public an-
     nouncement of reception of signals from spacecraft] and yet it
     never came out and it was disgusting, you know.”
       Schirra also commented on the heavy demands on Astronaut
     John H. Glenn for “outside” personal appearances. Interview
     had been taped several weeks before its broadcast.
 ∞ India offered to provide launching base for U.N. international
     rocket probes in session of U.N. Committee for Peaceful Uses of
     Outer Space. India’s proposal was related to a proposal that
     1964 be designated International Year of the Quiet Sun (IQSY),
     and include equatorial sounding rockets to gather data above
     the earth’s Equator. Southern part of India lies within 10” of
     the Equator and would provide suitable launching site for the
     project .
∞ Congressman George Meader (Mich.) introduced H.R. 13130, bill
     to establish a Commission on Research and Develo ment. The
    new bill wm a “perfected” version of his earlier bdf He called
    attention to S. 2771, the bill which had passed the Senate, and
    urged that “speedy action be taken on the legislation.”
 ∞ Analysis of the metal chunk believed to have been part of Soviet
    satellite SPUTNIK IV showed the object had greater radiation level
    than any other object previously recovered from space. AEC
    scientists a t Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory (N. Mex.) said one
    reason for high radiation was that the chunk was analyzed soon
    after being found, whereas previous objects had not been ana-
    lyzed until a t least three weeks after being found. Radiation
    expert Dr. Ernest C. Anderson of Los Alamos reported that the
    object had same sort of radioactivity shown by natural iron
    meteorites, evidence that the object wm part of a spacecraft that
    had been orbiting for long time above the atmosphere. SPUTNIK
    IV went into orbit May 15, 1960, and disintegrated September 5,
     1962, over the U S . Los Alamos forwarded 14-lb. chunk to US.
    delegation to U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
188    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 62

      Smithsoriian Astrophysical Observatory had kept a 6-lb. slice of
      the original object for further examination.
September 13: First operational Atlas-F launching silos turned over to
      Strategic Air Command. Ceremonies were held a t one of the
      underground launchinq complexes near Salina, Kans.
∞  Reported that Hughes Aircra€t Co. had developed special devices
     to determine radiation dosage an astronaut may absorb in space
     flight. Called “tissue-equivalent ionization chambers” and de-
     veloped under USAF contract, the instruments would be installed
     in three USAF (‘plastinauts,” man-sized dummies of astronauts
     made of plastic simulating human tissue. The plastinauts were
      designed “to fly in any space vehicle capable of carrying a man.”
∞  USAF Skybolt missile was intentionally destroyed when missile
     veered off course, third failure in three flight attempts of the
      air-to-surface Skybolt.
 ∞ International Air Transport Association (IATA) technical committee
     report,ed it was too early to state with certainty whether com-
     mercial supersonic aircraft were practical. Committee said there
      was a growing possibility that a supersonic airliner could fly
     within the next few years, but that “considerable research into
     such matters as sonic boom and cosmic radiation is still required
      before a final conclusion can be reached.”
∞ President Kennedy, replying to question a t regular news conference,

     said the U.S. had no plans to permit sale of U-2 high-altitude
     reconnaissance planes to Nationalist China. He added that the
     U.S. had not sold and would not, sell U-2’s to any third nation.
     Sale of two U-2 aircraft to Nationalist China was arranged in
     July 1960, during Eisenhower Administration, President Kennedy
     pointed out.
∞  Senator Hubert Humphrey announced public hearing on improve-
     ment of Government management of information and coordina-
     tion of reporting would be conducted by Senate Governmcnt
     Operations Subcommittee on Reorganization and International
     Organizations, September 20. Among officials testifying would
     be Melvin Day, Director of NASA Office of Technical Information.
September 14: MARINER 11, U S . Venus probe, continued to transmit
     signals from interplanetary space to earth on its nineteenth day
     of flight, thus surpassing record of U.S.S.R. Venus probe which
     stopped transmitting on its eighteenth day of flight in February
      1961. At 8:OO P M EDT the spacecraft was estimated to be
     3,067,471 mi. from earth and traveling a t a speed of 6,463 mph
     relative to the earth. JPL scientists said the probe appeared to be
     continuing “right on course.”
∞ I n meeting of U.N. Committee for the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,

     U S . offered to U.S.S.R. a 14-lb. metal chunk, believed to be part
     of SPUTNIK IV, that had landed in Wisconsin September 5.
     Soviet delegate to the U.N. Platon D. Morozov rejected the
     offer, saying “We do not know to whom it belongs.” He said it
     was not necessary to make dramatic gestures to show that falling
     satellite fragments could do harm, and charged the U S . with
      “dramatic staging” to divert the Committee from Soviet proposals
      on legal principles for use of outer space. Displaying the chunk
     following the meeting, U S . delegate Francis T. P. Plimpton said
     the object weighed 20 lbs. when it fell from the sky, but U S .
                                                                    189
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

     scientists of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had retained
     a six-lb. piece for further examination.
September 14: House and Senate Conference Committee on FY 1963
     appropriations agreed to one half the restoration of NASA funds
     recommended by Senate, allowing total of $3,674,115,000 for
     NASA FY 1963 appropriation.
∞ NASA announced that nine new astronauts for Projects Gemini and
     Apollo would be named a t Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston,
     on September 17.
∞ Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight
     Center, said in published interview: “People talk too much about
     crash programs and too little about sustained support. These
     space programs take time. A decision you make today on some
     engineering or scientific aspects of our space program may take
     anywhere from four to five years before it takes the form of
     hardware.
         “When you make a wrong decision now, the payoff, good or
     bad, could come five years later, not sooner than that. We can’t
     work miracles overnight. . . .”
 ∞ In prepared press statement, Astronaut John H. Glenn commented
     on September 13 televised remarks by Astronaut Walter Schirra,
     and said: “I will continue to support his flight [Astronaut
     Schirra’s orbital flight MA-81 just as well as I possibly can. . . .
     I don’t want to add any more statements to a situation that has
     all the aspects of a tempest in a teapot. Scheduling of my time
     for maximum benefit from a technical and national space program
     standpoint has been continually reviewed by both Dr. Gilruth
     and the management of NASA.” Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director
     of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, stated there was no real
     controversy over Col. Glenn’s position in the space program or
     on other questions raised by Cdr. Schirra.
 ∞ AEC announced 50th U.S. nuclear test in current series, an under-
     ground low-yield explosion a t Nevada test area..
 ∞ Dr. Leland 6. Haworth of AEC led delegation of scientists and Gov-
     ernment officials in dedication of $12 million electron accelerator
     at Cambridge, Mass. To be operated by MIT and Harvard Univ.,
     the facility would be supported by AEC, which financed its
     construction.
         announced International Telephone and Telegraph Corp.
∞ DOD
      (ITB~T)had leased to USAF two transportable ground communica-
     tions stations for operational training of communications per-
     sonnel. The units mould be used in new program to provide data
     on problems of using satellites for communications support.
∞ Communist China stated the U-2         shot down September 9 was
     fourth U.S. militarg-type aircraft China had downed since
                            - .-
     October 1959.
September 15: Signals from ARIEL satellite had been received during
     past week bf tracking stations. ARIEL had stopped transmitting
     after US. high-altitude nuclear test because of radiation damage
     to the satellite’s solar cells. Although resumed transmission
     was not continuous, it did demonstrate ARIEL’S regained capa-
     bility to return scientific data from space. Transmission ap-
     parently occurred whenever the satellite stayed in sunlight long
190    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

     enough for its damaged solar cells to absorb sufficient solar energy
     to power its electronic equipment.
September 15: NASA announced the sixth Tiros weather satellite would
     be launched into orbit from Cape Canaveral on September 18, at
     the earliest. Launch date was moved two months ahead to pro-
     vide backup of TIROS v cloud-cover photography during last half
     of current hurricane season and to provide weather forecasting
     support for Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s orbital space flight
     September 28. Wide-angle TV camera in TIROS v continued to
     operate, but medium-angle Tegea lens stopped functioning on
     July 2 because of ‘‘random electrical failure in the camera’s
     system .”
∞ Magnetic fields had been discovered in outer space by two scientists

     working in Australia, the Commonwealth Scientific Research
     Organization announced. Brian Cooper, of Sydney, and Marcus
     Price, of the U.S., made their discovery with new radiotelesco e
                                                                      7
     a t Parkes, New South Wales. Charting of the magnetic fie d
     near galaxy Centaurus A was termed “radio astronomy’s biggest
     discovery in 10 years.” Centaurus A is 20 million light years
     away from the earth.
∞  Announced that 140-million-candlepower lights would burn near
     Durban, So. Africa, for three minutes during fifth and sixth
     orbital passes of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s Mercury space
     flight (MA-8).
 ∞ Piloting an Albatross amphibian, LCdr Richard A. Hoffman (USN)
     claimed speed record of 151.4 mph average over 3,100-mi. flight
     course for amphibians carrying 2,205-113. loads. Flight was made
     from New York NAS, Floyd Bennett Field.
September 16: NASA announced the advanced version of liquid-
     hydrogenpiquid-oxygen rocket engine had completed its prelimi-
     nary flight rating tests. I n the test program, the 15,000-1b.-
     thrust engine underwent 20 static-firings for a total of 2,820 see.
     of firing; it also passed humidity and vibration tests.
∞ Dr. Albert Kelley, NASA Director of Electronics and Control (OART),

     told Electronics Industry Association that between 90 and 95%
     of US. space failures could be traced to failures in electronic
     components. ‘(We are trying to build a reliable spacecraft with
     unreliable components.” He added that NASA had begun an
     electronic components’ reliability program separate from that of
     DoD-a program providing a “great challenge” with prospects
     for rewarding technological payoffs.
∞  NASA announced contract award for research in communications
     between man and dolphins, results of which could apply if man
     encounters other species on distant planets. The $80,800, one-
     year contract was awarded to Communication Institute of St.
     Thomas, V.I., directed by Dr. John C. Lilly. Dr. Lilly’s research
     had already determined that dolphins communicate with each
     other and that they could be taught to mimic human speech.
 ∞ NASA announced new policy under which astronauts would be per-
     mitted t o negotiate individually for the sale of their stories, the
     policy being “aimed at assuring equal access by all news media
     to the Astronauts’ stories of their flight missions.” Notable pro-
     visions of new policy were: (1) requirement for a second post-
     flight news conference in which representatives of news media
     could question the astronaut (‘in depth” about his flight; and
                                                                    191
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 62

    (2) prohibiting of any publication’s advertising “exclusive” stories
    purchased from astronauts, with requirement that the contract-
    ing publication provide a method to avoid this inference and with
     all such agreements subject to approval of the NASA Adminis-
    trator. Inherent in the policy was that “all information reported
    by the Astronauts in the course of their official duties, which is
    not classified to protect the national security, will be promptly
     made available to the public.” New guidelines applied to all
     NASA astronauts, civilian and military.
September 16: U.S.S.R. exploded second nuclear device of “several
     megatons” in two days. AEC announced the atmospheric test
     had been conducted in vicinity of the island Novaya Zemlya.
September 17: NASA’s new astronauts were named in Houston by
                       nine
     Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft
     Center (MSC). Chosen from 253 applicants, the former test
     pilots who would join original seven Mercury astronauts in
     training for Projects Gemini and Apollo were: Neil A. Armstrong,
     NASA civilian test pilot; Maj. Frank Borman (TJSAF); Lt. Charles
     Conrad, Jr. (USN); LCdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (USN); Capt.
     James A. McDivitt (USAF); Elliot M. See, Jr., civilian test pilot
     for General Electric Co.; Capt. Thomas P. Stafford (USAF);
     Capt. Edward H. White, I1 (USAF); and LCdr. John W. Young
     (USN). Dr. Gilruth stressed that they would not all necessarily
     make actual space flights. “Assignment to flight crews will
     depend upon the continuing physical and technical status of the
     individuals concerned and upon the future flight schedule
     requirements.”
 ∞ USAF launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena B booster
     from Vandenberg AFB.
 ∞ NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced Mercury Astronaut
     Donald I .Slayton had been named “Coordinator of Astronaut
               (
     Activities.” Slayton would be responsible for assignment of
     training and engineering duties of all the astronauts.
∞ Reported that NASA would build facilities worth $15 to $18 million

     at White Sands Missile Range (WSMR), N.M., for testing Apollo
     spacecraft’s propulsion and abort systems. Facilities for flight
     tests of the abort system and the lunar excursion module would
     be ready in January 1963 ;static-firing sites for testing propulsion
     systems would be operational in mid-1363.
∞ DOD established conflict-of-interest ruling on industry’s role in DOD
     research contracts. New policy specified that a company serving
     as technical adviser in a research program was ineligible to com-
     pete for contracts in the hardware production phase. Ruling
     was first established in Project Advent communications satellite
     project.
∞ First Snap-8    nuclear reactor was operated successfully a t Santa
     Susana, Calif., AEC announced. The experimental reactor was of
     type designed to ultimately propel spacecraft through deep
     space.
 ∞ Reported that Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., had received less than
     half the heavy primary cosmic radiation dosage expected during
     his 4.5-hr. orbital flight MA-6. According to Dr. Hermann J.
     Schaefer of USN Biophysics Branch, Pensacola, the MA-6 space-
     craft walls and capsule instrumentation probably absorbed many
     of the rays and kept the total dosage lower than expected.
192    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

September 17: Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Board Chairman, Courtlandt
     S. Gross, wrote to 56,000 employees that the union-shop proposal
     by President Kennedy’s fact-finding panel was “just plain wrong.”
     I n response to President Eennedy’s plea that Lockheed and three
     other aerospace companies accede to labor demand for union
     shop, Gross protested that tlie “freedom to join or not to join an
     organization is a basic individual right. . . ” The other three
     companies-North American Aviation ,Generai D ynamics/Convair
     Div., and Ryan Aeronautical Co.-reportedly were willing to
     withdraw their opposition to union shop, and tlie two unions-
     United Auto Workers and International Association of Machin-
     ists-indicated they would accept the proposed settlement.
 ∞ Federal Radiation Council (Chairman: Anthony J. Celebrezze,
     Secretary of HEW) announced that radiation exposure greatly
     above the safety guide levels set two years ago “would not result
     in a detectable increase in the incidence of disease. . . . The
     radiation protection guides are not a dividing line between safety
     and danger in actual radiation situations; nor are they alone
     intended to set a limit a t whicli protective action should be taken
     or to indicate what kind of action should be taken.” Individual
     situations require individual evaluation before action is taken, the
     council continued.
 ∞ M. G. O’Neil, president of General Tire & Rubber Co., told na-
     tional convention of tire dealers that in 10 years astronautics
     industry may exceed size of combined automotive industries
     of the world. He compared the impact of the space age to that
     of the discovery of America in 1492.
∞  Reported that telemetry equipment developed for missiles and earth-
     orbiting satellites was available to automobile engineers to help
     make cars quieter. To check noise and vibration accurately, car
     manufacturers could use two-channel electronic telemetry system
     that picked up sounds made by test cars and transmitted signals
     to receiver in another vehicle.
September 18: NASA’s    TIROS VI weather satellite was placed in orbit
     by three-stage Delta vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral a t
     4:45 PM EDT (apogee, 442 mi.; perigee, 425 mi.; period, 95.7 min.;
     inclination, ranging between 58.3O north and south latitude).
     Orbit was believed too low for satellite’s 9,120 solar cells to be
     unduly damaged by artificial radiation zone created by US.
     high-altitude nuclear explosion in July. By midafternoon,
     pictures taken by TIROS VI’S two television cameras were being
     incorporated with ground data into conventional weather fore-
     casts. Weather Bureau reported quality of the photographs was
     “as good, if not better than that of any taken by the five previous
     Tiros satellites.” The launching marked the sixth straight
     success in Tiros program and the eleventh straight successful
     satellite launching by the Delta rocket.
 ∞ MARINER 11 entered ravitational field of the sun; the Venus probe
                       B
     was 3,608,857 mi es from earth. The velocity of MARINER 1          1
     relative to the earth now stopped decreasing and began increasing
     due to the effect of the gravitational field of the sun.
∞ House adopted conference report on Independent Offices Appropria-

     tions Bill, allowing $3,674,115,000 for NASA in FY 1963.
                                                                   193
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

September 18: First photographs of Gemini two-man spacecraft
    mockup were released by NASA and McDonnell Aircraft Corp.
    Three-section capsule would be used to train pilots to maneuver
   in space, particularly to rendezvous and to dock with another
   orbiting space vehicle.
∞ DOD announced award of $12.2 million contract to IT&T for systems
   engineering and technical advice in development of communica-
    tions satellite systems.
∞ Editorial in the New York Times said:
       ‘‘Since the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is a
    civilian agency, it miglit be wiser to make all the astronauts
    civilians so that no questions of inequality or discrimination arise
    among them and also so that they might receive more adequate
    pay than is provided by the low military pay scales. . . .
       (‘In permitting the astronauts to cash in on their exploits, the
    Kennedy Administration is following an unwise precedent set
    by the Eisenhower Administration.
       “While the practice of profiting from memoirs of Government
   service is an old one, such memoirs are normally written by
                                                           .
   persons who have already left Federal employment. . .
       “The government would be far wiser if it paid its astronauts a
   sufficiently generous salary so that it could in good conscience
   ask them to observe the same practices of discretion and modesty
    which have hitherto been considered normal for all other Govern-
   ment employees.”
∞ Dr. Ivan A. Getting. President of Aerospace Corp., told National
   Rocket Club in Washington that the US. space program had
   been plagued from the beginning by an artificial “dicbotomy”
   that assumed peaceful activities in space were “pure” and mdi-
   tary activities were ‘(evil.”
       “We lmow, all the world knows, that we have no intention of
   exploiting space for reasons of aggression. But now the Russians
   are demonstrtlting to the world that their space exploits are
   straightforward demonstrations of raw military power. . . .
       “We in the United States need to r e a f i m our traditional
   position-but with pride instead of seeming shame-that our
   presently great military strength is the most potent force in the
   world and that it is working 24 hours a day to help keep
                  .
   the peace. . .
       “If our strength is to be maint,ained we must have the military
   tools that are best suited to help keep the peace . . . operational
   however and whenever and wherever necessary-in space, in the
   atmosphere, under the seas, or even underground.
       “We need to restate the historic peacetime military role of
   sharing in exploring the frontiers . . . now in space . . . and
   that this sharing be on a basis of both cooperation and also some
   healt’hy competition. . . .
       “We must recognize that many practical space missions have
   both military and civilian uses; that the exploitation of space for
   these missions necessarily involves both the development and
   continuing operation of these systems, and that as a consequence,
   each should be evaluated on the basis of how it can be realized
   most effectively from the standpoint of overall national benefit.
194     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 62

        “It will take our best efforts in an overall unified plan. But
      to assure success there must be no dichotomy in space any more
      than has been in any other worthwhile national undertaking
      ....   11


September 18: Three fliers were credited with breaking two Soviet
     world records by flying their B-58 Hustler supersonic bomber to
     85,360-It. altitude with cargo of 11,023 lbs., DOD announced.
     Fliers were: Maj. Fitzhugh L. Fulton (USAF), pilot; Charles R.
     Haines, civilian flight test engineer; and Capt. William R. Payne
      (USAF), navigator.
∞ Dr.Fred P. Adler, Director of Space Systems Div. of Hughes Aircraft
     Co., told House subcommittee of Commit,tee on Science and
     Astronautics that the U.S. should not make a “major investment”
     in the Telstar communications satellite system until the Syncom
     system was proven or disproven. Dr. Adler said Hughes’
     Syncom could perform better tha AT&T’S Telstar and at one third
     the cost.
September 18-20: First national conference on the problem of Technical
     Manpower in the Space Age was held in New York City by
     Institute of the Aerospace Sciences, at request and under auspices
     of Executive Office of President Kennedy.
September 19: President Kennedy announced labor agreements had
     been reached with two aerospace industry companies, North
     American Aviation and General DynamicsJConvair, ending threat
     of strike. Agreement was based on recommendations of the
     President’s Aerospace Board.
 ∞ Mercury capsule for orbital space flight MA-8 was named “Sigma
     7” by Astronaut Walter M. Schirra. Sigma, the ei hteenth letter
     of the Greek alphabet and an engineering symbo? for “many,”
     symbolized the teamwork involved in the manned space flight;
     “7” referred to the seven-man Project Mercury astronaut team.
 ∞ Third Saturn launch vehicle (SA-3) arrived a t Cape Canaveral
     after 10-day trip by barge from NASA Marshall Space Plight
     Center, Huntsville, Ala. Flight test was scheduled for
     November.
 ∞ Leonard Jaffe, NASA Director of Communications Systems, told
     House subcommittee of Committee on Science and Astronautics
     that NASA was “endeavoring to assist in determining as rapidly
     as possible which of the various system designs . . . should
     be used in the establishment of operational communications
     satellite systems.” He described various “orbital configurations
     proposed for communications satellites” and reviewed passive
     satellites (Echo) and active-repeater satellites (Telstar, Relay,
     Syncom). “From these experiments and others which will
     follow, we will obtain engineering data upon which to base
     operational system designs. . . .
        “Satellites of the near future must be designed to exhibit
     reliability and dependability, unattended in the space environ-
     ment for many years, if we are to have economically viable
     communications systems. ”
 ∞ Senate began consideration of conference report of H.R. 12711,
     FY 1963 Independent Offices Appropriations bill. NASA appro-
    priations items were not in dispute.
                                                                   195
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

September 19: Reported in N w York Times that US.had notified the
                            e
    U.S.S.R. of its willingness to sign an agreement to cooperate in
     the peaceful exploration and utilization of space. Within the
     past 3 weeks, US. State Department had sent note to Moscow
     calling for formal signature of a bilateral agreement on joint
     weather and communications satellites and study of the earth’s
     ma netic fields.
 ∞ USAF Atlas missile was successfully flown 5,000 mi. downrange from
     Ca e Canaveral. As the Atlas rose, two cameras attached to pro-
     vidP pictures of blast-off were ejected and landed on the Cape.
         e
     Two additional camera capsules were ejected and recovered near
     Grand Turk Island. This was the 100th Atlas missile launching
     a t Cape Canaveral.
∞ USAF Minuteman ICBM successfully fired from silo a t Cape Canav-

     eral, the second such firing in as many days.
∞  Air Force Association (AFA) convention in Las Vegas unanimously
     adopted resolution calling for immediate clarification of U.S.
     policy on the military uses of space. AFA policy statement said:
     “Soviet space achievements, with their military implications,
     make it clear that we cannot satisfy the national security require-
     ment in space with by-products from our civilian s p a c e r -
     gram. . . . Space must be used to press our deterrent capab ity,
     to protect the future against the agonies and miseries of war, and
     thus to provide the climate required for the owth of freedom.”
 ∞ USAF named six men selected to pilot X-20 F y n a Soar) orbital
     spacecraft. The pilots, all from Edwards AFB, included five Air
     Force officers and one NASA civilian: Ca t. Albert H. Crews, Jr.;
                                            Id)
     Maj. Russell L. Rogers; Maj. James           Wood; Maj. Henry C.
     Gordon; Capt. William J. Enight; and Milton 0. Thompson
      (NASA). USAF also displayed full-scale mock-up of X-20 a t Air
     Force Association convention, iirst public showing of the space
     glider.
∞ 14,000 International Association of Machinists (IAM)       workers a t
     Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. plants threatened walkout effec-
     tive September 24.
∞  Announced that the opening ceremony of the Roman Catholic
     Church ecumenical council on October 11 would be televised in
     the Vatican and relayed to the U.S. via TELSTAR satellite.
September 20: World’s largest movable radiotelescope, located a t Na-
     tional Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO), Green Bank,
     W. Va., was turned on a t midnight for the first time. The 300-
     ft.diameter telescope, built for $800,000 in about one year, was
     expected to be trained on Venus as its first operational target.
∞ AEC Chairman Glenn T. Seaborg told panel discussion of Inter-

     national Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna that a U.S. nuclear-
     powered spacecraft now in the initial-test phase could take two
     men on a round trip to Mars in the 1970’s. He said that the
     round trip, including one-month visit on Mars, would take about
     a year.
September 21: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of NASC,
     told Air Force Association convention in Las Vegas that “the
     objective of our [national space] policy is to obtain and maintain
     leadershi in space activities for the benefit of man’s freedom,
             H
     man’s we -being, man’s understanding, and man’s scientific prog-
    ress. The details of the policy are not quite so clear, as those
196   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    who have studied our budgets and public documents have reason
     to know. It is clear, however, that our policy includes going to
     the moon during this decade. It includes developing an opera-
     tional communications satellite system as well as navigation and
     meteorological systems on a world-wide basis. The specifics are
     less clear as to the roles of man in space and what can and should
     be done to maintain peace in outer space. This lack of clarity,
     however, is partly due to the difficulty of knowing what can be
     done and what cannot be done. Continuing efforts will be made
     to clarify policy, while keeping it necessarily flexible. . . .”
September 21: Replying to September 20 statement by AEC Chairman
     Glenn T. Seaborg regarding U.S. nuclear propulsion capabilities
     for a 1970 Mars mission, NASA spokesman said: “There is no such
     approved program for such a flight a t this time, but the joint
     AEC-NASA program is aimed a t giving such a capability, and a t
     this time it appears i t may be feasible to conduct such a flight.’’
∞  Announced that International Association Machinist workers and
     Lockheed Corp. had agreed to extend their contract indefinitely,
      thus averting threat of strike in this aerospace industry.
 ∞ Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., USMC), was chosen as Ma-
     rine Aviator of the Year for 1962-63. This was the first annual
      award of the Alfred A. Cunningham Trophy.
 ∞ NASA contracted with Armour Research Foundation for an investiga-
      tion of conditions likely to be found on the lunar surface. Initial
     research would concentrate on evaluation of effects of velocity
      of landing, size of the landing area, and shape of the landing ob-
      ject with regard to properties of the lunar soils. Earlier studies
      by Armour had indicated the lunar surface may be composed of
      very strong material.
 ∞ USN announced tests conducted a t U.S. Naval Ordnance Test Sta-
      tion, China Lake, Calif., had included successful free-flight of a
      new type of rocket propulsion system called “Hybrid” because
      of its use of combination liquid and solid propellant in single
     motor.
 ∞ Two leading U.S. space scientists born in Germany were voted
     honorary members of the German Rocket Society: Dr. Kurt H.
      Debus, Director of NASA Launch Operations Center, and Prof.
      K. 0. Lange, Director of University of Kentucky’s Aeronautical
      Research Laboratory.
 ∞ Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, addressing the Air
      Force Association in Las Vegas, said: “The United States, in
      keeping with our motivations in freedom and peace, has embarked
      upon a space program aimed a t peace building, constructive
      exploitation of space-second to none.
         “In the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the
      nation has mobilized an effort unprecedented in history. NASA
      is making progress, because it has imaginative leadership, a
      competent staff, extensive facilities, and wholehearted support
      from all elements of industry and government which can contrib-
      ute, especially the Air Force.
         “In addition to our contribution to the success of the NASA
      program, the Air Force is required by its own mission to put its
      energies into a different kind of space effort. We are reaching a
      clearer definition of that mission as it relates to space. . , .
                                                                  197
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1862

      “The United States is dedicated as a matter of national policy
    to the eaceful exploitation of the space medium. The United
           i
    States oes not intend to extend the arms race into space.
        “We are, however, taking the step to enable us to protect our-
    selves in the event the Soviets or any other nation were to
    undertake missions in space that would endanger our security. . . .
        “The dual-vehicle orbital experiment of the Soviets, when
    coupled with their previous claims, seems to indicate that the
    need for protection against possible threats to our security wl il
    be in the near orbital stage of space, rather than farther out.
     One possible instrument of security that might be useful a t this
    level in space may be found in extending the X-15 and X-20
    technology, leading to craft which could operate from surface to
    orbit and back, and perform defense missions a t the edge of the
    atmosphere. Another might be the permanently manned orbital
    space station designed for military purposes. Progress toward
    utilization of such a vehicle for security and protection would be
    speeded by capitalizing upon the NASA program to acquire
    knowledge and competence in manned orbital flight. . . .
        “These are the principles on which Air Force space program
    must be based: (a) Ample preparation to utilize the space
    medium; (b) Ample preparation to defend ourselves in case
     others choose to extend the threat of aggression to outer space;
     (c) Concentration on the really important tasks, including
     today’s job and not just tomorrow’s, and finally, (d) An organ-
     izationally disciplined space program-well planned and spe-
     cific-which fits into overall national plans and objectives.
        “We in America have no choice but to extend our defenses as
     far as they need to be extended to save freedom on earth. . . .”
September 22: Four-stage Journeyman rocket carried 145-lb. payload
     to 1,058-mi. altitude, from NASA Wallops Station. Primary ex-
     periment was measurement of the intensity of R F energy at
     medium frequencies; secondary experiment was measurement of
     electron densities in the upper ionosphere and investigation of
     possibility of using ionosphere as a focusing medium in future
     radio astronomy mapping experiments. Payload landed about
     1,323 mi. from launch site in the Atlantic Ocean.
∞ NASA launched three-stage, solid-fuel Ram-B (Radio Attenuation

     Measurement) rocket from Wallops Station, Va., all contact with
     the vehicle lost 11 sec. after second-stage ignition. Project Ram
     was designed to provide information on communications blackout
     during space vehicle re-entry.
∞ Aerobee 150A launched from NASA Wallops Station, the rocket
     reaching 117-mi. altitude in experiment to measure absolute
     intensity of the spectrum of stars with 50 angstrom resolution
     and to measure ultraviolet fluxes. No usable data were received
     because rocket failed to despin as planned.
∞ Faulty valve in MA-8 spacecraft was replaced by technicians, a

    repair which required removal of Mercury capsule from the Atlas
     booster. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s orbital space flight was
    planned for October 3.
∞  NASA announced it would launch Canadian spacecraft Alouette
     (S-27) from Point Arguello, Calif., no earlier than September 26.
    Named for high-3ying songbird of Canada, Alouette was first
                198    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

                      satellite to be both designed and built by a nation other than U.S.
                     or U.S.S.R. The launching would mark NASA’s             first orbiting
                      attempt from Point Arguello and its first use of a Thor-Agena B
                     launch vehicle.
                September 22: Unnamed NASA official said that a four-stage rocket
                     probe would be launched in October or November to check the
                     strength of the radiation belt created by U.S. high-altitude
                      nuclear explosion over the Pacific on July 9, 1962.
               ∞   NASA announced award of facilities grants to five universities, first
                     such grants awarded by NASA. Worth a total of $6,410,000, the
                     grants were to provide research facilities for activities in space-
~




                       related sciences and technology to universities making “substantial
                      contributions” to the U.S. space program: University of Cali-
I


                     fornia, Berkeley ; University of Chicago ; Rensselaer Polytechnic
I

I                     Institute; State University of Iowa; and Stanford University.
                ∞  According to the Washington Post, USAF second attempt to orbit
                     belt of copper filaments in Project West Ford experiment was
                     apparently inadvertently revealed by Eugene C. Fubini, Deputy
                      Director of Defense Research and Engineering, testifying before
                      the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The
                      attempted orbiting was inferred to have been made sometime
                     this summer, failed because of launch vehicle malfunction (first
                     failure and only attempt publicized had been niade on Oct. 21,
                      1961). Of this report, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public
    I                Affairs, Arthur Sylvester, said to the press: “The facts are that
    I                only one attempt has been made [to orbit tiny metal filaments]
                      and the U.S. Air Force will coordinate with the National Academy
                     of Sciences on any future attempt.” Confusion had arisen
                     when the Washington Post had reported that the USAF had made
    I

                     an unsuccessful attempt to orbit such a payload during the
                     summer.
                ∞  Review in Red Star by General Pave1 Kurochkin, commenting on
                     new Soviet textbook on strategy, stated: “The Soviet people are
                     engaged in the peaceful conquest of space. But it is perfectly
                     clear that if the imperialists continue to conduct research for means
                     of using cosmic space for military goals, then the interests of
                     guaranteeing the security of the Soviet state demand definite
                     measures from our side.’’ Doctrinal textbook was written by
                     several of Russia’s top military leaders under the direction of
        ~




                     Marshal V. D. Sokolovsky, and was said to be the first serious
                     work on military strategy published in Russia since 1926.
                ∞  Israel Finance Minister, Levi Eshkol, speaking in Washington, D.C.,
                     said that the “missile race has entered the Middle East’’ and
                     Israel must be prepared to defend itself “no matter what the cost.”
                     He said: “When Colonel Nasser stands by Egyptian rocket
                     launchers and boasts they are trained in our direction, we dare
            I
                     not mistake this for an idle propaganda boast.”
            I
                September 23: Dr. Charles M. Herzfield, Washington physicist,
                     reported that the luminous particles sighted in space by both
                     Col. John Glenn and Maj. Scott Carpenter probably were
                     particles of solid nitrogen trapped in the extreme upper atmos-
                         ere. “As the temperature rises, the luminosity disappears.
                    kh  o other s stems seem to have all the requisite properties.
                                 7
                     These partic es may exist independently at the altitudes involved.
                                                                    199
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1963

     They may be produced from leaks of gas from the capsule or from
       as trapped in various portions of the vehicle. . . .” Dr.
     &erzfield presented his evaluation in report to American Associa-
     tion for the Advancement of Science.
September 23: Soviet Academician Nikolai N. Semenov, Nobel
             
     Prize-winning chemist, was quoted as suggesting the moon be
     made into a major power source for earth. I the moon were
                                                        f
     covered with semiconductors and photo-elements of high efficiency
     solar energy falling on the moon could be converted to electrical
     power far exceeding that produced on earth. He also proposed the
     moon be made the site for all atomic and thermonuclear power
     stations, to avoid overheating and irradiating the earth. Research
     may find a way, he continued, to transmit the power to earth-
     perhaps by lasers or masers.
September 23-29: Thirteenth International Astronautical Congress
     was held in Varna, Bulgaria, sponsored by the International
     Astronautical Federation (IAF). Opening session was marked
     with pleas by western delegates that U.S.S.R. remove veils of
     secrecy surrounding her space program.
September 24: Six-engine S-IV stage for Saturn space vehicle was suc-
     cessfully static-fired in 60-sec. test a t Douglas Missile and Space
     Systems, Sacramento, Calif.
 ∞ Announced that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., would study
       owerful light sources in Australia and South Africa, during his
     LA-8 orbital flight. NASA said experiment was to determine
     how well a space traveler could see light sources of known density
     on earth. Three high-intensity flares would burn a t Woomera,
     Australia, and electric lamps a t Durban, So. Africa. Schirra
     would try to determine effects of atmosphere on light observed
     from orbital altitude and to establish which light source was more
     readily visible. Other scientific experiments of the MA-8 flight
     would be studies of cosmic radiation, search for rare particles in
     space, and effects of re-entry heating on new materials.
 ∞ Reported that, if Astronaut Schirra’s six-orbit flight (MA-8) is fully
     successful, NASA would conclude Project Mercury with one 18-
     orbit, 24-hour flight. Present plans called for four %-hour flights
     with the one-man Mercury capsule; new plan under considera-
     tion would cancel three of these and assign their mission to two-
     man Gemini capsule.
∞  FCC Chairman Newton N. Minow invited U.S.S.R. to cooperate in
     an international television system using high-altitude communica-
     tions satellites. A high-altitude s stem would have advantages
     over low-altitude system such as $elstar, he said in Look maga-
     zine, but “we now lack the launching power to make it go.” He
     proposed that Soviet rockets be used to launch U.S. communica-
     tions satellites into high-altitude orbits, and added that “this
    would be a very dramatic area of cooperation for peaceful pur-
    poses in space.”
 ∞ Congressman John E. MOSS,Chairman of the Government Infor-
    mation Subcommittee, wrote to Secretary of Defense Robert 5.
    McNamara asking why 1959 Army report “Project Horizon”
    was not yet declassified. Originally classified “Secret,” the
    study proposing manned lunar program culminating in 1965
    lunar landing had 10 separate security reviews by 4 agencies,
200    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

      but it was still classified “official use only.” Congressman
      Moss observed that the House Committee on Science and
      Astronautics had requested declassified version of “Project
      Horizon” on Aug. 3, 1961, but had never received it.
September 24: Space Technology Center of General Electric Go. said i t
      was designing an esca e system for astronauts to use if orbiting
      capsule malfunctioneC Y and could not return safely to earth.
      Called “Moose” (Man Out Of Space Easiest), the system involved
      use of a “prepackaged spacecraft” consisting of plastic sack, fold-
      ing heat shield, retrorocket pack, containers of foaming plastic,
      and a standard parachute. Astronaut, zipped into sack, would
      step out of faulty spacecraft, aim himself with special scope, and
     fire the retrorocket. Then his heat shield would unfold and sack
     would fill with rapid-hardening plastic foam, protecting him
     from re-entry heat. At 30,000-ft. altitude, he would open para-
     chute and descend slowly to earth.
∞  Communications lag between basic researchers and those who apply
      the research was cited by Assistant Secretary of Commerce
     J. Herbert Holloman a t testimonial dinner for NAS president Dr.
     Frederick Seitz, in Chicago. Mr. Holloman said that communi-
     cation “throughout the international scientific community’’ was
     more rapid than communication between scientists and people
     working in application of scientific discoveries.
 ∞ AFSC announced invention of Bio-telescanner-compact       and portable
     instrument to determine biological properties of other planetary
     soil-by Dr. William G. Glenn, SAM research immunobiologist,
     and Wesley E. Prather, electronics expert. Designed to answer
     basic questions about extraterrestrial life, the instrument would
     analyze samples gathered by travelers to Mars or other planets
     and would telemeter its findings back to earth. It could be
     adapted to operate automatically, to gather and analyze soil
     samples before man set foot on the planet. Use of the Bio-
     telescanner would preclude necessity to bring samples of other
     planetary crust back to earth-an        operation which could be
     dangerous if alien micro-organisms were present in the sample.
September 25: Senate adopted conference report on H.R. 12711,
     Independent Offices Appropriations Bill containing NASA appro-
     priations for F Y 1963. Bill would be sent to White House.
∞  Bernard Strassberg was appointed director of the FCC Office of
     Satellite Communications.
 ∞ I n test near Florida coast, air-launched Skybolt missile flew most
     successful flight to date, achieving second-stage ignition for the
     first time. The USAF missile Eel1 short of its 900-mi. target when
     malfunction caused second-stage engines to burn out after
     only 15 sec., several sec. sooner than programed.
September 26: Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists reported that
     MARINER 1 Venus probe was disoriented on Sept. 8, by either
                 1
     a micrometeorite impact or a solar pressure wave, but that
     automatic devices onboard the craft had restored it to proper
     orientation.
 ∞ NASA announced it had completed preliminary plans for develop-
     ment of $500 million Mississippi Test Facility. First phase of
     three-phase construction program would begin in 1962 and
     would include four test stands for static-firing Advanced Saturn
                                                                    201
                                                            1962
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF

     S-IC and $ 1 stages; about 20 support and service buildings
                   1
     would be built in the first phase. Water transportation system
     had been selected, the system calling for improvement of about
     15 mi. of river channel and construction of about 15 mi. of canals
     at the facility. In planning the facility, Sverdrup and Parcel
     Co. of St. Louis was preparing design criteria; Army Corps of
     Engineers was acquiring land for NASA in cooperation with
     Lands Div. of the Justice Dept. The 13,500-acre facility in
     southwestern Mississippi is 35 mi. from NASA Mich_oud Opera-
     tions, where Saturn stages are fabricated.
September 26: Liquid hydrogen-liquid oxygen engine RL-lOAS com-
     pleted its preliminary flight rating test, MSFC announced. RL-
     10A3 was advanced version of RL-1OA1, first US. engine using
     liquid hydrogen. Six A3 engines will be clustered in Saturn S-IV
     stage and will be used in advanced Centaur vehicle. The five-
     day PFRT included 20 static firings for an accumulated 2,820
     sec. of firing time, plus humidity, vibration, and other tests.
∞  Federal District Judge Joseph Lieb signed injunction against
     International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 267, ordering
     the union to stop allegedly unfair labor practices-refusing to
     operate cranes unloading heavy equipment at Cape Canaveral
     missile launch complex.
 ∞ President Kennedy signed le islation to authorize production of
     electricity a t Hanford, Wac%., atomic plant by usin byproduct
                                                           t
     steam from a plutonium reactor. He commente that such
     production would ive the U.S. a clear margin of superiority in
                        P
     the peaceful use o atomic energy.
September 27: NASA announced that Venus-bound MARINER 11 had
     been in flight one month, during which time it had traveled more
     than five million mi. from earth and had transmitted scientific
     data on interplanetary space from a greater distance than any
     space probe except PIONEER v (launched March 11, 1960).
 ∞ U.S.S.R. placed scientific satellite COSMOS IX into orbit (apogee, 219
     mi.; perigee, 187 mi.; period, 90.9 mio.), in series to study ionos-
     phere, radiation belts, and effect of meteorites on spaceships.
 ∞ NASA postponed launch of first Canadian satellite, Alouette, a t
     Pt. Arguello.
 ∞ Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., would                   cloud forma-
     tions durin his forthcoming orbital
     nounced. 8dr. Schirra’s special
     used to test techniques for the advanced Nimbus weather satellite.
 ∞ Because of unnamed technical difficulties, flight test of x-15 rocket
     research aircraft was postponed minutes before X-15 was t,o be
     dropped from its mother ship.
∞  Results of a USIA poll in Britain showed that 82% of people ques-
     tioned had identified TELSTAR communications satellite by name,
     compared to 78% able to identify SPUTNIK I in 1957. Testifying
     before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and
     Astronautics, Robert Mayer Evans, special assistant to USIA
     Director Edward R. MUITOW,       reported the survey’s results and
     said they showed “an extraordinary level of awareness” of the
     communication satellite in its first weeks of existence.
 ∞ AEC announced Soviet atmospheric nuclear explosion of nearly 30
     megation yield.
     97317--6L-14
202      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

September 28: Canadian satellite ALOUETTE was placed in polar orbit
     by Thor-Agena B vehicle launched by NASA from Vandenberg
      AFB. Initial orbital data: apogee, 619.2 mi.; perigee, 597 mi.;
      inclination, 80.84’ to the equator; period, 105.4 min. Named
      for Canadian high-flying songbird, ALOIJETTE was first satellite
      both designed and built by a nation other than U.S. or U.S.S.R.
      Launching was NASA’s into polar orbit, first from PMR, and
                                 first
      first use of Thor-Agena B combination. To sustain its experi-
      ments in study of the ionosphere, the 32041. ALOUETTE had
       two crossed antennae, one 150 ft. long and the other 75 ft. long.
   ∞ X-15 No. 2 was flown by NASA pilot John B. h‘lcKay in longest
       engine run to date (127 sec.), the craft reaching 67,000-ft. altitude
      and 2,693-mph speed (mach 4.08) in successful 9-min. flight near
      Edwards AFB, Calif. Flight tested heat transfer rates over
      x-15’s skin, craft’s stability wit,hout its ventral fin, and newly
      designed windshield’s resistance to heat.
   ∞ Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., made 6jklir. simulated flight in
       Sigma 7 spacecraft for Project Mercury flight MA-8, World-
      wide tracking network of 21 ground stations and ships also par-
       ticipated in exercise, in which Cdr. Schirra and the tracking
      stations practiced solving emergency situations that could arise
      in actrual orbital flight.
   ∞ First successful firing of a Centaur flight stage at full thrust of
      30,000 Ibs. for ten seconds was achieved by General Dynamics/
      Astronautics a t Sycamore Canyon, Calif.
   ∞ NASA announced plans to launch two Project Echo ballons during
      October. T o be filled with helium while on the ground near
      White Sands Missile Range, N.M., one ballon would be Echo I-
      type measuring 100 ft. in diameter and the other would be
      Advanced Echo type measuring 135-ft. in diameter. They would
      reach respective altitudes of approximately 128,000 ft. and
       115,000 ft. in short flights over the range. Purpose of launches
      was to determine skin smoothness for the Advanced Echo balloon
      satellite, to be orbited in 1963.
  ∞  USAF Minuteman ICBM fired in combat-reedy test from Vandenberg
      AFB, Calif., range safety officer dcstroying missile shortly after
      launch.
   ∞ Spokesman for American Telephone and Telegraph Co. (AT&T) said
      TELSTAR communications satellite was still operating despite
      almost three months of intense radiation exposure.
   ∞ Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (USN), the first U.S. astronaut, and Lt.

      Col. R. G. Robinson (USMC) were awarded the FAI DeLaVaulx
      Medal-Shepard for achieving 615,300-ft. altitude in his sub-
      orbital Mercury flight (MR-3) and Robinson for setting closed-
      course speed mark of 1,606.5 mph in McDonnell F4C aircraft.
  ∞  Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of the House Committee
      on Science and Astronautics, summarized the year’s activities
      of the committee in speech on House floor: “It has been another
      busy year for the committee, highlighted by action on the fourth
      annual budget of the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
                                                                   203
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1982

     tion, now rapidly approaching the $4 billion mark. In addition
     to the intensive study the space budget underwent, the committee
     also conducted 26 investigations, issued 16 reports, held 124 days
     of hearings, and heard 236 witnesses.
        “Indicative of the committee’s activity i the more than
                                                     s
     2,175,000 words of testimony taken this year incorporated into
                                                        .
     approximately 3,860 pages of printed hearin s. . .”
                                                  %
September 29: NASA Administrator James E. Web announced that the
     project management of the liquid hydrogen-fueled Centaur launch
     vehicle and the hydrogen-fueled M-1 rocket engine would be
     transferred from Marshall Space Flight Center to the Lewis
     Research Center. Studies were being initiated to adapt Centaur
     as a stage to other boosters. Mr. Webb said: “The transfer will
     allow the Marshall Center to concentrate its efforts on the Saturn
     vehicles for the manned lunar landing program. . . . It will
     permit the Lewis Research Center to use its experience in liquid
     hydrogen to further the work already done on one of the most
     promising high-energy rocket fuels and its application to Centaur
     and the M-1.”
∞  USAF launched satellite from PMR with Thor-Agena booster.
∞ At the 13th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation
     (IAF), meeting in Bulgaria, the 1962 Guggenheim International
     Astronautics Award was awarded to Prof. James A. Van Allen.
September 30: NASA launched Aerobee sounding rocket from Wallops
            
     Station, the 259-1b. instrumented payload reaching 106-mi.
     altitude in test to map sources of photons in specific wavelengths
     in the nighttime sky. PayIoad landed about 61 mi. downrange,
     with recovery not attempted.
 ∞ Tropical storm developed 420 mi. east of Puerto Rico, travelin on
                                                                   %
     path that would cross impact area for Astronaut Schirra’s t ird
     orbit. NASA flight officials were closely watching the storm to
     determine whether it would necessitate postponing Schirra’s
     MA-8 flight scheduled for Oct. 3.
During September: Conclusion that wheel-shaped space station was
     technically feasible and identification of problems that still exist
     were revealed in NASA Technical Note D-1504, compilation of
     11 papers by NASA Langley Research Center staff. Selection of
     this 150-ft.-diameter, 171,000-lb. structure was result of studies
     by Langley for more than 2 years and detailed analyses by North
     American Aviation, Inc., for past 6 months. The report indi-
     cated the space station primarily would provide *a means of
     learning to live in space, where zero-gravity and variable-gravity
     experiments could be performed, closed life-support systems
     could be qualified, and rendezvous techniques and systems
     developed. Chosen model could support up to 38-man crew.
 ∞ Issue of ARS’ Astronautics contained series of articles by NASA
     Langle Research Center scientists and others, reviewing LfLRC
     researcz program on manned space-station technology since
     early 1960.
 ∞ Search for two huge meteorites believed to have fallen in western
     Virginia near Covington and West Virginia near Clarksburg was
     conducted by Dr. Frank Drake, Director of National Radio
     Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va. Reports by w t        i-
204                     AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2
       ASTRONAUTICAL

    nesses indicated that the meteorites weighed”about one ton each
    and that they fell in sparsely populated, national forest areas.
During September: Dr. Joshua Lederberg, of Stanford University,
    and Dr. Carl Sagan, former University of California professor,
    wrote in September Proceedings of the National Academy of
    Sciences that large amounts of moisture may be frozen into the
    subsoil of the planet Mars. From openings in the planet’s crust,
    steam and gas may escape and create hot spots that would be
    “favorable microenvironments for life.” They said that re-
    current clouds detected by telescope “may be symptomatic of
    this local outgassing of water vapor.”
∞ Dr. John W. Pindlay, deputy director of the National Radio
    Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., said Echo-type
    reflective orbiting balloon and West Ford-type copper-needle
    belts were potential threats to science of radio astronomy.
    Writing in Science magazine, Dr. Findlsy said these objects would
    contribute to llnoise” in radiotelcscope reception and (‘would
    cut down sharply on a11antenna’s ability to receive faint signals.”
∞ Army Corps of Engineers announced that Launch Complex 12 at
    Cape Canaveral would be modified to service larger and more
    sophisticated space vehicles. Complex 12 was used to launch
    Mariner and Ranger space probes.
∞ World’s first regularly scheduled Hovercraft transportation service
    ended. Operating since July with 8 round trips daily from Rhyl,
    Wales, to Wallasey, England, the experiment proved Vickers
    Armstrong 24-passenger Hovercraft could successfully negotiate
    soft sand and shallows as well as deeper water. Hovercraft
    rides 8 in. above surface (land or sea) on cushion of air.
∞ Secret of radio emissions from planet Jupiter was proposed by
    physicists Dr. Leon Landovitz of Yeshiva Univ. and Dr. Leona
    Marshall, New York Univ. They suggest that perhaps Jupiter
    acts as a gigantic maser, using energy from the sun as its ‘(pump-
    ing” energy, to produce the decameter waves. They proposed
    that Jupiter’s decameter radiation was based on principle that
    the change of state of an electron with respect to static magnetic
    field results in either emission or absorption of electromagnetic
    energy, such as light or radio waves, at frequency that depends
    upon the magnetic field. There may be a “cascading” of such
    stimulated emissions from the electrons as the disturbance
    propagates through the electrically charged layer of Jupiter’s
    atmosphere, Dr. Marshall stated. Jupiter’s emission of radio
    waves was discovered in 1955 by Dr. Bernard Burke and Dr.
    Kenneth L. Franklin, then of Carnegie Institution of Washington.
∞ Seven X-15 pilots and Paul F. Biclde, Director of NASA Flight
    Research Center, were awarded the first John J . Montgomery
    Award for aerospace achievement by the National Society of
    Aerospace Professionals and the Aerospace Museum of San Diego.
    The X-15 pilots were : Scott Crossfield, NAA; Maj. Robert M.
                                                                 205
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    White, USAF; Neil A. Armstrong, NASA; John B. McKay, NASA;
    Joseph A. Walker, NASA; Cdr. Forrest S. Petersen, USN: and
    Maj. Robert A. Rushworth, USAF.
During September: Ground rehearsals for ONR-NSF-NASA Stratoscope I1
    balloon-carried telescope experiment took place in Norwalk,
    Conn., the 36-in. telescope focusing on the planet Jupiter. Later
    in month, telescope was disassembled and transported to Pales-
    tine, Tex., where it would remain in hangar until first flight, in
    February or March 1963. To be lifted above most of the earth’s
    atmosphere by two balloons, telescope wodd be stabilized a t
    80,000-ft. altitude throughout each observing night, where it will
    make a variety o€ astronomical and planetary observations.
                          OCTOBER 1962
October 1: Fourth official anniversary of NASA, charged by the Na-
     tional Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to organize and conduct
    U.S. space exploration for peaceful purposes. No new agency
    of the Executive Branch of the Federal Government was created
    by the transfer of so many units and programs of other depart-
    ments or agencies as NASA.
∞  Project Mercury flight officials studied tropical storm “Daisy,”
    which continued moving westnorthwest about 300 mi. east of
    Puerto Rico, the general landing area for third orbit of Astronaut
    Walter M. Schirra’s six-orbit MA-8 flight planned Oct. 3.
    Mercury Operations Director Walter C. Williams, indicating
    continuing surveillance of “Daisy,” ordered preparations for the
    launch attempt to continue.
 ∞ NASA Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the Greater Hart-
    ford (Conn.) Chamber of Commerce, said that the “habit of
    oversimplifying has carried over into the evaluation and under-
    standing of our objectives in space. . . . Many of our citizens
    believe our major, and in some cases, our only purpose in space,
    to be one of winning, in a contest with the Soviet Union, ‘a race
    to the moon.’ . . . [This concept] overlooks the significant and
    seldom appreciated fact that learning how to get to the moon,
    developing the technology which will be required to get there,
    and employing this technology for many purposes in space, is
    more important than the lunar landing itself. . . .
        “Characterization of our effort solely as a ‘space race to the
    moon’ also leads to the mistaken notion that the nation first to
    conduct a lunar exploration will have assured itself of ultimate
    and enduring superiority in space. The fact is overlooked that
    landing men on the moon, although a great and challenging goal,
    is only one of many goals in space. . . .
        “With the resources which are being applied, and knowledge
    of how those resources are being utilized to mobilize our nation’s
    scientific, technical and industrial strength, I am confident that
    we will achieve a space posture satisfactory to the United States
    given a continuation of our present efforts and support for those
    planned for future years. On the basis of what we know now of
    the scope of the Soviet Union’s efforts, and of what is required
    to do the job, this country has a better than even chance to con-
    duct the first manned exploration of the moon. For these rea-
    sons, I have said I believe we will be there first.
       “But in saying this I do not want to fall into the same trap
    which has snared too many of us-that of again inviting a charac-
    terization of this broad and vital national effort as a spectacular
    (race to the moon.”’
       He pointed out that President Kennedy did not set the national
    goal of “landing the first man on the moon.” Rather, the Presi-
    dent “stated our determination to attain ‘a position of pre-
     200
                                                                    207
                                                        OF 1982
           ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS

    eminence in space’ and to become the world’s leading spacefaring
    nation . . . .
       “That is our objective-to develop superior competence in
    spaco which will be available for any national purpose which
    may be required, whether it be the peaceful utilization of s ace
    for the benefit of mankind, or to keep the peace and forestai its
    exploitation by any nation €or aggressive purposes . . . .11
October 1: Nova launch facilities study contract was awarded to
    Martin-Marietta Corp., Denver, by NASA Marshall Space Flight
    Center. The study assumes Nova will be launched from Cape
    Canaveral.
October 2: EXPLORER XIV satellite was launched into orbit by Thor-
         
    Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral on mission to study natural
    and man-made radiation in space. NASA spokesmen said satellite
    appeared to be following the planned orbital path (53,000-mi.
    apo ee, 185-mi. perigee, 31-hr. period), but scientists could not
           &
    con m the exact orbital figures for several days (later conikmed
    as 61,000-mi. apogee, 175-mi. perigee, 36.1-hr. period). The
    89-lb. satellite was injected into orbit a t nearly 24,000-mph speed
    by the three-stage Thor-Delta. This was Delta’s 12th straight
    successful satellite launching.
 ∞ 20th anniversary of first military jet-powered flight in the U.S.,
     a Bell P-59A piloted by USAF pilot Laurence C. Craigie a t Muroc
     Calif., attained estimated speed of 450 mph. P-59A was powered
    by two GE I-A engines, each developing 1,250-lb. thrust and
    weighing 780 lbs.
∞ Project Mercury operations director Walter C. Williams ordered

    launch countdown to continue toward MA-8 launch a t Cape
    Canaveral the following morning. Weather conditions which
    had been under surveillance were considered generally favorable,
    and all elements of the six-orbit manned space mission were in
    a “go condition.”
∞ Nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller told 1962 conference of UPI

    editors and publishers that recent US. nuclear tests in the
    Pacific had ‘‘not been quite satisfactory” and that it was his
    guess “that the Russians are ahead of us in the nuclear race
      todY.” and Industry Exposition inaddressing the Northeast
          dministrator James E. Webb,
 ∞   NASA


      Commerce                          Boston, said:
        “The achievement of . . . [US. pre-eminence in space] re-
     quires that we learn to travel in space as we have learned to travel
     on the sea or in the air. We must develop what might be termed
     space power-the capability to utilize space for every purpose
     which our national mterest may require. And, to fulfill the dlrec-
     tives established by the Congress, we must develop that compe-
     tence in space for the benefit of our own people, and of all man-
     kind. . . .
        “Although creative individual effort is as important today
     as it has ever been, and the imagination and initiative of the
     individual remain the primary source of scientific and technical
     progress, the development and perfection of the complex equip-
     ment, the systems and subsystems which are taking men into
     space are rarely, if ever, the work of single individuals. Today,
                                          ...
     teams of talented and imaginative technicians are joined in each
     major technological achievement .         99
208    ASTRONAUTICAL A N D AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

October 2: Thomas F. Dixon, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator,
     addressed the Southern Governors’ Conference, Hollywood-by-
     the-Sea, Bla., on the role of the South in the Space Age, and
    remarked: “. . . our space activities are in no sense stunts-
     spectaculars, if you will-nor will the landing of U.S. astronauts
     on the moon be our ultimate objective. Rather, the national
     effort is broadly organized to accomplish rapid advances in science
     and technology that will make it possible for us to perform any
     space assignment-military or civilian-that the national interest
     might require. Furthermore, from lunar exploration, we will go
     on to wider exploration of the solar system, ventures whose end
    no man can foresee. . . .1 ,
∞  International Association of Machinists rejected contract offer of
     Aerojet-General Corp. and began a strike. I n Washington, a
     Presidential committee opened talks on labor dispute between
     IAM and the Boeing Co. United Auto Workers employed by
     North American Aviation, Inc., had accepted a three-year con-
     tract, thus averting strike.
∞ Lewis L. Strauss, former AEC chairman, criticized US. manned
    lunar flight program as seeming “perilously like a stunt.” Speak-
    ing at United Republican Bund dinner in Chicago, Strauss urged
    the lunar program be coordinated with military necessity.
 ∞ Science Service announced that a total solar eclipse would be visible
     July 20, 1963, in Alaska, Canada, and Maine.
∞  Secretary of Commerce Luther Hodges told news conference that
    U S . emphasis on defense- and space-related research was “one
    of the great dangers” to the productivity of US. economy be-
    cause such research programs attract scientists and engineers
     away from the civilian economy.
∞ Monetary awards under $1,000 were made to NASA employees for
     pa ten table inventions :
                                                 L. Rogallo; Joseph R.
       NASA Ames Research Center-Vernon
    Smith, Jr.; John V. Foster; and Albert E. Clark, Jr.;
                                                      J. Peake, Stephen
       NASA Goddard Space Flight Center-Harold
    P a d , and William A. Leavy;
                                                     J. O’Sullivan, Jr. ;
       NASA Langley Research Center-William
     George F. Pezdirtz; George F. Look; Frank M. Ballentine, Jr.;
    Virgil S. Ritchie; Howard F. Ogden; Eldon E . Kordes; Donald
    H. Trussell; Deene J. Weidman; George E. Griffith; Blake W.
    Corson, Jr. ; and Emanuel Schnitzer;
       NASA Lewis Research Center-Paul       F. Sikora;
                                                    Gillespie, Jr. ;
       NASA Manned Spacecraft Center-Warren
       NASA Marshall Space Flight Center-Donelson B. Horton.
∞ AEC announced first U S . atmospheric nuclear test in the Pacific
    since July had been conducted near Johnston Island, with inter-
    mediate-range yield.
October 2-4: Third Symposium on Advanced Propulsion Concepts
    held in Cincinnati, cosponsored by USAF Office of Scientific Re-
    search and GE Flight Propulsion Division.
October 3: SIGMA 7 spacecraft with Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr.,
     as pilot was launched into orbit by Mercury-Atlas vehicle at
     Cape Canaveral. Orbital data: apogee, 176 mi.; perigee, 100 mi.;
     period, 88.5 min. Schirra traveled 160,000 mi., nearly six orbits,
     returning to earth at predetermined point in Pacific Ocean about
                                                                       209
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    9 hrs., 14 min. after blastoff. Within 40 min. after landing he
    and his spacecraft were safely aboard aircraft carrier U.S.S.
     Kearsarge.
        Highly successful MA-8 flight proved the feasibility of (1)
     prolonged weightless flight in space and (2) drifting in orbit
     without consumption of hydrogen-peroxide attitude control fuel
     and without physically endangering the astronaut. Schirra,
     who spent a total of 2% hrs. in drifting flight, reported there
     were no unusual attitude control problems during drifting.
        Various other scientific experiments during MA-8 flight in-
     cluded astronaut’s sighting of’ luminous particles in space, also
     reported by Astronauts John H. Glenn and M. Scott Carpenter;
     and photographing cloud formations with a special hand camera.
        SIGMS 7 was sighted by observers on Indian Ocean tracking
     ship for five min. as the spacecraft made its third orbit more
     than 100 mi. high. The observers said SIGMA 7 appearcd almost
     as bright as Venus. This was the first reported visual sighting
     of a manned spacecraft during orbital flight.
        Only technical difficulty of the entire operation was attaining
     proper adjustment of Schirra’s spacesuit coolant supply and fail-
     ure of body temperature measurements in first orbit. However,
     desired suit temperatures were achieved early in second orbit.
October 3: In press conference following MA-8, D. Brainerd Holmes,
     NASA Director of Manned Space Flight, said: “This was a highly
     successful flight, magnificently performed. It proved there is no
     substitute for sound engineering and thorough training.”
        Walter C. Williams, MSC Director of Mercury Operations, said
     that “so far as I am concerned, the mission was perfect.” H e
     added that the next Mercury mission would be a 24-hour flight
     in early 1963.
∞  Soviet Foreign Ministry told U S . Embassy in Moscow that the
     “Soviet Union will not undertake any action that might hinder
     the flight of the American spaceman Walter Schirra.” The So-
     viets were replying to U S . note requesting the U.S.S.R. to refrain
     from nuclear tests during the MA-8 flight.
 ∞ President Kennedy appointed Dr. Frederick Seitz to his Science
     Advisory Committee. Dr. Seitz, president of the National Acad-
     emy of Sciences, succeeded Dr. Detlev W. Bronk on the com-
     mi ttee.
 ∞ SIGMA 7 (MA-8) launching was relayed to Western Europe via
     TELSTAR satellite. European TV network Eurovision broadcast
     the launching sequence to 17 countries. Televised launch was
     also viewed by millions of Americans.
October 4: Fifth anniversary of the Space Age, inaugurated with the
     orbiting of first manmade satellite, SPUTNIK I, by the U.S.S.R.
     According to the G o d h r d Satellite Situation Report of October 10,
     1962, the first half decade of the Space Age saw the orbiting of
     134 satellit.es, lunar probes, and space probes. U.S.S.R. orbited
     26 (6 still in orbit), the U.S. 108 (48 still in orbit). Of US.
     total, NASA orbited 36 (24 still in orbit), DOD 72 (24 still in orbit).
     Two of the NASA launches must also be credited to the nations
     contributing tbe experiments or the payload-U.K. for ARIEL
     and Canada for ALOUETTE. Of the U.S. total, three were manned
     orbital spacecraft, as were four of the U.S.S.R.’s. Totals for
21 0   ASTRONAUTICAL A N D AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    manned space flight-U.S.: 12 orbits, with 19 hrs., 3 min. flight
    time; U.S.S.R.: 130 orbits, with 192 hrs., 41 min. flight time.
October 4: Maj. Robert A. Rushworth (USAF) flew X-15 No. 3 to
    altitude of 106,000 ft. and speed of 3,375 mph (mach 4.91), in
     10-min. flight to check out the craft’s adaptive control system.
    A secondary objective was to further evaluate X-15 performance
    with ventral fin removed. All flight objectives were achieved.
∞  Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., on board aircraft carrier U.S.S.
    Kearsarge, began debriefing and medical check. Schirra would
     arrive in Honolulu Oct. 6 and then fly to NASA Manned Spacecraft
     Center, Houston.
 ∞ President Kennedy nominated 13 men to form satellite communica-
     tions corporation, under terms of communications satellite law
    passed in August. The names of the nominees, who would serve
     only until establishment of corporation’s operating procedures
     and arrangement for stock sale, were sent to the Senate for
     confirmation.
 ∞ International Association of Machinists reached preliminary agree-
     ment with Aerojet-General Corp., ending strike which began
     Oct. 2 a t the Sacramento and Azusa plants in California and
     extended to Cape Canaveral this morning.
                                    Prof. N. P. Arabashov said: “All the
 ∞ Speaking on Radio MOSCOW,
     magnificent achievements of Soviet science convince us that
     flights by men to the moon and the planets are not only possible,
     but are also near. It is now clear that automatic interplanetary
     space ships, a t first unmanned, will be sent to the moon and then
     to Venus and Mars.”
October 4-5: Seventh NASA Management Conference held a t Langley
     Research Center.
October 5: EXPLORER XIV was relaying “excellent quality preliminary
     data,” NASA announced. The satellite, launched Oct. 2, was
     traveling in highly eccentric earth orbit: apogee, 61,000 mi.;
     perigee, 175 mi.; period, 36.1 hrs. Speed a t perigee was 23,700
     mph; a t apogee, 1,500 mph. NASA said it would be some time
     before analysis of telemetry data on the radiation belts could be
     correlated.
 ∞ Walter M. Schirra, aboard the recovery vessel U.S.S. Kearsarge,
     reportedly suggested to Project Mercury engineers that the
     ground communications stations should give the orbiting astro-
     naut “more quiet time” in space. Extraneous conversation could
     interrupt the astronaut’s concentration on technical duties.
 ∞ Dr. Charles A. Berry, Chief of Aerospace Medical Operations Office,
     NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, reported that preliminary
     readings of a dosimeter indicated Astronaut Schirra had received
     much smaller radiation dosage than expected. Dr. Berry said
     post-flight examination of the astronaut determined that he was
      “in excellent condition and detected no physiological effects from
      the space flight.”
∞  NASA announced progress of MARINER 11 Venus probe launched
     August 27: distance from earth-6,268,440 mi.; distance from
     Venus-34,997,199 mi. ; radio signals-good.
 ∞ Cluster of six RL-10 engines for the Saturn S-IV stage was static-
      fired in first full-duration (seven-minute) test at Douglas Aircraft
      Co., Sacramento.
                                                                   211
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

October 5:  USAF announced special instruments on unidentified military
         
    test satellites had confirmed artificial radiation belt densities
    calculated from earlier INJUN and TELSTAR data. Radiation of
    new belt, created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear test in July, was
    composed primarily of electrons. Radiation sharply increases
    above 400-mi. altitude at the geomagnetic equator and reaches
    peak intensities of 100 to 1,000 times normal levels a t altitude
    above 1,000 mi. Lt. Col. Albert C. Trakowski (USAF) stated in
    press conference that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., could
    have been killed if his MA-8 space flight had taken him above
    400-mi. altitude. Answering questions about USAF report on the
    artificial radiation belt, Col. Trakowski said the lifetime of the
    belt “cannot be forecast a t present-it will be long.”
 ∞ Nevada Extension of the AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office
     (SNPO) became operational, with Robert P. Helgeson as Chief.
    Located a t Las Vegas, the Nevada Extension assumed financial
     and contract responsibilities for construction and operation of
    facilities a t Nuclear Rocket Development Station (NRDS), which
    will conduct static ground testing of nuclear rockets.
∞ NASA signed $1.55 million contract with Hamilton Standard Div. of

     United Aircraft Corp. and International Latex Corp. for develop-
     ment of spacesuit for Apollo crewmen. As prime contractor,
    Hamilton Standard has management responsibility of the overall
    program and would develop life-support, back-pack system to be
    worn by crewmen during lunar expeditions; Latex would fabricate
     the suit with Republic Aviation Corp. furnishing human factors
    information and environmental testing. The suit would allow
     crewman greater mobility than previous spacesuits, enabling him
     to walk, climb, and bend with ease.
∞ Third test fight of USN Polaris A-3 was partially successful, the
     missile functioning properly until second stage went out of control
     near burnout and was destroyed by range safety officer.
∞ Sperry Gyroscope Co. announced it was patenting a new gyroscope
    using liquid instead of wheel as the spinning element. Sperry said
     this was - first such gyroscope to operate successfully and to go
               the .
    into roduction.
∞ Soviet hinister of Amiculture E . G. Pvsin. visiting U.S.S.R. Em-
                                    (
     bassy in Washinaon, commented b h e n aske& about Soviet
     droughts that “control of the weather is being researched up there
     in outer space.”
October 6: NASA Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was greeted by cheering
     crowds in Honolulu, transferring from aircraft carrier U.S.S.
     Keursurge to USAF jet a t hick am-^^^, for trip back to Manned
     Spacecraft Center, Houston, Texas.
∞ NASC Chairman Dr. Edward Welsh, in message to American Legion,
    refuted arguments that the accelerated space program was detri-
    mental to other interests, and said: “Even before we had a space
    program, we were not spending enough on education, or medicine,
     or housing, and there is no reason to believe that we would be
     doing even as much as we are now on those essential projects if it
    were not for the space program. In fact, our national space effort
     increases our gross national product and provides more employ-
    ment and more funds than we would have without it. This is a
     solid investment which we must make.”
212    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

October 6: AEC announced low-yield nuclear detonation in the atmos-
    phere near Johnston Island, the 29th announced test in current
    US. series in the Pacific.
∞ Decision to sell Cape Colony Inn, partially owned by the seven
    Project Mercury astronauts, was announced by attorney C. Leo
    DeOrsey of Washington. He said the astronauts’ investment
    in the motel near Cape Canaveral “had become the subject of
    controversy in some quarters of the press and might become
     embarrassing to the National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
    tration. I believe it is in the best interests of all concerned to
    sell the motel.”
 ∞ USAF revealed that three (‘plastinauts,’’ plastic dummies of human
     astronauts, were undergoing tests a t Kirtland AFB preparatory
     to being sent into space. Plastinauts in space would be used to
     deterniin e radia tion hazards to astronauts.
During October: 5-2 liquid-hydrogen rocket engine successfully
    completed its first full-duration static firing (more than four
    minutes) a t Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc.
    J-2 engines will be clustered to power S-I1 stage of Advanced
    Saturn vehicle.
October 7: Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., after arriving in Houston
     after trip from Pacific landing of six-orbit MA-8 flight, held
    press conference a t Rice University auditorium: “My intention
    was to use so little [attitude control] fuel that no one could argue
     that we [had not] had enough fuel aboard SIGMA 7 for eighteen
     orbits, if we wanted it. I think I proved that point.” He said
     MA-8 was 8 “textbook flight” and that he was sorry to see it
     end.
        On the issue of space sickness, Astronaut Schirra stated that
     despite the prolonged weightlessness of this longest U.S. manned
     space flight, “there was no problem a t all. There was no break-
     off phenomena, there was no uneasiness, there was no queasiness.
     I felt great.
         “The suit temperature problem . . . is a problem which we
     have solved. I have been much hotter in the tent a t Cape Ca-
    naveral than I ever, ever thought of being in SIGMA 7.”
        He reported sighting the (‘fireflies”and believing they emanated
    from the spacecraft.
 ∞ New York Times reported7‘that more than 20 fragments from
     SPUTNIK IV had been recovered in Wisconsin. Launched May 15,
     1960, the Soviet satellite had re-entered earth’s atmosphere Sept.
     5 , 1962, and disintegrated over Wisconsin.
October 8-12: Series of space science lecture-demonstrations held a t
     St. Johns Univ., N.Y., under auspices of NAsA-Aerospace Educa-
     tion Council.
October 9: X-15 No. 2, piloted by NASA’s I3. hfcKay, was flown
                                              John
     to 129,000-ft. altitude (24.4 mi.) and 3,716-mph speed (rnach 5 )
     in test of aircraft’s performance without its electronic flight-
     control system and without its ventral fin. Pilot McICay in-
     duced the most severe yawing motion thus far in tests to check
      the craft’s re-entry stability under severe strain. Although pilot
     McKay later reported “the whole airplane shook for about three
     minutes,’’ the stability test was considered very successful.
                                                                   213
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    Altitude and speed were greatest ever achieved in X-15 flights
    without the lower tail-fin.
October 9: Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., told newsmen he hoped
    Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper would be selected for Project
    Mercury flight MA-9. Astronaut selection had not yet been
    made for the 18-orbit 24-hour flight.
 ∞ U.N. Space Registry revealed the U S . had reported total of 66
    satellite and spacecraft launchings as of Aug. 15, 1962. Of these,
    25 were NASA launchings and 41 were U.S. military launchings.
    U.S. reports to U.N. Space Registry gave same data for NASA and
    military launchings: name of object; launch date; and satellite’s
    apogee, perigee, inclination, and period. U.S. reports also identi-
    fied satellites in one of four categories: development of space-
    flight technology; space research and exploration; practical ap-
    plications of space technology; and non-functional objects.
 ∞ USAF announced launching of an unidentified satellite using a Thor-
    Agena launch vehicle.
∞ White House officials announced the secrecy policy on launchings

    of military satellites w s being re-examined.
                            a
∞  John Rubel, DOD Deputy Director of Research and Engineering,
    told the Aerospace Luncheon Club in Washington that DOD was
    supportina two programs in space-one “directed a t clear,
    identifiab6 military needs and requirements” and the other, Iess
    well defined, designed to provide “building blocks” as “insurance
     against an uncertain future.” Replying to charges that military
    space activities should be expanded, he noted that DOD’S military
    space program exceeded $1.5 billion this year and probably
    would be greater next year; DOD expenditures on space develop-
    ments were “remarkably high in relation to viable concepts for
    military applications in space.” He concluded that the military
    space program was adequate and well balanced, although “we
    probably err on the side of allowing too generous a margin of
    safety for the effects of these uncertainties.”
 ∞ USN Transit navigational satellite system was described by Capt.
    Alton B. Moody (USNR) of NASA, a t National Electronics Con-
    ference in Chicago. The system of four Transit satellites in polar
    orbits, to be operational by end of 1962, was designed primarily
     to provide naval craft with constant, accurate navigational fix
     around the world.
October 10: NASA announced MARINER 11 would miss Venus by 20,900
    mi. instead of the 9,000 mi. previously expected, but that the
    probe would still come “well within the region where the scientific
    planetary experiments are expected to be very effective.” The
     added distance was caused by midcourse correction maneuver on
    Sept. 4 increasing MARINER 11’s velocity by 47 mph instead of
     the intended 45 mph.
       NASA scientists said telemetry data /from ‘MARINER 11 indicated
    that (1) solar particle radiation appears to be sufficiently strong
     to distort solar magnetic fields; (2) some atmospheric gas was
    present in entire path of the probe; (3) density of small particles
    in deep space was a t least 1,000 times less in interplanetary space
    than in the near vicinity of the earth.
214    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 6 2

October 10: DOD released “Project Horizon,” an Army study of manned
    lunar flight program aimed at 1965 lunar landing. Written in
     1959 as a classified report, the study was declassified in 10 security
    reviews by three agencies and unclassified version sent to House
     Science and Astronautics Committee at its request.
  AEC displayed its latest radioisotope electrical power generator,
     Snap-SA, in exhibit at Whittier (Calif.) Civic Center. Designed
     to produce 20 watts of electrical power for several years, the
     nuclear generator was scheduled to power radio transmitters in
     USN Transit satellite to be launched into polar orbit within the
     next few months.
October 10-12: NASA held agency-wide representatives conference on
     automatic data processing in Washington, D.C.
October 11: Opening of the Ecumenical Council in Vatican City was
     viewed in U.S. with 24-min. TV broadcast relayed via TELSTAR.
 ∞ General Dynamics/Convair reported developin a new laser with
                                                     f
    increased pulse rate. When perfected, new aser would be able
     to machine and trim any material with greater speed and ac-
     curacy than available by any other means.
October 12: USAF Titan I1 rocket achieved all test objectives in flight
    from Cape Canaveral. This was fourth success in six test launch-
    ings of the rocket, a modified version of which will be used in
             Project Gemini beginning in 1964.
     NASA’s
∞ International Association of Machinists reached agreement on new
    contract with Aerojet-General Corp , after negotiations which
    had followed IAM walkout October 2-4.
October 13: USAF announced the third in series of Project Firefly
     upper atmosphere experiments would be conducted during 1962.
     Approximately 30 research rockets, launched from Santa Rosa
     Island Aerospace Facility near Eglin AFB, would carry chemical
     payloads to above 50-mi. altitudes.
 ∞ Soviet military newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda reported that U.S.S.R.
     had been first nation to use rockets in combat and cited rockets
     fired by Soviet airplanes against the Japanese in Mongolia,
     August 1939.
October 13-14: Open house at NASA Wallops Station, Va.; more than
     15,000 visitors toured the launch site facilities.
October 14: NASA announced plans to launch Ranger (5) toward the
     moon during mid-October. The 775-113. lunar probe would
     represent third U.S. attempt to take close-up photographs of the
     moon, gather information on lunar surface composition, and land
     instrumented capsule on lunar surface.
 ∞ 33-member board of trustees of Pacific Science Center Foun-
     dation was announced. The foundation would operate the U.S.
     Science Pavilion for Century 21 in Seattle as a permanent
     science center.
October 15: Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., returned to his home-
     town, Oradell, N.J., for triumphal welcoming ceremonies in
     honor of his successful MA-8 six-orbit space flight for NASA
     Project Mercury. NASA Administrator James E. Webb pre-
     sented Cdr. Schirra with the NASA Distinguished Service Medal.
∞  Analysis of scientific measurements by RANGER 111 lunar probe
     showed gamma ray intensity in interplanetary space probably is
      10 times greater than expected, NASA reported. Measurements
     were taken by gamma ray spectrometer on RANGER 111 after it w s    a
                                                                   215
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

     launched Jan. 26, 1962. Similar instrumentation was planned
     for Ranger (5)) to be launched in mid-October.
October 15: NASA announced five additional lunar spacecraft would be
     launched in Project Ranger during 1964. The five additions
     brought total scheduled Rangers to 14.
∞ Beginning of two-month-long Project Firefly under USAF Cambridge
     Research Laboratories, the project involving about 30 research
     rockets carryipg varioas chemical payloads to altitudes of from
     50 to 150 mi. Some of the payloads were intended to create higher-
     than-normal electron density in ionosphere for communications
     studies. Other payloads were designed to remove electrons from
     the F-layer to generate a “hole” in the ionosphere. Other
     released chemicals would interact with ambient elements to pro-
     duce glow; observation of glow at night would enable tracking
     and measuring of upper-atmosphere winds. Mixtures exploding
     a t high altitudes would permit observation of shock-wave pertm-
     bations of the ionosphere. Vehicles used included approximately
      16 Nike-Cajuns, 9 Honest John-Nikes, and 5 Aerobee 150’s.
     Launchin s were from Eglin AFB, Fla.
 ∞  Dr. Siegfie% J. Bauer of NASA Goddard Space Blight Center, one
     of the scientists who discovered existence of 900-mi.-thick helium
     layer in the atmosphere, offered explanation of USAF probe’s fail-
     ure to detect helium layer. USAF Cambridge Research Labora-
      tories probe did not detect helium layer because the probe was
     launched a t night, when the layer is so thin that the instruments
     used could not detect it. According to Dr. Bauer, even in day-
      time, helium layer will become relatively thin during periods of
     minimum solar activity and relatively thick during periods of
     maximum solar activity. Dr. Bauer feels the layer will not be
     detected by standard ionosphere probing but will necessitate use
      of special instrumentation.
  ∞ Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, described use of
      instruments in space exploration, in address a t 17th annual
      Instrument-Automation Conference and Exhibit, New York:
      “There are three main areas. The first is that of observations of
      spacecraft by instruments on the ground, and the processing of
                    .
      [such] data. . . The second area is that of measurements made
                                                                      .
      by instruments in the s acecraft on the space environment . .
                             P                                            .
                 erformance o the equipment m the s acecraft. . .
                                                        E
     The thiri f area consists of similar measurements of t e performance
      and O n
      of the rockets and the acceleration, vibration, and noise environ-
      ment which they impose on the spacecraft. . . .,>
  ∞ DOD announced ste s were being taken to organize an integrated
                        E
      scientific and tec nical information rogram within DOD, headed
      by Dr. Harold Brown, Director of f5efense Research and Engi-
     neering.
  ∞ Soviet press agency Tass announced U.S.S.R. would test “new
     versions of multistage carrier rockets for space objects” in the
      Pacific test ranges between October 16 and November 30.
  ∞ NASA announced appointment of Robert H. Charles as procurement
      consultant to the Administrator. Charles previously had served
      as executive vice president of McDonnell Aircraft Gorp.
 ∞ Dr. Lawrence E. Lamb, chief of Clinical Sciences Div. of USAF
      School of Aerospace Medicine, predicted before the Second Inter-
    216   ASTRONAUTICAL A N D AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S O F 1 9 6 2

        state‘-ScientificTAssembly’of D.“C. and Virginia Physicians that
        manned space explortr,tion would yield u wealth of information-for
        prxticing physicians during the next tcn years.
    October 15: RCA reported development of laser that directly converts
        sunlight into beains of coherent infrared radiation. Such devices
        would be potentially useful for communications, tracking, and
        geodetic measurement systems on board future spacecraft and
        satellites.
    ∞ NASA announced William B. Taylor, NASA systems engineer and

        Assistant Director for Flight Systems, Office of Manned Space
        Flight, had received citation for meritorious service for his work
        with Army Corps of Engineers Sept. 1960-April 1962. Taylor
        was praised for his “outstanding leadership, technical competence,
        and dedicated service . . .” while serving a s Deputy Director of
        Army Engineers’ Geodesy, Intelligence, and Mapping Research
        and Development Agency (GIMRADA), before he joined NASA in
        May 1962.
    ∞ Governor Nelson Rockefeller, addressing New Y ork State Associated

        Press Association, proposed establishment of New York state
        science and technology foundation “to stimulate industrial
        expansion through research attuned to the space age.”
    During October: 3. Thomas Marldey, Apollo project officer a t NASA
        Manned Spacecraft Center, announced details of space facility
         to be established by NASA a t White Sands Missile Range (see
        Sept. 17). To be used in testing Apollo spacecraft’s propulsion
         and abort systems, WSMR site facilities would include two static
         test-firing stands, a control center blockhouse, various storage
         and other utility buildings, and an administrative services area.
    October 16: Nike-Apache two-stage sounding rocket carried 65-lb. in-
         strumented payload to 103-mi. altitude, in NASA launching from
         Wallops Island, Va. Primary objectives of the flight were to
        measure ionosphere electron density and temperature and to
         obtain data on the ion density and conductivity of the ionosphere.
                  high-altitude nuclear test failed, the safety officer of
    ∞ AEC-DOD
        Joint Task Force 8 destroying the Thor booster and nuclear pay-
         load within minutes after liftoff because of booster’s malfunc-
         tioning. This was third failure of four attempted high-altitude
         tests in the current Pacific series.
    ∞ Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and his faniily were welcomed by

         President Kennedy in brief visit a t the White House. Also in
         Washington, Cdr. Schirra appeared before NASA Headquarters
         employees, later a t the Pentagon receiving USN astronaut wings
         from Secretary of the Navy Fred Korth.
    ∞ NASA announced appointment of Dr. Fred L. Niemann as Assistant

         Director for Technical Programs in NASA North Eastern Office,
         Cambridge, Mass. Dr. Nieinann would conduct technical liaison
         with contractors, research institutions, and other government
         agencies in New England.
    ∞  NASA announced selection of International Business Machine Corp.
         to provide ground-based computer system for manned space
         flight Projects Gemini and Apollo. The computer complex will
         be part of the Integrated Mission Control Center (IMCC), a t
         NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston.
   ∞   George M. Low, NASA Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions,
         predicted in Voice of America interview that final decision on



I                                                                             i
                                                                   217
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    manned lunar flight technique would be made soon. Of the lunar
    orbit rendezvous (LOR) method, he said: “We in NASA have
    already reached the firm conclusion that this is the best, cheapest,
    most reliable and quickest way to reach the moon. . . . The
    final decision has not been made, but in the meantime, we are
    proceeding with the lunar orbit rendezvous approach.”
October 16: Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, addressing
    National Rocket Club, asserted : “Developing the right kind of space
                                                                       .
    program is a continuing job in the Department of Defense. . .
    The difficulties encountered do not relate to problems of principle.
    The problems are questions of specifics. There are tough de-
    cisions of choice to be made. We have to weigh effects on other
     activities, make careful estimates as t.0 time, determine rates and
    select the projects to be pursued. . . . The current rate of invest-
    ment in space by the Department of Defense reflects our best
    judgment as to which projects are dictated by specific iequire-
    ments and those which should be carried on for general develop-
    ment purposes. . . . As projects become more precisely defined
    and funding and time estimates can be firmed, and as require-
    ments become clearer and more specific, then efforts are focused
    on those most pressing and most promising. . . .11
October 16-17: U.S.S.R. successfully fired new multistage rockets
    approximately 7,500 mi. to target area in the Pacific, according
    to Soviet news agency Tass.
October 16-22: International Rocket Week, with more than three
    dozen nations participating in intensive cooperative study
    Brogram.
October 17: U.S.S.R. announced successful launch of COSMOS x into
    earth orbit (apogee, 208 mi. ; perigee, 126 mi.; inclination, 65’
    from the equator; period, 90.2 min.). Tass said the satellite’s
    many scientific instruments to measure radiation and other spatial
    conditions were functioning normally.
∞ NASA postponed Ranger (5) launch because of weather a t Cape

     Canaveral.
 ∞ Among the 22 scientists and engineers honored a t Franklin Insti-
    tute’s Medal Day ceremony, Philadelphia, were: Dr. Wernher
    von Braun, co-recipient of an Elliott Cresson Medal for his
     contributions to design and development of liquid-propellant
    rocket engines; Dr. James G. Baker, co-recipient of a Cresson
     Medal for his contributions to design of cameras for satellite
     tracking and aerial mapping; Dr. Wilbur H. GOSS,     recipient of
    Howard N. Potts Medal for engineering designs and technical
    supervision leading to development of first successful supersonic
    ramjet; and DI. Charles H. T o m e s and Dr. Arthur L. Schawlow,
    recipients of a Stuart Ballantine Medal for their concept of an
     operable solid-stage, optical maser.
∞ Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight

     Center, predicted U.S. will have as many as 24 men operating a
    moon station within a decade.
∞  USAF Minuteman missile was destroyed after eight seconds of
    flight, in silo launch at Cape Canaveral.
 ∞ Soviet news agency Tass reported Soviet scientists had developed
    instrument to photograph any object by its own invisible thermal
    radiation. .
     97317-63---16
218    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

October 18:           v lunar probe launched from Cape Canaveral by
               RANGER
    Atlas-Agena B, the Agena B stage attaining parking orbit and
    25 min. later reigniting to send RANGER v toward the moon.
    The spacecraft’s solar cells did not provide power, making it
    impossible for reception of flight-path correction signal and
    rendering its television cameras useless. RANGER v was to have
    relayed TV pictures of the lunar surface and rough-landed an
    instrumented capsule containing a seismometer to send back data
    on moon quakes and meteoritic impact. Jet Propulsion Labora-
    tory scientists tracked the spacecraft for 8 hours, 44 min. before
    its small reserve battery went dead.
 ∞ Transatlantic telephone conversations via TELSTAR opened cere-
    monies honoring Paul Julius Reuter, founder of international
    news agency and communications pioneer who in 1850 linked
    cities of Brussels and Aachen, Germany, using 40 carrier pigeons.
    TELSTAR, in its 914th orbit, transmitted nearly flawless exchange
    of telephone messages between Herman Heusch, Lord Mayor
    of Aachen, and Turner Catledge, managing editor of New York
      Times.
 ∞ Japabese Foreign Ministry announced it had filed protest with
    U.S.S.R. against Soviets’ establishing of restricted areas in the
    Pacific for its rocket tests. Japan said barring ships and air-
    craft from the areas violated rights of other nations to the
    open seas.
∞ President Kennedy presented 1961 Harmon International Aviation
    Trophies to four pilots: Lt. Col. William R. Payne (USAF);
    Jacqueline Cochran; and Cdr. Malcolm R. Ross (USNR) and
    Lt. Cdr. Victor E. Prather (USN) (posthumously).
October 19: Second successful high altitude U.S. nuclear test in
    Operation Dominic was conducted near Johnston Island in the
    Pacific, a low-yield explosion a t altitude of between 20 and 30 mi.
    Specially-built rocket with Sergeant motor was used to loft the
    nuclear warhead.
∞ NASA would later select additional astronauts for Project Apollo,
    Dr. Robert Voas of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center told Virginia
    Psychological Association in Richmond. Dr. Voas said the nine
    new astronauts recently selected would participate in Project
    Gemini two-man, orbital rendezvous missions and Project Apollo,
    culminating in manned landing on the moon.
∞ DOD announced launch of Anna geodetic satellite would be attempted
    October 23 a t Cape Canaveral.
∞ NASA ordered a technical review board to conduct reliability analysis
    of the Ranger program and to study reliability of future Ranger
    spacecraft. Cause of RANGER v’s failure to get power from its
    panels of solar cells was still not clear.
∞ Atom Affairs Ministry, West Germany, announced work on third
    stage of Western Europe’s first space rocket would soon begin
    in West Germany. First stage would be developed from U.E.
    Blue Streak missile, second stage from French Veronique.
    Satellite to be launched by the three-stage vehicle would be built
    by Italy. First model would be completed in 1966.
∞ NASA Wallops Station announced construction of bleachers located
    about a half-mi. from the launching area and capable of seating
    about 200 persons.
                                                                      219
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1884

                           F missile was successfully fired more than 4,000
October 19:   USAF Atlas
    mi. from Cape Canaveral in test flight.
October 20: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS XI into orbit (572-mi. apogee,
              x
     152-mi. erigee, 96.1-min. period); one of series of satellites to
    studyra ‘ation belts, propagation of radio waves in the ionosphere,
     and the sun.
∞ An Echo I-type balloon launched from White Sands Missile Range
    ruptured at 21-mi. altitude and fell back to earth 91 min. after
     launch. The lOO-ft.-diameter balloon was to have reached 24-
     mi. altitude in structural test.
 ∞ At executive session of Defense Industry Advisory Council, a sub-
     committee to investigate implementing changes in Armed Services
     Procurement Regulation was established.
October 21: RANGER v, its batteries dead, passed within 450 mi. of the
     moon on its way into orbit of the sun.
 ∞ NASA announced U.S. and Swedish experimenters were studying
     samplings of noctilucent clouds obtained in four Nike-Cajun
     sounding rocket fli hts during August. Preliminary analysis
                            9
     indicated that samp es taken when noctilucent clouds were ob-
     served contained significantly more particles than when no
     noctilucent clouds were visible. Analysis of origin and structure
     of the particles may take up to a year. Participants in the
     project include scientists from University of Stockholm Institute
     of Meterology, Kiruna (Sweden) Geophysical Observatory, NASA
     Goddard Space Flight Center, and USAF Cambridge Research
     Laboratories.
October 22: President Kennedy addressed the Nation concerning the
         
     Cuban crisis, pointin to the “unmistakable evidence” of prepara-
                             B
     tion of missile sites, t e purpose of which “can be none other than
     to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemi-
     sphere.” President Kennedy demanded removal of Soviet off en-
     sive missiles and bombers from Cuba. Two days later, U.S.
     began naval quarantine of Cuba.
 ∞ Report of Soviet dual space flights VOSTOK 111 and VOSTOK IV,
     published in Pruvdu, disclosed the minimum distance between
     the two orbitin spacecraft had been 6.5 km. (about 4 mi.), ti
                      Pkm   . as earlier estimated. On radiation, Prudu
    revision from 5
     said maximum dose for both cosmonauts was 11 millhad. Total
     dose incurred by Maj. Nikolayev was 43 millifad and by Col.
                                Pruvda described these dosages as “abso-
    Popovich, 32 &ad;
    lutely safe.”
∞ USAF announced names of 10 additional officers to be trained as
    space pilots, engineers, and program managers for X-20 (Dynti
     Soar) manned space flight, rovams: Capt. Alfred L. Atwell;
     Capt. Charles A. Bassett; &ai. Tommie D. Benefield; Capt.
     Michael Collins; Ca t. Joe M. En le; Maj. Neil R. Garland;
    Capt. Edward G. Jivens; Capt. firancis G. Neubeck; Capt.
    James A. Roman, Capt. Alfred H. Uhalt.
 ∞ DOD postponed launch of Anna geodetic satellite to Oct. 24, for
    undisclosed reason.
  ∞ Lunar and Planetary haboratory of University of Arizona, directed
    by Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, reported its analysis of lunar photo-
      raphs taken by LUNIK 111 differed with that announced by
    &viet scientists. The most extensive feature of moon’s far side,
220    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

    photographed in 1959, was named [‘The Soviet Mountains”;
    this Ieature was identified by the Arizona laboratory as an elon-
    gated area of bright patches and rays, possibly flat. Another
    feature was named the “Joliot-Curie Crater” by Soviet scientists,
    but i t was re-identified by the Arizona laboratory as Mare Novum
     (New Sea), first identified by German astronomer Julius Branz
    near the turn of the century.
October 22: U.S.S.R. exploded nuclear device a t high altitude above
     central Asia, with “yield of a few hundred kilotons,” AEC an-
     nounced. Unnamed official sources indicated the explosion
     created a new artificial radiation belt around the earth, probably
    high within the earth’s natural radiation belts.
October 23: Thirteen incorporators named by President Kennedy to
    set up communications satellite corporation elected Philip L.
    Graham as chairman. Graham is president of The Washington
    Post Co. and board chairman of Newsweek.
 ∞ x-15 No. 3 piloted by Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF) reached
     134,000-ft. altitude and 3,818-mph speed in test to evaluate the
    craft’s re-entry stability without its ventral tail f n
                                                         i.
 ∞ International Association of Machinists announced it had requested
     the Government to seize Lockheed Aircraft Co. plants and to
    operate them until an (‘equitable contract” is achieved. IAM
     said it had “exhausted all avenues of settlement that lay within
     the confines of free collective bargaining. . . . there remains
    only the strike weapon, [but] we fully realize the gravity of such
    a work stoppage in this critical period [of the Cuban crisis].”
October 24: NASA test pilot Joseph A. Walker, key speaker a t 40th
     Anniversary and 1962 Annual Meeting of National Aeronautic
     Association in Washington, said: “I feel very strongly that the
     source of our strcngth in tho air in commerce and in National
     Defense is gradually drying up. Looking a t the attrition of
     small airports, the cost of flight instruction, the attitude of local
     residents near airports, and the increasing restrictions upon use
     of airspace and facilities, I cannot help becoming alarmed. . . .
     The supply of individuals with skills capable of supplying the
     demand for pilots will inevitably decrease from old age and
     retirement. . . .
        “Two things are apparent. One, that the present outlook is
     gloomy. Two, that history and foresight give us grounds for
     expecting that there will be plenty of need for pilots in space as
     well as in the atmosphere. . . . The need for pilots will not be
     confined to the cockpit. Engineers with pilot training have a
     better understanding of the cockpit problems. We need the
     understanding of the cockpit problem in operations, in main-
     tenance and repair, in management and in planning. Beyond
     doubt, pilot experience can be an effective tool and augment
     business administration as well as engineering and accounting. . . .
        “The space programs are depending upon qualified, experienced
     test pilots. It is my belief that they don’t happen, they are
     made, and they are made just about the time of the first solo.”
∞ Problem of communications blackout during spacecraft re-entry
     ionization has been surmounted, according to Boeing Co.’s X-20
     Project Manager A. M. Johnston and engineers a t Radio Corp. of
                                                                  221
                                                      OF 1962
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS

    America. RcA-developed equipment using higher radio fre-
    quencies would penetrate the blackout sheath 99 per cent of the
    time during which it engulfed a spacecraft.
October 24: USAF Cambridge Research Laboratories reported its 150-ft.
    radiotelescope a t Sagamore Hill Observatory, Hamilton, Mass.,
    would be ready for operation in early 1963. Telescope would be
    among three largest radiotelescopes in U.S., the others being one
    operated by Stanford Univ. a t Palo Alto, Calif., and one by NRL
    a t Chesapeake Beach, Md.
∞  White House memorandum asking U.S. news media to use “caution
    and discretion” in handling information regarded by DOD as vital
    to national security during the Cuban crisis. All military com-
    mands had been ordered not to release such information, memo-
    randum said, but “such information may come into the possession
    of news media.”
 ∞ A single communications satellite in stationary equatorial orbit
    could connect 92 per cent of world’s telephones, Dr. Herbert
    Trotter, Jr., president of General Telephone & Electronics, Inc.,
    told U S . Independent Telephone Association in Chicago.
 ∞ Launching of DOD geodetic satellite Anna was postponed indefinitely
    for undisclosed reasons.
∞ Scientists a t Lockheed-Georgia Co. and Georgia Tech announced

    development of method to prevent space vehicle disintegration
    upon atmospheric re-entry. New method involved coating the
    vehicle with liquid refractory (heat resistant) materials: Refrac-
    tory materials in powder form were mixed with inert gases a t
     temperatures up to 40,000” in spray gun. Heat turned the ma-
     terials to liquid, which could be sprayed on the foundation metal.
∞  AEC announced a second 24-hour postponement of high-altitude
    nuclear test in the Pacific, for technical reason.
October 25: At annual NASA awards ceremony, NASA Administrator
    James E. Webb presented Group Achievement Awards: to four
     groups a t NASA Manned Spacecraft Center’s Assistant Directorate
    for Engineering and Development, Preflight Operations Division,
    Mercury Project Office, and Flight Operations Office; and to
    NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Directorate for Tracking and
    Data Systems. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L.
    Dryden presented Exceptional Scientific Achievement Awards
    to Robert E. Bourdeau and John C. Lindsay, both of NASA God-
    dard Space Flight Center. NASA Associate Administrator Robert
    C. Seamans, Jr., presented Outstanding Leadership Awards to
    Maxime A. Faget, Assistant Director for Engineering and De-
    velopment, MSC; George B. Graves, Jr., Assistant Director for
    Information and Control Systems, MSC;      George M. Low, Director
    of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, Office of Manned Space Flight ;
    and John W . Townsend, Jr., Assistant Director for Space Science
    a t GSFC.
∞ Maj. Virgil I. Grissom (USAF) was first astronaut to pilot paraglider

    in test a t Edwards, Calif., in development tests for Gemini
    manned spacecraft landings, Xi te-like paraglider was towed
    aloft by biplane and released to glide downward. Maj. Grissom
    landed the partiglider upright, although the craft’s nose wheel
    crumpled upon hitting the ground.
222   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 106.2

October 25: An S-IV stage for the two-stage Saturn began three-week,
    3,500-mi. trip via barge from Douglas Aircraft Co. in Santa
    Monica, Calif., to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center in Hunts-
    ville, Ala., for dynamic testing.
∞ London Times reported that Manchester University team conducting
    photographic survey of the moon, working at Pic-du-Midi Ob-
    servatory in the French Pyrenees, and similar Japanese team,
    working a t Kwasan Observatory, Kyoto, would be joined by a
    third observing station in California. Eight-hour time difference
    between France and Japan enables the two stations to photo-
       aph the moon for 16 hours of night; the California station would
        a central point in time between the other observatories, making
                                                             z
    possible the first round-the-clock photographic surve of the
    moon. Manchester University program is sponsored y USAF,
    while Kyoto University program operates under NASA research
    grant.
 ∞ $16,280,069 contract for construction of F-1 rocket engine test
    stands was awarded to Santa Fe Engineers, M. M. Sundt Con-
    struction Co., and Stolte, Inc., by Army Corps of Engineers as
    agent for NASA. Complex of three test stands and control center
    would be built at Edwards AFB, Calif.
 ∞ First live two-way radio broadcast via TELSTAR was conducted by
    Armed Forces Radio Network. TELSTAR relayed conversations
    of representatives of Conseil International du Sport Militaire
     (Military Olympics) between Annapolis, Md., and Germany.
∞ NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced first nationwide
    conference of scientists and educators would be held in Chicago
    November 1-3 to study the relationship between NASA and uni-
    versities in meeting national space goals.
∞ United Auto Workers employed by North American Aviation, Inc.,
    voted to defeat union shop proposal. IAM workers a t General
    Dynamics/Convair and UAW workers a t Ryan Aeronautical Co.
    would also vote on the proposal.
∞ Republic Aviation Corp. selected RCA to design and build data
    acquisition and communications subsystem for Project Fire,
    NASA program to study re-entry heating of spacecraft. Two
    Project Fire spacecraft will be launched late 1963.
∞ Washington Post reported comparative scores of U.S. and Soviet
    nuclear tests (through Oct. 22, 1962): U.S., 239 tests with about
    143-megaton total yield; U.S.S.R., 121 tests with about 305-
    megaton total yield.
October 26: USAF announced launching of unnamed satellite employing
     a Thor-Agena launch vehicle from Vandenberg AFB, Calif.
∞ Titan I1 rocket launched by USAF from Cape Canaveral scored its
    fifth successful test flight in seven attempts.
 ∞ NASA published proposed revisions to patent regulations, simplifyin
                                                                     Ei
    procedures under which NASA can waive to contractors commercia
     rights to inventions developed under NASA contracts. Patent
     waiver regulations would not be effective until after public hear-
    ings, scheduled for December. NASA also issued regulations pre-
    scribing how NASA-held patents would be made available for
     industrial or commercial development. NASA announced it would
     make provisional agreements with industry for nonexclusive
     commercial development of inventions on which NASA patents
                                                                      223
                         AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962
       ASTRONAUTIC&

     were pending. Revised patent policy was designed to promote
     widespread use of space inventions by industry and the public.
October 26: Third high-altitude nuclear test of Operation Dominic
    was conducted by U.S. near Johnston Island in the Pacific. The
    sub-megaton bomb was carried to estimated altitude of between
     30 and 40 mi. by Thor missile.
∞  New York Times reported a 300-ft.-diameter radiotelescope a t
     National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va.,
     had recently detected in one day as many radio si nals from
                                                              fit
     Jupiter as smaller instruments have recorded in a mont . Source
     of Jupiter’s long-wave radio signals was still unresolved.
October 27: EXPLORER xv energetic particles satellite (S-3b) placed
     in orbit by Thor-Delta vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral.
     Initial orbital data: apogee, 10,960 mi.; perigee, 193.7 mi.;
     period, 315.3 min.; inclination, 18.02’ to the equator; velocity
     a t apogee, 6,015 mph; velocity a t perigee, 21,598 mph.
     Launched to study artificial radiation belt created by U.S.
     high-altitude nuclear explosion in July, the 98-lb. satellite was
     similar to EXPLORER XII and EXPLORER XIV which successful1
                                                                       d
     measured energetic particles of natural radiation belts.
     though satellite achieved orbit within predicted estimated range
     it was spinning on its axis about 10 times faster than the planned
     10-rpm rate. Unnamed spokesman said: “We have a high
     spin rate. It may well be that we’ll receive acceptable data
     from the main experiments, with some secondary experiments
     not able to function. . . . We won’t know for certain until
     we have made a thorough study of data over a period of days.”
     EXPLORER xv carried experiments on magnetic field, ion-electron,
     electron flux, and distribution in pitch angle of electrons; trans-
     mitter; optical attitude sensor; and solar cells, including solar-cell
     damage experiment. Launching marked 13th successful satel-
    lite-orbitin by NASA-developed Delta vehicle.
                %
                                   r
∞  Dr. Hugh L. ryden, NASA De uty Administrator, was among five
     Government career men seected for 1962 Rockefeller Public
     Service Awards.
∞ AEC announced two US. nuclear test explosions-one in atmosphere
     near Johnston Island and one underground in Nevada-and a
     Soviet test in the atmosphere near Novaya Zemlya.
 ∞ Eleven per cent of national budget is spent for research and develop-
    ment-more than twice the combined investment in research of
    industry and nonprofit institutions, New York Times reported.
October 29: Aerobee sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops
    Station carried 230-lb. payload to 116-mi. altitude before land-
    ing in Atlantic Ocean 59 mi. from launch site. Flight tested
    performance of three photometers developed for use in Oao
     (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory) satellite to be launched
    by NASA in 1964. Other instrumentation obtained data from
    the comparatively young stars Gamma Cassiopeia and Delta
    Persei, for use in star-evolution study being conducted by Uni-
    versity of Wisconsin. Launch was under management of NASA
    Goddard Space Flight Center.
 ∞ Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists disclosed they were conduct-
    ing radar exploration of Venus. Data obtained by the experi-
224         ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    ment, continuing from October 1 for about three months, would
     be compared with those obtained by MARINER 11 spacecraft when
     it flies in vicinity of Venus.
October 29: NASA officials said five experiments aboard EXPLOREIZ xv
     were workinq well but that two others had been adversely affected
     by satellite’s excessive spin rate. The two experiments were
     designed to determine decay rate of artificially created radiation.
∞  All industry proposals for 210-ft. antenna a t Goldstone Tracking
     Station were reported rejected by JPL because their prices ex-
     ceeded sum allocated for the project. JPL was considering relax-
    ing its requirements and requesting bidders to compromise on
     price.
 ∞ W. Randolph Lovelace 11,of Lovelace Foundation for Medical Edu-
     cation and Research, told 200 space experts from 14 countries
     that scientists would have to volunteer for space flight teams.
     “It takes four years of college plus three years or more of further
     study to reach the doctor of philosophy level. It is a bit too
     much to ask our test pilots to undergo this further training.”
     He said that in projects such as two-man Gemini a scientist
     could make space flights in company of trained flier. Lovelace
     was addressing an international symposium on environmental
     problems of man in space, held in Paris.
 ∞ USAF awarded $75 million contract to General Dynamics/Astro-
    nautics for a standardized Atlas space launch vehicle, to be
    known as Atlas SLV-III. Contract covered design and develop-
    ment of standard space vehicle version of Atlas ICBM, modifica-
     tions to launch sites a t AMR and PMR, and production and launch
    of SLV-111 boosters.
 ∞ Indonesian scientist Dr. Radinoto said Indonesia hoped to launch
    her first space rocket in 1964 for scientific purposes, with aid
     provided by U.S.S.R.
∞ AEC announced three Soviet nuclear tests in past two days, two of
    intermediate yield and one of low yield.
October 30: MARINER 11 Venus probe passed the earth on 65th day of
    its 110-day flight to vicinity of Venus. At that point in its
     smaller-than-earth’s orbit, the 447-113. spacecraft was 11.5 million
    mi. from earth and traveling a t 70,500 mph relative to the sun.
 ∞ NASA announced realignment of functions within office of Associate
    Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr. D. Brainerd Holmes
     assumed new duties as a Deputy Associate Administrator while
    retaining his responsibilities as Director of NASA Office of Manned
    Space Flight. NASA field installations engaged principally in
    manned space flight projects (MSFC, MSC, and LOC)would report
    to Holmes; installations engaged principally in other projects
     (Ames, Lam, LRC, GSFC, JPL, and Wallops) would report to
    Thomas 3‘. Dixon, Deputy Associate Administrator for the past
    year. Previously most field center directors had reported di-
    rectly to Dr. Seamans on institutional matters beyond program
     and contractual administration.
 ∞ NASA announced signing of detailed contract with Space and Infor-
    mation Division of North American Aviation, Inc., for development
     and production of Saturn S-I1 stage. The $319,922,328 con-
    tract, largest single contract ever awarded by NASA, covered
                                                                    225
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    production of nine live flight stages, one inert flight stage, and
    several ground-test units for the Advanced Saturn vehicle.
October 30: Oran W. Nicks, NASA Director of Lunar and Planetary
    Programs, summarized results obtained from MARINER 11 scientific
    experiments, at Eighth Tri-Service Conference on Electromagnetic
    Compatibility in Chicago: “One of the primary scientific objec-
    tives in measuring magnetic fields in interplanetary space is to
    determine the magnitude and direction of the steady field com-
    ponent. . . . The Mariner has indicated a typical steady
    state transverse component of ten gamma or less, and it has
     clearly shown how the transverse field becomes large (as high as
    25 gamma) during geomagnetic storms. I n addition to this, the
    Mariner 2 has provided information on the steady interplanetary
    field indicating that the radial component is apparently more
    stable, even under storm conditions, and that there are quiet
     times when the radial component from the sun is essentially
                 .
     constant. . . Measurements from the ion chamber [onboard
     MARINER 111 have indicated an average radiation level as expected,
     corresponding to about 1.1 milli-roentgen per hour (about 100
     times the cosmic ray intensity a t the surface of the earth). . . .
     It has been reported by measurements [of the probe’s cosmic dust
     detector] thus far that the flux of interplanetary dust particles is
     at least one thousand times less in interplanetary space than in
     the near vicinity of the earth. The cause of this is unknown.
     . . . Preliminary data from the [solar plasma detector in the]
     Mariner indicate abrupt changes in the velocity and intensity of
     solar winds, and correlated effects on the magnetic fields in space.
     Measurements show that the particle energies generally range
     from about 750 electron volts to 2500 electron volts, although
     some lasma with an energy of 3225 electron volts has been ob-
     serve2 These variations almost certainly were the results of
     events on the sun, but the exact nature of these events is not yet
     understood. . . .9 ,
∞ NASA announced 19 experiments would be included on Pogo satellite

     (Polar Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) to be orbited by
     Thor-A ena vehicle launched from Pacific Missile Range. Pogo
            %.
     wouId e second in Ogo (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory)
     series and first Ogo in polar orbit; it was scheduled for launch in
     early 1964.
October 31: Sudden drop in voltage on MARINER 11 Venus probe was
     reported by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists. JPL turned off
     the probe’s four interplanetary experiments to conserve on-board
     power for experiments in the vicinity of Venus. Discounting
     any probability of the solar cells being affected by radiation,
     e erts indicated the problem could have come from faulty
     7l
     vo tage regulators.
  ∞ ANNA IB geodetic satellite launched into orbit by Thor-Able-Star
     vehicle from Cape Canaveral (apogee, 727 mi.; perigee, 670 mi.;
     inclination, 50° to the equator). Mounted on the 350-lb.) 36-in.
     spherical satellite were four high-intensity lights that would
     flash on and off; by comparing simultaneous observations of the
     satellite from various points on earth, scientists could measure
     earth’s size, shape, and surface features with accuracy never
226    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 0 2

    before possible. The light beacons were to be activated by
    ground command within three days, after orbital data were
    precisely analysed. ANNA (Army-Navy-NASA-Air Force) was
    developed and launched by military services, with Johns Hopkins’
    Applied Physics Laboratory as prime contractor; NASA cooperated
    in tracking and in dissemination of orbital data to the inter-
    national scientific community for worldwide use of the man-made
    star for geodetic purposes.
October 31: Dr. Thomas L. K. Smull, NASA director of grants and
    research contracts, told press conference in Chicago that by 1970
    one out of every four technically trained persons in U.S. will be
    engaged in some phase of the space program. Press conference
    preceded first national conference between NASA and representa-
    tives of 300 universities, colleges, and technical schools, Nov. 1-3.
 ∞ EXPLORER XIV had transmitted 589 hours of data to NASA Goddard
    Space Flight Center, which had released about 240 hours of data
    to the various experimenters.
∞ Soviet scientist N. Varvarov was reported to have stated U.S.S.R.
    program to orbit one-man spacecraft had been completed with
    flights of VOSTOK 111 and VOSTOK IV.
During October: In letter report to House Committee on Science and
    Astronautics, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden
    disclosed problems in the Centaur launch vehicle program:
    Atlas-Centaur capability to carry heavy payloads under severe
    wind conditions must be studied in greater detail; quality of
    fabrication must be improved to reach desired level of quality
    control; guidance system requires further development to achieve
    necessary accuracy and reliability; tank fabrication requires
    better welding techniques; Atlas-Centaur inflight separation
    requires further analysis; nose cone and insulation panels must
    be further tested to prove their aerodynamic-load resistance.
    Report said about $100 million would be spent on Centaur in
    FY 1963 to accelerate development. NASA Lewis Research Center
    would study use of Centaur in combination with Titan 1 ,            1
    Saturn C-1, and Saturn C-1B boosters.
∞ Program testing astronaut tolerance to space flight conditions was
    initiated with order of motion-simulator platform from Textron
    Electronics, Inc., MB Electronics Div. The platform, to be
    installed a t Wright-Patterson AFB, will move in six directions-
    pitch, roll, yaw, up-and-down, side-to-side, and back-to-forward.
∞ NASA acquired from the Army a shi basin adjacent to Michoud
                                        i
    Operations facility for loading an unloading space vehicles a t
    the Saturn fabrication plant. Plans called for construction of
    ship dock a t the basin and dredging of vessel-turning area.
∞ Senator Hubert Humphrey, in hearings of the Subcommittee on
    Reorganization and International Organizations of the Senate
    Committee on Government Operations, told Melvin S. Day,
    Director of NASA Office of Scientific and Technical Information:
    “Mr. Day, I want to commend you for blueprinting one of the
    finest intra-agency systems in the Federal government today in
    the information field and, of course, I speak of NASA. While the
    work is being done by private contractor, it is you who have
    set the high standards for performance. . . . We feel what
                                                                    227
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    has been done within the agency, from our limited examination,
    is an outstanding job, and we want to compliment you on it.”
During October: Geophysical Institute of University of Alaska reported
    to NASA that specially instrumented sounding rockets would be
    desirable for measuring extent of solar cosmic rays associated
    with ionization of the upper atmosphere. Auroral-zone absorp-
    tion disturbances make ground measurements difEcult.
∞ Three scientists a t Boeing Company made seven-day simulated

    space trip to the moon in a cylinder-shaped capsule 8 ft. in di-
    ameter and 6 ft., 4 in. high.
∞ Atlantic Research Corporation introduced new Archer solid-pro-

    pellant sounding rocket for use during International Year of the
    Quiet Sun (IQSY), 1964-65. Archer successfully completed its
    initial flight to 75-mi. altitude carrying 35-lb. payload, a t Pt.
    Mugu, California. Flight testing would be completed early in
     1963.
∞ USAF announced completion of network of 71 “gravity base meas-

    uring stations” throughout the U S . Exceedingly accurate and
    sensitive gravity meters a t each location would establish a base
    value of gravity. This knowledge wns expected to contribute to
    missile accuracy, to geophysical exploration for new sources of
    minerals, and to assist future researchers in determining whether
    gravity values for a given location change with time.
∞ USAF prepared proposed FY 1964 budget requesting $23.5 billion,
    including funds for construction of eight RS-70 reconnaissance
    bombers and for expanded development of space weapons. Also
     considered in budget preparation was long-range proposal to use
              Gemini two-man spacecraft as a stepping stone toward
     NASA’s
     developing military manned space flight capability.
∞ Space General Corp. reported development of aspect-insensitive
     antenna system for satellites and spacecraft. System, which
     automatically points toward its transmission source on earth,
     could reduce number of communications satellites in worldwide
    network “by a factor of four or five,” according to Space General.
 ∞ Jnternational Association of Machinists voted to ratify new three-
      ear contract with General Dynamics Corp., thus leaving Lock-
    Eeed Aircraft Corp. as the only aerospace company that had
     not reached contract settlement with union workers.
 ∞ George M. Kohler of General Electric Co. suggested to the IAF
     meeting in Bulgaria that a worldwide, intensive program be es-
    tablished to use asteroids as scientific bases for space exploration.
     Kohler estimated that between 10 million and 10 billion objects
     30 ft. to 300 ft. in diameter pass within 20 million mi. of the earth
     each year, and that a good number of them probably come much
     closer-perhaps within several thousand miles. He called for (1)
     careful search for closer asteroids with special electronic tele-
    scopes; (2) landing unmanned spacecraft on asteroids; and (3)
     steering asteroids into earth orbit, to be hollowed out and used as
    manned satellite bases.
 ∞ Czech scientist Adeneck Dobrichovsky, writing in a Prague tech-
    nical journal, said the U.S.S.R. would launch a four-man space
    observatory for two-month orbit in 1965-66.
                         NOVEMBER 1962
November 1: U.S.S.R. announced it had launched MARS I, a 1,970-lb.
    space probe on seven-month flight to Mars. Launched with an
     “improved booster” into parking orbit around the earth, MARS I
    was hurled into escape trajectory when vehicle engines re-ignited.
    Tass reported MARS I was flying as planned on its course toward
    Mars. “All systems are functioning normally and orders sent to
    the station [i.e., probe] are well received and obeyed.” Main
    tasks of the probe were interplanetary exploration, establishment
    of interplanetary space radio communications, photographing
    the Martian surface and relaying the photographs back to earth
    by radio. “Telemetric, measuring, and scientific instrumenta-
    tion will be automatically activated in conformity with the flight
    program by radio commands from the earth,” Tass said. The
    flight had been preceded by an unsuccessful launch attempt the
    previous week, unidentified DOD sources said. (NASA Adminis-
    trator James E. Webb stated in September that two Soviet
    attempts to launch Mars probes had failed in October 1960.)
 ∞ NASA reported radiation satellite EXPLORER xv, launched Oct. 27,
    was spinning at rate of 73 rpm instead of desired 10 rpm because
    of failure of despin weights to deploy. Preliminary data indi-
    cated all experiments were functioning and that all received data
    were of good quality. Effect of high spin rate on experimental
    results was under analysis.
 ∞ High-altitude nuclear test in U.S. Operation Dominic was made in
    Pacific test area, the sub-megaton device carried by Thor rocket
    to estimated altitude of 30 to 40 miles. AEC reported two Soviet
    nuclear explosions also occurred, one a high-altitude test over
    central Asia and the other an atmospheric test over Soviet Arctic.
∞ Development of new type of laser by General Electric and Inter-
    national Business Machine researchers was reported in American
    Physical Society’s Physical Review Letters and American Institute
    of Physics’ Applied Physics Letters. Called “injection laser,”
    new crystal laser was powered by electrical current; previous
    solid lasers used strong flash lamps as energy source. At least
    10 times more efficient than existing lasers, injection laser was
    expected to enable engineers to broadcast audio messages on the
    beams of light and to modulate the brightness of the light accord-
    ing to voice, television, or other pattern. Researchers antici-
    pated that single laser beam could transmit a million telephone
    messages or a thousand television channels.
∞ Ten years ago the U.S. exploded a hydrogen device (fusion) at the
    Eniwetok atoll in the Pacific, the first full-scale thermonuclear
    explosion in history and the dawn of the so-called “H-bomb era.”
∞ Dr. Lev Davidovich Landau, member of the Soviet Academy of
    Sciences, was awarded the Nobel Prize in physics for having
    developed pioneering theories for liquid helium’s fluidity a t low
    temperatures.
     228
                                                                    229
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 0 6 2

November 1-3: First NASA-University Conference on the Science and
    Technology of Space Exploration held in Chicago, with 1,181
    educators and scientists representing NASA Headquarters, NASA
    field installations, and other Government agencies, as well as
    more than 300 colleges and universities.
November 1: Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator,
    speaking at NASA-University Conference in Chicago, said NASA
    needed help from universities i four main areas: space sciences,
                                      n
    manned space flight, applications of earth satellites to communi-
    cations and meteorology, and advanced research and technology.
     “Our educational institutions bear a major responsibility for the
    success of our national effort to explore space. Our universities
    and colleges are called upon to produce a body of scientists and
    engineers of unexcell~dcompetence. Some of these graduates
    will enter governmental service with NASA and other agencies
    participating in the space program; some will join private re-
    search organizations and industrial corporations.
       “But some must remain at the universities where they continue
    to advance knowledge and produce new talent. This last func-
    tion should receive high priority. The government laboratory,
    industry, and research foundation all are users of creative and
    talented men without reproducing this vital national resource.
    The university alone is the producer of new engineers and sci-
    entists.”
∞ Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Director of Space Sciences, addressed
    NASA-University Conference on the Science and Technology of
    Space Exploration, Chicago: “During the first four years of the
    existence of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
    157 sounding rockets, 55 satellites, and 9 space probes have been
    launched and have yielded a tremendous amount of information
    in all of the areas of interest. Many hundreds of research papers
    have appeared in the open scientific literature and a considerable
    portion of the scientific community, both national and interna-
    tional, has become involved in the effort to make t,he most of the
    opportunities afforded by the space program for the conduct of
    important research. It is hoped that the university community
    will continue to find new and challenging opportunities and will
    continue to increase and strengthen its participation which has
    already become a major element in the success of the program so
    far.”
∞ Dr. T. L. K. Smull, Director of NASA Granbs and Research Contracts,
    addressed NASA-University Conference on policies and procedures
    of NASA-University grants and research contracts: “The basic
    principle of all NASA policy regarding its relationships with uni-
    versities is that NASA wishes to work within the structure of the
    universities in a way that will strengthen the university and at the
    same time make it possible for NASA to accomplish its mis-
    sion. . . . NASA hopes to conduct its joint activities in a
    manner that will preserve and strengthen the universities’
    educational role. This basic policy is interwoven in t,he policies
    and procedures of NASA support of research, facilities, and training.
       ‘(. . . NASA support of activities in the universities has approx-
    imately doubled each year since NASA was organized. During
    Fiscal Year 1962 some $40 million were committed for these
230    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    activities. Of this $40 million, $2 million was utilized to initiate
    the training grant program; $6)4 million was used to initiate the
    facilities grant program; and some $3)4 million was utilized for
    the special purpose research grants. The rest of the funds sup-
    ported project type research. . . .
       “It is expected that the university involvement in NASA
    activities during the current fiscal year will be more than double
    that of FY 1962. . . .9 )
November 2: James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, and the NASA
    astronauts were honored at Explorers Club’s Night of Exploration
    dinner in New York. Addressing the club on NASA programs and
    goals, Mr. Webb said: “Curiosity-the driving human thirst for
    knowledge-is only one reason, of course, for undertaking space
    exploration on the scale and at the pace which our country has
    established. . . .
       “First, we seek for mankind the benefits inherent in the
    scientific and technological knowledge and dexterity that will
    emerge from this dynamic effort to conquer the most hostile
    environment that man has ever entered-and to use that knowl-
    edge and technical skill as an important new resource for human
    progress.
       “Second, we seek to maintain our position as leader of the Free
    World, through continued superiority in science and technology.
       ‘(And, finally, we seek space power as a deterrent to any
    potential adversary who might attempt to exploit space as an
    avenue of aggression against us . . . .9 1
∞ Transatlantic use of TELSTAR     communications satellite was dis-
    continued for about seven weeks. During this period, TELSTAR’S
    orbit brought it too briefly on line of sight with North America
    and Europe for useful transmission. AT&T said the situation
    would recur every six months. Domestic transmissions would
    be suspended only from Nov. 26 to Dec. 2 , during which time
    ground equipment would be “tuned up.”
 ∞ Unnamed NASA spokesman said MARINER 1 was sending “about 90
                                               1
    kinds of information” from interplanetary space, despite power
    drop of Oct. 31. Officials were “pretty optimistic” Venus-bound
    probe could renew experiments turned off because of drop in
    voltage of the spacecraft’s power system.
 ∞ DOD announced ANNA geodetic satellite was functioning properly and
    its orbit was “near perfect.” ANNA’S flashing light system
    would be tested Nov. 4 with single series of five flashes triggered
    by onboard command. Full-scale operation of all systems would
    begin within a week with ANNA’S flashing light series triggered by
    ground command from Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics
    Laboratory, Md.
∞  Soviet academician M. Sissakian, Presidium member of Soviet
    Academy of Sciences, was quoted as saying U.S.S.R. hoped to
    bring MARS I back to earth.
 ∞ H. Julian Allen, Assistant Director of NASA Ames Research Center,
    proposed a t NASA-University conference in Chicago that inter-
    planetary spacecraft be cone-shaped and that they enter the
    atmosphere point-end-first. The originator of concept for re-
     turning orbital spacecraft blunt-end-fist, Allen stated: “Blunt
     vehicles are desirable when you are dealing with speeds of the
     sub-orbital range up to speeds required to escape the effects of
                                                                  231
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    the earth’s gravity. But when entry speeds exceed this range,
    &s they probably w i l l on return to the earth from tri s to other
                                                           P
    planets, radiation heating drives you away from very b unt bodies,
                                                                    ..
    such as the Mercury capsule, to bodies with conical noses. .
    Our concepts of aerodynamic flow, in short, must9 , change as the
    velocities with which we are dealin increase. . . .
November 2: Rep. Charles S. Gubser ?Calif.) announced NASA and
            
    USN had agreed to convert an old dirigible hangar a t Moffett
    Field, Calif., for production of Rift nuclear vehicle stage. Hangar
    was located about two mi. from prime Rift contractor, Lockheed
    Missiles and Space Co., and adjacent t o NASA Ames Research
    Center.
∞ Douglas-built S-IVB stage, originally conceived only as third stage
    of Saturn C-5 (“Advanced Saturn”), would be modified for use
    as upper stage of Saturn C-lB, it was reported. “Minor design
    changes” would be made under initial funding of $2.25 million
    by NASA.
 ∞ Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC) was awarded the Alfred A. Cun-
    ningham Trophy for being selected as the Marine Aviator of the
    Year. Mercury Astronaut Glenn orbited the earth three times
    in first U.S. manned orbital flight MA-6, February 20, 1962.
November 3: MARINER 11 interplanetary probe reported data showing
    that interplanetary space was free of cosmic dust and debris found
    in vicinity of earth, Dr. William H. Pickering, director of Jet
    Propulsion Laboratory, told press interviewers. “On this basis,
    one has to think of the earth as moving in its own cloud of dust,”
    Dr. Pickering added.
∞ AEC announced 31st nuclear explosion by U.S.S.R. in current test
    series, an atmospheric detonation of intermediate-range yield.
∞ Four “hot spots” on the moon were reported discovered by Bruce
    Murray and Robert Wildey of Cal Tech, using new telescope
    with heat-sensitive, gold-plated mirror to detect infrared radia-
    tion. The two space scientists speculated that hot spots could
    indicate large areas of bare rock exposed on the lunar surface.
    Spots were discovered during survey of the moon which also
    revealed the lunar surface gets colder a t night than previously
    believed, -270OF compared to -243OF recorded by earlier
    heat-measuring devices. Murray said the new evidence could
    mean there are prominences of heat-retaining rock protruding
    through thick dust layer on lunar surface.
∞ NASA announced Col. George M. Knauf (USAF), Deputy Director of
    Space Medicine in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, has
    retired from USAF and accepted appointment to same position as
    a civilian. Dr. Enauf was res onsible for much of development
                                  2
    and organization of Project ercury medical recovery support
    operation.
November 4: Soviet news agency Tass reported MARS I probe was
    606,000 mi. from earth (at 4:OO PM EST) and was increasing that
    distance by 215,000 mi. a day. Soviet observatories photo-
    gra hed the Mars probe and its carrier rocket on Nov. 3; director
    of k i m e a n Astrophysical Observatory said this was the first
    time moving artificial interplanetary bodies had been photo-
    graphed from earth.
∞ Soviet press agency Tass reported the planet Mars has “experienced
    the effects of meteorites to a much greater degree than the earth.”
232   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 62

    Emblen Sobotovich, senior scientist at Leningrad Radium Insti-
    tute, said meteorites were preserved on Mars for long periods of
    time because Martian atmosphere contained almost no moisture,
    Tass reported.
November 4: High-altitude nuclear explosion over Johnston Island
    ended current U S . atmospheric test series. President Kennedy
    announced that underground testing in Nevada would continue,
    and added: “I hope that in the next months we can conclude an
    effective test ban treaty, so that the world can be free from all
    testing. . . . We shall devote our best efforts to conclude such
    a treaty and hope all othcrs will do the same.”
∞ AEC announced U.S.S.R. conducted atmospheric nuclear test with
    intermediate-range yield.
November 5-7: Symposium on Protection Against Radiation Hazards
    in Space sponsored by Oak Ridge National Laboratory, American
    Nuclear Society, and NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, in Gatlin-
    burg, Tenn.
November 5: USAF launched Thor-Agena from Vandenberg AFB, with
    unidentified satellite to be placed in polar orbit.
∞ 16th of Project Firefly series of high-altitude rocket launchings was
    conducted a t Eglin AFR, Fla., the two-stage Nike-Cajun rocket
    releasing chemicals a t about 50-mi. altitude. Chemicals caused
    formation of artificial cloud which ground stations tracked to
    determine upper atmosphere movements.
∞ Political Committee of the United Nations passed resolution urging
    end to all nuclear testing by January 1. No negative votes were
    cast; 25 nations abstained, including U.S., U.K., France, U.S.S.R.
    and Soviet-bloc countries. Similar resolution, proposed by U.S.
    and U.K., emphasized need for international control to enforce
    a test ban; it was adopted 50-12, with 42 members abstaining.
∞ NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced award of $12 million
    worth of contracts for tracking-network modification in prepara-
    tion for lengthy manned space flights. Contracts were awarded
    to : Canogo Electronics Corp., for tracking antenna acquisition
    aid systems; Radiation, Inc., for digital command encoders;
    Collins Radio Corp., for RE’ command systems; and Electro
    Mechanical Research Corp., for PCM systems.
 ∞ Space chimp Enos died a t Holloman AFB, of a form of dysentery
    resistant to antibiotics. Enos had orbited earth two times Nov.
    29, 1961, on MA-5 flight.
∞  Dr. James B. Weddell of North American Aviation Space and In-
    formation Systems Div. announced development of new technique
    to predict solar flares up to 35 days in advance with 70 per cent
    accuracy. Dr. Weddell announced his new forecasting technique
    a t symposiuni on radiation hazards, Gatlinburg, Tenn., cospon-
    sored by NASA, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and American
    Nuclear Society.
 ∞ United Technology Corp. announced development of new technique
    for throttling rocket engines involving use of helium mixed with
    liquid fuel. Depending on ratio of gas to liquid, the engine will
    exert either more or less thrust; system would permit throttling
    of an engine of 10,000-lb. thrust down to as low as 100 lbs. UTC
    director of research and advanced technology, William J. Corco-
    ran, pointed out that a practical method of throttling liquid
    rocket engines had never before been attained.
                                                                  233
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

November 5: Decision on whether NASA or USAF would be assigned
    development of orbital space stations was reported in process
    within the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
∞ Advanced Polaris missile (A-3) exploded 30 seconds after launch
    from Cape Canaveral.
 ∞ No Nobel Peace Prize would be awarded for 1962, Norwegian Par-
    liament committee announced.
 ∞ William L. Gill, Chief of Crew Systems Div. Radiation Branch,
    NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said walls of Apollo spacecraft
    would provide most of radiation shielding required for crew.
    Astronauts would have special shielding devices only for their
    eyes.
November 6-8: Fourth Annual Liquid Propulsion Symposium held i       n
    San Francisco, with more than 500 representatives of Govern-
    ment and industry. Conference was sponsored by NASA, ARPA,
    and JANAB, with series of restricted sessions not open to public.
November 6: U.S.S.R. reported its interplanetary probe MARS I would
    pass within 162,000 mi. of Mars on its present course. Press
     agency Tass added a “precise system of star orientation and
    special engines” would be used to correct the trajectory so that
     MARS I would pass within 600 to 6,800 mi. of the planet.
 ∞ US. transferred to Dominican Republic its rocket tracking station
     a t Sabana, D.R. Formerly used to track missiles launched from
     Cape Canaveral toward Ascension Island, the facility would be
    used as a training center.
 ∞ First ground-controlled flashes from ANNA geodetic satellite were
    delayed because delivery of command equipment to Johns Hopkins
    Applied Physics Laboratory had been delayed.
 ∞ Thomas Dixon, Deputy Associate Administrator of NASA, told
    Liquid Propulsion Symposium in San Francisco that NASA was
    studying large liquid-propellant rocket engines, beyond the 1.5
    million-1b.-thrust F-1 engine, that would be necessary for manned
     planetary flight. Pointing out the unacceptability of simply scal-
    ing up the F-1 engine to produce the required 20 to 30 million-lb.
     thrust, since it would then measure about 60 ft. high and 45 ft.
     nozzle diameter, Dixon cited need for “new and imaginative
     approaches for propulsion in the future . . . . NASA will empha-
    size advanced research that could culminate in the development
    of these giant engines for the future.” He added that current
     NASA research projects in advanced propulsion were makin
                                                                     8
     progress. “These studies will assess current work on advance
    propulsion concepts and point out areas where new concepts need
     to be investigated.”
 ∞ NASA and the Japanese Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications
     signed a Memorandum of Understanding for cooperative testing
     of NASA-launched communications satellites. Japanese Ministry
    would make available a ground station for communication via
     artificial satellites; NASA would arrange for use of experimental
     communications satellites locally by Japan as well as jointly by
     US.-Japan.
 ∞ President Kennedy announced International Association of Machin-
     ists (IAM) and Boeing Co. had agreed to extend negotiations for
     two months so that National Labor Relations Board could poll
     employees on question of union shop.
     97317--83---16
    234    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 6 2

    November 7: NASA announced selection of Grumman Aircraft Engi-
         neering Corp. to build lunar excursion module (LEM) of the three-
         man Apollo spacecraft. I n announcing the selection, NASA
         Administrator James E. Webb said: “We are affirming our
         tentative decision of last July . . . using lunar orbit rendezvous
         as the prime mission mode to accomplish initial manned lunar
         flight. . . . Studies [of alternate approaches], now completed,
         along with a great deal of related analyses . . . during the in-
         tervening months, make us confident that our present course is
         the proper one.” D. Brainerd Holmes, Deputy Associate Ad-
         ministrator of NASA and Director of Manned Space Flight added
         that more than 1,000,000 man-hours of some 700 scientists,
         engineers, and researchers had been devoted to studies of the
         Apollo mission. “. . . The results of these studies added up
,
         to the conclusion that lunar orbit rendezvous is the preferable
         mode to undertake.” Apollo lunar spacecraft will be composed
         of command module, service module, and lunar excursion mo-
         dule.
     ∞ NASA fired two experimental rockets into upper atmosphere within a
         half-hour of each other, to obtain a comparison of electron density
         profile with wind profile measured a t about the same time. First
         rocket, two-stage Nike-Cajun, attained 82-mi. altitude with a
         55-lb. payload to obtain measurements of electron density and
         electron temperature in ionosphere at night. Second experiment,
         using two-stage Nike-A ache, involved use of sodium va or
                                  P                                     H
         clouds to measure atmosp ieric winds and diffusion; rocket reac ed
         34-mi. altitude before ejecting its vapor cloud, which extended t o
         peak altitude of 103 mi. Twin launchings, conducted a t NASA
         Wallops Station, marked first time such experiments were con-
         ducted together. Experiments were conducted by NASA God-
         dard Space Flight Center and Geophysics Corporation of America.
     ∞ Advanced USAF missile, Atlas F, was successfully fired more than
         4,000 mi. from Cape Canaveral. The missile was 150th Atlas
         to be launched since the first went aloft June 1957, including 31
         launched as space vehicles.
     ∞ AEC announced University of California Lawrence Radiation Labora-
         tory and Texas A&M Activation Analysis Laboratory would
         conduct NASA- and Am-funded research in methods of determin-
         ing chemical composition of lunar surface.
    During November: Armour Research Foundation reported to
     is
         NASA that surface of the moon may not be covered with layers of
         dust. Initial Armour studies indicated dust particles become
         harder and denser in higher-vacuum environment such as that
         of moon, but studies had not proved that particles eventually
         become bonded together in rock-like substance as vacuum
         increased.
    November 8: Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Goldstone Tracking Station
         turned on MARINER 11’s four interplanetary experiments by com-
         mand, when the Venus-bound spacecraft was 14.6 million mi.
         from earth. The scientific instruments-magnetometer,           ion
         chamber and particle-flux detector, cosmic dust detector, and
         solar spectrometer-were turned off Oct. 31 to conserve power
         when onboard voltage drop was noted. Experiments were
         resumed when telemetry from MARINEQ TT indicated onboard
                                                                    235
                                                        OF 1962
       ABlXONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS

    power supply was normal again. Signals received a t Goldstone
    showed the resumed experiments were functioning normally and
    were transmitting excellent data.
November 8: Scientists at Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns
    Hopkins Univ. sent operating commands to ANNA satellite, and
    three minutes later ANNA responded by flashing its lights five
    times to show the message had been received. Satellite’s blinking
    beacons were designed to aid scientists make precise measure-
    ments of the earth and to determine its gravitational field.
 ∞ NASA Goddaxd Space Flight Center announced it would conduct
    experiments using laser in tracking S-66 ionosphere beacon satel-
    lite, to be launched in polar orbit early next year. Laser (light
    amplification by stimulated emission of radiation) would be
    tested as “potentially vastly more accurate than current tracking
    methods and requiring no electrical power from the satellite.”
    Laser device, emitting beam jis of a degree wide, would be
    mounted on tracking telescope at NASA Wallops Station. Laser
    signals to satellite would be received on passive reflector and
    bounced back to earth.
∞ 30th sounding rocket launched by three-man team at McMurdo
    Station, Antarctica, the program calling for 60 Arcas rocket
    launchings at rate of one a week. Purpose of launchin s was to
                                                              %
    obtain information on sudden warming of upper atmosp ere that
    occurs durin Antarctic spring.
                 %
 ∞ AEC released p otographs of underground cavity created by first
    nuclear detonation for peaceful use (Project Gnome). The
    three-kiloton explosion was made Dec. 10, 1961, near Carlsbad,
    N.M. Since May 17, scientists have explored the cavern and
    gathered data on neutron physics, seismic effects, and isotope
    production. Cavity i 1,200 f t . underground and measures 160-
                            s
     170 ft. in diameter and 60-80 ft. in height.
 ∞ French and British ministers agreed to submit to their respective
    governments plans for joint production of supersonic airliner i     n
    mach 2 range (about 1,400 mph). Julian Amery, U.K. Minister
    of Aviation, and Roger Dusseaulx, French Minister of Public
    Works and Transport, announced the agreement after c o n f e m g
    in Paris.
∞  NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, addressing General
    Session of U.S. Savings and Loan League in Washington, said:
     “. . . What we are buying in our national space program is the
    knowledge, the experience, the skills, the industrial facilities, and
    the experimental hardware that will make the United States first
    in every field of space explorationscientific and practical uses,
    including military applications. And to accomplish this result
    we must make advances a t the frontiers of knowledge in nearly
    every field of science and technology which will project new ideas
    into our whole industrial system. . . .
       “The success of the National Space Program hinges on the
    ability of the American people, through their government, their
    industry, and their privately endowed institutions, to implement
    many difEcult tasks. Not one or two men will make the landing
    on the moon, but, figuratively, the entire Nation.
       “And our ultimate success also depends, in some measure, on
    our ability to enlist the cooperation of other nations in this enor-
236    ASTRONAUTICAL A N D AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

     mous undertaking. An important (but certainly not determin-
      ing) consideration in our international programs is winning and
      cementing friendly relations with our allies in the Free World
     and among the uncommitted nations. This we do by demon-
     stration of our peaceful objectives and our willingness to share
     what we learn from space exploration with the scientific com-
     munity the world around. . . .
        “The investment in space progress is big and will grow, but the
      potential returns on the investment are even larger. And because
     it concerns us all, scientific progress is everyone’s responsibility.
     Every citizen should understand what the space program really
     is about and what it can do. . . .2 )
November 8: Speaking before MIT School of Industrial Management,
      NASA Manned Space Flight Director D. Brainerd Holmes said:
      “The major national problem today is not a lack of technological
      or economic resources. It is a lack of trained and courageous
     minded men. For this reason, the integration of our human,
     economic, and technological resources is basically a manpower
     problem. We need a special kind of man.
        “This kind of man not only combines general and scientific
     training and general management with technical experience, but
     he has the true courage of his convictions. Above all, he must
     be tireless and devoted and not give in to compromisers and
     obstructionists. Technical people may not necessarily be the
     best managers, but in this age of technology if you do not have
     the technical answers you cannot make good decisions. This
     is the vital point I want to stress to you today. . . .
        “We need group research, group engineering, and group
     science. But we also badly need individual creativity. I n
     short, we need to utilize effectively all of our available capabili-
     ties, regardless of the channels they i-ake. We must integrate
     group and individual efforts.”
∞  Lt. Col. Joseph A. Connor, Jr. (WAF) of NASA Office of Manned
     Space Flight received Air Force Legion of Merit for establishing
     and directing nuclear safety board for TRANSIT IV-A satellite.
     Lt. Col. Connor’s work on the project was done more than a
     year ago when he was assigned to the AEC.
∞  Maritime Administration announced award of contract t o Vehicle
     Research Corp. of Pasadena, Calif., for building two models of
     man-carrying craft that moves over water on cushion of air.
November 9: I n emergency landing of x-15 No. 2, piloted by NASA’s
     John McICay, it went out of control when nosewheel broke off,
     the craft skidding nose down and sideways, then stopping in
     upside-down position. McKay sustained only superficial in-
     juries; x-15 nose gear, wings, and tail were damaged. Flight
     was supposed to have reached 120,000-ft. altitude in test of stabil-
     ity during re-entry into earth’s atmosphere, but engine failed to
     develop power when X-15 was released from B-52 mother ship
     a t 45,000 ft. and McKay glided to emergency landing a t Mud
     Lake, Nev. Flight was 31st made in X-15 No. 2, seventh in
     X-15 by McKay, and first X-15 flight involving any injury to
    personnel.
 ∞ Soviet space probe MARS I was 1,677,704 mi. from earth and “con-
     tinuing satisfactorily” on its flight to Mars, Prof. Vsevoldod
     Fedynsky of Moscow Univ. said in Tass interview.
                                                                           237
         ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

                  NASA S-27 Project Officer reported Canadian ALOUETTE
November 9:
       topside-sounder satellite was performing as expected. Launched
       Sept. 28, ALOUETTE was considered ((avery successful experiment
       since it is producing not only ionospheric data but also informa-
                                                    ..
      tion about the earth’s magnetic field. .                Operation of the
      satellite continues to be normal. . . .     11

    ∞ S-I stage of Saturn C-1 space vehicle was static-fired for full dura-
     


       tion a t full thrust (1.5 million lbs.) for first time, a t NASA Marshall
       Space Flight Center. Previous full-duration firings had attained
       1.3 million-lb. thrust.
 ∞   Scientists a t Jodrell Bank Experimental Station announced they


       had measured part of Milky Way’s magnetic field, marking first
       time positive evidence had been obtained of the field’s existence.
       Milk Way’s magnetic field measured 25 millionths of a gauss
       (earti surface’s magnetic field measures about half a gauss). Led
       by Dr. Rodney D. Davies, research team had spent 20,000 hours
       over past four years on the experiment, involvin radiotelescopic
                                                             %
      measurement of light from a star cluster 1,000 lig t years away.
 ∞   Floyd L. Thompson, Director of NASA Langley Research Center,

       announced construction of $12.3-million space radiation effects
       laboratory would begin in March and would be completed in
       about two years. Facility, to be operated by NASA and three
      -Virginia colleges, would be used to study effects of radiation on
       space vehicle materials and components; it would simulate radia-
       tion hazards astronauts and spacecraft would encounter in space.
       Facility would be used also in graduate studies program in con-
       junction with the three colleges-Univ. of Virginia, College of
       William and Mary, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute.
∞   Hughes Aircraft Co. reported final assembly of Syncom synchronous


       communications satellite had been completed. Spacecraft was
       undergoing final checkout before delivery to NASA at Cape Canav-
       eral, where it would be launched early 1963.
∞    Univ. of Illinois radiotelescope a t Vermilion River Observatory was

      dedicated. The radiotelescope, world’s largest, included 400’ x
       600’ x 65‘ parabolic reflector. Prof. George W. Swenson, Jr.,
      Univ. of Illinois project engineer for the observatory, said radio-
       telescope’s first job would be to map Milky Way. The $871,650
       telescope was financed mainly with grants from Office of Naval
      Research (ONR) , with supplemental grants from National Science
      Foundation (NSF) and Univ. of Illinois.
∞    Use of missiles and earth-orbiting satellites in forest-fire detection


       was forecast by R. C. Howard of British Columbia Forest Prod-
      ucts, Ltd., speaking in Vancouver to annual convention of
       Canadian Institute of Forestry. Howard said satellites would
      report fires to computer center which would evaluate the fire,
      permitting foresters to dispatch missile with built-in-fire extin-
      guisher.
∞    Washington Post reported that Thrust-Augmented Thor (TAT)
      booster would be used with Agena D upper stage to orbit first of
      new Discoverer satellite series.
 ∞   British Institute for Strategic Studies estimate reported that the
      Free World has more than six times as many ICBM’s the Soviet  as
      Union, but that the Soviet Union has far more IRBM’S than the
      Free World.
238   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

November 10: Baltimore Sun published photograph of ANNA satellite
    taken by U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey tracking team, Spesuti
    Island (Chesapeake Bay), Md. Triggered by Johns Hopkins
    Applied Physics Lab., flashing lights onboard ANNA were photo-
    graphed in project to aid geodetic studies; photographs would be
    made from points around the earth.
 ∞ USMC gold medal was presented to Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr.
     (USMC) a t USMC 187th anniversary dinner, Washington. Medal
    commemorated Astronaut Glenn’s Project Mercury orbital
    space flight Feb. 20, 1962 (MA-6).
November 11: NASA reported MARINER 11 Venus probe was 15,652,770
    mi. from earth and 11,591,751 mi. from Venus.
∞  USAF announced launching of unidentified satellite with Atlas-
    Agena from Point Arguello, Calif.
∞  Catalogue of Astronomical Photographs featuring close-up photo-
    graphs of moon, was released by Lick Observatory. Each
    photograph showed area 230 mi. by 280 mi. on scale of 30 mi. to
    the inch (view of lunar surface from 300 mi.). Lick spokesman
    said precise optical and guidance systems, high magnification,
    and skilled use of modern astropho tographic techniques were
    used to obtain the pictures. The 120-in. reflecting telescope a t
    Lick is world’s second largest.
∞ In interview at Soviet Academy of Sciences, Soviet physicist Dr.
    Sergei N. Vernov stated he believed particle acceleration accounts
    for outer radiation belt of the earth. Deep-space probes have
    not detected enough high-energy particles to prove the outer
    belt is replenished by high-energy particles ejected from the sun.
    Dr. Vernov believes the particles acquire their energy within the
    b e l t t h r o u g h some as yet unknown accelerating mechanism.
    He believes there are two such means of acceleration, one sus-
    taining the day-to-day energy level and the other accounting for
    its increases when a cloud of erupted solar gas reaches vicinity of
    earth, causing magnetic storms. Dr. Vernov suggested inner belt
    is sustained by protons formed by neutrons which decay upon
    bombardment by cosmic rays; some of the high-energy protons
    are trapped by earth’s magnetism to become the inner radiation
    belt.
∞ Moscow radio reported Soviet designers were working on airplane
    that flies by flapping its wings like a bird. The plane was ex-
    pected to have 10 to 30 times lifting power of similar-size con-
    ventional plane.
November 12: NASA Flight Research Center released photographs of
    “lifting body” experimental wingless craft to test landing tech-
    niques in gliding from altitudes as high as 5,000 ft. The 24-ft.-
    by-13-ft. craft would begin testing early in 1963, first with truck
    to tow it aloft and later with airplane as towing vehicle. Made
    mostly of plywood, the 500-lb. craft suggests shape of missile nose
    cone cut in half lengthwise.
∞  FAA Administrator N. E. Halaby told International Air Transport
    Association meeting that British, French, and Soviet competition
    probably would force the U.S. to develop its own supersonic
    commercial airliner within 10 years.
                                                                 239
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

November 12.- Tave (Thor-Agena Vibration Experiment), flown with
     Thor-Agena launching ALOUETTE satellite on Sept. 29, measured
    low-frequency vibrations to Agena stage and spacecraft interfaces
                                                                     .
    during Thor boost phase, it was reported. Tave provided ii. .
     data verifying the techniques used by Goddard and Lockheed in
     predicting the launch vibration environment of the Thor-Agena B
    rocket. Demonstration that these techniques were sound is most
     important in designing future experiments and structures for the
     Thor Agena vehicles,” Goddard project experimenter James
     Nagy said. Goddard Space Flight Center had designed, built,
     tested, and shipped 200-lb. Tave in on1 20 days.
                                           B
November 13: USAF announced it had place in orbit 1.47-lb. Tetra-
     hedral Research Satellite (TRS) , launched piggyback aboard uni-
     dentified satellite using Thor-Agena vehicle. TRS was orbited
    to map radiation in space and radio its findings back to earth.
     NASA communications and telemetry stations were supporting
     this USAF project.
 ∞ Tass reported interplanetary probe MARS I began broadcasting
     scientific data on command from earth. The Mars probe, about
     two million mi. away from earth, was reported functioning
     normally.
 ∞ Rocket- owered instruments will be traveling as far as Jupiter by
     1975,Sobert J. Parks, director of JPL Planetary Programs, said in
     interview. Parks said by 1975 the planets Mars and Venus
     probably would have been studied “quite closely” by instru-
     ments.
∞  Congressman Joseph E. Karth (Minn.), chairman of space sciences
     subcommittee, said in press interview that planned mission
     schedule for Saturn launch vehicle “doesn’t appear to be the
    best way to use a vehicle on which we have spent so much money.”
     Mr. Karth said the powerful vehicle might prove useful in
     “speeding up the interplanetary research program, which may not
     be ambitious enough.”
∞ Albert J. Evans, NASA Deputy Director of Aeronautical Research,
     told IATA Public Relations Conference in Washington: “Our
    understanding of aerodynamics has reached the point where it
     appears certam that in time an efficient supersonic transport can
    be developed. . . . There is no question as to whether there
     will be a supersonic transport; the only question is whose. Right
     now part of my job is to see that the United States is the first
                                                                     .
     to develop a commercially competitive supersonic transport. . .
        “In the hypersonic region, the x-15 has given tremendous
    focus to our efforts. The X-15 has such capability that it will
    be used in furthering certain space research programs. Already
    we am making radiation measurements-piggy-back experiments
    alon with the hypersonic research program. Our results m t h
    the 5-15 have been so encouraging that I think we must soon
    look beyond the transport that goes to Mach 2 or 3, and begin
                                                         .
    layin the groundwork for the generation to follow. . .”
         f
 ∞ Signals rom Venus-bound MARINER 11 interplanetary probe opened
     17th annual meeting of American Rocket Society in Los hgeles.
240    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 62

November 13-14: More than 500 leaders from business, industry, gov-
    ernment, and finance participated in New England Regional
    Conference on Science, Technology, and Space in Boston, spon-
    sored by MIT and NASA. Dr. Howard W. Johnson, Dean of
    MIT School of Industrial Management, told conference that the
    “impact of space is largely the impact of space research and
    development on the economy, one of the important features of
    the last 20 years. . . .” In 1941, he said, R&D spendings
    amounted to .7 of 1% of gross national product, or $900 million.
    Today largely because of space R&D, about 3% of gross national
    product, or $16.5 billion, goes for R&D.
November 14: NASA announced Maj. L. Gordon Cooper, Jr. (USAF),
    had been selected for 18-orbit Project Mcrcury flight MA-9.
    The day-long space flight would be made no earlier than April
    1963. Astronaut Cooper, youngest of original seven astronauts,
    was back-up pilot and technical adviser for Astronaut Walter
    M. Schirra in flight MA-8. Back-up pilot for MA-9 would be
    Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., who made first U.S. manned space
    flight (suborbital flight, MR-3) on May 5, 1961.
∞ In news conference at MIT, Dr. James A. Van Allen said the radia-
    tion caused by US. atmospheric nuclear test in July would be
    “undetectable” by July 1963. Dr. Van Allen reported signals
    from INJUN, TELSTAR, EXPLORERS XIV and xv showed the elec-
    tronic stream had disappeared within a few days of U.S. explosion
    and that the electrons at 600-mi. altitude were now undetectable.
    Electrons at 900-mi. altitude were still creating radioastronomy
    interference, he acknowledged, but this would be gone by next
    July.
       Speaking a t New England Regional Conference on Science,
    Technology, and Space held at MIT, Dr. Van Allen reviewed sug-
    gestions made by panel of scientists which met last July-August
    under National Academy of Sciences auspices at Iowa City.
    Panel reviewed NASA program and recommended that NASA (1)
    send scientists with astronaut training along with test-pilot astro-
    nauts on early lunar and planetary flights; (2) establish an acad-
    emy within a year to train scientist-astronaut volunteers, located
    a t Houston, Tex.; (3) work harder to develop new instruments
    needed for lunar exploration; (4) ensure that planet Mars is not
    contaminated with terrestrial organisms until question of exist-
    ence of Martian life is resolved; (5) make more use of university
    facilities; and (6) reduce time lag between concept of a space
    experiment and its execution. Spokesman in Washington said
    complete report of the panel would be issued by early January.
∞ West Side Association of Commerce (N.Y.C.) presented National
    West Side Award to NASA. In accepting the award, NASA
    Administrator James E. Webb said: “Except in war time, no
    large national effort has had such a rapid buildup as the space
    program over the past five years. The end of the buildup is
    not in sight, but the rate is slowing down and is keyed to the
    policy . . . that this is a fast paced, driving, prudently man-
    aged and efficiently conducted program, but is not a crash
    program. . . .
       (<
        In my view, we are entering a period when our national de-
    cisions and the debates which accompany theni will not so much
    relate to whether and when we can achieve pre-eminence in
                                                                 241
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1982

    space, but the rate a t which we should proceed beyond the
    time when this pre-eminence is achieved-beyond the time when
    we have begun manned exploration of the moon. . . .
       “It is the contribution of all the forces, in industry, gov-
    ernment, and the universities, under the leadership which
    President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson have given the
    program, that gives us the basis for the pre-eminence we have
    in most fields in space and the pre-eminence we will shortly
    have in all.”
November 14: Soviet interplanetary probe MARS I was 2,725,337.592
    mi. away from earth a t 4 AM EST, Tass reported.
∞  USAF advanced Atlas missile, Atlas F, was successfully test-fied
    more than 4,000 mi. down the Pacific Missile Range (PMR).
∞  Albert R. Hibbs, chief of JPL Arms Control and Disarmament, told
    American Rocket Society convening in Los Angeles: “Most
    people on both sides don’t feel that space weapons will be too
    important . . .,” but military neglect of space could be dangerous
    pending ratification of a treaty.
∞ N. E. Halaby, FAA Administrator, said in speech to Bond Club of
    New York that recommendations on Federal development of
    supersonic airliner would be submitted to President Kennedy in
    about two weeks. He emphasized that U.S. was interested in
    transport of mach 3 capabilit,y (2,000 mph or more).
∞ Plan for joint British-French     development and construction of
    supersonic airliner was approved by French Cabinet. Under
    plan, British and French aviation industries would be subsidized
    by respective governments and would work together on airplane
    capable of carrying 90 passengers across the Atlantic a t mach 2.2
    speed (about 1,450 mph)-more than twice as fast as current jet
    transports.
∞ Lt. Col. Charles N. Barnes (USAF)     of AEC Reactor Development
    Div. told annual meeting of Association of Military Surgeons of
     the United States that first attempt to orbit nuclear reactor in
    joint AEC-USAF Project Snapshot would be made next year.
    Snap-1OA would be launched with Atlas-Agena vehicle, the
    Agena stage to be orbited with the 950-lb. Snap-1OA which
    would furnish auxiliary electric power for instruments. In-
    tended orbit would be several hundred mi. high. Reactor would
    be turned off after a year and the accumulated radioactive fission
    products allowed to decay over period of several hundred years;
    it would be designed to disintegrate during re-entry into earth’s
     atmosphere.
∞ Monetary awards for patentable inventions were made to NASA
     employees under provisions of the Incentive Awards Act of 1954
     as follows: George A. Smith of NASA Ames Research Center;
    Arlen F. Carter, George P. Wood, and Adolf Busemann of NASA
    Langley Research Center; David G. Evans, Warner L. Stewart,
    Edward F. Baehr, H. Allen, Jr., C. C. Ciepluch, E . A. Fletcher,
    Samuel Stein, David M. Straight, and John W. Gregory of NASA
    Lewis Research Center; William J. D. Escher and Thomas L.
     Greenwood of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center.
∞ Soviet AF Maj. Yevgeny M. Andreyev dropped 15-mi. in free fall
    from balloon before opening his parachute, feat believed to have
    set new record for free fall without stabilizing devices.
242   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S OF 1 9 6 2

November 15: Venus-bound MARINER 11 spacecraft set new record for
     communications, transmitting engineering and scientific data to
     earth from nearly 18 million mi. in space. Previous transmission
     record was set by PIONEER v space probe a t distance of 17.7
    million mi. June 14, 1960. (PIONEER v’s signal was tracked to
     22.5 million mi., but no scientific data were obtained beyond 17.7
    million mi.) Launched by NASA on Au . 27, MARINER 11 was
    providing new information on nature of interplanetary space.
     It would fly by Venus a t distance of 20,900 mi. and measure
    microwave and infrared emissions from the planet on Dec. 14.
∞ NASA attempt to launch ionosphere experiment for Commonwealth

    of Australia failed when Aerobee vehicle malfunctioned 38 sec.
     after launch from NASA Wallops Station. However, Australian
     payload electronics, including telemetry instrumentation and
    lunar aspect sensor, was activated before liftoff and functioned
                            . Launch of similar experiment would be
    properly durin
    attempted in %Iflight Commonwealth of Australia Scientific
                       ec. for
     and Industrial Research Organization.
∞  NASA Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes,
    addressed National Industrial Conference Board, Chicago, on
    economic implications of manned space flight program: ‘‘ . . . I n
    a significant, though incidental way, the space program is already
    enriching and will continue to enrich our country, It is causing
    a rapid advancement of industrial technology and the stimulation
    of our economy. The billions of dollars required for the space
    effort are not being spent on the moon; they are being spent in
    our factories and laboratories-for salaries and for new materials
    and supplies, which in turn represent income for others.
       “Already the space industry is a major industry. It is creating
    new job opportunities a t all levels of skills and abilities. It is
    improving standards of living.
       ‘[New economically beneficial breakthroughs will be made in
    many fields. A successful space program will require major and
    rapid advances in the uses of energy and the development of new
    materials, fabrics, and lubricants-the very forces that are basic
    to economic growth.
       “Space research and development is already producing corol-
    lary benefits in the form of new products, new methods, and new
    industrial processes which can be employed in the manufacture
    of countless articles for human use. The surface has probably
    barelybeenscratched. . . .
       “The development of space science and technology will un-
    doubtedly strengthen our whole industrial base and serve as effec-
    tive insurance against technological obsolescence. . . .1 1
∞  NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced three- ear grant to
    Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, Dalcs, Tex., for
    development of advanced scientific experiments in lunar, plane-
    tary, and space exploration. Major operating division of GRCSW
    was Southwest Center for Advanced Studies (SCAS), which would
    “provide research organization structured specifically to design
    new space experiments and to provide the scientific guidelines
    for engineering them.”
 ∞ AEC announced Dr. Edward Teller would be awarded the Enrico
    Fermi Award a t ceremony on Dec. 3. Citation accompanying
                                                                    243
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1864

    the award would praise Dr. Teller “for contributions to chemical
    and nuclear physics, for his leadership in thermonuclear research,
    and for efforts to strengthen the national security.” Dr. Teller,
    now a professor a t University of California, is most noted for his
    role in development of thermonuclear bomb.
November 15: USAF announced there would be at least three-month
    delay in first test-flight of prototype RS-70 (reconnaissance-strike)
    supersonic aircraft. Delay was attributed to problems in sealing
    fuel cells.
 ∞ Astronomer Dr. E. J. Opik, of Univ. of Maryland, was quoted as
    saying “the Russians have contributed only five-tenths of on0
      er cent” of the new information on space. “They profess to
    gave sent huge payloads into space 10 to 100 times larger than
    any the United States is capable of sending. At the same time,
    however, 99.5 per cent of all information on space has come from
    the United States’ probes.” Dr. Opik was cited in 1960 by
    National Academy of Sciences for (‘outstanding investigation of
    meteoric bodies.”
∞ Ambassador Charles Bohlen officiated a t the opening of a NASA
    exhibit a t the Palais de la Dkouverte. Paris. France. The exhibit
    would stay in Paris until January 15, induded models of past,
    current, and future NASA spacecraft; panels explaining the goals
    and results of the U.S. space program; a working TELSTAR
    demonstration; and a Spacemobile lecture and demonstration.
    The exhibit was enthusiastically received by French scientific
    and government personages attending the inauguration.
∞ AFSC announced it was testing electrocardiogram package in free-fall
    parachute jumps for possible applications in future manned space
    flight. Worn inside the astronaut’s pressure suit, the small, 14-oz.
      ackage could monitor heartbeat (and other physical reactions) :
    bonditioning unit in package converts heartbeat to FM radio
    signal which is sent by transmitter in package to amplifier in
    cockpit, and then to ground receivers, where it is converted to
    electrocardiogram. Use of package would provide astronaut
    freedom of movement by eliminating need for connections from
    pilot to spacecraft. Developed by Hughes Aircraft Co., the
    package was bein considered for use in X-15 program.
∞ Astronomer Dr. Car: Sagan told American Rocket Society, meetin
                                                                       E
    in Los Angeles, that there was a statistical likelihood that eart
    had been visited a t least once by intelligent beings from other
    worlds. I n interview, he suggested that successful planetary
    civilizations endure for perhaps a hundred million years and that,
    as the societies advance, they reach farther from their respective
    planets into space. He predicted man would begin interstellar
    travel in about 100 years-in star ships, powered by hydrogen-
    fusion ram’et engines and built in space.
∞ Scientists a t bughes Aircraft Co. displayed Surveyor lunar probe
    at American Rocket Society, the probe containing redesigned
    payload weighing about 114 lbs. as compared to originally de-
    signed payload weighing 220 lbs. Payload of instruments would
    be placed on the moon in late 1964. Dr. Leo Stoolman, Surveyor
    project chief for Hughes, said reasons for redesigning Surveyor
    mstrument package were dficulty in Centaur launch vehicle
    program and decision to include only instruments that would
    directly assist U.S. manned lunar landing program.
244    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S O F 1962

November 15: Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Space-
    craft Center, told Aircraft Industries Association Quality Control
    Committee in Houston that designs, procedures, and schedules in
    manned space flight program had to be flexible in order to absorb
    continual changes of rapidly advancing technology. Emphasizing
    importance of equipment malfunctions that occur during systems
    development or preflight preparations, Dr. Gilruth said: “In
    manned flight, we cannot afford to regard any of these equipment
    malfunctions as a ‘random’ failure. We must regard every mal-
    function and, in fact, every observed peculiarity in the behavior
    of a system, as an important warning of potential disaster. Only
    when the cause is thoroughly understood, and a change to elimi-
    nate it has been made, can we proceed with the flight program. . . .
       “Rapid corrective response to malfunctions throughout system
    development and preflight preparations is a critically important
    requirement of our programs if we are to meet schedules with
    hardware that is fit to fly. . . .1 1
∞ Dept. of Commerce released translation of Soviet report on use of
    rockets to prevent hailstorms. Report said thousands of acres
    of grape crops were protected by anti-hail rockets in 1961 and
    efforts were expanded this year. Rockets were loaded with
    cloud-seeding chemicals and fired into suspected clouds, the
    released chemicals crystallizing cloud droplets to (1) prevent
    existing hailstones’ growing larger, and ( 2 ) cause the crystallized
    droplets to “fall as harmless snow.”
 ∞ Aviatrix Jerrie Cobb told Women’s Advertising Club of Washing-
    ton, D.C.: “We’re bypassing the one scientific space fcat we
    could accomplish now-putting the first woman in orbit. . . .7 1
November 16: Saturn SA-3 reached 104-mi. altitude in ballistic flight
    from Cape Canaveral, the fully-fueled S-I stage performing as
    planned. Upper stages were fdled with water simulating weight
    of live stages. At peak altitude, rocket was detonated by radio
    command and the ballast water was released into the ionosphere,
    forming massive cloud of ice particles several mi. in diameter.
    From the cloud experiment (Project Highwater 11) scientists
    hoped to gain data on atmospheric physics. This was third
    straight test-flight success of NASA’s Saturn and fist flight with
    maximum fuel onboard. Vehicle generated 1.3 million-lb. thrust
    on flight of 4 min., 55 sec.
 ∞ NASA Ames Research Center announced construction of four space
    research facilities, totaling more than $14 million, had been
    authorized for FY 1963: biosciences laboratory, guidance facility,
    radiative heat system for Mass Transfer Facility, and helium
    tunnel. Bioscience laboratory would be used for studies in ge-
    netics, radiobiology, immunology, and environmental physiology,
    and detection of extraterrestrial life. Guidance facility, consist-
    ing of three-man capsule with systems and equipment, combined
    analog and digital computer. and rotating centrifuge to drive
    capsule, would be used to obtain data on integrated design of
    guidance, stabilization, control, and crew support systems in
    advanced manned spacecraft. Radiative heat system would per-
    mit Ames scientists to investigate re-entry heating of spacecraft
    from lunar or planetary missions. Sections of complete heat
    shields will be tested a t the facility. Mach 50 helium tunnel
                                                                     245
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

     would be used to complement the existing Ames hypersonic free-
     flight facility, which used gun-launched models to obtain 50
     times speed of sound.
November 16: Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Ft. Church-
     ill, Can., under direction of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.
     Second stage failed to ignite, so rocket reached altitude of only
     about 9.5 mi.
∞ S-IV    stage for Saturn space vehicle arrived a t NASA Marshall
     Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., after 23-day journey
     from Douglas Missiles and Space Systems Div., Santa Monica,
     Calif. First Saturn stage to be shipped by water from West
     Coast manufacturing site, the S-IV would be mated with other
     Saturn stages in dynamic test tower a t Marshall, for series
     of bending and vibration tests. Its external configuration,
     weight, and other characteristics were same as S-IV flight units.
 ∞ Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center,
     told newsmen: “The first unmanned capsule launch [in Project
      Gemini] has slipped from the third quarter to the fourth quarter
      of 1963. There is virtually no possibility of a manned flight
     before 1964 . . . . [Slippage was] simply because of the time
     it takes to do this very complicated job.”
∞ Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in first
      annual Theodore von K&rm&n       Lecture of the American Rocket
      Society: “The costs of the presently approved [space] program
      increase next year to about six billion dollars if current time
      schedules are maintained. It would not be possible to include
      the development of a [manned] space station now without still
     larger resources assigned to the space program. I personally
      believe that the next large manned space flight project [after
      Project Apollo manned lunar landing] will be this one rather than
      extensive exploitation of the moon or manned expeditions to the
      planets. This might change if the early lunar exploration
      returned surprises in the form of natural resources of use on earth.
         “I think it will now be appreciated that the present rather
      arbitrary subdivisions of our program wl coalesce, for the
                                                   il
      manned space station will be useful for both manned and un-
      manned scientific exploration and could be the site of observation
      of weather or of communications relay stations . . . .,,
∞  Relationship between very low frequency (VLF) hiss and aurora
      australis (Southern lights) was c o n b e d after six months of
      research by two scientists, it was reported. Ward Helms and
      John Turtle, working a t Byrd Station, Antarctica, believe they
      have confirmed the theory of Henry Morozumi, Stanford Univ.
      scientist, when they found peaks of auroral display and VLF hiss
     were identical in intensity and coincided repeatedly. Helms said
      he was “not certain that VLF hiss is part of the aurora, per se,
      but I’m sure that since the aurora and hiss peaks are simultaneous
      there is reason to think the same particles generating the aurora
     also generate the hiss.”
∞ Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert announced signing

     of contract with United Technology Corp. for solid-propulsion
     rocket motors t o be strapped to sides of Titan I1 rocket in Titan
     I 1 configuration. He said contract with Martin-Marietta Corp.
       1
     for airframe assembly and test of the rocket, as well as for
     structure of transitional upper stage, would be signed soon.
246   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 0 2

November 16: At American Rocket Society Honors Night Banquet in
    Los Angeles, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned
    Spacecraft Center, was presented the Robert H. Goddard Me-
    morial Award, highest ARS honor, for “general eminence in the
    field of rocket engineering and space flight.” Other 1962 ARS
    awards: Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., NASA astronaut, received the
    ARS Astronautics Award; Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Deputy
    Chief of Naval Operations, Special Projects Office, received the
    James H. Wyld Memorial Award; Samuel E . Hoffman, president
                                                 (
    of NAA Rocketdyne Div., received ARS Propulsion Award; Dr.
    Howard S. Seifert, of Stanford Univ. and United Technology
    Corp., received the G. Edward Pendray Award; Theodore For-
    rester, director of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., Ion Physics
    Dept., received the ARS Research Award; and John R. Winckler,
    prof. of physics a t Univ. of Minnesota, received the first ARS
    Space Science Award.
∞  Soviet aircraft designer Artem Mikoyan was quoted as saying
    U.S.S.R. would have a “rocket plane” within this decade. Air-
    craft was described as wide-winged, stainless-steel covered, and
    powered by multistage rocket. After launching, craft would
    fly ballistic trajectory reaching height of 150-222 km. and later
    re-enter earth’s atmosphere, for intercontinental transport of
    mail, freight, and, later, passengers. Rocket planes also would
    be principal transportation between earth and earth satellites.
November 17: Aerobee sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops
    Station, the vehicle carrying 21 1-lb. instrumented payload to
    12s-mi. altitude in experiment to study behavior of liquid hydro-
    gen exposed to radiant heating and zero gravity. Experiment
    was conducted for NASA Lewis Research Center, which would
    use data obtained in development of liquid-hydrogen rocket
    engines.
 ∞ Four USN officers in altitude chamber were injured when electrical
    spark ignited fire in the chamber, near end of 14-day experiment
    at USN Air Crew Equipment Laboratory, Philadelphia. Men
    were participating in NASA experiment to determine effect on
    human beings of breathing pure oxygen for 14 days at simulated
    high altitudes.
 ∞ USAF S stems Command said re-entry from space flights was being
        9
    simu ated at Flight Control Laboratory, Aeronautical Systems
    Div., Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio. The tests were “part of
    AFSC’S long-range Mark IV program to determine the control-
    display requirements for advanced orbital vehicles.”
∞ Fifth attempt to launch Polaris A-3 missile failed when Polaris
    second stage veered off course and had to be destroyed.
∞ DOD released following statement:
       “Lockheed [Aircraft Corp.] stands alone in refusing to follow
    the course that the other members of the [aerospace] industry
    considered reasonable. . . . Should a strike take place at Lock-
    heed, Department of Defense programs of critical urgency to the
    national defense would be affected. It is imperative in the na-
    tional interest that the Department of Defense make necessary
    preparations to minimize to the greatest extent possible any loss
    of production that might follow a work stoppage. Responsible
    officials of the Department of Defense are therefore considering
                                                                   247
       ASTRONAUTICU AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1969

    whether alternate means of production can be utilized so that
    work on these vital programs can go forward in the event of a
    stoppage at Lockheed.”
November 17: Low yield nuclear device was exploded in atmosphere
    a t U.S.S.R. Semipalatinsk testing grounds, 32nd Soviet test
    announced by AEC in current series.
November 18: MARINER 11 Venus probe, launched Aug. 27, was 18,767,-
    939 mi. from earth and 8,603,582 mi. from Venus, NASA an-
    nounced.
 ∞ Dr. Niels Bohr, pioneer atomic physicist and winner of Nobel Prize
    and Atoms for Peace Award, died in Copenhagen.
November 19: Dr. Andrie B. Severng, Director of U.S.S.R.’s Crimean
    Astrophysical Observatory, explained techniques used to photo-
    graph MARS I on Nov. 3, when the interplanetary probe was
    120,000 mi. from earth. Using 102-in. telescope, largest outside
    the U.S., astronomers fixed its aim at spot MARS I was calculated to
    be; automatic controls shifted telescope’s aim slightly to sweep
            the probe’s assumed trajectory. A t same time, photo-
    alon%
    p a p s were made, with each plate exposed twice a t 30-sec.
    intervals. Resulting photogra hs showed MARS I as well as its
                                    ph
    booster rocket traveling throug space. This was believed to be
    greatest distance from which man-made objects had been photo-
    gra hed.
 ∞ USAF binuteman ICBM successfully launched from Cape Canaveral
    silo on 4,000-mi. R&D flight down the Atlantic Missile Range.
∞ International Associa tion of Machinists announced strike against
    Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had been set for Nov. 28.
∞ NASA and Indiana University jointly announced experimental
    center for industrial applications of aerospace research would be
    established a t Indiana Univ., with initial NASA funding of
    $150,000. Project would involve the university’s business pro-
    fessors, biologists, geologists, physicists, and others, working
    with research and development people of industry and NASA.
∞ Bell Helicopter Co. successfully flew unmanned helicopter in demon-
    strations a t Naval Ordame test station, China Lake, Calif.
    Guided by remote control system, helicopter flew for 72 min. a t
    altitudes up to 2,000 ft. and speeds of about 70 mph; brought back
    to earth, the craft was refueled, inspected, and relaunched in 15
    min. for 48-min. unmanned flight.
∞ NASA and DOD approved new plan for solid-propellant development.
    Program considered the solid-propelled boosters as a development
    concept and called for advanced studies.
November 20: Sparobee sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops
           
    Station with 90-lb. payload to measure electron and neutral part-
    icle temperatures a t 75 to 225-mi. altitudes. Vehicle reached
    peak altitude of 214 mi. and payload impacted in Atlantic Ocean
    about 217 mi. away. Secondary objectives were measurement
    of ion and neutral particle density and flight testing of newly
    designed Thermosphere Probe system. Experiment was joint
     roject of University of Michigan and NASA Goddard Space
    $l Center.
        l
       ght
 ∞ NASA named Adm. Walter E”. Boone (USN, Ret) as Deputy Associate
    Administrator for Defense Affairs. Primary responsibility of the
    newlycreated post was to strengthen the flow of technical and
    management information between NASA and DOD.
248   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 2

November 20: Office of Aerospace Research announced scientists a t
    Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories (AFCRL) would con-
    duct the ‘(most thorough study of atmospheric ozone ever
    made,” a concentrated one-year series of observations with
    more than 700 balloons carrying sensitive ozone meters into the
    upper atmosphere. New 11-station network, from Canal Zone
    to Greenland, would participate in project. To begin in January
    1963, project was expected to yield data on nature of ozone.
∞  Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of NASA Biotechnology and Human
    Research, told conference of Manufacturing Chemists’ Association
                                  . . may eventually make it an attrac-
    that nuclear rocket fuel ((.

    tive matter to bring lunar ore to the earth for processing. . . .)’
    Nuclear fuel would reduce the cost of each pound of payload.
∞ USAF Nuclear Effects Research Laboratory dedicated a t Kirtland
    AFB, N.M. Lab was designed to simulate effects of nuclear ex-
    plosions on ballistic missile systems; study effects of radiation on
    people and electronic systems ; simulate magnetic and radiation
    effects of high-altitude nuclear explosions ; and conceive radiation
    experiments for space probes.
 ∞ Dr. Andrei S. Severny, Soviet astronomer who heads the Crimean
    Astrophysical Observatory whose 102-in. telescope is the largest
    outside of California, reported a partial theory on cause of solar
    flares-olar    flare convulsion is brought about by a release of the
    accumulation of magnetic energy. Based on observations of
    changes in the strong magnetic fields, Dr. Severny’s interpretation
    of flares is based on technique developed by Dr. Horace D. Bab-
    cock and his son a t Mount Wilson in California. Skeptical of
    Severny’s thesis, a colleague of tlie Babcocks, Dr. Robert Howard,
    was reported in Russia to challenge the Soviet data.
 ∞ Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and International Association of Machinists
    (IAM) union agreed to Federal Mediation Service request that
    they resume negotiations. The request came after the union
    had set Nov. 28 as strike deadline.
∞ Soviet astronomer Vladimir I<. Proliofief reported       that he had
    discovered traces of oxygen in the atmosphere of the planet
    Venus, based on observations from the spectrum of sunlight
    reflected from the Venutian cloud cover.
November 21: Temperature within MARINER 11 Venus probe was
    reported to be rising. Calculations indicated that when the
    spacecraft reached Venus its battery temperature would be
    1 2 9 O , 9’ more than design limit-creating pressures that could
    rupture the sealed battery.
 ∞ NASA confirmed Rift nuclear rocket stage would be manufactured in
    renovated dirigible hangar at Moffett Field NAS, Calif. To be
    used to flight-test NASA-AEC Nerva engine, Rift was being devel-
    oped under technical direction of NASA Marshall Space Flight
     Center with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. as prime contractor.
    Rift would be flight-testcd in 1967-68 as top stage of Advanced
    Saturn (C-5) launch vehicle.
∞  Difficulties in Centaur launch vehicle development were forcing
     NASA to program 1964 Mars probe for Atlas-Agcna vehicle,
    New York Times reported. Use of Atlas-Agena would mean
    smaller payload, with about 60 Ibs. of instruments instead of
     200 Ibs.
 ∞ USAF launched unidentified Blue Scout probe from PMR.
                                                                    249
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1963

November 22: Soviet astronomer Dr. Vasily Grigorgevich Fesenkov
      reported in interview his conclusion that earth is followed by a
      comet-like tail, the tip of which stretches as far out as the moon’s
      orbit. From lifetime of observations of zodiacal light and gegen-
      schein, Dr. Fesenkov believes solar winds and sunlight pressures
      form tail from dust cloud enveloping the earth.
November 23: MARINER 11 reported by JPL to have again lost power
      from one of its solar panels on November 15 (similar to inopera-
      tive period between October 31 and November 7, after which it
      suddenly returned to life). Temperatures in MARINER 11 con-
      tinued to mount within 20’ F of what was foreseen (200° F
      on sunward face of solar panels, 100’ F toward the shady side).
  ∞ Letter from President Kennedy defending Administration policy of
      permittin astronauts to sell their personal stories for profit was
      made pub7ic by M. B. Schnapper, editor of Public Affairs Press,
      in Washington, D.C. Replying to Mr. Schnapper’s criticism of
      the policy, the President said the “policy decision was reached
      only after most careful review of all the facts and lengthy con-
      sultation both within and without the Government. Efforts
      were directed toward removing specific controversial aspects of the
      original astronaut agreement, and we feel that this goal has been
      reasonably achieved.”
∞ In interview, FAA Administrator Najeeb Halaby stated that he

      would probably recommend the development of a 2,000 mph
      commercial jet transport, pending results of a full study. Super-
      sonic transport would carry up to 150 passengers between New
      York and Los Angeles in one hour and 40 minutes. Development
      costs of perhaps $700 million would, said industry leaders, require
      Federal subsidy.
 ∞ I n press interview in Houston, Astronauts Leroy Gordon Cooper

       (Maj., USAF) and Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., USN) said television
       pictures of Maj. Cooper would be transmitted to ground stations
       during MA-9 flight by means of miniature transmitter inside the
       Mercury spacecraft. Pictures could not be viewed live on com-
      mercial TV because transmissions would be on different scan
       speed. Astronaut Cooper also said that a rendezvous maneuver
       had been considered for MA-9 flight, but decision had been made
       not to attempt the maneuver. MA-9 is considered to be the
       last Project Mercury flight, to be followed by Project Gemini.
 November 23-December 2: Space Science Fair, held in Cleveland and
       cosponsored by NASA and Cleveland Plain Dealer, included
       extensive exhibit covering “virtually all topics of space tech-
       nology” as well as series of lectures for junior and senior high
       school students by aerospace scientists and engineers Honorary
       co-chairmen of the fair were NASA Administrator James E. Webb
       and former NASA Administrator T. Keith Glennan, President of
       Case Institute of Technology in Cleveland.
 November 24: USAF launched unnamed satellite from Vandenberg AFB
       with Thor-Agena B booster.
  ∞ DOD announced selection of contractor for 22 test models of TFX
       aircraft (tactical fighter, experimental), the Convair Division of
       General Dynamics, with Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corpora-
       tion as an associate. Based upon much work a t Langley Research
      97317-63-17
250   ASTRONAUTICAL A N D AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    Center, TFX fighter was designed in USAF and USN versions, having
    variable geometry wings for flight speeds up to 1,650 mph.
    Contract which would procure up to 1,500 aircraft was said to
    be bigger than “any fighter aircraft program since World War I1
    in both numbers and dollars.”
November 24: DOD issued restrictions, it was reported by L A . Times,
    on assigning new contracts to strike-threatened Lockheed Air-
    craft Corp. pending settlement of its labor-management dispute.
∞  Soviet astronomer Dr. Iosif Samuilovich Shklovsky, head of radio-
    astronomy department a t Sternb erg Astronomical Institute,
    MOSCOW, in interview with western press that first place to
               said
    seek signs of intelligent extraterrestrial life is in Andromeda
    Nebula. The spiral nebula is closest galaxy to our own Milky
    Way-about 1.5 million light years awa . Reasoning that it
                                                119
    was likely an advanced civilization sho d be able to harness
    enough energy from its sun to create a powerful radio beacon,
    and pointing out that no such beams had been detected from
    other parts of our own galaxy, Dr. Shklovsky said such beams
    could be detected by a single radiotelescope aimed a t the entire
    Andromeda Nebula.
November 25: MARINER 11 Venus probe established new communications
    record, transmitting “excellent quality” data from more than 22.5
    million mi. in space. (PIONEER v robe’s transmission had ceased
    with position signal from 22.5 m d o n mi. in 1960; PIONEER v had
    ceased transmitting scientific data a t 17.7 million mi.) NASA
    said MARINER 11 signals were relaying good data on the four
    scientific experiments on board. MARINER 11 was expected to
    pass within about 21,000 mi. of Venus on Dec. 14.
∞ Dr, Glenn T. Seaborg, AEC Chairman, predicted in interview that

    in 20 years “we’ll be well advanced in the use of nuclear power in
    space both for pro ulsion of rockets and for auxiliary power
    within orbiting sate&tes.
       “Around the year 1982 we will have already made, or be seri-
    ously planning, a manned journey to one of the near planets.
    And we’ll be using nuclear energy rather routinely in satellites
    as an auxiliary source of electric power.
       “For example, by then, we’ll probably be able to have [world]
    television broadcasts relayed by satellites brought directly into
            .
    homes, . . Within 20 years it might be possible to get recep-
    tion direct from a satellite wherever a television set was located,
                                           ..
    even in the darkest part of Africa . .
       “I feel that even such predictions as I have outlined may be
    too conservative in the sense that there may be spectacular
    developments that we do not even foresee . . . .9 ,
∞ U.S. diplomatic source in Geneva disclosed U.S.S.R. had been con-

    ducting nuclear tests at the rate of one every two days since
    Nov. 20, the date reviously announced by Soviet Premier
                         P
    Khrushchev as end o current series.
∞ Pertinent facts of human evolution should be included in prepara-
    tion for interstellar communication, according to Prof. Robert
    Ascher of Cornell Univ. dept of anthropology and his wife, Marcia,
    assistant professor in Ithaca College dept. of mathematics and
    physics. Models of primitive man’s efforts in surmounting bar-
    riers can be used as theoretical background for thinking about
                                                                   251
                        AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S OF 1962
       ASTRONAUTICAL

                          on other planets. Problem of watching and
    Flsteningcivilizationsacrossessentially same as problem oftoprehis-
      ossible
              for signals        space and developing means      reach
    source of those signals is
    toric man making contact with other races or civilizations.
    Ascher also declared whenever two civilizations have made
    contact, conquest by dominant group has followed. Models of
    those communications should be constructed and studied, Ascher
    said, and applied to future interstellar communications.
November 25: Secretar of Defense Robert S. McNamara allotted
                       19
    additional $50 mi ion for development of radar and other com-
    ponents in USAF RS-70 project. DOD announcement said restudy
    of the project had been completed and that recommendations
    had been submitted to President Kennedy last week.
∞ U.S.S.R. waa building an atom accelerator about twice the size of
    any i existence, it was reported. The “alternating gradient syn-
          n
    chrotron” would be able to accelerate a beam of protons to ener-
    gies o 50-70 bev (billion electric volts), as compared to 33-bev
           f
    accelerator at Brookhaven. Atomic research station, with many
    su porting facilities, was located near Serpukhov.
∞ U.S.S.R. was building “largest radiotelescope in existence” near
    Serpukhov, it was reported. 20-acre, cross-shaped radiotelescope
    featured two movable antenna arms of l-km. length with support-
    ing towers of 65-ft. height, the instrument modeled after cross
    designed by Dr. Bernard Y. Mills of Australia. Chief character-
    tic of cross was its ability to collect considerable amount of radio
    energy emanating from an extremely small area of the heavens.
    Another instrument at the radioastronomy station was radiotele-
    scope with parabolic antenna 72-ft. in diameter. Station was
    under direction of Dr. Viktor V. Vitkevich and operated by
    Lebede Institute of Physics of Soviet Academy of Sciences.
November 26: NASA Flight Research Center announced investigation
    of x-15 No. 2 accident on Nov. 9 had revealed probable cause
    was succession of equipment failures coupled with landing gear
    colla se. Inability of rocket engine to attain full power was
    attriguted to faulty governor actuator which prevented engine’s
                                                  . Failure in engine’s
    receiving suEcient amount of
    receiving mechanism did not a1propellant flaps to come down
                                        ow landing
    and resulted in high load on aircraft’s landing gear. Unusually
    high landing-load caused collapse of main landing gear soon after
     the X-15 touched down at Mud Lake, Nev. Pilot John McKay
    sustained severe bruises, a back injury, and shock; but he had
    been released from hospital and had returned to work at NASA
     Flight Research Center. Accident was under continuing inves-
     tigation by NASA and USAF engineers, with plans calling for
    mechanical improvement in flap-lowering mechanism before an-
    other x 1 flight.
             -5
∞  Dr. Harold Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist, predicted U.S. would
    land a man on the moon in 1969.
∞  Bell Telephone Laboratories reported TELSTAR communications
    satellite’s refusal to res ond to transmitter cut-off commands
                              K
    had been followed by t e satellite’s turning off its command
    receiver. Bell scientists expected to correct TELSTAR communi-
     cations system by remote control.
252    ASTRONAUTICAL A N D AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S O F 1 9 62

November 26: Closed-door sessions of the 13 directors of Communica-
       tions Satellite Corp. were reported in Drew Pearson’s column,
       discussions on the revolution in communications made by satel-
       lites and the international complications involved.
∞  J . G. Morse of Martin-Marietta Corp. told Atomic Industrial Forum
       in Washington that the Government should begin immediately
       to develop nuclear power systems for communications satellites.
       Morse suggested that only nuclear power in form of radioactive
       chemical or isotopic generators could satisfy communications
       satellite needs-systems in power range of 60 to 300 watts, with
       operational lifetimes of more than 10 years.
 ∞ Soviet scientist Nikolai Semyonov, writing in Pravda, noted that
       many U.S. corporations had applied-science laboratories and
       U.S. universities had laboratories devoted to pure science. ((. . .
       This is profitable for them inasmuch as it is university science
      which gives them, in the main, those fundamental Scientific
      results which supply the laboratories of corporations, and through
       them,. production.” Mr. Semyonov’s article was in support of
      Premier Khrushchev’s order that Soviet research institutions be
      developed on an industry basis.
November 27: Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from White
       Sands Missile Range, N.M., in NASA experiment to gather data
      on solar radiation intensity in ultraviolet region. Rocket carried
       spectrophotometer package to 124-mi. altitude. Preliminary
      experimental results: “High voltage arcing in the instrumenta-
       tion prohibited collection of scientific d a t a . . . .9 ,
∞ Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary
      Programs, NASA Office of Space Sciences, was appointed chairman
      of Joint Working Group of NASA Office of Space Sciences and
      Office of Manned Space Flight. Group would be responsible for
       (1) recommending detailed program of scientific exploration in
      future manned flights; (2) defining information desired from
      unmanned flights to support manned flights; and (3) establishing
      and maintaining close liaison with NASA field centers, other
      Government agencies, and universities in development of inte-
      grated scientific program for manned flight. Dr. Shoemaker had
      been employed by U.S. Geological Survey as Chief of Astrogeology
      Branch in Menlo Park, Calif.
∞ Experimental new method of producing synthesis of chemicals with
      low-energy ions was reported by Rocket Power, Inc., a solid-
      propellant manufacturer. Milton Farber, vice president and
      director of laboratories, and Dr. Stanley Singer, chief chemist,
      indicated several new compounds had been produced. Mr.
      Farber said the ion-synthesis method could produce rocket
      propellants perhaps 10 per cent more efficient than any now
      available in US. (‘The key is the speed of the ions. I the beam
                                                                   f
      of ions meets the target chemical a t too high a rate, shattering
      occurs. By controlling the velocity of the ions, they can be made
      to merge with the chemical, creating a new compound.” Research
      project was sponsored by USAF OAR.
∞ Representative Chet Holifield, Chairman of Joint Congressional
      Committee on Atomic Energy, declared in speech that “moon
      madness” is starving scientific programs other than space ex-
     ploration. He predicted budgetary troubles for atomic energy
     programs because of “greater priority” of space programs.
                                                                    253
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

November 27-December 9: Four launchings of Centaur rockets took
    place from the Argentine Rocket Range, Chamical, as part of
    worldwide program of simultaneous measurements of winds and
     turbulence in the ionosphere by means of sodium-cloud experi-
    ments. The Argentine launchings were joint cooperative effort
    of French National Committee on Space Studies and the Argen-
    tine National Commission on Space Research.
November 28: Presidential Science Adviser Jerome Wiesner, speaking
     before American Society of Mechanical Engineers in New York,
    said special panel to study scienti6c manpower had concluded
     that “impending shortages of talented, highly trained scientists
     and engineers threaten successful fulfillment of vital national
     commitments.” As first step to overcome shortage, Wiesner
    urged that 8,000 additional college students enroll in autumn
     1963 as full-time graduate students in engineering mathematics,
     and physics. Panel set goal of 7,500 Ph. D. graduates by 1970
     (3,000 Ph. D. degrees were awarded in 1960).
∞  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center released sketch of Project Apollo
    suit to be worn by astronauts making four-hour expeditions on
    lunar surface. Suit contains portable life support system to
    supply oxygen and pressurization, control temperature and
    humidity, and protect against solar radiation.
 ∞ AEC announced first U.S. “breeder-reactor” had achieved self-
    sustaining nuclear chain reaction. Producing more fuel than it
    burns, plutonium-fueled reactor was expected to become valuable
     and economical power source.
∞ Dr. Edward     Teller, Associate Director of Lawrence Radiation
    Laboratory, told American Nuclear Society in Washington that
    peaceful use of atomic explosives had ‘%hepotentiality of becom-
    ing the first really important and thoroughly economic use of
     atomic energy.)) Feasibility of such use was demonstrated last
    summer with 100-kiloton thermonuclear explosion at 635-ft.
    depth in Nevada, the explosion removing about 7,500,000 cu. yds.
    of earth and leaving crater 1,200 ft. in diameter and 320 f t . deep.
    Dr. Teller said radioactivity can be controlled so that excavated
     area can be entered a few weeks after the explosion with no more
     exposure than in an atomic laboratory. He predicted nuclear
    explosions on the moon could be used to extract water from
    chemical compounds in lunar rock.
∞ International Association of Machinists (IAM)      workers struck at
    Lockheed Aircraft Corp. in California, Florida, and Hawaii.
     President Kennedy, invoking Taft-Hartley Act, created three-
    man board of in uiry to investigate the dispute; board’s recom-
                      B
    mendations, due ec. 3, would contribute t o President’s decision
     whether to request Federal court order barring strike for 80-day
     period. Included in Lockheed production items are Agena
     second-stage rocket, used by USAF and in NASA Ranger and
     Mariner programs.
 ∞ USAF Skybolt missile failed fifth flight-test, dropping into Atlantic
     Ocean minutes after launch from high-flying airplane.
 ∞ Nike-Zeus antimissile was shot outside earth’s atmosphere and
     successfully maneuvered with controlled blasts of rocket exhaust,
     in test over the PMR.
 ∞ Rodney D. Steward was named RL-10 rocket engine program
     manager a t NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Steward
254   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    replaced William D. Brown, who resumed full-time duties as
    deputy chief, Engine Management Office, MSFC.
November 28: Project stabilization agreement-set of standard pay
    and benefit practices for both union and non-union workers-
    was adopted a t Cape Canaveral, it was reported. Agreement
    was product of more than a year’s negotiation by contractors
    and unions working at Cape Canaveral, undertaken at suggestion
    of President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission.
November 29: Dr. EdwardlWelsh, Executive Secretary of the National
    Aeronautics and Space Council, told Atomic Industrial Forum :
     “We cannot afford to find ourselves with a space gap due to a
    lack of advanced planning and of attention to advanced develop-
    ments. Yet, we will assuredly have such a gap if we do not push
    enthusiastically the potential of nuclear energy and power a t an
                                               .
    increasing rats in the field of space. . . It would indeed be
     foolish not to develop and use the propulsion system which would
    carry the greatest weights the greatest distances most economi-
    cally. The potential of nuclear propulsion in such an objective
    cannot be overestimated. . . .9 ,
 ∞ NASA test pilot John McKay predicted X-15 would soon attain
    speeds seven times speed of sound at altitudes up to 500,000 ft.
    during a new series of flights.
 ∞ AFSSD broke ground at Edwards AFB for construction of world’s
    largest and most highly instrumented solid-rocket engine test
    facility. Stand was primarily to test five-segment 120-in. solid
    rockets for Titan 1 1 but it also had capacity to test segmented
                         1,
    solid rocketszup toland fincludng 156-in.
November 30: Franco-American scientific sounding rocket launchings
            
    coordinated when two U.S. launchings were made from Wallops
    Island while France launched one from Algeria and failed to
    launch one from France. First U.S. rocket (Nike-Cajun) fired
    a t 5:57 AM carried a Langmuir probe to determine electron
    density and the temperature of the “E” layer of the ionosphere
     (50-100 miles altitude) ; the second (Nike-Apache) launched a t
    6:15 AM, released a sodium vapor cloud to 106-mi. altitude which
    spread over 100 miles of the eastern seaboard. “Sporadic E”
    regions of the ionosphere have electron density that reflects much
    higher radio frequencjes, and may result from wind shears. On
    November 7, GSFC scientists undertook the first sounding rocket
    firings to examine correlation between “E” region and wind shears.
 ∞ Sixth and final powered test of Kiwi B-4A ground-test reactor for
    Project Rover was successful at Jackass Flats, Nev. Newsmen
    were permitted to watch this test from a mile away, the first
    test to which outside observers had been allowed. Kiwi B-4A,
    looking more like a flyable engine than some of its predecessors,
    was mounted on a remote-controlled railroad flatcar, consumed
     tons of liquid hydrogen in the half-power, five-min. test. Part
    of the joint AEC-NASA program for development of a nuclear-
    powered rocket, the series of ground reactors tested different
    reactor designs, fuels, metals, and accessories.
                                                                     255
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1963

November 30: Dr. Jesse L. Greenstein, prof. of astrophysics a t Cal
          
    Tech, estimated aggregate of energy far out in universe was equal
    to amount of energy released by 10,000,000 stars like our sun in
    their entire lifetimes. “No known hysical phenomenon can
                                           up
    account for it. It must be the res t of some fantastic catas-
    trophe in the universe,” Dr. Greenstein said. Electromagnetic
    energy was detected by radiotelescopes.
 ∞ Representative Charles E. Goodell (R-N.Y.) , speaking a t House
    Education Subcommittee hearing, criticized NASA’s         hopes to re-
    cruit 1,000 graduate students into space research each year
    during this decade: “That’s125 per cent of our production of
    Ph.D.’s in the space-oriented sciences. That’s an incredible
    share of our brainpower to concentrate on one agency.” John
    F. Clark, Associate Director and Chief Scientist, NASA Office of
    Space Sciences, defended NASA aim as being commensurate with
            share of total Government expenditures for research.
    NASA’s
 ∞ Representative John E. Moss (D-Calif.) ,Chairman of special House
    Subcommittee on Government Information, criticized “Govern-
    ment news management which is unique in peacetime.” He
    objected stron lg to handling of news about military space
    launches : “All Taunches by military agencies, whether they are
    for a military purpose or to gather information of a scientific
    nature, are covered by a blanket of secrecy. . . . AII informa-
    tion about the billions of dollars spent, by the military in space
    research is channeled through the Pentagon’s single public
    information voice.”
       Moss recalled last September when NASA said that six Russian
    attempts to send space probes to Venus and Mars had failed.
    Since then, Moss said, “there has been a complete blackout of
    information about Russian satellite efforts. This is the kind of
    news management that causes grave concern. . . . I we coverf
                             .
    up Russian successes . . we can certainly cover up our failures.
    This . . . leads to a dangerous delusion of the American people. ”
                                             D. D. Eisenhower recom-
∞ In press interview, former President

    mended reduction in next year’s Federal spending by a t least
    $4 billion, with $2 billion coming out of the $4-billion space budget.
∞ At meeting of the National Academy of Sciences a t Austin, Texas,
    President Frederick Seitz said that other nations should bear a
    larger share of space exploration efforts. This would help solve
        big problem for us today-whether the attention being given
    to aero-space in America is draining too much manpower from
    the other sciences.”
∞ Secretary of Labor W. Willard Wirtz said in San Francisco that
    Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s “extraordinary intransigence” was
    responsible for deadlocked negotiations with the International
    Association of Machinists which resulted in two-day strike (IAM
    strikers returned to work today). Three-man board of inquiry
    appointed by the President began their investigation of the
    9mion shop” conflict.
During November: In letter to House Committee on Science and Astro-
    nautics, NASA Administrator James E. Webb advised Congress of
    plans to reprogram $10,426,000 in F Y 1963 funds to begin
    construction of facilities at White Sands Missile Range (WSMR).
256                                                       1962
      ASTRONATTFICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF

    Of this sum, $1,717,000 was needed for Little Joe launch-complex
    construction; $9,084,000 was for site development and support
    facilities.
During November: Goodyear Aircraft Corp. announced development
    of tunnel to simulate conditions encountered by satellites, missile
    nose cones, and recovery packages during re-entry into earth’s
    atmosphere.
∞ Aerojet-General Corp. reported first successful firing of development
    engine for Apollo spacecraft’s service module, full-scale prototype
    engine with ablative thrust chamber assembly fired for checkout
    runs up to 50 sec.
∞ General Dynamics/Astronautics named by NASA as systems inte-
    gration contractor for Project Fire re-entry test program. Project
    systems included Atlas D launch vehicle built by GD/A, velocity
    package built by Chance Vought, and re-entry vehicle built by
    Republic Aviation.
∞ NASA selected Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. as
    prime contractor to manage and integrate spacesuit program for
    Project Apollo as well as to design and produce its life-support
    pack. Spacesuit development and fabrication would be done
    by International Latex Corp. under subcontract.
∞ USAF OAR announced it had awarded basic research grants and con-
    tracts to 56 universities and 20 research firms in U.S. and Europe
    in November.
∞  USAF awarded Radio Corp. of America a contract to develop new
    communications system which would allow X-20 to maintain
    communications with ground stations during re-entry. New
    system would use frequencies in “super high” range and would
    sustain communications for greater than 97 per cent of re-entry
    phase.
∞ General Dynamics/Astronautics announced results of its molecular
    erosion-rate tests of low-altitude satellites showed erosion due
    to molecular bombardment was less than one billionth of an inch
    per year.
∞ Project Mercury boilerplate capsule successfully landed at Gary
    Army Air Field, Tex., in soft-landing technique being studied by
    NASA Manned Spacecraft Center for future manned space ve-
    hicles. System utilizes retrorocket for deceleration and steer-
    able paraglider device. Three previous landing tests were made
    on water.
∞ Dr. Marvin H. Gold, manager of Propellant Chemicals Div. of
    Aerojet-General’s Solid Rocket Plant, was awarded Navy Meri-
    torious Public Service Citation by ONR for his contributions to
    high energy rocket propulsion for advanced Polaris.
∞ NASA Ames Research Center established Space Sciences Div. to be
    headed by Dr. Charles P. Sonett. New division will conduct
    research in the areas of geophysics, interplanetary and planetary
    physics, planetary sciences, astronomy, and astrophysics.
                            DECEMBER 1962
December 1: Three sounding rockets were launched from NASA Wal-
    lops Station in series of GSFC experiments to study structure and
    composition of upper atmosphere and ionosphere:
       Nike-Apache carried 65-lb. payload to 105-mi. altitude, pay-
    load designed to measure electron density and temperature and
    ion density and conductivity of the ionosphere.
       Nike-Apache with 70-lb. payload containing Pitot-static probe
    reached 82-mi. altitude, instrumentation designed to measure
    pressure, temperature, density, and winds in upper atmosphere.
       Nike-Cajun with payload to measure winds and temperatures
    in upper atmosphere, payload consisting of 12 special explosive
    charges which were detonated at intervals from about 24 to 58 mi.
       NASA Nike-Apache was also launched from Eglin Gulf Test
    Range, Fla., to 128-mi. altitude to measure winds by sodium
    vapor method.
∞ Medium-angle camera on TIROS VI meteorological satellite stopped
    transmi ttmg pictures, during orbit 1,074, but satellite’s wide-
    angle camera was still sending pictures of “excellent quality.”
    Through orbit 1,073, the medium-angle, Tegea-lens camera took
     12,337 cloud-cover pictures of which 11,131 or 90.2% were usabIe
    for weather analysis.
∞ President Kennedy was reported by N w York Times to have re-
                                           e
    quested Bureau of the Budget to look into possibility of ob taining
    extra funds for US. manned lunar flight program. An additional
    $300,000,000 to $400,000,000 was estimated requirement for
    fiscal year 1963. President’s request came after White House
    meeting with NASA Administrator James E. Webb and NASA
    Director of Manned Space Flight D. Brainerd HoImes.
∞ Unnamed DOD spokesman said DOD was preparing a list of exceptions
    to its ban against disclosing information on military space shots.
    New list of exceptions would provide for information about both
    launch and subsequent performance of USAF, USN, and US. Army
    scientific research vehicles. Specifically included were X-20
    (Dyna Soar) manned space vehicle; Project West Ford (orbiting
    metallic filaments) ; space projects to gain scientific data; Transit
    navigational satellite; Project Anna geodetic satellite; and U.S.
    Army scientific rocket launchings from White Sands Missile
    Range, N.M.
∞ Harold Berger, Associate Physicist at Argonne National Laboratory,
    said recent experiments with neutron beams had demonstrated
    they not only match penetrating power of x-rays but also reveal
    structural features which x-rays cannot expose. “It has been
    known virtually from the time the neutron was discovered 30
    years ago that these particles might be used to make pictures
    through objects opaque to light,” Berger said. “But neutron
    radiography could not be developed until sources of slow neutron
    beams became available. Such sources were provided by the
    development of the nuclear reactor and particle accelerator.
                                                               257
258    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 6 2

    The value of neutrons is that their absorption characteristics
    are quite different from those of x-rays. . . .
       “One of the fascinating things that has emerged concerning
    neutron radio raphy is that the same neutron beam used to
                   B
    inspect severa inches of uranium or lead can be used to inspect
    specimens such as leaves, insects, and thinner biological speci-
    mens.”
December 1: “Upper Mantle Project” to explore outermost 600 mi. of
    earth’s solid-rock interior was reported by National Academy of
    Sciences’ Geophysics Research Board. The $3 1 million inter-
    national study would take three years.
 ∞ Aerospace Industries Association told designers and manuf scturers
    that the (‘number one target in all technical fields” in coming
    decade would be improved reliability. (‘An entirely new method-
    ology must be developed to obtain the necessary reliability of
    space missions,” AIA report said.
December 2: MARINER 11 Venus probe was 27,293,368 mi. from earth
    and traveling 81,080 mph through space. Launched Aug. 27,
    the spacecraft had traveled 158 million mi. on its orbital path
    toward Venus.
∞ 20th anniversary of first controlled, self-sustaining nuclear reaction,
    achieved at Univ. of Chicago in 1942. AEC reported an estimated
    518 reactors now in operation or under construction around the
    world, with 286 in US., 39 in U.S.S.R., 39 in U.K., 25 in France,
    18 in West Germany, 14 in Italy, 11 in Japan, and 10 in Canada.
∞ Radiation research results reported by George M. Woodwell of

    Brookhaven National Laboratory to American Association for
    the Advancement of Science showed that plants, like animals,
    vary in sensitivity to radiation. Large plants that reproduce slow-
    ly, such as trees, appear more susceptible to radiation than less
                                                     .
    complex plants, such as algae and fungi. “. . The hy othesis
                                                                P
    seems tenable that small organisms with wide ecologica am$-
    tudes and high rates of reproduction-in short, weeds and other
    organisms frequently considered pestiferous because of their
    persistence under persecution-have survival advantage under
    conditions of long-term exposure to ionizing radiation over large
    organisms with longer life cycles.”
∞  Development of two-way portable communicator providing con-
    fidential conversations up to 10 mi. apart via infrared beams was
    announced by Raytheon Co. Pencil-thin light beam is so narrow
    that it is virtually impossible to intercept or tap, Raytheon said.
December 3: Successful ground tests of Automatic Picture Transmis-
    sion (APT) subsystem reported by NASA. To be flight-tested on
    a Tiros satellite next year, APT would eventually enable weather
    stations to obtain local cloud-cover pictures directly from orbiting
    weather satellites, thus making possible a world-wide weather
    satellite service.
                                       told U.N. General Assembly’s
∞ Senator Albert Gore (D-Tenn.)
    Political Committee that US. was seeking following goals in
    space policy:
       “TObe guided by the general principles already laid down by
    the United Nations for establishment of a regime of law in outer
    space, and to negotiate an extension of those principles by inter-
    national agreement.
                                                                   259
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

       “TOconclude a treaty banning immediately the testing of any
     more nuclear weapons in outer space.
        “To preclude the placing in orbit of weapons of mass deatruc-
     tion.
        “TOtake all reasonable and practicable steps, including con-
     sultation with the world’s scientific community, to avoid space
     experiments with harmful effects.
        “To conduct a program which is as open as our securit n.eeds
                                                               I
     will permit and as cooperative as others are willing to ma e it.
        “To press forward with the establishment of an integrated
     global satellite communication system for commercial needs and
     a cooperative weather satellite system, both with broad inter-
     national participation.”
December 3: DOD announced it had canceled plans for immediate
            
     development of detector-interceptor satellite (unofficially called
     “Project Saint”), and that the project was being ‘le-oriented
     towards achieving longer-term” objectives. Official explanation
    was that Saint had been “bypassed by technological develop-
    ments.”
∞ NASA and Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories launched
    Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Eglin Gulf Test Range, Fla.
    Intended to measure winds by sodium vapor method, rocket rose
    to 117-mi. altitude and emitted a fair vapor trail.
∞  NASA request for AEC study of nuclear power unit was reported.
    40-watt units for NASA interplanetary monitoring probes would
    be launched at rate of two per year for four years, beginning in
    1964.
 ∞ President Kennedy presented AEC’S Enrico Fermi Award for 1962,
    carrying a $50,000 prize, to nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller,
    the citation reading: “For contributions to chemical and nuclear
    physics, for his leadership in the thermonuclear research and for
    efforts to strengthen national security.”
 ∞ Temporary restraining order against, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and
    International Association of Machinists to prevent further IAM
    strike action was issued by U.S. District Judge Jesse Curtis,
    effective until Dec. 13. Hearings on Justice Dept. request for
    temporary injunction, based on report from President Kennedy’s
    three-man board of inquiry, were set for Dec. 10.
 ∞ Editorial on tactical fighter (TFX) program, contract for which was
    awarded to General Dynamics and Grumman Aircraft by DOD,
    appeared in Aviation Week and Space Technology:
         .
        “. . Underlying the whole TFX concept is one of the solid,
    basic technical explorations by the researchers of the old Na-
    tional Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) that did SO
    much to keep this country the international leader in supersonic
    aircraft development. Without the fundamental research into
    the variable sweep wing and the detailed development of this
      rinci le by the Langley research laboratory
    fohn Htmk, the current TFX concepts of both
                                    .
    would have been impossible. . . The full
    contribution to the TFX program should be hammered home as an
    example of how these research and development investments
    eventually pay substantial dividends. . . .”
260    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 19 6 2

December 4: USAF announced launch of unidentified satellite with
    Thor-Agena booster from Vandenberg AFB. This was 100th
    launch with Thor as space booster, 93 of which were considered
    successful. To date, Thor launched more satellites and probes
    into space than all other boosters combined, including PIONEER I
    space probe, EXPLORER VI scientific satellite, PIONEER v space
    probe, and TIROS I weather satellite as Thor-Able vehicle; and
    ECHO I balloon-satellitte, os0 I, ARIEL, TELSTAR, and four Tiros
    satellites as Thor-Delta. Thor-Able-Star (Vanguard-derived
    upper stages) combination launched series of USN navigation
    satellites, Army communications satellites, and tri-service ANNA
    geodetic satellite. With Agena upper stage, Thor boosted series
    of USAF satellites as well as Canadian ALOUETTE satellite for NASA.
∞  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center launched two Nike-Cajun
    sounding rockets, one from Wallops Island, Va., and one from
    Ft. Churchill, Canada, for purpose of comparing data on wind
    and temperatures in upper atmosphere. Nike-Cajun from Ft.
    Churchill reached 69-mi. altitude and ejected 12 high-explosive
    grenades which detonated on schedule; ground instrumentation
    measured sound energy from exploding grenades and recorded
    rocket position during flight. Nike-Cajun from Wallops Island
    performed unsatisfactorily, reaching altitude of only 3 1.8 mi. in-
    stead of 69 mi. predicted; only two grenade explosions were
    observed.
∞ NASA announced award of contract to Army Corps of Engineers to
    define a research program necessary to give the U S . capability
    to construct research station on the moon. D. Brainerd Holmes,
    Director of NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, said NASA does
    not have a program to establish a “manned lunar laboratory,”
    but that initial studies “are required now which can lead to the
    existence of a lunar construction capability.” Objectives of the
    six-month, $100,000 study: (1) define R & D effort required t o pro-
    vide U.S. lunar research capability; (2) define needed experi-
    mental facilities; and (3) prepare schedules and budgetary esti-
    mates for a lunar construction research program. Areas of
    research would include lunar soil characteristics; lunar soil move-
    ment and excavation techniques; construction materials; struc-
    tural design; power generation; storing and handling of life-
    supporting atmosphere, water supply, and sanitation; construc-
    tion tools; and human engineering and training.
∞ Dr. Victor A. Belaunde of Peru told U.N. General Assembly’s
    Political Committee that it was “imperative that we have a co-
    ordinating authority and a finally decisive authority, with deci-
    sive jurisdiction” to regulate exploration of space. He said the
    jurisdiction must be that of the U.N.
∞ Soviet news agency Tass announced MARS I interplanetar probe
    was now more than 7 million mi. from earth; all onboardy equip-
    rnent was working normally and the spacecraft was sending back
    radio reports to earth. MARS I was expected to pass within
    120,000 mi. of Mars in June 1963.
∞ Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, told
    Joint Computer Coderence in Philadelphia: ‘(. . . It is no exag-
    geration to say that we could never have succeeded in orbiting
    and tracking even the simplest satellite without the availability of
                                                                    261
                                              EVENTS 9 ’ 1 0 6 2
       ASTRONAUT‘ICAL AND AERONAUTICAL                3

    computers. . . . And it is certainly true that one of the major
    pacing elements in our rate of progress toward achieving the
    national goals in space will be the development of pro ressively
    more advanced computers and computer techniques to %elp cope
    with the even greater tasks ahead.
       I t . . . [Data processing] systems of the future, as we see them,

    will involve compatible combinations of computer and ancillary
    devices, some of which will be spaceborne, some stationed on
    celestial bodies other than the earth, and some of course will
    still be here on earth.
       “Such computer systems will be required to perform naviga-
    tional and attitude control tasks; edit and store scientific and
    engineering data; make calculations of a conventional nature;
    time sequences of operations; feed displays; and trigger alarms.
       “A task for the future is to extend . . . [the computer’s
    pre-launch checkout] function to spacecraft for launching from
    orbit, for landing on celestial bodies, and for take-off’ from remote
    pIanets for return to earth. . . . What we are looking for are
    systems which are fully automatic and fast. . . .
       “It is apparent that in general a rather complete distribution
    range of computing burden will exist. In some missions, such
    as close-to-earth satellite, earthbased computing equipment will
    perform most of the processing required. Other missions, such
    as one bound for Pluto, will require the autonomous activity of
    a highly redundant, self-adaptive, self-checking computer com-
    plex aboard the spacecraft.
        “A vital need, therefore, is determination of the optimum
                                                               ..
    nature, disposition and use of computing equipment. .
                       .
       “Eventually .       . we may have large numbers of vehicles
                                          .
    simultaneously operating in space. . . In such a situation we
    will need sophisticated and very comprehensive Flight Control
    Centers, with compatible computer systems aboard the space-
    craft, to handle information on flight status, command control,
    navigation, and program sequences. . . . 11
December 4: U S . Army Nike-Hercules missile exploded over McGregor
    Missile Range, Tex., killing French officer and injuring four other
    persons. Range safety officer reportedly detonated the missile
    a t 500-ft. altitude when it veered off course.
December 5: US. and U.S.S.R. announced in U.N. their bilateral
    agreement to cooperate in space exploration programs of weather
    observation, magnetic-field study, and satellite communications.
    In meteorology, agreement called for experimental phase extend-
    ing through 1964 “during the development of experimental
    weather satellites” by both countries ; second phase would begin
    approximately 1964-65 with coordinated launchings by both
    countries of weather satellite system for operational use. In
    magnetic survey, agreement called for U S . and U.S.S.R. each to
    launch a satellite equipped with magnetometers during Inter-
    national Year of the Quiet Sun (IQSY), 1964-65. Both countries
    agreed to use the intervening years to continue their own magnetic
    mea.surement research and to exchange the data obtained. In
    satellite communications, agreement called for US. and U.S.S.R.
    to cooperate during coming year in communications experiments
    via U.S.passive communications satellite Echo A-12. Future
262   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    negotiations would consider cooperative efforts in experimental
    system of active-repeater satellites. Agreement provided that
     “the results of these cooperative experiments would be made
    freely available to all interested states,” U.S. Ambassador to the
    U.N. Adlai Stevenson said. Agreement was product of Geneva
    negotiations between U.S. team headed by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden,
    NASA Deputy Administrator, and Soviet team headed by Prof.
    Anatoli A. Blagonravov, conducted in spring of 1962.
December 5: Nike-Cajun launched from NASA Wallops Station carried
    electron-density and temperature instrumentation to 80-mi. alti-
    tude, as part of current series of upper-atmosphere studies.
∞ Sodium-vapor experiment launched with Nike-Apache vehicle from
    NASA Wallops Station was not successful because the payload
    did not perform properly. Flight was part of current upper-
    atmosphere studies being conducted by NASA Goddard Space
    Flight Center.
 ∞ Committee for International Year of the Quiet Sun (IQSY), meeting
    in London, approved worldwide research program to be conducted
    during 1964-65 eriod of minimum solar activity. Proposed
    program includex multi-nation participation in such research
    areas as meteorology, geomagnetism, aurora, airglow, ionosphere,
    solar activity, cosmic rays, and aeronomy. Project was out-
    growth of International Geo hysical Year (IGY), 1957-58, con-
                                 E
    sidered highly successful bot in scientific results and in inter-
    national cooperation.
 ∞ John Dykstra, president of Ford Motor Co., told American Ord-
    nance Association meeting that a great potential defense capa-
    bility lay untapped in industry-particularly in heavy, mass-
    producing manufacturing. Asserting that the problem of de-
    veloping and maintaining broad defense and s ace capability
                                                     P
    throughout industry had not been adequately rea ized or defined,
    Dykstra suggested reorganizing U.S. productive resources and
    putting “much more of our heavy manufacturing industry in a
    state of preparedness to switch readily from peacetime to war-
    time production. Such preparedness would mean, a t a mini-
    mum, that heavy industry would be kept current in matters of
    defense technolo y in areas of natural interest to it. Such
                     f
    preparedness cou d also involve a broader distribution of space
    and defense research and development effort, as well as of pro-
    duction, on a systematic basis. . . .
       “Whatever form an Industrial National Guard might take, I
    believe the concept is essential. In view of the enormous de-
    mands now being made on all our resources of brainpower, we
    cannot afford to make less than the best possible economic and
    eacient use of them. . . .3,
∞ Titan I ICBM was successfully fired 4,000 mi. down the PMR in test
    of recently modified ground support equipment. This was sixth
    Titan I launch from Vandenberg AFB.
∞ Rear Adm. Luis de Florez died a t age 73;he had been instrumental
    in 1945 “Project Paperclip” to ensure German scientists and
    engineers would come to U.S.
∞ Nine Soviet cosmonauts were lost in space between February 1959
    and October 1961, it was reported by Oton Ambroz of North
    American Newspaper Alliance (NANA). Article, relying heavily
                                                                   263
                                                       OF 1962
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS

    on European sources, claimed five cosmonauts were sent on
    orbital space flights from which they did not return; two cosmo-
    nauts, a man and woman, orbited in a single spacecraft May 17,
    1961, but did not return; and two cosmonauts, man and woman,
    were sent on lunar a g h t Oct. 14, 1961. Conversations of the
    dual flights were reportedly monitored by Western receivers ;
    signal from a single cosmonaut (“World-S.O.S.4.O.S.”) was
    received Nov. 28, 1960. Other flights were based on rece tion
    of physiological, tracking, and other signals. None of the 8 g h t s
    was reported),by U.S.S.R. andjNASA had no comment on the
    re ort.
      f
December 5: Upon returning to Sweden from Moscow, Swedish scien-
    tist Bjoern Malmgren reported that two Soviet coqmonauts were
    being trained in Swedish-built centrifuge for a t n p around the
    moon and back. Malmgren reported Soviet space officials told
    him the venture was planned for late next year.
 ∞ USAF Atlas missile flight-test series was completed with successful
    Atlas F flight 5,000 mi. down AMR. Witnessing the launch was
    “father” of the Atlas-Karel J. Bossart, project e n e e e r a t
    GD/A since five-engine Atlas development was initiated in 1946.
    DOD canceled program in 1947 and subsequently redesi ned the
                                                              f
    ICBM to three-engine configuration, first flight-tested une 11,
    1957. Since then 151 Atlases were launched (105 of them from
    AFMTC) with 108 successes. Future Atlas missiles launched from
    Cape Canaveral would be involved in space-probe missions or in
    testing nose cones.
December 6: Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops
    Station to measure high-altitude winds and temperatures, the
    payload consisting of 12 special explosive charges which were
    ejected and detonated a t intervals from 24- to 57-mi. altitude.
∞  Roger Seydoux, French ambassador to U.N., announced that France
    planned to launch its first satellite by 1965, and that .France
    would continue its space activities “ a t the rhythm required by
    the present day world-.”
 ∞ Titan I1 missile, fired from CaDe Canaveral, failed to travel planned
    8,000 mi. because of malfunhion in second stage.
∞ Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, was among the
    five i ederal employees presented with the distinguished Rocke-
          5
    feller Public Service Award for 1962 by President Kennedy.
∞ Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Project Div. of NASA
    Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded 1962 Hermann
    Oberth Award of the Alabama section, American Rocket Society.
 ∞ No funds for Skybolt missile development were included in Secretary
    of Defense McNamara’s proposed FY 1964 budget, it was re-
    ported. DOD officially acknowledged it was giving the Skybolt
    project a “hard look.” Each of Skybolt’s five flight-tests had
    been unsuccessful.
 ∞ USN advanced Polaris A-3 missile, launched f o Cape Ca’naveral,
                                                 rm
    began twisting after second-stage ignition and had to be destroyed
    by range safety officer. Large section of the missile, still under
    power, escaped detonation ands buddenly shifted off course,
    landing in ocean 300-350 mi. northeast of Cape Canaveral and
    about 150 mi. east of Savannah, Ga. Range safety procedures
    were under careful review as result of the errant missile’s fight.
264    ASTRONAUTICAL A N D A E R O N A U T I C A L E V E N T S OF 1 9 62

December 7 : Analysis of data from MARINER 11 interplanetary probe
    revealed there are 10,000 times as many small dust particles near
    the earth as there are in interplanetary space, reported W. M.
    Alexander of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. This was
    revision of earlier estimate of 1,000 times as many dust particles
    near eartb as in interplanetary space. Other observations from
    MARINER 11 included in the report, which was published in Science:
    solar plasma experiment showed constant presence of solar plasma
     (or “solar wind”), generally ranging from 850,000 mph to 1,-
    550,000 mph; magnetometer experiment found “convincing
    evidence” that magnetic fields of a t least a few gamma are
    nearly always present, except perhaps for occasional, transient
    lulls.
∞  MARINER 11 temperatures continued rising, JPL reported, but all
    systems aboard the Venus probe were functioning normally.
    MARINER 1 temperatures, planned for maximum 140’ F, had
                 1
    reached l6Oo F.
∞  X-14.4 VTOL aircraft was being used in research for lunar-landing
9

    maneuvers a t NASA Ames Research Center, it was reported.
    X-14A pilot Fred J . Drinkwater, 1 1 said that a “great similarity
                                         1,
    exists between the flight control system of our [plane] and that
    proposed for a lunar craft. This makes the X-14A a logical
    vehicle to investigate problem areas connected with the let-down
    and landing phases of the lunar mission.”
∞  USAF Minuteman missile was successfully test-fied 3,500 mi. down
    the AMR, in test “to evaluate the performance of an operational
    missile.”
 ∞ British low-yield nuclear explosion made in Nevada, in cooperation
    with US., Britain’s Atomic Energy Authority announed. Test
    was 23rd British nuclear explosion.
December 7-8: President Kennedy visited SAC bases and U.S. nuclear
    facilities at Los Alamos, N.M., and Jackass Flats, Nev., where
    he reviewed progress of AEC-NASA Rover nuclear rocket program.
December 8: U.S.S.B., U.S., and 13 other countries proposed that
    U.N. General Assembly call for urgent efforts to break deadlock
    over legal problems of space exploration. Compromise resolution
    was submitted for consideration in General Assembly’s Political
    Committee, which was debating report of the U.N. Committee
    on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
 ∞ Evidence suggesting plant life has existed on earth for 2.7 billion
    years (a billion years longer than previous estimates) was reported
    by Caryl P. Haslsins, President, Carnegie Institution of Wash-
    ington, in his annual report. Research by Thomas C. Hoering
    of Carnegie’s geophysical laboratory indicates existence of onc-
    celled algae in world’s oldest known sedimentary rocks-Bula-
    wayan limestone of Southern Rhodesia. Hoering isolated chem-
    icals, mostly hydrocarbons, thought to be “the end products of
    cellular chemicals that have been subjected to reactions for more
    than two billion years and, as such, have lost their identity.”
    Two of Hoering’s colleagues, Philip H. Abelson and Patrick L.
    Parker, isolated more complex organic compounds known as fatty
    acids from rocks as old as 500 million years.
                                                                     265
                                                        OF 1 9 6 2
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS

December 8: Secretary of Defense Robert J. McNamara announced
    Operation Dominic nuclear test series was “highly successful.”
    Tests were conducted from April 25 to Nov. 3 by Joint Task
    Force 8.
∞  Another Atlas F squadron was declared operational a t Walker AFB,
    Roswell, N.M.
December 9: Gen. Curtis LeMay, USAF Chief of Staff, was quoted as
    saying: “Eventually I see the development of a manned vehicle
    that can take off from existing runways, go into orbit, maneuver
    into a parking orbit, come out of orbit, maneuver while re-entering
    the earth’s atmosphere, and land at any air base in the conven-
    tional manner.”
       And Lt. Gen. Roscoe C. Wilson, former USAF Dcs/Development,
    described the futuristic spacecraft as “a winged, manned vehicle
    which could go from the earth into orbit and return, solely on its
    own power. . . . From our investigations, this concept of a
    future aerospace vehicle appears feasible, and we look forward
    to it as a follow-on to the Dyna Soar [X-20].”
December 10: NASA launched 186-lb. payload of scientific instruments
    for Commonwealth of Australia from NASA Wallops Station, but
    Aerobee 150A vehicle malfunctioned 42 sec. after liftoff and pay-
    load did not reach intended altitude. Payload instrumentation,
    designed to measure VLF radio waves in the ionosphere, func-
    tioned successfully throughout the flight.
∞ Senator Estes Eefauver (D-Tenn.) announced NASA proposed patvnt
    regulations would “flout the clear legislative intent underlying
    the NASA Act of 1958.” Urging NASA not to adopt the regulations
    he contended they would impede the space program, increase
    monopoly “in an already concentrated industr ,” and give pri-
                                                    K
    pate industry the fruits of research financed pu licly.
       Franz Olson, of Aerospace Industries Association, said at the
    NASA hearing that proposed patent waiver regulations would lead
    to an increase in inventions through <‘theproven incentives of
    the patent system.”
       Senator Russell B. Long (D-La.) charged the patent roposals
                                                               f
    would give “patent monopolies” to the industry on deve opments
    resulting from publicly financed research. Senator Long said
    Monopoly Subcommittee of the Senate Small Business Commit-
    tee would conduct hearings on the proposed regulations in
    January.
∞ Incorporators of communications satellite corp., authorized by the
    Communications Satellite Act of 1962, decided temporary head-
    quarters for the new company would be established in Washing-
    ton, D.C. Also a t the meeting held in N.Y.C., the incorporators
    discussed name for the corp. ; considered names of 50 persons for
    its management; and discussed budgetary requirements. Next
    meetin of group was set for Dec. 21, in N.Y.C.
            5
∞ National cience Foundation announced it would grant $2.5 million
    for 74 institutes of college teachers next summer. Consisting of
    about 30 teachers each, the institutes would cover subject matter
    ranging from history and philosophy of science and mathematics
    to various aspects of engineering.

     97317-63-15
        266   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S OF 1 9 6 2

        December 10: Aviation Week and Space Technology reported    NASA was
            considering substituting piggyback satellite for Agena D target
            in Project Gemini rendezvous maneuvers. Dr. Joseph F. Shea,
            NASA Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight Systems, was
            quoted as saying NASA could save both time and money by such
            substitution. USAF plans for Blue Gemini project were not yet
            firm, pending NASA’s   decision. USAB hoped to buy four of NASA’s
            12 two-man Gemini capsules for use in its own manned space
            flight training using Agena D as rendezvous target for two-man
            Gemini crew. DOD had not yet approved any Blue Gemini funds
            for FY 1964.
        ∞ USAF Minuteman I C B M exploded within seconds after launch attempt
            from Vandenberg AFB, Calif.
        ∞ U S . Army Pershing missile met all test objectives in flight from
            Cape Canaveral with pre-programed zig-zag maneuvers designed
            to test missile guidance system’s ability to keep the Pershing on
            course.
        ∞  NASA Flight Research Center announced modifications to x-15
            (No. 1) had been completed, the modifications providing window
            and camera in fuselage for Follow-On Program of high-altitude
            research. Camera with window would be used to study optical
            degradation resulting from observations through hypersonic
            boundary layers and shock waves. This project would begin in
            early 1963 and would include first five flights of the 35 flights
            planned in X-15 Follow-On-Program, a two-year program
            sponsored by NASA and USAF.
        December 11: Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara met in
            London with British Defense Minister Peter Thorneycroft to
            discuss future of Skybolt air-launched missile, among other
            defense matters. DOD was considering canceling Skybolt de-
            velopment because it would be very cost1 to develop, might
            not be successful by proposed operationar date of 1965, and
            was thought no longer needed in view of Minuteman and Polaris
            successes. U.S.-U.K. agreement of 1960 had provided for joint
            participation in Skybolt project.
         ∞ First USAF Minuteman squadron was declared operational, with
                                                 -
            20 of the ICBM’s     placed in underground silos a t Malmstrom
            AFB, Mont.
        December 12: President Kennedv. back in Washing.ton after insDection
,           of defense and nuclear-rocket facilities, said:
                “We are going to let these test go on of the [Project Rover]
            reactor. These tests should be completed by July. I they   f
            are successful, then we will put more money into the program,
            which would involve the Nerva and Rift, both the engine and the
            regular machine. We will wait until July, however, to see if
             these tests are successful.
                “It should be understood that the nuclear rocket will not
             come into play until 1970 or ’71. It would be useful for further
             trips to the moon or trips to Mars. But we have a good many
             areas competing for our available space dollars, and we have to
             try to channel it into those programs which will bring us a
            result, first, on our moon landing, and then to consider Mars.”
    I

         ∞ Unidentified pa load launched by USAF with Thor-Agena vehicle
                         t
             from Vanden urg AFB.
    I
                                                                  267
                                             EVENTS OF 1962
                        AND
       ASTRONATJTICAL         AERONAUTICAL

December 12: Two tandem 600-f t.-tall research balloons launched
    from Palestine, Texas, with dummy payload of 6,300 lb., a
    development test for February 1963 launch of 36-in. telescope
    with germanium eye to obtain undistorted look a t the Martian
    atmosphere. Scientists from Princeton University, Univ. of Cali-
    fornia, Vitro Corp., and Schjeldahl Corp. conducted test flight.
∞ DOD announced Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully inter-

    cepted Atlas ICBM over the Pacific Ocean. Target Atlas was
    launched from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., and two Nike-Zeus
    missiles were fired from Kwajalein Island, the first Nike-Zeus
    making the successful intercept. This was second successful
    intercept-test by Army’s Nike-Zeus.
∞ NASA A ena B vehicle program would be transferred from NASA

         %
    Mars all Space Flight Center to NASA Lewis Research Center,
    Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., announced.
    Transfer included Atlas and Thor boosters used with Agena B
    upper stage. Dr. Seamans said the transfer, which would be
    completed within three months, would allow “Marshall to wholly
    concentrate its work on the vital Saturn vehicle development for
    the manned lunar landing rogram and for the Iarge unmanned
                               P
    scientific payloads of the uture. . . . In addition, it concen-
    trates a t Lewis the two Atlas-based vehicles, Agena and Centaur,
    which are essential to NASA’s   program of space sciences.” Cen-
    taur was transferred to Lewis in September.
∞  “At least 15 per cent of the original synchrotron radiation” created
    by US. high-altitude nuclear blast last July could persist for
    more than a year, American and Peruvian scientists reported.
    Measurements made at National Bureau of Standards radio
    astronomy observatory in Jicamarca, Peru, showed that about
    one half the radiation had decayed within two months of the
          . ._
    explosion, but that the rate of decay was “thought to be de-
    creasing.”
∞ USAF SAC crew launched Atlas ICBM from Vandenberg AFB in routine
        ..

    training exercise.
December 13: REGAY communications satellite launched into orbit by
    Thor-Delta vehicle from Cape Canaveral (about 800-mi. perigee;
    4,600-mi. apogee; 3 hr., 5 min. period). Built by RCA for NASA,
    RELAY was designed to be first active repeater satellite linking
    three continents-North America, South America, and Euro e.
                                                                   t
    Efforts to turn on RELAY’S communications equipment (
    NASA test station at Nutley, N.J.) were unsuccessful, the s a t e l
    lite’s onboard battery power being too low to operate the trans-
    ponders. NASA said telemetry data indicated “abnormal drain
    upon the power supply” was probable cause of low volta e;
                                                                   K
    RELAY communications experiments were postponed indehite y.
    Objectives of NASA Project Relay were to test intercontinental
    microwave communications by low-altitude active repeater
    satellites, measure energy levels of space radiation in its orbital
    path, and determine extent of radiation damage to solar cells and
    electronic com onents.
                    ian Government launched two Black Brant I11
∞ NASA and Cana C f


                                                           h
    sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station, in oint US.-
    Canadian experimental test series to determine ve icle flight
    performance characteristics and to obtain engineering data on
268   ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 0 6 2

    effectiveness of instrumentation. In each flight, 100-lb. payload
    carried a cosmic ray sensor for measuring altitude, roll-rate
    magnetometer, and new telemetry transmitter and related an-
    tennae. Both vehicles reached 61-mi. altitude and both flights
    were considered successful.
December 13: Attempts to launch scientific experiment from NASA
    Wallops Station failed when malfunction occurred in launch
    vehicle and caused ((some damage to the launch tower and
    building.” Experiment was to have determined distribution of
    certain molecular and atomic species in the upper atmosphere.
 ∞ USAF would undertake “development program to advance the
    technology of large solid propellant rocket motors” under recent
    NASA-DOD agreement, DOL) announced. Program was designed
    to “keep open the possibility of expedited development” in case
    large solid-propellant motors should be required for future space
    boosters. Principal effort would be devoted to providing tech-
    niques for and proving feasibility of manufacturing, handling,
    transporting, and firing motors measuring 260-in. diameter and
    capable of about six million lbs. thrust.
∞ Howard Simons, science writer for the Washington Post, was named
    winner of 1962 newspaper science writing award by AAAS. Award
    was based on Simons’ article on structure of matter, entitled
    “There’s Dichotomy Among Neutrinos,” appearing in the Post
    July 8, 1962.
December 14: MARINER 11 passed within 21,600 mi. of planet Venus
    and made 42-min. instrument-scan of Venutian atmosphere and
    surface before continuing into perpetual orbit of the sun. In
    world‘s first close interplanetary contact, MARINER 11 measured
    and returned temperatures and other characteristics of Venutian
    surface and its atmosphere; telemetry signals would be analyzed
    and evaluated by JPL, technical manager of interplanetary pro-
    grams for NASA. In press conference a t NASA Headquarters, JPL
    Director Dr. William H. Pickering said all instruments onboard
    MARINER 11 functioned as planned and the mission was virtually
    a complete success, NASA Adrninistrator James E. Webb hailed
    the achievement as “an outstanding first in spade for this country
    and for the Free World.” NASA Director of Space Sciences Dr.
    Homer E. Newell pointed out that the probe’s internal tempera- -
    tures ranging from 125O F to 200’ F had not prevented the
    scientific experiments from succeeding; temperatures were ex-
    pected to continue rising as the spacecraft traveled closer to the
    sun. JPL would continue tracking the probe as long as possible,
    even though its scientific mission was considered completed.
       Dr. Newell outlined significant interplanetary data already
    obtained from the four scientific instruments onboard MARINER 11.
     “. . . The plasma probe revealed a steady ‘solar wind’ at 250-
    450 miles per second. The magnetometer showed that space
    contains fields of a t least a few gamma and that there are fluctu-
    ations by factors of as much as 5 to 10. . . . The cosmic dust
    detector indicated that the meteoritic particles in space are less
    numerous than near Earth by a factor of 10,000. . . .” When
     MARINER II neared Venus, two additional experiments were
     activated-microwave       and infrared radiometers to measure
     temperatures and identify their sources (surface or atmosphere).
                                                                269
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

December 14: X 1 No. 3 flown by Major Robert White                in
               -5                                         (USAF)
   stability test a t speed exceeding mach 5 , with lower tail-fin
   absent and with nose raised to 25’ angle above the horizon.
   Successful flight was the 75th by the rocket research airplane.
∞ Ground signal station a t Nutley, N.J., turned on RELAY satellite’s
   communications transponders and sent signals to the satellite ;
   telemetry indicated RELAY received signals, but RELAY failed to
   return transmission to Nutley, Andover (Me.), or Pleumeur-
   Bodou (France) stations. All onboard systems were turned off
   except command receivers.
∞ Unidentified USAF payload launched with Thor-Agena vehicle from
   Vandenberg AFB.
∞ Soviet news agency Tass distributed announcement by U.S.S.R.
   Academy of Science giving new details on MARS I interplanetary
   probe. Announcement said scientists had held 37 radio com-
   munications with MARS I during first month of the probe’s journey
   and that more than 600 orders had been transmitted to it. Com-
   mand, measuring, and computing centers onboard the spacecraft
   were reported working properly. Announcement said MARS I
   would pass planet Mars a t distance of about 119,000 mi. (193,000
   km) and added that its trajectory would have to be corrected
   sometime during the flight. Data from probe indicated space
   radiation had increased about 50 to 70% since 1959 Soviet lunar
   probes made measurements; other data indicated extremely low
   density of meteor matter a t great distances from earth. An-
   nouncement said MARS I onboard equipment included television
   to photograph Martian surface; spectrograph to study ozone ab-
   sorptions in Martian atmosphere; equipment to measure mag-
   netic fields and radiation in space and around Mars; and radio-
   telescope to register streams of low-energy protons and electrons.
∞ Project Stargazer balloon landed after 18>&hr.trip to 82,000-ft.
   altitude, in southwestern New Mexico, by Capt. Joseph A.
   Kittinger, Jr. (USAF), and William C. White, astronomer from
   US. Naval Test Station at China Lake. White had clearest view
   of heavens of any astronomer in history by using telescope
   mounted on top of gondola. J. Allen Hynek, director of USAF
   OAR’S Project Stargazer, predicted great future for balloon
   astronomy.
∞ General Assembly of the United Nations voted unanimously to
   approve resolution submitted by the U.S., U.S.S.R., and 24 other
   nations, calling for continued scientific cooperation directed
   toward using space to improve weather forecasting and inter-
   continental communications system. The U.N. Assembly also
   approved continuation of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful
   Uses of Outer Space.
∞ Scientists requested Continental Air Defense Command to shoot
   down tandem pair of runaway test balloons launched from
   Palestine, Texas, on December 12th. 600-ft.-long balloons, which
   had drifted eastward across the Gulf of Mexico were considered a
   hazard to the airways.
∞ USAF Minuteman ICBM launched from silo a t Cape Canaveral, its
   re-entry package landing approximately 5,000 mi. down the AMR.
270    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF i 9 6 2

December 15: Joint US.-Norwegian-Danish Nike-Cajun sounding
    rocket launched from Andoeya, Norway, with instrumented
     experiment to probe the ionosphere and the Northern Lights.
     Third in a series, the sounding rocket reached an altitude of near
     68 mi.
∞ JPL scientists said MARINER 11’s earth-seeking sensor had unaccount-
     ably gained strength since the probe passed Venus Dec. 14,
     enabling Goldstone Tracking Station to receive signals from the
    probe for perhaps another m o n t h - o r distance of nearly 80
    million mi. from earth. Internal temperatures close to boiling
    point of water were reported from the probe.
 ∞ Power supply onboard RELAY communications satellite remained too
    low to o erate the satellite’s instrumentation properly.
            %
∞ Two-mont     Project Firefly series of 27 upper atmos here chemical
                                                       B
    releases was completed by USAF Cambridge Researc Laboratories,
    ending four- oint basic research program aimed at learning
                 1
    more about t e ionosphere.
∞ Article in Komsomolskaya Pravda stated that one of MARINER 11’s
    main missions was to learn temperatures of Venutian atmosphere
    and surface but that Soviet radioastronomers already had
    answered these questions. Experiments by Pulkovo Observatory
    determined that Venutian surface was between 300’ C and 400’
    C, and Venutian atmosphere was within limits of 0’ C to 100’
    C and therefore, that Venus should be defined as a “red hot
    planet .)’
December 16: EXPLORER XVI (S-55b) launched into orbit by four-stage
    Scout vehicle from NASA Wallops Station (initial orbital data:
    apogee, 733 mi.; perigee, 466 mi.; period, 104 min.; inclination,
    52’ to the equator), began measuring micrometeoroids in space.
    Satellite was designed to measure micrometeoroid puncture haz-
    ards directly by means of samples of spacecraft structural sur-
    faces, measure particles having different momentums; and com-
    pare the performance of protected and unprotected solar cells.
    Cylindrical satellite was 24-in. in diameter and 76-in. in length;
    total weight in orbit was 222 lbs., including Scout fourth-stage
    motor case which was an integral part of the satellite assembly.
∞ RELAY satellite’s 136-mc beacon was detected by tracking stations
    a t Santiago, Johannesbur , and Woomera, indicating the beacon
                              H
    spontaneously turned itse f on.
∞ MARINER 11 would orbit the sun every 345.9 days, JPL scientists

    announced. The spacecraft would make its closest approach to
    the sun Dec. 28, a t distance of 65,505,935 mi., and would be
    farthest from sun June 19, 1963, a t 113,813,087 mi. MARINER
    11’s closest approach to earth would come Sept. 27, 1963, when
    it would be 25,765,717 mi. away. All systems aboard the space-
    craft were still functioning normally, with temperatures and other
    data still being telemetered to earth from more than 37 million
    mi. away.
∞ Radio Moscow quoted Mikhail Yarov-Yarovoy, senior scientist a t
    U.S.S.R. Astronomical Institute, as saying:
       “We learn today that America’s space vehicle, the Mariner 11,
    has passed quite close to Venus. The successful launchin and
    the reception of radio signals from such a great distance infiicate
                                                                  271
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1962

    that American scientists and engineers have achieved more and
    more in conquering space.
        “We congratulate our American colleagues.”
December 16: NASA Goddard S ace Fhght Center scientist Dr. Michael
    E. Lipschutz discovered iamonds in meteorite that fell in India
    90 years ago, the h d i n published in Science. Dr. Lipschutz,
                               ‘eutenant in U.S. Army on active duty
    an astrochemist, is first %  l
    with NASA. His research was made with minute portion of the
    D alpur meteorite, which fell to earth May 8, 1872. Dr. Lip-
      K
    sc utz observed two sizes of diamond crystallites in the meteor-
    ite-a few large c stah and many small c stals. He concluded
                                               7
                      3
    that diamonds in yalpur meteorite were ormed by shock when
    meteorite’s arent body collided with another bod in space.
                                                       B
December 17: d h o u g h RELAY power supply remaine low, Nutle
                                                                    9
    N.J., ground station was able to obtain about 10 min. of usab
    telemetry data from the NASA satellite. Engineers were conduct-
    ing intensive analysis of telemetry data in effort to diagnose
    cause of RELAY’S low battery voltage.
∞ Walter C. Williams, Associate Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft
    Center, said “I can’t guarantee we’re going to be first [to land a
    man on the moon], but if we don’t try, we’re going to be last.
    Either we have to spend more money on space . . . or change
    our goals.” Williams was speaking at dinner commemorating
    59th anniversary of Wright brothers’ flight, in Beverly Hills,
    Calif.
∞ John Stack, former NASA Director of Aeronautical Research and

    NACA aerodynamicist, was awarded Wright Brothers Memorial
    Tro hy-sterling silver model of Wright Brothers’ Kitty Hawk
          P
    airp ane-at Wright Memorial Dinner, Washington. Earlier in
    the day, ceremonies a t Kill Devil Hills near Kitty Hawk, N.C.,
    commemorated 59th anniversary of Wright brothers’ historic
    flight.
∞ USAF launched Atlas-Agena vehicle with undisclosed payload from
    Pt. Arguello, the vehicle failing in flight.
 ∞ U.S.Army fired Nike-Zeus antimissile missile in successful develop-
     ment test at White Sands Missile Range, N.M.
December 18: USN TRANSIT V-A navigational satellite launched from
     Point Arguello, Calif., into near-perfect polar orbit (apogee, 395
     nautical mi.; perigee, 375 nautical mi.; period, 99.06 min.; in-
     clination, 90.7’ to the equator), but satellite’s radio receiver
     failed to function in first five attempts to transmit data to the
     satellite. TRANSIT V-A wm to have been the first operational
     satellite in system of four satellites, but now it would be useful
     as test vehicle rather than operational satellite. This was first
     time in Transit series that the radio command system had failed
     to work. The satellite was launched into orbit by four-stage
     Blue Scout rocket by USAF for USN.
∞  Spontaneous transmission of RELAY I 136-mc beacon signd has been
     observed at minitrack stations, NASA Relay Project officer J.
     Russell Burke reported.
 ∞ NASA Administrator James E. Webb, a t press conference and
     luncheon announcing Chicago and Midwest Space Month, said:
       .. . I would like to stress one of the most challenging oppor-
     6t

     tunitiea of the Space Age for American busin-nd            for the
272    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S OF 1 9 0 2

     consumer. I n designing, building, testing, and flying space
     hardware we are searching for and creating new materials,
    lubricants, manufacturing processes, and techniques. We are
    stressing miniaturization, quality control, and foolproof auto-
    matic operation over long periods of time. We hope that many
    of these new products and new techniques can be put to good use
    on earth as well as in space and that the benefits they yield for
    business and the American consumer will eventually pay a
    substantial portion of the cost of the space program. We do
    not know what new products or uses may develop from space
    activities of the next few years. But we are hoping that business-
    men throughout the country will be watching closely for profitable
    possibilities. And this is one way in which close contacts between
    business and the scientific community will pay off. The uni-
    versity can act as a transmission belt to make this accumulation
    of new technology available to industry . . . . 1 1
December 18: USAF launched unidentified Blue Scout space probe from
    Point Arguello, Calif.
∞ USAF Atlas ICBM exploded shortly after launch by SAC crew a t Van-
    denberg AFB on training mission. USAF spokesman said no one
    was injured and no facilities were damaged.
December 19: NASA announced Ranger 6 lunar spacecraft would not
    be launched but would, instead, be subjected to “an exhaustive
    test program . . . intended to achieve the high reliability re-
    quired for Ranger lunar missions.” Improvements resulting from
    test program would be incorporated in Rangers 7-9, launching of
    which would be delayed “several months.” Revised schedule
    was based on recommendations by Board of Inquiry headed by
    Cdr. Albert J. Kelley (USN), Director of Electronics and Control
    in NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology. After
    intensive one-month study of Ranger system Board concluded
    that “certain improvements could be made in Ranger spacecraft
    design, construction, systems test and checkout which could con-
    tribute to increased flight reliability.” Kelley board, ap ointed
                                                              7
    by NASA Space Sciences Director Dr. Homer E. Newel after
    RANGER v flight, consisted of officials from NASA Hq., five NASA
    field installations, and Bellcom.
∞  U.S. Weather Bureau announced development of infrared spectrom-
    eter, to be flight-tested in new balloons during next six months.
    The 100-lb. “flying thermometer” was planned for use in Nimbus
    weather satellites.
∞  NASA Flight Research Center announced it had received A-5A
     (A3J) aircraft from USN for use in its supersonic transport re-
    search. The “Vigilante” would be used primarily in study of
    problems in terminal area of air-traffic control operations.
    Working closely with FAA officials, FRC engineers would plan and
    conduct supersonic flights of Vigilante on assigned Federal air-
    ways and into high-air-traffic-density areas; the flights would
    provide basis for formulation of control plans necessary for safe
    operation of future commercial supersonic aircraft.
∞ Titan I1 ICBM fired from Cape Canaveral in successful 5,000-mi.
    flight down AMR, DOD announced. R&D flight was “designed to
    further test the missile’! propulsion and guidance system in
    flight,” announcement said.
                                                                   273
                                                       OF 19 6 2
        ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVEN!&

December 19: Polaris A-2 missile, modified to carry guidance system
    fdr advanced 8-3 model, was launched on successful 1,500-mi.
    teat flight from Cape Canaveral.
∞ All three stages of Army’s Nike-Zeus antimissile missile fired suc-

    cessfully in test from Point Mugu, Calif., last of Nike-Zeus fight
    series from that site.
∞  Final USAF Atlas ICBM squadron declared operational at Plattsburgh
    AFB, N.Y., bringing total operational Atlas force to 123. Addi-
    tional composite squadron of Atlases was being maintained a t
    Vandenberg AFB, partly for R&D and partly for training use.
December 19-21: President Kennedy and Prime Minister Harold
    Macmillan, meeting in Nassau, reached defense agreement desig-
    nating Polaris misslle to replace the Skybolt air-launched missiles
    as Britain’s primary nuclear deterrent weapon. Under terms
    also to be offered to France, Britain and France would receive
    Polaris missiles from US. and eventually these would form the
    backbone of a NATO nuclear force.
December 20: X-15 (No. 3) piloted by Joseph A. Walker (NASA)
    reached 3,886 mph and 157,000-ft. altitude in test of re-entry
    stability without the craft’s ventral f n Walker said high climb-
                                           i.
                                       a
    ing speed (186 mph faster than lanned) was attained because
    sun’s glare temporarily prevente his reading instrument panel;
    thus, re-entry after engine shut-off was faster than planned.
    Test was seventh in series without x 1 ’ ventral fin.
                                           - 5s
∞ Navy announced that TRANSIT V-A navigation satellite transmitter
    was now dead, which indicated that its power supply had failed
    completely. TRANSIT v had previously been unable to receive
    commands from the ground.
∞ Management of Project Anna geodetic satellite program was trans-

    ferred from DOD to NASA. ANNA I-B, launched Oct. 31, would
    remain a responsibility of DOD, with NASA scientific direction, but
    further launchings would be planned and executed by NASA.
∞ DOD announced plans to support NASA Syncom communications

    satellite operations in early 1963. US. Army Satellite Com-
                                     Ft.
    munications Agency (SATCOM), Monmouth, N.J., would send
    signals to activate and test the first US. synchronous-orbit
    satellite.
             Science Foundation announced FY 1963 expenditures
∞ National

    for Government-sponsored research and development would
    total $14.7 billion, 31v0 higher than last fiscal year. 95% of
    the estimated total would be spent by four agencies-NASA,
      DOD, AEC, HEW.
∞    Eugene W. Wasielewski, Associate Director of NASA Goddard Space


      Flight Center, told National Rocket Club that ARIEL (U.K.-US.)
      satellite was “just beginning to show signs of trouble.” Launched
      April 26, 1962, the satellite was designed for one year of trans-
      mitting life. Wasielewski said some of the experiments aboard
      the satellite were “not doing as well as some others,” that the
      radio signals from some of the experiments were fading.
∞    Six cash awards totaling $12,000 were presented by NASA Deputy
      Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden to 14 employees of NASA
      Manned Spacecraft Center and NASA Langley Research Center:
      $4,200 for design of Mercury-t e spacecraft to Maxime Faget
                                    8
      Andre J. Meyer, Jr., R. G. C ton, Jerome B. Hammack, and
274     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

      C. C. Johnson, all of MSC; W. S. Blanchard, Jr., of Lam; and
      A. B. Kehlet, formerly of LaRc and now in private industry.
         $1,500 for development of emergency safety system for manned
      spacecraft, used in Project Mercury as Mercury escape tower,
      awarded to Faget and Meyer.
         $1,000 for mvention of vehicle parachute and equipment
      jettison system, also incorporated in Project Mercury, awarded
      to Meyer.
         $2,100 for design of contour couch used in manned spacecraft,
      awarded to Faget, William M. Bland, Jr., and Jack Heberlig, of
      MSC.
        $2,000 for invention of ablation-rate meter awarded to Emedio
      M. Bracalente and Ferdinand C. Woolson, of Lam. Rate meter
    had been used to gather data from three small rockets and one
    four-stage Scout vehicle, all launched from NASA Wallops Station.
       $1,200 to George P. Wood, Arlen F. Carter, and Dr. Adolph
    Busemann of Lam for development of plasma accelerator, con-
    sidered a milestone in progress toward electrical propulsion of
    space vehicles and large-scale laboratory simulation of hypersonic
    and re-entry flight. T i award was made under Employees
                             hs
    Incentive Awards Act of 1954; other five were made under
    National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958.
December 20: USAF Minuteman ICBM launched from Cape Canaveral
    fell short of its intended range, but “many of the test objectives
    were achieved,” DOD announced. Causes of malfunction would
    be determined by study of telemetry data.
∞  Washington Evening Star reported responsible officials credited
    US. with 340-1 nuclear missile-power advantage over U.S.S.R.
    The ‘commanding lead, said to be maintainable for decades to
    come, was chiefly due to new operational status of Minuteman
      ICBM.
∞ University of Alabama Research Institute dedicated at Huntsville,
    Ala.
∞  Claim of two Soviet scientists of Turkmen Medical Institute that
    they had discovered micro-organisms of extraterrestrial origin
    in the Sikhote-Alinst meteorite was disputed by U.S.S.R. Aca-
    demicians V. Fesenkov, A. Imshenetskiy, and A. Oparin, Izvestia
    reported. Investigation by U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’
    Institute of Microbiology, of which Imshenetskiy was Director,
    showed that the claim had been based on incorrect premises and
    poorly conducted research.
December 21: Governments of US. and Canada jointly announced
    cooperative venture to build data acquisition station for Nimbus
    meteorological satellite a t Ingomish, Nova Scotia. Successor
    to Tiros weather satellite program, Nimbus satellites wl record
                                                            il
    meteorological data, including TV pictures, and relay the data
    back to earth on command; they wl travel in near-polar orbit
                                       il
    and thus be able to “see” the entire earth every 24 hours. In-
    gomish station would be staffed mainly with Canadian personnel
                        v
    and would be com leted in 1964.
 ∞ Full-size test boilerp ate command module of Project Apollo space-
    craft was delivered by North American Aviation’s Space and
     Information Div. to Northrop Corp’s Ventura Div., which would
    equip spacecraft with earth-landing system in preparation for
    drop tests early next year.
                                                                275
                                            EVENTS OF 1962
      ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL

            NASA announced selection offor academicand universities
December 21:                               88 colleges
    to receive graduate training grants               year 1963-64.
    Estimated 800 students in space-related science and engineering
    would participat>ein the program, established by NASA to Idhelp
    achieve the long range objectives of the national space program
    and meet the Nation’s future needs for highly trained scientists
    and engineers.’’ Project began in 1962 with approximately 100
    students receiving graduate training under grants to 10 uni-
    versities.
 ∞ Spokesman said that the comsat corporation created by an act of
    the Congress would be named the Space Communications Cor-
    poration by decision of the board of incorporators. The board also
    decided to lease Tregaron, estate of Mrs. Herbert May and her
    former husband, the late Joseph E. Davies, as temporary head-
    quarters in Washin ton, D.C.
∞ USAF announced awar c f of $30 million contract to United Technology

    Corp. for design, development, fabrication, delivery and flight
    test of large segmented solid-propellant motors.
December 22: COSMOS XII satellite placed in orbit by U.S.S.R. Re-
    ported orbital data: 270-mi. apogee, 126.6-mi. perigee, 90.45-min.
    period, 6.5’ inclination to the equator.
 ∞ Revealed that world’s first attempt to flight-test an ion rocket
    engine was made on USAF Scout launching from PMB during the
      ast week (perhaps 12/18/62), according to the Washington Post.
    Galfunction limited value of the test but launching marked
    beginning of new hase of space flight. Electric propulsion, with
                     1p
    low thrust over ong periods of time and of light wei ht, can
    propel large payloads, once boosted jnto space, for long ckstances
    a t reater speeds than heavier chemical rockets with heavy fuels.
       %
 ∞ President Kennedy’s approval of $5.7 billion bud et for NASA in
                                                     %
    FY 1964 was reported. Of the total nearly $4.5 illion would be
    for manned flight.
 ∞ Soviet Ambassador to India Ivan A. Benediktov announced in
    Bombay that U.S.S.R. would soon launch a manned spaceship
    weighing (‘several dozen tons.’’ No further details were
    announced.
 ∞ Soviet government organ Izvestia stated that the Anglo-American
    agreement concluded a t Nassau “turns out that they [U.S. and
    U.K.] want to drag atomic weapons into NATO in the form of
    Polaris rockets . . .”
 ∞ U.S.S.R. detonated atmospheric nuclear explosion in Novaya
    Zemlya mea, the 36th reported by AEC in current teat series.
    Force of the explosion was in intermediate range.
∞ Air-launched Skybolt missile was successfully test-flown near Cape

    Canaveral, only successful flight in six attempb and last test
    scheduled in Skybolt program. Acting Secretary of Defense
    Roswell F. Gilpatric stated that the successful test of Skybolt
    had not changed DOD decision to discontinue the program:
    “Today’s single test did not conclusively demonstrate the capac-
    ity of the missile to achieve the target accuracy for which the
    Skybolt system was designed . . .”
∞ USAF announced “routine training launch” of Atlas ICBM from
    Vandenberg AFB by the 576th Strategic Missile Squadron.
∞ U.S. Army’s Nike-Zeus successfully intercepted ICBM target in first
    teat involving decoys, DOD announced. Atlas ICBM with its
276    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    decoys was launched from Vandenberg AFB toward Kwajalein
    Island in the Pacific, from which two Nike-Zeus were launched;
    one of the antimissile missiles had to be destroyed after launch-
    ing, but the other successfully completed the mission.
December 23: NASA announced $240,000 grant to Smithsonian Astro-
    physical Observatory for setting up 16-station (‘prairie network”
    with automatic cameras to photograph bright meteors over seven
    midwestern states and to enable prompt recovery of meteorites.
    Project would enable scientists to study chemical and organic
    structures of meteorites before contamination on the surface of
    the earth.
 ∞ Pope John XXIII, addressing diplomats gathered in Consistorial
    Hall of the Vatican, called upon men of all nations to join in
    cooperative and peaceful exploration of outer space. “The
    church applauds man’s growing mastery over the forces of
    nature. Thanks to those men who harbor thoughts of peace,
    mankind could dedicate itself, in noble rivalry, not only to the
    great economic and social tasks which confront it but to the
    continuing exploration of space and to the bold achievements of
    modern technology . . .”
December 24: Edgar M. Cortright, NASA Deputy Director of Space
    Sciences, said in press interview that stringent rules on steriliza-
    tion of spacecraft components constituted one of the greatest
    problems in Project Ranger. NASA policy to prevent contamina-
    tion of the moon by terrestrial germs did not require sterilization
    (‘to the point of jeopardizing reliability,” Cortright said, but
    rejection rate on many spacecraft components became much
    higher as result of the policy; some components would not operate
    properly after being subjected t o sterilization processes (including
    alcohol, ethylene oxide, ultraviolet rays, and heat). Relaxation
    of strict sterilization rules for Ranger spacecraft was one of the
    changes being considered in “re-orientation” of Project Ranger,
    Cortright indicated.
∞ Japanese Meteorological Observatory reported abnormal atmos-
    pheric pressures from a Soviet nuclear blast, apparent1 one of
                                                               ir
    two recorded also by Uppsala University in Sweden. apanese
    agency estimated the strength of the blast at 20 megatons. It
    said the abnormal pressure lasted from 40 t o 100 minutes. Two
    blasts registered at the seismological institute in Sweden were
    listed a t 19 megatons and 8 megatons. The geodetic institution
    of the Technological High School at Stockholm, Sweden, registered
    another gravitational disturbance which may have been a third
    Russian nuclear test, one which had a force of about 10 megatons.
    During the past 10 days, the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission
    had announced that the Russians have conducted a t least four
    nuclear tests.
December 26: At AAAS convention in Philadelphia, Dr. P. J. Coleman,
    UCLA scientist, reported on the findings of MARINER 11 in the
    vicinity of the planet Venus. Coleman reported on the mag-
    netometer experiment which showed no rise in the average value
    of the magnetic field above the “interplanetary value” during the
    fly-by of Venus: ‘(The sensitivity, or lower limit, of the field’s
    change that could be observed on the magnetometer was five
    gamma . . . During the encounter, no changes were observed
                                                                    277
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 8 2

     of this magnitude-five gamma-which might be attributed to
    Venus.” Observations thus far, he said, suggest that planets
    and satellites such as the moon that rotate slower than the earth
    have small magnetic fields.
December 26: Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Director of Space Sciences,
    urged in speech before AAAS that scientists be among the next
    group of astronauts selected for training. “I have a complete
     and utter conviction that we should take a scientist and make a
    flyer out of him rather than the other way around.”
        In interview, Dr. Newell outlined tentative NASA plans for
     1963 launchings : 6-8 communications satellites, three weather
     satellites; 8 scientific satellites; at least one manned orbital
     flight; initial unmanned flight-test of Gemini capsule; three lunar
     impacts ; Apollo capsule boilerplate tests of emergency flight
     conditions; three Saturn launch vehicle flight-tests; two electrical
    rocket-engine flight-tests ; three re-entry heating tests.
∞  FERRET su er-sensitive robotinspector satellite developed by
    LockheecfAircraft and RCA for U.S., reported in orbit by News-
    week. FERRET was reported capable of tapping microwave tele-
     phone messages and pinpointing missile launching sites by their
    radio y d a n c e signals. Newsweek said satellite was aimed par-
     ticular y at Baikonur, major Soviet rocket-testing base.
∞  NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s selection of Lockheed Missiles
     and Space Co. to establish method of assessing hazard potential
     of operational nuclear vehicle (Saturn C-5/Nerva) was reported.
     Three-phase study would include: (1) study of influence of
    impact delay time on hazard magnitude at impact in case of
    flight failure; (2) study of effect of vehicle trajectory on flight
    hazards; and (3) study to produce integrated hazards evaluation
    technique.
∞  In intervlew with Datu magazine, Director of NASA Manned Space-
    craft Center, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, said that Houston Chamber
    of Commerce had predicted that the ‘‘arrival of the Manned
    Spacecraft Center will influence the economic growth of the area
     to a de ee similar to that associated with the opening of the ship
           !?
    channe here almost 50 years ago. Community leaders are
    enthusiastic concerning the diversion of Houston’s growth from
    an almost total reliance on the petrochemical industry. Of
    course, you must also remember that Houston, in terms of
      opulation increase, is one of the most dynamic cities of America.
    &he Manned Spacecraft Center represents only a segment of its
                ..
    growth. .
        “Undoubtedly, there has been some immediate im act on the
                                                            %
    economy since MSC’S arrival in the Houston area.           ore than
                                                             .   . .J )
    80 aerospace corn anies have opened local offices here.
                                                          r
December 27: EstablisLent of joint AEC-DOD-NASA pro am for de-
            
    velopment of space nuclear reactor was announced y the three
    a encies. Col. Elwood M. Douthett (USAF) would head program
     &
    o ce, responsible for research, technology, and component de-
    velopment phmes of nuclear-electric power unit Snap-50/Spur.
    A 300-1,000 kw power unit capable of 10,000-hr. unattended
    operation, Snap50/Spur would be unification of two existing
    projects: AEC’S Snap (system for nuclear auxiliary power) and
    USAF’S Spur (space power unit reactor). Unit could be used
278    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S OF 1 9 8 2

    as power source for “space missions, communications satellites,
    and other space applications.”
December 27: MARINER 11 calculated to reach its closest point to the
    sun (65,505,935-mile perihelion) according to JPL scientists.
∞  Alexander V. Topchiev, vice president of the Soviet Academy of
    Sciences, died in Moscow. Winner of the 1949 Stalin Prize and
    twice winner of the Order of Lenin, Topchiev was believed to
    have played a major role in the development of new rocket fuels
    and had attended many important international conferences
    since 1960. He had recently declared that “war is no longer
    possible” and had advocated East-West collaboration on nuclear
    space propulsion.
 ∞ Goddard Space Flight Center officials reported that they had
    received “indications the voltage had recovered somewhat” in
    RELAY satellite, but doubted that its communications mission
    would be accomplished.
December 27-29: Second Western Conference of the American Geo-
    physical Union at Stanford, Calif. Sidney M. Serebreny of SRI
    reviewed TIROS I photographs on 14 orbits in May 1960, which
    showed a blocking pattern in east-central Pacific accompanied
    by an invasion of tropical air aloft into northerly latitudes and
    rationale for positioning of the jet stream over the northern
    Pacific. Life history of tropical cyclones was analyzed from Tiros
    photographs by James C. Sadler of NSF. And Richard D. Tarble
    of U.S. Weather Bureau indicated that TIROS I photographs of
    ice pack and areal snow cover oould be used to predict river
    flow and water supply from snow melt. Other space science
    papers on meteorology and planetary sciences were presented.
December 28: Preliminary results of particle-flux-detectors onboard
    MARINER 11 were reported by Dr. L. A. Frank and Dr. H. R.
    Anderson at American Geophysical Union meeting, Stanford
    Univ. The instruments showed absence of particles near Venus,
    indicating the planet’s magnetic field does not extend out as far
    as trajectory of MARINER 11; this observation was confirmed by
    onboard magnetometer. Cosmic-ray measurements during the
    probe’s interplanetary flight indicated cosmic-ray flus was a
    constant measurement throughout the flight (approximately 3.0
    particles per sq. centimeter per sec.). High-energy solar particles
    were generally absent except for a single solar-flare event begin-
    ning Oct. 23 ;low-energy solar-particle counter detected this event
    and at least eight others. Total radiation dose recorded in
    Oct. 23 event was only about 0.24 roentgens inside ionization
    chamber’s 0.01-in.-thick steel wall, and radiation was very
    non-pene trating.
∞  At national confermce of American Geophysical Union at Stanford
    Univ., scientists John D. Anderson and George Null of JPL
    reported MARINER 11 fly-by of Venus produced the most accurate
    estimate pet of the mass of that planet-0.81485 times the mass
    of the earth, with probable error of 0.015 per cent. Final analysis
    might slightly alter value and further reduce error.
 ∞ Preliminary results of solar-wind experiments by MARINER I I were
    reported by Dr. Conway W. Snyder of JPL at American Geo-
                                                                    279
                        AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF l e 6 2
       ASTRONAUTICAL

    physical Union meeting. Experiment measured velocity, density,
    and temperature of solar plasma using electrostatic analyzer
    onboard the probe. Results showed energies of gas atoms in
    solar wind are very low as compared to cosmic-ray particles, but
    number of solar-wind particles is about a billion times greater
     than number of cosmic rays, making total energy content of solar
    wind much greater than of cosmic rays. Solar flares eject plasma
     clouds which may have higher velocity, density, and temperature
     than undisturbed solar wind-which MARINER 11 found to be little
    less than 250 mi. per sec. velocity, 10-20 particles per cu. in.
    density, and few hundred thousand deg. temperature. MARINER
     1 also found solar wind appears to be “supersonic”-and        super-
      1
    sonic effects such as plasma shockwave ahead of the earth and
    other planets would be objects of study of future NASA space
    vehicles.
December 28: scientists again attempted to turn on RELAY communi-
    cations equipment, but the satellite’s power level was still too low.
∞  Interaction of winds in lower atmosphere and turbulence in upper
     atmosphere was reported at AAAS meeting by Univ. of Chicago
    scientist Colin 0.Hines. Hines said wave motions (“internal
       avity waves”) from earth appear to generate whirlpool turbu-
    Cnces up to 50 mph and sweeping upward as high as 50 mi. As
    strength of upper atmosphere varies, so too does its chemical
    composition; changes may react back to lower atmosphere.
     Hines said turbulence seems to provide heat to upper air a t
    rate of one degree a day-and perhaps as high as 10 degrees a
     day. He also noted that turbulence ends rather abruptly at
     altitudes from 60 to 70 mi., the abrupt change altering upper
     air’s chemical composition: whereas presence of turbulence mixes
     chemicals in atmosphere, absence of turbulence separates chemi-
     cals into distinct layers. Hines concluded further study of turbu-
    lence could contribute to better long-distance radio communica-
     tions which use ionospheric irregularities, partially produced and
     controlled by the whirlpools.
 ∞ Dr. Sheldon J. Korchin of National Institutes of Health and Dr.
     George Ruff of Univ. of Pennsylvania reported at AAAS confer-
     ence that American astronauts are typically Protestants, natives
     of small towns, members of middle or upper-middle class families,
    and have average I& of 135. Summing up results of testin
                                                                       5
     astronauts, two psychiatrists concluded astronauts have norma
    anxieties but above normal ability to control them. Average
    astronaut prefers outdoor sports t o indoor; is ofiented to action
    rather than thought; prefers facts to speculation; has abiding
    belief in his own competence and willingness to strive for per-
    fection.
∞ Efforts of special Presidential board to settle dispute between
    Boeing Co. and International Association of Machinists (IAM)
    were unsuccessful, board chairman Saul Wallen announced, and
    no further mediation sessions were planned. Dispute centered
    around IAM’S demand for union shop and Boeing’s unwillingness
    to grant it.
280    ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL E V E N T S O F 19 6 2

December 29: Planet Venus may rotate clockwise on its axis a t a rate
    of about once in 250 earth days, Richard H. Goldstein of NASA
    Goldstone Tracking Station announced. Conclusions were based
    on MARINER 11 “fly-by” of planet Venus Dec. 14 and of radar
    experiments conducted by Goldstein at NASA Goldstone Oct.
     1-Dec. 17.
∞  NASA announced 4,000-lb. micrometeorite satellite would be launched
    with Saturn test vehicles S A 4 and SA-9. Satellite, to unfold
    in space exposing surface area of 2,000 sq. ft., would be “bonus”
    experiment with chief missions of flight to be launch vehicle
    development test and atmospheric re-entry test of Apollo boiler-
    plate spacecraft.
∞  Dr. Freeman H. Quimby, Chief of Exobiology Programs in NASA
    Office of Space Sciences, announed U S . plans to land life-detect-
    ing devices on Mars in 1966. “Perhaps Mars is sterile. But
    we’re working on the postulate there may be some forms of life,”
    Dr. Quimby told the American Association for the Advancement
    of Science meeting in Philadelphia.
 ∞ Addressing American Association for the Advancement of Science,
    Dr. Loren K. Eiseley, anthropology prof. at Univ. of Pennsyl-
    vania, said that space defense efforts ar0 “consuming an enor-
                                              ...
    mous amount of our wealth and energy.             Let a few genera-
    tions go by, and so much of society’s wealth and employment
    will be wrapped up in this sort of thing that you will get-as we
    are beginning to get now-a vested interest in war. . . . [The
    space/defense effort is] a kind of gigantic tumor. When these
    emerge, you not alone run the danger of weakening society, but
    also encounter the fact that these tumors grow and become
    monstrous; to reduce them to normal size becomes difficult if not
    impossible. . . .” Dr. Eiseley predicted the massive emphasis
    on space and armaments might lead to downfall of modern
    civilization; he compared the preoccupation with space and arm-
    aments to Imperial Rome’s colonialism, Ancient Egypt’s tomb
    and pyramid building, and India’s elaborate caste system which
    contributed to downfall of those ancient civilizations.
∞ Soviet news agency Novosti reported first Soviet radioastronomy
    experiments with planet Venus Nov. 19 and 24. Scientists sent
    words “peace,” “Lenin,” and “U.S.S.R.” to Venus in radio code
    and they returned to earth about 4.5 min. later.
December 30: AT&T announced that second Telstar communications
    satellite would be launched next spring, one which would attempt,
    to avoid or overcome radiation damage which shortened the life
    of TELSTAR I. TELSTAR I transmitted the first live intercon-
    tinental television after launch on July 10, but developed mal-
    functions in power sources on November 29.
 ∞ Speaking at general AAAS meeting in Philadelphia, Dr. Hugh L.
    Dryden, Deputy NASA Administrator, supported the thesis that
    science has developed most rapidly in an environment of a
    national social need, most often for national defense or health.
    In an atmosphere of highly motivated and widely supported
    national activities, science and scientists have received enhanced
    support over broad areas as well as in narrow specialties:
    Benefits of this have far outweighed unbalances. Such has been
    our national experience in the technologies of aeronautics, com
                                                                  281
       ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

    munications, radar, nuclear energy, and now space. In such
    periods, the number of free scientists supported to work on
    problems of their o m selection is greater than in the absence of
    social pressures, although admittedly there is a still greater
    expansion of team effort.
       Dr Dryden said: “. . . It is our aim in NASA to administer
    the [space] program in such a way as to strengthen science and
    engineering broadly, to strengthen our universities and our
    industrial base, in fact to add to our national strength in every
                  . As regards the problem under discussion, NASA
    gossible way
      as undertaken as a goal the support of about 4,000 graduate
    students per year in 150 qualified universities to do our part in
    increasing the supply .”
December 30: Dr. Robert M. Petrie, Director of Dominion Astro-
    physical Observatory in Victoria, B.C., told AAAS in Philadelphia
    that the Milky Way Galaxy appenss to be expanding. Dr.
    Petrie’s PO-year study of 600 “B” stars (hottest and brightest
    stars in the galaxy) produced evidence that our sun and all other
    stars are moving away from the galactic center.
 ∞ Dr. James A. Van Allen, State University of Iowa physicist,
    criticized Government report on atmospheric radiation resulting
    from US. high-altitude nuclear explosion in July, which stated
    radiation levels were much higher than had been predicted and
    would last longer than had been predicted. Dr. Van Allen
    charged the Government report was a “hasty and ill-considered”
    interpretation of the facts; he predicted the bulk of artificially
    formed radiation would no longer be detectable by summer of
    1963. Dr. Van Allen said Presiden.t’s Science Advisory Com-
    mittee ignored findings from INJUN satellite (which he used to
    study effects of the explosion) and relied instead on data from
    TELSTAR satellite, launched after the nuclear test. Scientist
    James W. Warwick of University of Colorado, basing his con-
    clusions on radio measurements from ground stations in Hawaii
    and the Philippines, said his studies were in general agreement
    with those of Van Allen and his coworkers and were “inconsistent)’
    with Government estimates .*based on TELSTAR data. The two
    scientists were in Philadelphia for session of American Association
    for the Advancement of Science.
∞ Dr. Joseph A. Conner, Jr., of NASA, said in AAAS paper that there
    will be an arbitrary retirement age for astronauts, not in terms of
    years but in exposure to penetrating radiation in space.
∞ Soviet Cosmonaut Pave1 Popovich arrived in Havana to participate
    in fourth anniversary celebration of Fidel Castro’s Cuban revolu-
    tion, Havana Radio announced.
December 31: DOD formally canceled Skybolt missile program, an-
    nouncing that “the Air Force is taking immediate action to termi-
    nate all production in connection with the Skybolt program.”
    Announcement was first public DOD notice since President
    Kennedy’s press conference statement of December 12 on the
    high cost of Skybolt.
 ∞ Chaiman of the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy,
    Rep. Chet Holifield, stated that he saw a narrowing of the
    Nation’s objectives in space:
     9731743-19
282     ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 6 2

        “I cannot help but wonder about the sincerity of our entire
      space effort in view of the trends which I see in our current pro-
      gram. It appears, increasingly, that our goal is gravitating to-
    ward a one-shot manned mission to the moon.
       “This effort is centered around the development of chemical
    rockets whose limitations, compared to nuclear propulsion, are
    severe.
       (‘. . . The leader in space cannot afford to be so lacking in
    vision as t,o fail to appreciate the need for nuclear power. If
    we are sincere in our effort to be the first on this new frontier,
    we must maintain a concerted effort to develop nuclear powered
    machinery for use in space.”
       Holifield’s views were made known in a statement accompany-
    ing publication of testimony taken during September 1962.
December 31: President Kennedy named Theodore von K&rm&nas
    the first recipient of the National Medal of Science for leader-
    ship in the science and engineering of aeronaiitics. A nntive of
               , von K&rm&n   became a U.S. citizen in 1936 8s director
      HungarJ
    of the uggenheim Aeronautical Laboratories of Cal Tech. I n
     1936 he also initiated the rocket research development which led
    to the creation of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. He is presently
    chairman of the Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research and
    Development for NATO (known as AGARD).
∞ U.S. Navy announced that the last of its lighter-than-air ships as
    well as associated s are parts and equipment was being disposed
    of. Although the R’avy “blimp” program had been terminated
    in October 1961, a few airships had been maintained on a standby
    mobilization basis.
∞ White House and State Dept. officials denied report by French news-
    paper Paris-Presse that US. and U.S.S.R. negotiators had signed
    cooperative agreement to send team of Russians and Americans
    to the moon in 1970 on first manned lunar flight.
During December: Response to Q.E. Forum survey of editors, writers,
    and publishers: 60% considered present ex enditure for U.S.
                                                    P
    space pro ram fully warranted; 26% probab y fully warranted;
               B
    8% proba ly not; 5%, not warranted; and 1%, no response.
    Asked what should be level of expenditure (relative to GNP) in
    immediate future, 25% replied sharply higher; 30%, a little
    higher; 22%, remain a t about present ratio; 6%, a little lower;
    6%, sharply lower; 11%, no response. 33a/, said U.S. would
    probably exceed U.S.S.R. in space achievements by 1970, while
    40% said U.S. would approximately equal U.S.S.R. by 1970.
    45% said prime objective of U.S. in space was to exceed U.S.S.R.
    space achievements-but without duplication and inefficiencies
    of an all-out crash program. 35% said prime objective was to
    sustain a prudent and orderly program of scientific progress in
    space achievements, with little regard for who leads in the various
    aspects of space technology. 16% chose crash program to exceed
    the Russians in space. As to justification for U.S. space program,
    59% said: “Because of its by-products, both actual and poten-
    tial, our space program is an excellent dollar investment, over and
    above its value for military security and international prestige.”
    29% chose this statement: “Our space program requires a high
                                                                   283
        ASTRONAUTICAL AND AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1963

    dollar expenditure which must be justified-preponderantly if not
    wholly-m terms of ita value for military security and inter-
    national prestige.”
During December: NASA awarded contract to Ford Motor Co. Aero-
    nutronic Div. for development of camera system to be hard-
    landed on the moon. To relay photographs of lunar surface
    back to earth, camera would be used in future’Ranger lunar
    spacecraft and would replace seismometers carried in RANGERS
                    v.
      1 1 IV, and
       1,
 ∞   Hibernation of space crewmen was roposed for long-term space
                                         E.
0
      travel, by USAF surgeons Capt. T.      Cockett and Capt. Cecd C.
      Beehler of SAM, Brooks AFB, Texas. Under their plan, one astro-
      naut would work while the other would ride in state of sus ended
      animation, with life processes slowed to the minimum. burin!
      simulated hibernation the body withstands stresses that woul
      be harmful under normal body conditions, the sur eons said.
                                                        9
 ∞   Subcommittee of House Committee on Science an Astronautics
      issued report on solid-propellant rocket motors for Nova-class
      vehicles: “If the cancellation of this development program
      [solids for Nova] is based on the cost factor alone, then the com-
      mittee feels that NASA should review the events of the past.
      For it was this approach in the development of our ICBM that
      gave the U.S.S.R. their superbooster and the resultant lead in
      space exploration which the U.S. is still struggling to overcome.
      The United States cannot afford a second setback of this magni-
      tude. . . .
         “The committee is struck by the large amount of manpower
      and time that both the DOD and NASA have devoted to coordi-
      nation in tryin to reach an agreement and the extended delay in
                         %
      starting even t e most basic development program.” Committee
      recommended givin NASA the funding responsibility for continua-
                             if
      tion of solid-prope ed motor effort, since there exists no direct
      military requirement for the large boosters.
∞    Modulation from ARIEL I satellite appeared on the carrier approxi-

      mately 10 days out of the 31. Data received indicated the x-ray
      e eriment had failed.
∞    Dr.%. Stark Draper, director of YIT Instrumentation Laboratory,

      named 1962 recipient of Louis W. Hill Space Transportation
      Award by IAS. Dr. Draper was cited “for his leadershi i the  n
                                                               P
      development of inertial guidance and automatic contro equip-
      ment and techniques vital to the success of space flights.”
∞    Vice Adm. William F. Raborn (TJSN) wrote in U.S. Naval Institute
      Proceedings that ability to control weather might bring about
      greater changes in warfare than did explosion of first nuclem
      bomb, adding: “The capability to chan e the direction of de-
      structive storms and guide them towar% enemy concentration
      may exist in the future arsenal of the Navy tactical com-
      mander. . . . We already have taken our first steps toward
      developing an environmental warfare capability. We are u?ine
      satellite weather from TIROS 11 for current tactical operatlons
      and more accurate long-range weather predictions. . . . Some
                    in fog dissipation have shown promise, and some
                   research has been conducted on ways to change the
                         storms. . . .”
284    ASTRONAUTICAL A N D AERONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 2

       Admiral Raborn said USN was planning 10-year study of the
    atmosphere (“ATMOS”) which would be coordinated with separate
    research on oceans.
During December: Soviet Prof. V. Nikiforov, in article entitled “Chem-
    istry in the Cosmos and on the Moon” which appeared in Soviet
    journal Aviation and Cosmonautics, suggested use of a chemical
    foam envelope on the moon to protect cosmonauts from
                                                                 $eat
    temperature changes, solar radiation, and materials on the unar
    surf ace.
∞ Sir Bernard Lovell of Jodrell Bank in an interview with London
    D i y Telegraph: “. . . Although the Russians may have [space]
     al
    superiority purely in the sense of rocketry, the Americans have
    tremendous superiority over the Russians in their ability to
    instrument their space vehicles and in the extraction of space
    informa tion.
       “If you made an assessment of the scientific information we
    have obtained about the earth’s environment from space vehicles,
    you could find that this was very heavily biased in favour of the
    Americans. They have mounted more sophisticated experiments
    in their satellites and space probes and they have made them
    work much better.”
During 1962: Dr. Louis Smullni of MIT’S Lincoln Laboratories suc-
    ceeded in detecting a laser reflection from the moon, although at
    too low a signal level and too long a pulse length for quantitative
    measurements. This was considered a first step in use of laser
    reflection for scientific research.
 White Sands Missile Range, N.M., was busiest missile test center,
    recording 2,615 “hot’’ tests.
 Man’s conquest of space accelerated on a broad front. The U.S.
    achieved manned orbital flight three times, provided man with
    his first close-up of another planet with MARINER 11’s fly-by
    of Venus, brought global communications a step closer with the
    orbiting of the first active repeater communications satellite
    TELSTAR I, and saw the X-15 exceed its design speed and altitude
    (4,104 mph and 58.7 mi.). U.S.S.R. achieved first dual manned
    space flight in an effort that racked up an impressive total of 112
    orbits, and launched a space probe toward Mars.
       During the year the U.S. successfully launched a total of 61
    satellites, deep-space probes, and probes, the U.S.S.R. 17, accord-
    according to the U.N. Public Registry. Of the U.S. total, 20
    were launched by NASA, 41 by DOD.
                          APPENDIX A
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS
                     A CHRONICLE FOR 1962
   Tbe following tabulation was drafted from open sources by Alfred
Rosenthal, Historian of the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, and
finalized from available open materials by Dr. Frank W, Anderson,
Jr., Assistant NASA Historian. Sources included the United Nations
Public Registry, the Satellite Situation Reports issued by the Space
Operations Control Center a t Goddard Space Flight Center, public
information releases of the Department of Defense, NASA, and other
agencies, and the President’s Report to the Congress on U.S. Aero-
nautics and Space Activities-1962.       Russian data are from the U.N.
Public Registry, translations of Tass News Agency statements in the
Soviet press, and international news services’ reports. The history
of space exploration requires the recording of as much of the full
            ossible for the events swiftly pass by.
         Y
story as data are either initial or those reported in the &st biweekly
   Orbita
Satellite Situation Report after launch. Date of launch is that of local
launch site time. After all available sources had been checked, there
still remained six gaps in the International Code Name Greek-
alphabet listing of orbital bodies : 1962 Alpha-Phi, 1962 Beta-Zeta,
1962 Beta-Theta, 1962 Beta-Iota, 1962 Beta-Nu, and 1962 Beta-Xi.
Three of these can be accounted for as known but undesignated Soviet
launches ; the o them remain unknown.
   Even though the tempo of space flights continued to increase, valid
interpretation of the scientific results of many satellites and probes is
as yet limited by tthe normal “lag-time” required to process and eval-
uate telemetry and other data.
                                                               2 85
 -                                                        -                 ~   ~~




Launcl                          .nternationa
                 Name                                                   Payload Data
                                                Vehicle                                                    Apogee       Perigee      Period                Remarks
 Date                           Designation                                                                (st. mi.)    (st. mi.)   (minutes)

                     rn
Jan.                                                        Total weight: 727 Ibs.
                                1962 Alpha     Atlas-                                                     11 3 AU-
            BANOER                                                                                         .6          0.9839 AU.
       2[                                                                                                                                       Lunar impact not achieved' ex-
             (United States).                               Objective: Roughland survivable
                                               AgenaB.                                                                                           cessive acceleration by 1st itage
                                                          oaDsule on moon: take T V Dictures of                                                  booster caused payload to pass
                                                                                                                                                 22,862 mi. in front of m o m
                                                                                                                                                 1/28/62; no attempt made t o
                                                                                                                                                 land lunar capsule. TV sig-
                                                                                                                                                 nals were too weak to provide
                                                                                                                                                 usable pictures because high-
                                                                                                                                                 gain antenna did not home on
                                                           rectional antenna.. Instrumentation                                                   earth. Still in solar orbit.
                                                           included vidicon camera gamma-ray
                                                           spectrometer radar redectivity ex-
                                                           periment add seismometer. 3 trans-
                                                           mitters. B 680 solar cells 1 h e r - z i n c
                                                           battery) B'siIver-cadmi& batteries.
            rmos IV (United
       8
Feb.                            1962 Beta      l'hor-        Totdweight: 2951bs.                          625                                   All systems provided good data.
             States).                            Delta.      Objective: Develop hardware and                                                     T V photos used of FRIEND-
                                                                                                                                                 analyses in supportin weather
                                                          techniques of weather satellite system.
                                                          obtain cloud photos and heat data fa;                                                          manned orbital fight.
                                                                                                                                                 SHIP 7
                                                          use in meteorology.                                                                    Transmitted 30000 photos as
                                                             Payload: 42" x 19'' cylinder con-                                                   of 6/14/62, after'which photos
                                                          taining 2 T V camera systems idkared                                                   no longer usable for weather
                                                          sensors, heat-budget sensors: attitude                                                 forecasting. Still in orbit.
                                                          controls; 3 transmitters and 2 tracking
                                                           beacons; 9,260 solar cells; 63 cadmium
                                                          batteries.
                                                                                                          159.5_____.
                                               Mas D.
Feb. 20                                                      Total weight: 2,900 lbs.                                                           First U.S. manned orbital flight.
                                                             Objective: Orbit and recover                                                         After 3 orbits capsule contain-
                                                          manned spacecraft; evaluate man-                                                       ing Astronaut John E. Glenn
                                                          spacecraft performance; investigate                                                    Jr., re-entered parachuted
                                                          man's capabilities in space environ-                                                   into Atlantic last of Grand
                                                          ment.                                                                                  Turk Island Bahamas mws
                                                             Payload: Bell-shaped 9%' x 6' (di-                                                  picked up &d taken iboard
                                                          ameter at base) capsule 'containing in                                                 U.S.S. Noa. Valuable data
                                                          addition to astronaut, cameras; life-                                                  gained on capsule and systems
                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                          support, aeromedical monitoring, and                                                   weightlessness consumption
                                                          attitude control systems; RF and UHF                                                                        foods, dis-
                                                                                                                                                 solid and li&d
                                                          transmitters, radar recovery beacons;                                                  orientation exercises, etc.
                                                          plus retrofire and recovery apparatus.                                                 Glenn piloted spacecraft in
                                                                                                                                                 2nd and 3rd ,?rbits reported
                                                                                                                                                 "Glenn effect gre&isb glow-
                                                                                                                                                 ing spots pas'sing slowly out-
                                                                                                                                                 side capsule.
                                                                                                   Reentered 3/4/62.
                                                         Not available.
                                            Thor-
                              9 3 Delta
                               12
Feb. 21
                                             Agena
                                             B.                                                    Capsule reentered and wan re-
                                            mor-         Total weight: 2 1W lbs.
                              962 Epsilon
Feb. 27   OISCOVEBEB                                                                                covered in mid-air over the
                                                         Other payload b not available.
                                                                          t
                                                                          a
           x x x w (United                   Agena                                                  pacific 3/3/03' 8th mid& re-
                                                                                                              the
                                                                                                    covery&~ biscoverer series.
                                             B.
           States).
                                                                                                                                reen-
                                                                                                    Remainder of satellite
                                                                                                    tared 8 2 1 3
                                                                                                           118.
                                                                                                                       reacquired the
                                                                                                   Con'ii&-i~-&
                                            Thor-         Total weight: 4 0 lbs.
                                                                            4
                              1882 zeta
M r 7 os0 I (Unitel
 a.                                                                                                 sun over 1OOO times (77 days)
                                                           Objective: Measure solar electm
                                             Delta.
           States).                                                                                 sent data on 'some 75) solar
                                                                                                    before &g        5/22/62 had
                                                        magnetic radiation in the ultraviolet,
                                                        X-ray and gamma-ray portions of thf
                                                                                                    &sres and subflares. Inter-
                                                        s p e c k m ; investigate dust particlea
                                                                                                    mittent operation until0/24/02.
                                                        in spaca' test spacecraft design.           then became active again.
                                                           Payloid: Nine-sided box tapped b7
                                                                                                    Still in orbit.
                                                        semicircular sail mounting 1880 solsl
                                                        cells. Instruments to m d d c t 13 ex
                                                           riments i solar radiation. others tc
                                                                      n
                                                        gvestigate dust particlea inkmca and
                                                        thermal radiation characteristics 0
                                                        spacecraft surface materials 2 trans
                                                        mltters; nickel cadmium 'batteries
                                                        complex attitude control system tc
                                                        kee instruments focused on sun.
                                                                                                   Reentered 11/3/02.
                                                           &t avalllrble.
                                            Atlas
                              iwla ~ t a
Mar. 7    U8AP sp8cecrSft
           (United States)                    Ag-
                                              B.                                                   Experiments reported to have
                                                           Total weight: Not available.
                              1962 Theta    Not avail
Mar. 10 COSMOS I                                                                                    transmitted as planned. Re
                                                           Objective: Study of earth's mdla
                                             able.
           (U.S.S.R.).                                                                              entered 5/2b/82.
                                                        tion belt, wsmio rays and theu
                                                        acceleration shortwave emission!
                                                        from sun s'nd other bodies; earth7
                                                        cloud systems; meteoric impacts.
                                                           Payload: Not available.
                                                                                                   Probewentto39lOmi inQ7-min
                                                           Total weight: 94 Ibs.
Mar. 28                                     swut.
          P-21~ Probe                                                                                        Qood data'on night
                                                           Oblective: Expertmmta on wn
            (United States)                                                                          time P-21 daytime data. D -
                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                    with ionospherefor wmparison
                                                        tinuowwave propegation to stud]
                                                        electron density andassodated param                   newlv discovered he-
                                                                                                     amlhnd
                                                        eters of ionosphere. swept-frequena
                                                                                                     U-G-bier h d e r nighttime
                                                        measurements of (electron densltv
                                                                                                     wnditions for 5rst time. Ion*
                                                        positive ion experiment to d e t e d i
                                                                                                     mbericdata needed to improve
                                                          on wncentration a t night.
                                                                                                     eirrth-spacecommunications.
                                                           Payload: &sided m e , wntalnini
                                                         amtlnuouswave propagation experi
                                                         ment, swept-frequericf probe, io1 ~




                                                         tra s transmitters
                                                                                                   Experiments reported to have
                                                           8 o h weight: Not available.
Apr. e                        1662 Iota     Not avail
                   U
          COEYOS
                                                                                                     transmitted as planned. Still
                                                           Objective: Inveatimrte fonomhem
                                              able.
            (...L.
             U8SF)                                                                                   in orbit.
Lannck                       [nternationa
                 Name                        Vehicle                Payload Data                                Perigee          Perio
                                                                                                    Apogeec                                Inclina                   Remarks
 Date                        Designation                                                            (st. mi.    (st. mi.)       (minut       tion
                                                                                                                                -
-
Apr. 9       Spacecraft    1952 Kappa Atlas-              Not available.
          USAF                                                                                                 1,748.5- . 153.0-.
                                                                                                                       ..                  85.68’. .
                                                                                                  2,099.6.-                                             Still in orbit.
                                      Agena B .
          (United States)
                                                                                                                                     __
Apr. 17 USAF Spacecraft    1962 Lamb& Thor-               Not available.                          332.65.-     97.99.   -.-. 91.5-                      Re-entered 5/28/62.
                                                                                                                                           73.530-.
          (United States)             Agena B ,
                           1962 Mu
Apr. 23 RANGER IV                     Atlas-              Total weight: 730 lbs.                                                                        Timer failure caused loss of COD-
                                                                                                                                           6.18’ to
                                                                                                               _..__..._.
          (United States),            Agena B.            Objective: Roughland survivable                                                                troland data 2 hrs. after launch.
                                                                                                                                              eclip-
                                                       capsule on moon; take TV pictures                                                                  RANGER I V traveled 231,486 mi.
                                                                                                                                              tic.
                                                       of moon.                                                                                          in 64 hrs., impacted on moon
                                                          Payload: 17’’-wideand 10’-tall (cruise                                                         4/25/62 at a point calculated as
                                                       position, with solar panels extended)                                                             229.3’ E longitude and 15.5’ S
                                                       structure. Hexaennal base containing                                                              latitude. First U.S. space-
                                                       conicat riid-courii motor, retrorocket‘;                                                          craft to impact on the moon.
                                                       siiticricill lunar cilprulo, wild ornni-
                                                       direction;il niitcnnn. 1nstrumetit.itiun
                                                                   vidicon cnmvra, g:imin’l-ray
                                                       ~i~cludeil
                                                       spectrometer, radar reflectivity expef-
                                                       iment, and seismometer; 3 transmit-
                                                       ters; 8,680 solar cells; 1 silver-zinc
                                                       battery, 6 silver-cadmium batteries.
                                                                                                                          ___
                                                                                                 414.5...
Apr. 24                      1s62 Nu                                                                           130.8- -
                                            Not avail-    Total weight: Not available.
          COSMOS 1 1
                  1                                                                                                             92.5. .
                                                                                                                                     .                  Experiments reported to have
                                                                                                                                           490..   -.
            (U.S.S.R.).                      able.        Objective: Investigate ionosphere,                                                             transmitted as planned. Re-
                                                       cosmic rays, meteoric dust, earth’s                                                               entered 10/17/62.
                                                       magnetic field, cloud formations and
                                                       distribution, and solar radiation.
                                                          Payload: Not available.
                             1962 xi
Apr. 26                                     Not avail-
          COSMOJ IV                                       Total weight: Not available.                         186_-.___. 6 5 O - - .
                                                                                                                      90.6---.                       Flight      stated to be a continua-
                                                                                                 206                                               ._
            (U.S.S.R.).                      able.        Objective: Investigate earth’s radia-                                                            tion of program of scientiflc in-
                                                       tion belts for effects on manned space                                                              vestigations announced 3/16/62
                                                       flight; meteoric particles; weather                                                                 with launching of COSMOS I;
                                                       phenomena; and factors affecting                                                                   experiments reported to have
                                                       communications.                                                                                    transmitted as planned. Sat-
                                                          Payload: Not available.                                                                         ellite recovered “at a pre-
                                                                                                                                                          determined point” in U.S.S.R.
                                                                                                                                                          on command, 4/29/62, after
                                                                                                                                                          1,25O,OM)-mi. flight.
Apr. 26                      1962 Omi-      Thor-         Total weight: 1321bs.
          ARIEL I                                                                                 754.2.-..    242.1-----       100.9--.   53.87’-.     411 experiments except Lyman-
           (United States-    cron           Delta.                                                                                                       Alpha transmitted normally.
           United King-                                                                                                                                   Discovered new ion belt at 450-
           dom).                                                                                                                                          569 mi. Transmission inter-
                                                                                                                                                          mittent after radiation from
                                                        electron temperature gauge, solar                                                                 U S . high-altitude nuclear test
                                                        aspect sensor, cosmic-ray detector, ion                                                           damaged solar cells. First
                                                        mass sphere, Lyman-Alpha gauges,                                                                  international satellite. Still in
                                                        tape recorder, x-ray sensors, trans-                                                              orbit.
                                                        mitters.
Apr. 26    USAF Sp&YXraft        1962 Pi       AtlW           Not available.                                  Not avail           Not avail.          Not           Re-entaed 4/28/62.
             (United States).                   Agena                                                          able.               able.               avail-
                                                 B.                                                                                                    able.
                                                                                                                                              ____
                                                                                                                             _.           -                     -
Apr. 28        Spacecraft     1962 Rho         Thor-          Not available.
           USA)                                                                                               ZZ6.18.                                               Re-entered 5/26/62.
                                                                                                                                                      73.07“-
                                                                                                                                  90.0.
                                                                                                                         ~




             (United States).                   Agena
                                                 B.
                                                                                                                                          ___-_ 92.46’.
                                                                                                                        .--.                                    -
M a y 16   USA) Spacecraft    legl Sigma       Thor-          Not available.                                                                                        %Ill in orbit.
                                                                                                                                  84.0.
                                                                                                              401.4.
             (United States).                   Agena
                                                 B.
                                                                                                                                          - ___-
                                                                                                                         - _.
May 2                                                                                                         168 -                                          -
     4     AURORA 7                             Atlas D.
                                 1882 Tau                     Total weight: 2,975 Ibs.                                                                Re-entered after 3 orbitr space-
                                                                                                              6..                 88.3-               32.5O--
                                                                                                                                                       craft and Astronaut d. Scott
            Mercury-Atlas                                     Objective: Orhitandremvermanne
            VI1 (MA-?)                                      spacerraft; e v a l u a t e m a n n e d s p a a                                            C a r m t e r picked up 136 mi.
                                                              rfomance; investigate man‘s capr
            (United States).                                                                                                                           east of Puerto Rim (ZOO mi.
                                                            I?
                                                             llities in space environment.                                                             beyond intended area) by
                                                              Payload: Bell-shaped 9%’ x 6 (d                                                          U.S.8. Pierce. Carpenter per-
                                                                                                      ‘
                                                            meter a t base) cansule. containin!                                                        formed many experiments
                                                                                                                                                       includina star observ$ms)
                                                                                                                                                       studying “c+lenn effect and
                                                                                                                                                       behavior of liquid ‘under
                                                                                                                                                       weightless conditions; proved
                                                            hracons; retrofire and recovery a]                                                         feasibility of drifting flight
                                                            paratus; tethered balloon for study                                                        with ita great saving in fuel.
                                                                                                         I
                                                            drag and visibility in space.                                                              Recond U.S. manned orbital
                                                                                                                                                       flight.
                                                                                                                        --
May 28                                         Not avail-
                                 1962Upsilon                                                                  308.3- -.
                                                               Total weight: Not available.                                       101.5----. 49.05“-- Experiments reported to have
           COSMOS V
             (U.S.B.R.).                        able.          Objectlre: Orbital scientific sate                                                      operated as planned. still in
                                                            lite to continue “program announce                                                         orbit.
                                                            March 16 of this year,” (launch I
                                                            COSMOS I).
                                                                                                                                         ______             -
                                                                                                              198____-_.
May 30     USAF SpaCWTaft        1962 Phi      Thor-          Not available.                                                                                        Re+ntered 6/11/62,
                                                                                                                                  88.7                74.1”-    ~



             (United States).                   Agena
                                                B.
                                 -------____-                                                                                     ---------.
           USAF Probe
M a y 31                                       Blue           Not avdlable.                                                                                         Yo information availablc.
             (United Statrs).                   Ecout.
                                                                                                                                  9 . _ _ _ _ _ _ 74.2G0. -
                                                                                                                         - -.
Jun.       USAF Spacecraft
       1                         1962 Chi 1    Thor-          Not available.                                                                                        Re-entered 6/28/62. Carried
                                                                                                              241.09-              05
             (United States).                   A gen a                                                                                                              OSCAR II as piggybnck satel-
                                                B.                                                                                                                   lite.
                 and
                                                                                                                                         ______
                   (United       1962 Chi 2                                                                                                           74.30--. IO-lb. American Radio Relay
                                                                                                              240
           OSCAR I1                                                                                                               90.5
            States).                                                                                                                                             League sate!lite, transmitting
                                                                                                                                                                 the word Hi” for use by
                                                                                                                                                                 amateur radio opernbors. Re-
                                                                                                                                                                entered 6/21/62.
Jun. 17                                                       Not available.
                Spacecraft       1962 Psi      Atlas-                                                         Not avail           Not avail.          Not      Re-entered 6/16/62.
           USAF
             (United States).                   Agena                                                          able.                                    avail-
                                                                                                                                   able.
                                                B.
                                                                                                                                              __ __     able.
                                                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                         __.      wa..
Jnn. 18 UlAF sI%CSCraft                        Thor-          Not avallnbl6.                                                                                   First orbital flight of Agana b.
                                 1912Omega                                                                    u3.6..                                  J20.--.
             (Utlite8 States).                  Agena                                                                                                            Still i orbit.
                                                                                                                                                                        n
                                                D.
Lame1                          nternationa!
                  Name                         Vehicle                  Payload Data                     Perigee          Inclina-                    Remarks
 Date                          Designation                                                              (st. mi.)           tion

                                                                                                                                     -
           !mas v
Jun. 1                                                                                                 367__-_--.
     1              (United    1962 Alpha-    Thor-           Total weight: 286 lbs.                                                  Infrared system did not pass
                                                                                                                          68.1°-.
            States).            AIpha          Delta.         Objective: Develop hardware and                                           preflight checks but satellite
                                                           techniques of weather satellite system;                                      was launched with this in-
                                                           obtain cloud photos and heat data for                                        operative because of need to
                                                           use in meteorology.                                                          cover August-September hur-
                                                             Payload: 42" x 2 cylinder, con-
                                                                                '                                                       ricane season. Inclination of
                                                           taining 2 T V camera systems, infrared                                       orbit increased to Boto widen
                                                           sensors; attitude controls; 4 transmit-                                      global weather coverage (tip of
                                                           ters and 2 tracking beacons 9 260 solar                                      Greenland to fringes of Antarc-
                                                           cells: 63 nickel-cadmium bdttkries.                                          tica). Cameras transmitted
                                                                                                                                        excellent photos although me-
                                                                                                                                        dium-angle (Tekea-lens) cam-
                                                                                                                                        era ceased functioning 7/2/62
                                                                                                                                        after transmitting 4,700 photos:
                                                                                                                                        Still in orbit, still transmitting.
                                                                                                                 -
Jun. 2:    TSAF Spacecraft     1962 Alpha-                                                                            -
                                              Thor-                                                                       75.09"- - . Re-entered 7/7/62.
                                                             Not available.                            130.49.
            (United States).     Beta          Agena
                                                B.
                                                                                                                 ---
Jun. 2         SpaCeCl.irft    1962 Alpha-
     '                                        Thor-                                                                                  - . Re-entered 9/14/62.
                                                             Not available.
           JSAF                                                                                        130.49-            76.04'-
            (United States).     Gamma         Agena
                                               D.
                                                                                                                                    - _.
Jun.                           1962 Alpha-    Not avail-
           >OS?dOS V I
       3
       (                                                                                               162.4---.-                          Experiments reported to have
                                                                                                                          48.9'-
            W.S.S.R.).           Delta         able.                                                                                        functioned as planned. Re-
                                                                                                                                            entered 8/8/62.
                                                                                                                 __
Jul. 1(                        1962 Alpha-    Thor-                                                           -
           PELSTAB I                                                                                   593. _ _ _                          First rivatecorporation satel-
                                                                                                                          44.790-..
                                 Epsilon
            (United States).                   Delta.                                                                                       lite guilt by AT&T, launched
                                                                                                                                            by 'NASA. Successfully trans-
                                                           band microwave communication in                                                  mitted international TV ( b e
                                                           space; study radiation effects; test                                             tween U.S. and France and
                                                           satellite tracking techniques.                                                   U.K.) and telephone conversa-
                                                             Payload: 34%" sphere, containing                                               tions. Command circuit failed
                                                           communications receivers and trans-                                              11/23/62 because of radiation
                                                           mitters; tracking beacons; ex eri                                                effects, was bypassed from the
                                                           ment? to study earth's radiation gel&                                            ground; satellite resumed trans-
                                                           and their effect on semiconductors,                                              mission 1/4/63. Still in orbit,
                                                           mirrors for optical tracking: 3,600 sola;                                        still transmitting.
                                                           cells and 19 nickel-cadmium batteries.
Jul. 1
     1     USAF Spacecraft     1962 Alpha-    Atlas-         Not available.                            Not avail-         Not              Reentered 7/25/62.
            (United States).    Zeta           Agena                                                    able.              avail-
                                               B.
                                                                                                                 ___       able.
Jul. 2
     4     USAF Spacecraft     1962 Alpha-    Thor-          Not available.                            122.41-                             Reentered 8/14/62.
                                                                                                                          70.29O--.
            (United States).    Eta            Agena
                                               B.
                                                                                                                          - ___ __ - -.
Jul. 2.                                                                                                ----_-_---
           USAF Probe                         Blue           Not available.                                                                Yo information available.
            (United States).                   Scout,
                                               Jr.
                                                                                                                                                           Re-entered 8/24/62.
Jul. %                                                                                                                                         71.0B0-.
                                           Thor-
          U W Bpacscraft                                                                            251.04.---.
                             1982 Alpha-                  Not available.
           (United States)    Theta         Agem
                                             B.
                                                                                                                                                           Experiments reported t o have
                                                        Total weieht: Not available.                                                           650-.--.
Jul. %                                                                                            218.2
                             1962 Alpha-   Not avail-
          COBHOB VII
                                                                                                                                                            functioned as planned. Re-
                              Iota
           (U.8.8.R.).                      able.       OhJectivePbrbit s d k j l t t c satellite
                                                                                                                                                            entered 8/1/62.
                                                     to investigate charged particles in
                                                     ionosphere corpuscular streams and
                                                     low-enerm’cartlcles. earth’s magnetic
                                                     fleld and-irhtion belts, cloud firma-
                                                     tions and cosmic rays
                                                        Pa$losd: Not availible.
                                                                                                                                                           Reentered 8/26/62.
                                                                                                                                               82.25O..
Aug. 1 USAF SpaceCraft                                                                            22?.43.---.     120.55..--.
                                           Thor-
                             1962 Alpha-                Not availablc.
                                           _~._
                                            Agena D.
         (United States)       Kappa
                                                                                                                                                           Ro-entered 8,‘6/flZ.
                                                                                                                  Not nvnil- h‘ot nvail-
                                                                                                  Not avail-                                   Not
Ang. E US.4F Spacecraft                                 Kot available.
                             1062 Alpha-   Atlas-
                                                                                                                                                 avail-
                                                                                                                               able.
                                                                                                    able.          able.
                                            Agena B.
         (United states)       Lam bda
                                                                                                                                                 able.
                                                                                                                                                           ?pacowaft carrying Cosmonaut
                                                                                                                                               65O Iatf
                                                                                                                  105.6, later   88.5, later
Aug. 11                                    Not avatl-     Total weight: Approx. 10 Mx) lhs.         156, later
                             1962 Alpha-
                 N
          YOSTOK
                                                                                                                                                             Ma]. Andrlan Nikolayee trans-
                                                          Objective: Orbit manneh satclllte                                                      64“50‘
                                                                                                                                   88.13
           (U.S.S.R.).                                                                                137.2         107.4
                              Mu            able.
                                                                                                                                                             mitted llve T V to Soviet
                                                                                                                                                            ground stations showing cos-
                                                                                                                                                            monaut rnovekents diiring
                                                                                                                                                            weightlessness. Cosmonaut
                                                                                                                                                            mmnriinlcat~d several times
                                                                                                                                                            W i t h - v 6 i s ~ o ~ orbited a d a y
                                                                                                                                                                                yv,
                                                        toring equipment 2 remrdrrs, trsns-
                                                                                                                                                            later On r entry, Priknlayev
                                                                                                                                                                             r
                                                        mitters and trackkg beacons.
                                                                                                                                                            left spacecraft vin ejcetion cap-
                                                                                                                                                            sule. Dararhuted to earth ncar
                                                                                                                                                            Kaiagand               Kazakhstan,
                                                                                                                                                            IJ.S.S.R., iftw 01 orbits (96
                                                                                                                                                            hrs. 25 min.)
                                                                                                                                                     ---   First. tiindcm‘ flight of manned
Aug. 12                                                                                                                                        65O-..
                             1962 Alphb    Not avail-     Total weight: Approx. 10 Mx) Ibs.
          VOSTOK IV
                                                                                                                                                            spacecraft reported to have
           (U.8.8.R.).         Nu           able.         Objective: Orbit manned ’satellite
                                                                                                                                                            been as cfme ss 4.3 mi. to each
                                                        in close conjunction with another
                                                                                                                                                            other at one mint in the flight.
                                                        manned satellite already in orbit.
                                                                                                                                                            Cosmonaut -Lt. Col. Pave1
                                                        Investigate effects of space flight on
                                                                                                                                                            Popovich in VOSTOK I V WBS in
                                                        man Make recision i w v e r y .
                                                                                                                                                            vlsual and radio contact with
                                                          P&load: 8notacially reported to
                                                                                                                                                            Cosmonaut Nikolayev in VOs-
                                                        Include in addition to cosmonaut
                                                                                                                                                            m u m. “floated” in weinhtless
                                                        TV t A s m i t t e r aeromedical monitor!                                                                                    ~I



                                                                                                                                                            cOndition-iorF3).$ hrs. On I B
                                                        ing equipment: 2 recorders, trans-
                                                                                                                                                            entry Popovich left space-
                                                        mittem and tracking beacons.
                                                                                                                                                            mat h a eJwtion capsule, para-
                                                                                                                                                            chuted to earth near Karspand,
                                                                                                                                                            Kazakhstan. U.S.8.R.. after 46
                                                                                                                                                            orbits (70 hh. 29 e;).           Tan-
                                                                                                                                                            dem flieht (1) demonstrated
                                                                                                                                                            E order of Russian launch
                                                                                                                                                              &
                                                                                                                                                            and vehicle technology’
                                                                                                                                                            multiplied semd timest t%
                                                                                                                                                            amount of spaca aeromedical
                                                                                                                                                            data.
                                 ----zp’ooz
                       .
‘ma ‘bs lad sa[a!)~t?d 8 inoqe
le xng beCeJ-a!msoa !spopd uns
iamb l m m p ‘aas lad ‘?m OQZ
                                                                                                                                  Reported by U S (9/662) to
                                                                                                                   Not
                                                                                                      Not avail-
                                              Not avsil-    Not avsilabb.
                                lBB2 Alpha-
           Venus Probe
8ep.   1
                                                                                                                                   have been 811 a t k p t e d Venus
                                                                                                                    avail-
                                               able.                                                   able.
             (U.8 S.R.).          Tau
                                                                                                                                   umbe that Idled to leave
                                                                                                                    able.
                                                                                                                                   5ariiing orbit. Infomationon
                                                                                                                                   orblhl StatuS Bot avsilable.
                                                                                                                                  %ill in orbit.
                                                                                                                   82.820.-
                                              Thor-         Not available.
                SpaCeCr8ft    1962 Alpha-
sep.   1   USAF
                                               Agena
                                Upsilon
             (United States).
                                               B.
                                                                                                                              -   Reentered ll/l9/02.
                                                                                                                   81.840-
                                              Thor-         Not available.
           USA? S p a U ? d     1962 Alpha-
8ep. 17
                                               Agena
                                  Chi
             (United States).
                                               B.
                                                                                                                                  Launch moved up from Nov. t     a
                                                                                                                   68.20--.
                                              Thor-          Total weight: 281 lbs.
Sep. 18 m o a VI (Unites        1962 Alpha-
                                                                                                                                   ensure maximum wve
                                                             Objective: Develop h r w r and
                                                                                    adae
                                               Delta.
                                 Psf
         Staten).
                                                                                                                                   the storm season and o? $f%
                                                           techniquesof weather satellitesystem.
                                                                                                                                   launching. Infrared        sensor
                                                           9btain cloud DhOtOS for use I me!
                                                                                          n
                                                                                                                                   w s left out of TIROS VI. Photo
                                                                                                                                    a
                                                           teorology.
                                                                                                                                   quality as good as an in Tiros
                                                             Pavload: 42" x 22" cylinder, con-
                                                             Payload:        22'' cvlinder. mn-
                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                   series. Medium-an         camera
                                                           taining2 TV camera systems; attitude
                                                                                sys6ms;
                                                           tainhg2
                                                                                                                                   (Tegea lens) stoppe8 function-
                                                           controls4 transmitters and 2 tracking
                                                                                                                                   ing 12/1/62 after transmitting
                                                           teaeon4 91a0 solar cells; ~a nickel-
                                                                                                                                   12 ~ c ~ o u d - w vpbotos. still
                                                                                                                                                        er
                                                           tadmi& dattedes.
                                                                                                                                   in'orbit still transmitting pho-
                                                                                                                                   tos fro4 wide-angle camera.
                                                                                                                            ___   Equipment reported to have
                                                             Total weieht: Not available.                          66O..
                                              Not avail-
                                1962 Alpha-
Sep. 27    COSMOS IX
                                                                                                                                   functioned as planned. Infor-
                                                              Objective: Orbit scientific satellite
                                               able.
             (U.S.S.R.).          Omega
                                                                                                                                   mation on orbital status not
                                                           lor study of ionosphere radiation
                                                                                                                                   available.
                                                           belts, and effect of mdeoroids on
                                                           rpacecraft.
                                                             Payload: Not available.
                                                                                                                                          m u satellite lanncb from
                                                                                                                                  First
                                                                                                                   8.B.
                                                                                                                    040.
                                              Thor-          Total weighk 320 Ibs.
                                1962 Beta-
Sep. 28    ALOugTTr I
                                                                                                                                         U r s t sstellite designed and
                                                                                                                                   pr
                                                                                                                                   m
                                                              Objective: Measure electron density
                                               Agena
             (United States-     Alpha
                                                                                                                                   b u d b country other than
                                                           iistribution i the ionosuhere: varia-
                                                                          n
                                               B.
             Canada).
                                                                                                                                   U.8. or 6.5.8.R. Exmriments
                                                           tions in electron dansity-distribution
                                                                                                                                   transmitted as piogramed.
                                                           wlth tlme of day and with latitude
                                                                                                                                   Stillin orbit. still tnnsmitting.
                                                           under V        ~ magnetic and auroral
                                                                               K
                                                           conditions: galactla noise; energetic
                                                           particle flux.
                                                              Payload: !NO" x 8'6'' eggshaped
                                                           satellite containing mepetre uency
                                                           pUhd ' sounder electron 8ensity
                                                            oniclttfon and Vhistler experiments
                                                           2 crossed anteman extending 160' end
                                                           76'- solar panela
                                                                                                                             --
                                                                                                                   66.40.
                                                              $lot available:
                                1882 Beta-    Thor-
sep. 28
                                               Agens.
                                  Beta
-
                                                                        Payload Data                                                   Period      Inelin:              Remarks
                               btemationa     Vehicle                                                                     Perigee
                   Name
Launcl                                                                                                    Apogee
                                                                                                          (st. mi.)       (st. mi.)   (minutes)      tion
                               Designation
 Date
-
                                                                                                                   - __               36.4 h . 32.90- -      Experiments transmitted good
                                                                                                                                            ..
                               1962 Beta-    Thor-            Total weight: 89 Ibs.                      61,160-
Oct.   2   EXPLORER XIV
                                                                                                                                                              data. Highly elliptical orbit
                                              Delta.          Objective: Describe the trapped
                                QaIlUlU
            (United States)
                                                                                                                                                              would enable satellite to sam-
                                                           corpuscular radiation solar particles,
                                                                                                                                                              ple virtually all levels of the
                                                           cosmic rays, and sola; wind; correlate
                                                                                                                                                              magnetosphere as the magneto-
                                                           particle phenomena with magnetic
                                                                                                                                                              sphere changed shape and
                                                           Eeld observations taken in a highly
                                                           elliptical orbit over a n extended time                                                            strength throughout a year’s
                                                                                                                                                              passage of the earth around the
                                                           period.
                                                              Payload: 27“ x 19” cone with mag-                                                               sun. Data to be compared
                                                           netometer boom and 4 solar paddles;                                                                with those from EXPLORER
                                                           instruments include cosmic-ray de-                                                                       Still in orbit, ceased
                                                                                                                                                              XII.
                                                                                                                                                              transmitting 1/10/63; resumed
                                                           tector, ion-electron detector, proton
                                                           analyzer, trapped particle radiation                                                               transmitting 1/29/63.
                                                           experiment; transmitter; optical atti-
                                                           tude sensor: solar cells. including
                                                                                                               _______
                                                           solar-cell damage experiment.
                                             Atlas D.                                                                                                        Wnt U.S. manned orbital fiight
                                                                                                         176
                               1962 Beta-                     Total weight: 3,030 lbs.
                7
Oct.   3                                                                                                                                           32.5O.-
           3IOPA
                                                                                                                                                              of more than 3 orbits; Brst
            Mercury-Atlas       Delta                         O b j e c t i v e : O r b i t a n d rewver
                                                                                                                                                              manned spaceflight recovery in
            VI11 (MA-8)                                    manned spacecraft; evaluate man-
                                                                                                                                                              the Pacific. Astronaut Walter
                                                           spacecraft performance: investigate
            (United States)
                                                                                                                                                              M. Schirra Jr. flew 6 orbits
                                                           man’s capabilities in space environ-
                                                                                                                                                              most of it ih “drifting” mode:
                                                           ment.
                                                                                                                                                              reentered and landed within
                                                              Payload: Bellshaped 9W’x 6‘(diam-
                                                                                                                                                              13,000 ft. of predicted impact
                                                           eter at base) capsule, containing, in
                                                                                                                                                                 int 295 mi. NE of Midway
                                                           addition to astronaut, cameras; life-
                                                                                                                                                              f”
                                                                                                                                                               ciland, WBS picked up hy
                                                           support, aeromedical monitoring, and
                                                                                                                                                              U.S.S. Kear~arge.
                                                           attitude control systems: A F and UHB
                                                           transmitters, radar recovery beacons;
                                                           retrofire and recovery apparatus;
                                                           experiment to compare various types
                                                           of heat shielding.
                                                                                                         238.5-----
                                             rhor-                                                                                                           Re-entered 11/16/62.
                                                                                                                                                   31.96‘-
                               1962 Bet%                     Not available.
Oct.   9
                                Epsilon        Agena.
                                                                                                            _______                                          Equipment reported to have
                                                                                                         208
                               Kot avail-    \Tot avail-     Total weight: Not available.
Oct. 17                                                                                                                                            so----
                                               able.                                                                                                          functioned normally. Infor-
                                                              Objective: Continuation of Cosmos
                                able
                                                                                                                                                              mation on orbital status not
                                                           scientificsatellite series.
                                                                                                                                                              available.
                                                             Payload: Not available.
                                                                                                         Not avail.                   Not avail-             ?ower malfunction prevented
                                                                                                                                                   vot
                                             4tlas-          Total weight: 755 lbs.
Oct. 18                        1962 Beta-
           1ANOER V
                                                                                                          able.                        able.                  solar cells from feeding power
                                              Agena          Objective: Roughland survivable                                                        avail
                                Eta
            (United States).
                                                                                                                                                              to instrumentation making
                                                           capsule on moon; take T V pictures of
                                              B.                                                                                                    able.
                                                                                                                                                              payload inoperative from 2 hn.
                                                           moon.
                                                                                                                                                              after launch. No midcourse
                                                             Payload: l7’-wide and 10‘-tall
                                                                                                                                                              correction possible: no TV
                                                           (cruise position, with solar panels ex-
                                                                                                                                                              photos; no ejectionof lunar c a p
                                                           tended) structure. Hexaeonal base
                                                                                                                                                              d e . Passed within 450 mi. of
                                                           containin: conical midcourse motor,
                                                                                                                                                              moon 10/20/62,  went into solar
                                                           retrorocket, spherical lunar capsule
                                                                                                                                                              orbit.
                                                           and omnidirectional antenna. I !     n
                                                      strumentation includes vidibn cam-
                                                      era, gamma-fay spectrometer, radar
                                                      reflectivity experiment, and seismom-
                                                      eter; 3 tpusdtters; 8,880 solar cells;
                                                     I silver-zmc battery; 6 silvercadmium
                                                    batteries.
                                                                                                 Instruments reported to have
                                                       Total weight: Not available.
Oct. 20   coBYos XI         Not avail-   Not avail,
                                                                                                   functioned as lanned. Infor-
                                                        Objective: Continuation of Cosmos
           (U.S.S.R.).       able.        able.
                                                                                                                     status not
                                                                                                   mation on or&
                                                    scienti0c satellite serles.
                                                                                                   available.
                                                       Payload: Not available.
                                                                                                 Btill in orbit.
Oct. 26                     1962 Beta-   Thor-      Not available.
                                          Agene.
                              Ka Pa                                                              Wmt into orblt with min rate 10
                            IW                         Total weight: 1001bs.
                                 8eta-   Thor-
Oct. a7
                                                                                                                      wee.because
                                                                                                  &&thepl&ed
                                                       Objective: Inject scientific satellite
                             hmbda        Delta.
                                                                                                  of failure of dedpin weights to
                                                    into elliptic81 orbit to stud artifldsl
                                                                                                  deploy; spin rate renders data
                                                    radiation belt created by 8.5. high-
                                                                                                  fr&mthe-2 electron directional
                                                    altitude nuclear explosion 7/9/02.
                                                       Payload: 27” I Iff’ cone wtth mag-         detectoraalmost unusable. S t i l l
                                                                                                  in orhlt, dill transmltthg.
                                                    netometer b o and 4 solar paddles;
                                                                    om
                                                    experiments were on magnetic field
                                                    ion-electron, electron flux, and d i a d
                                                    hution i pitch angle of electrons’
                                                                n
                                                    transmitter; optical attitude senso<
                                                    solar cells, including solarcell damage
                                                    experiment.
                                                                                                 Still in orbit. All 3 tracking sys-
          ANNA In (United                Thor-         Total weight: 360 lbs.
Oct. 31                     I(w2 Beta-
                                                                                                   tems on board satellite s t U
                             Mu
           States).                       Abls         Objective: Orbit geodeticsatellite to
                                                                                                   tmsmitting.
                                                    calibrate Instruments at U S tracking
                                                                                   ..
                                          Star.
                                                    stations around the world and obtain
                                                    geodetic data.
                                                       Payload: 36” sphere, contatning 4
                                                    flashing-light beacons Secor radio
                                                    ranging system Dopiler radio sys-
                                                    t m transmittek solar cells.
                                                      e
                                                                                                 Trip to Mars to take about
                            Not avail-
Nov. 1                                                  Tbtsl weight: 1:980 lbs.
                                         Not avail.
          MARE I
                                                                                                  7 mos. Soviet calculations in-
                                                        Objective: Conduct fly-byof planet
                                          able.
           (U.B.8.R.).       able.
                                                                                                  dicated that on original trajec-
                                                    Mars. gather interplanetary data on
                                                                                                  tory satellfte would pass
                                                    trip to Man and Martian data on
                                                                                                  n s b mi. from am. NO
                                                    fly-by: take TV Dictum of M a a and
                                                                                                  micieourse w m t i o n reported
                                                    relay them to ehth.
                                                                                                   -.of 12/31/02. Still transmit-
                                                        Payload: 10’ I 1Y (in cruise posf-
                                                    tion. with solar naneh and radiatora
                                                    extended) strich; -n 2 w m rt-
                                                                                i
                                                    menu. orbital compartment mnt-
                                                    mid-cd.urse motor, solar cells, radl.
                                                    atom. and antennas; planetary coma
                                                    partment contains TV cameri, spee
                                                    t d e c t o m e t e r , spectrograph m
                                                    netornetem, gaa discbar e and ’kcin%
                                                    lating gauges, r a d i O t e ~ ~ p elow-
                                                                                          ,
                                                    energy-proton-electron-iont p andra
                                                                                       Source:
                                                    micrometeorite countera.
                                                    TasS).
-

                                    II
Launch                                   Internations    Vehicle               Payload Data                   Apogee          Perigee        Period     Inclina-                    Remarks
                                          Designation
 Date                                                                                                         (st. mi.)       (st. mi.)     (minutes)     tion
               Name
                                                                                                                                                                  __
               Spacecraft
Nov. 5                       1962 Beta- Thor-     Not available.
          USAF                                                                                               249.79.--       129.86.--.                 750- .         Reentered 12/3/62.
                                                                                                                                                             .
            (United States).   Omicron    Agena.
Nov. 11                      1962 Beta- -4tlas-   Not available.                                              Not avail      Not avail                    Not          Reentered 11/12/62.
                               Pi         Agena.                                                                able.         able.                     available
                                                                                                             - __ __                                    -- - - - - - - Information not available.
                                                                                                             . - --
Nov. 21                                 Blue                                                                          -.
                                                  Not available.                                                             -.-___-_-.
                             ___________._                                                                                                              .
                                          scout.
Nov. 24                      1962 Beta- Thor-     Not available.                                             196.98..-       128.63..-.                 65.15"--       Re-entered 12/13/62.
                               Rho        Agena B
                                    I
Dec. 14   USAF Spacecraft    1962 Beta- Thor-     Not available.                                             174.61---.      119.31.--.                 65'---      Marked        100th Thor launch as
                                                                                                                                                                  ._
                              '

            (United States).   Sigma      Agena.                                                                                                                         space booster, of which 93 were
                                                                                                                                                                         successful. Reentered 12/8/62.
             Spacecraft
Dec. 12                                  1962 Beta-     Thor-      Not available.
          USAF                                                                                               1,731.22-.      144.79. --.                               Still in orbit.
                                                                                                                                                        70.36O.-
             mted States).                 Tau 1         Agena.
           (u 'and
                      ___________        1962 Beta-                                                                          154. 11-...
                  3                                                Not available.
          INlUN                                                                                              1,726.87..                                 70.34'.        Still in orbit.
                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                           Tau 2                                                               H-4
                  and                    1962 Beta-                Not available.                            1,699.45.       136.81---.                 70.29".-       Still in orbit.
                                           Tau 3
                  and                    1962 B e t a              Not available.                            1,728.65.       144.78..-.                 70.35O.-       Still in orbit.
                                           Tau 4
                                                                                                                             828.91- - -.
Dec. 13          (United                 1962 Beta-                  Total weight: 172 lbs.
          RELAY I                                                                                            4,611.18-.                                                Power failure in satellite made it
                                                                                                                                                        47.48O..
           States).                        Upsilon                   Obiective: Orbit active reuenter                                                                   impossibleto receive communi-
                                                                                                                                                                        cations from RELAY I in early
                                                                                                                                                                         days of the flight; all satellite
                                                                                                                                                                        systems except command re-
                                                                                                                                                                         ceiver were turned off in hope
                                                                   space radiation and amount of damage                                                                 that solar cells would build up
                                                                   it does to solar cells and electrical                                                                battery charge. on 1/3/63 first
                                                                   components.                                                                                          intercontinenti test patterns
                                                                     Pavload: 33" x 29" octaeonal urism.                                                                were transmitted fromsatellite.
                                                                                                                                                                         Still in orbit; still transmitting.


                                                                   damage diode and radiation moni-
                                                                   toring e)xperimknts; 8,215 solar cells:
                                                                   3 nickel-cadmium batteries; 5 external
                                                                   antennas.
                                    I                                                                        237.37. - - .                                        -
Dec. 14                                  1962 Beta-                  Not available.
          USAB &XW3X3ft                                                                                                      124.9-..-.                                Still in orbit.
                                                                                                                                                        70.97'.
           (United States).                Phi
                                                                                                                  Third NASA attempt to orbit
                                                                                                   52.04’-.
                                            scout.         Total weight: 222 lbs.
Dec. 16                        962 Beta-
                     XI
                      V
          EXPLORER
                                                                                                                   micrometeoroid satellite. 1st to
                                                           Objective: Orbit satellite to make
                                Chi
           (UnitedStates).                                                                                         attain dmbleorbit (EXPLORER
                                                         direct measurements of micromete
                                                                                                                   xm reenterad after 3 days;
                                                         oroid puncture hazard to structural
                                                                                                                   fust attempt on 6/30/61 notdid
                                                         skhsamples, of particleshaving difler-
                                                                                                                   achieve orbit). EXPLOREB XVI
                                                         ent momentums; comparing perform-
                                                                                                                   still in orbit, still transmittlug.
                                                         ance of protected and unprotected
                                                         solar cells exposed to space radiation.
                                                           Payload: 2 ‘ x 76” cylinder, con-
                                                                       4’
                                                         taining 160 pressurized cells for mete-
                                                         oroid puncture detection 60 foil gauge
                                                         detectors 46 wire grid’detectors 2
                                                         cadmiu’-sulflde-cell detectors a$d
                                                         tmpacbdetecting transducers; ’radio
                                                         tracking beacon; 2 telemetry systems;
                                                         solar cells. batteries.
                                                                                                                  No information available.
                                                           Not ava’ilable.
                                            Blue
Dec. 18   USAP Probe.--.--
                                              Scout.
            (United States),
                                                                                                              -   Intended to be world’s first o p
                                                                                                   89.980.
                                                           Total weight: 140 lbs.
                                            Blue
                               lW2 Beta-
Dec. 18 TRmSll’ V-A
                                                                                                                    erational navigation satellite,
                                                            Obective: Orbit first of 4 opera-
                                             scout.
                                Psi
         (United States).
                                                                                                                    but failure of command re-
                                                         tional navigation satellites
                                                                                                                    ceiver meant no signals could
                                                            Payload: 43” x 31’.’ dr&, wntain-
                                                                                                                    be sent to satellite’s memory
                                                         ing oscillators, contmuous transmib
                                                                                                                    system and that its attitude
                                                         ters, attitude control system, memory
                                                                                                                    controls could not be activated;
                                                         system, clock, Snap auxiliary power
                                                                                                                    this reduced its utility from
                                                         system for transmitters.
                                                                                                                    operational to research. Still
                                                                                                                    in orbit; ceased transmitting
                                                                                                                    12/21/62.
                                                                                                                  Equipment reported to be fun*
                                                                                                   65’---..
                                            Not avail.
                               Not avail-
Dee. 22   COSMOS XII
                                                                                                                   tloning as planned. Still in
                                             able.
                                able.
            (U.S.S.R.).
                                                                                                                   orbit.
                                                    exploring space’ transmitter. tele-
                                                    metry’ radio system for precis; meas-
                                                    uremeht of orbital elements.
                                            _--_-----.                                                            Launched piggyback aboard a
                                                                                                    Not
                                                      Total weieht: 1.6 lbs.
                               Not avail-
              I (United
During    TBS
                                                                                                                   larger satellite launched by
                                                                                                     avail-
                                                      Objective: Orbit satellite to map
                                able.
 1962.      States).
                                                                                                                   USAF Thor-Agena. Informa-
                                                                                                     able.
                                                    artificial radiatlon belt.
                                                                                                                   tion on orbital status not avail-
                                                      Payload. 6 pyramid, contalning
                                                                   W
                                                                                                                   able.
                                                    radiation sensors and transmitter.
-
                          APPENDIX B
       CHRONOLOGY OF MAJOR NASA LAUNCHINGS
      OCTOBER 1, 1958, THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 1962
   This chronology of major NASA launchings is intended to provide an
accurate and ready historical reference, one compiling and verifying
informa tion previously scattered over several sources. It spans
NASA’s four years. It includes launchings of all vehicles larger
        first
than sounding rockets launched either by NASA or under “NASA
direction” (e.g., ABMA served as launching ageot for the early Jupiter
C and Juno I1 shots, and AFBMD for the Thor-Able shots).
   An attempt has been made to classify the performance of both the
launch vehicle and the payload and of total results in terms of primary
mission. Three categories have been used for vehicle performance
                                    (S), partially successful (P), and
and mission results-successful
unsuccessful (U). A fourth category, unknown (Unk), has been
provided for payloads where launch vehicle malfunctions did not Cgve
the payload a chance to exercise its main experiments. These im-
sions are necessarily arbitrary, since many of the results cannot be
neatly categorized. Also they ignore the fact that a great deal was
learned from shots which may have been classified as unsuccessful.
   A few unique items require separate treatment. Their dates have
been kept in sequence, but their history has been relegated to footnotes.
   Dates of launchings are referenced to local time a t the launch site.
   The original table was prepared by Robert Rosholt of the NASA
Historical Office, who made a comparative analysis of the several
general chronologies prepared by the NASA Historical Office, the first
six semiannual reports of NASA, and the Space Activities Summary
prepared by the NASA Office of Public Information. Additional
information and guidance was received from Headquarters Offices,
from Launch Operations Center, and from the very useful comments
received on the October 1962 version. For further information on
each item, see Appendix A of Aeronauiics and Astronautics (1916-
1960), Aeronautical and Astronautical Events o f 1961, and this volume.
   Prepared January 1963 (AFEH).
                                                               299
                                                                                                       ~~




                                                                                     Performance
                                                        Launch                                              Mission
                                                                                       1
                                                        Vehicle                                             Results
                    NASA
  Date       Name             General Mission                              Vehicle           Payload
                    Code                                                                                                                   Remarks
                                                                     -
                                                                       s     P
                                                         (Site)
                                                                     --
  1968
                                                                     ____ x
Oct   11                   Scientific lunar probe    Thor-Able                                                        Uneven separation of 2nd and 3rd stages.
                                                                                                                       reached 70,700 miles. Verified Van Alled
                                                       (AMR).
                                                                                                                        Belt.
                                                                     ____ ___
      n
Oct                        Scientific earth sat-     Jupiter C                                                        Premature upper-stage separation.
                            ellite.                    (AMR).
                                                                           __
Nov      8                 ScienttfIc lunar probe    Thor-Able                                                        3rd-stage failure. reached 963 miles its brief
                                                                     .___
                                                                                                                        data indicated' equatorial region i a d higher
                                                       (AMR).
                                                                                                                        flux and energy levels than previously
                                                                                                                        thought.
                                                                                                                      Premature cutoff on 1st stagv reached 63,580
Dec                        Scientific lunar probe
         6
                                                                                                                        miles. Radiation belt dis&eries.
  1969
Feb 17                     Scientific earth satel-                                                                    E-
                                                                                                                       x     satellite wobble. Cloud cover data not
                            lite.                                                                                       mea.
                                                       (AMR).


                                                                     I I---
Mar      3                                           Juno I1
                           Scientific lunar probe                                                                     2nd and 3rd stage propulsion and pitch mal-
                                                                                                                        function. Communicated to 407,000 miles.
                                                       (AMR).
Apr 13                                               Vanguard
                           Scientific earth sat-                                                                      2nd-stage failure.
                                                                     ___.
                            ellite.                    (AMR).
May 28                     ----________._____.___
Jun 22                     Scientific earth satel-                                                                    2nd-stage failure.
                            lite.
Jul                        Scientific earth satel-
      16                                                                                                              Dastroyed after 6% seconds.
                            lite.
                           Scientific earth satel-
Aug      7                                                                                                            Mapped Van Allen belt. Photographed cloud
                            lite.                                                                                       cover.
Aug 14                     Scientific earth satel-                                                                    Premature fuel depletion in 1st stage; upper-
                            lite.                                                                                      stage malfunction.
                                                                     [ x [___
Aug 21:                    ---.____.____.-_______
                                   ._____..____________--
Sep 0                      Suborbital Mercury        Atlas-Big Joe                                                    Capsule recovered after re-entry test.
                            capsule test.              (AMR)
                           ----____________-_____
Sep 16:
Sep 18                     Scientific earth satel-                                                                    Magnetic fields radiation belt, and micro-
                            lite.                                                                                      meteorite findings.
Sep 24'                    -----._______.-_-_____
Oct 4                                                                                                                 Qualify booster for use with Mercury test pro-
                           Suborbital Mercury
                            capsule test.                                                                              gram.
Oct   13                   Scientific earth satel-                                                                    Radiation and magnetic storm findings.
                            lite.
                                                           Oantster ejection suceessfut l W h t sphere in-
Oct 28       Suborbital communi-     Augmented       X
                                                                                                  test of
                                                            flation IULSUCCBPS~. ~hcceasr~l
              catiom test.            sergeant
                                                            Dla stage.
                                                             et
                                       (WS)
                                                           Capsule escape teat. Eseape rocket had a
                                     Little Joe
Nov 4        Sttborbltal Mercury                     X
              came.                                         delayed thrust buildup.
                                       (WS)
                                                     -_    Shroud failure after 46 seconds.
Nov 26       Sdeatificlunarprobe.    Atlas-Able
                                       (AMB)
Dec                                  Little Joe
             SuborMtal Mercury                             Eseaps spatem and biomedical h t ; monkey
         4                                           X
                                                            (Sam)used.
              capsule teat.            (WS)
  1860           \d
Jan 16                                                     Canister ejection successful, sphere M a t i o n
             Subokbltal communi;     Augmented       X
                                                            -e.
              cations teat.           Sergeant
                             .
                                       (WS)
Jan 21                                                     Emape syrbm and biomedical tert; monkey
             Suborbital Mercury      Little Joe      X
                                                            (Miss Sam) used.
              capsule teat.            (WS)
                                                           Canister ejection successful, sphere inflation
Feb 27       Suborbital communi-     Augmented       X
                                                            Uumlcceasful.
              cations test.           Sergeant
                                       (WS)
                                                           Communicnted data from 17 700,000 mi., pod-
M r 11
 a           ScienMflc deep space    Thor-Able       X
                                                                        from ~,500,000 &.
               probe.                                       tion
                                       (AMB)
                                                     _.    Failure in upper stages.
             SdentiBc earth satel-   Juno I1
M r 23
 a
               lite.                   (AYB)
                                                           Twelvesentence voice massage relayed success-
             Suborbital communi.
Apr                                  Augmented
         1                                           X
               cations test.                                fully.
                                      Sergeant
                                       (WS)
                                                           First true meteorological satellite; photo-
Apr                                  Thor-Able
         1                                           X
                                                             gmphedcloudcover.
                                       (AMR)
                                     scout x (WS)          Structuml failure prevented 3rdstsge ignition
Apr 18
                                                             (Zndaudlthstages weredummies).
                                     ----_____-----
May 9
                                                           Failure in upper stages.
             Communications          Thor-Delta
M a y 13
              earth satellite.         (AMR)
                                                           Infistion successful deapite excess spin.
             Suborbital communi-     Augmented
May 31                                               X
              cations test.           Sergeant
                                       (WS)
                                                           Ground tracking failure led to erroneous
             Launch vehicle de-
Jul                                  scout (WS)
         1
                                                            destruction by Range Safety Officer.
                       a l t test.
                                                           Atlas erploded; capsule re-entry qualification
             S%%
              I%                     Mercury-
                         Mercury
Jul   29
                                                             test.
               capsule test.          Atlas (AYR)
                                                           First passive communic&ionr &elUte; W m t
             Communlcations          Thor-Delta
Aug 12                                               X
                                                            I here used for assive communioetit~~ d
                                                                                                 ur
               earth satellite.        (AMB)
                                                             a?r densi ty experqments.
                                                           2ndstage failure.
                                     Atlas-Able
Sep 26
                                       (AMR)
                                                           Air Force Special W a o s Center payload
                                                                              epn
                                                            included.
                                     scout (WS)--- X
Oct      4
                                                           Ion, electron, and micrometeoroid measure-
                                     Juno 11 CAME)
Nov      3                                           X
                                                            ments.
                                                           Mercury escape system qualI5cation; prema-
                                     Little Joe
Nov      8                                           I
                                                            ture escape-rocket firing.
                                       (W8)
                                                     .-.
Nov 21
-                                                                    ~          ~~~




                                                                                                           I!
                                                                                         Performance
                                                                                                                Mission
                                                                            Launch
                                                                                                                Rt3Ults
                                                                            Vehicle
                                       NASA
  Date             Name                Code     General Mlssion                                                                               Remarks
                                                                                                 Payload

                                                                             (Site)

  1960
                    ____________
Nov 23                                A-2                                                                                 Combined infrared measuremrnts wlth photog-
                                              Meteorological earth
             lTEO9 II                                                    Thor-Delta
                                                                                                                            rapby. Wide-angle photographs substand-
                                               satellite.                  (AMR).
                                                                                                                            Bra.
             Explorer___________
Dee      4                                                                                                                2nd-stage failure; wmbined vehicle test and
                                      9-58    Scientific earth           Swut (WS).
                                                                                                                            Beacon inflatable sphere.
             Pioneer____________
                                                satellite.
Dee 15                                P-31                                                                                Exploded after 70 seconds.
                                              Scientific lnnar           Atlas-Able
                        ___________            orbiter.                    (AMR).
Dec 19       Mercury                  MR-IA   Suborbital Mercury                                                          235-mik flight.
                                                                         Mercury-
                                               capsule test.              Redstone
                                                                           (AMR).
  1961
                        ___________
Jan 31                                                                                                                    Booster oversped; chimpanzee (Ham) 16-
                                      MR-2                                                                                                                  in
             Mercury                          Suborbital Mercury         Mercury-
                                                                                                                           minute flight.
                                               capsule test.              Redstone
                          I _______
                                                                           (AMR).
FebZ16                                                                                                                    Repeat of V2/4,/4/60shot.Satellite tracking trans-
                                      S-58a   Scientiflc earth satel- scout (WS).
                           S
             EXPLORER
                                                                                                                            mitter did not function but optical tracking
                                               lite.
                        ___________ MA-2                                                                                    providod atmospheric density data.
Feb-21                                                                                                                    1,4'lbmile flight.
             Mercury                          Suborbital Mercury         Meremy-
                                               capsule test.              Atlas
                       __________                                          (AMR).
Feb 24                                        Scientiflc earth satel- Juno I1 (AMR).
             Explorer.                9-45                                                                                2nd-stage mnlfunction prevented 3rd and 4th-
                                                                                                                            stnge firing.
                                               lite.
             Little Joe 6A_______
Mar 18                                LJ-5A                                                                               Mercury escape system qualiflcation; prema-
                                              Suborbital Mercury LittleJoe (ws).
                    ___________ MR-D                                                                                        ture escape-rocket firing.
                                                capsule test.
Mar 24                                        Vehicle test for Mer- Mercury-
             Mercury                                                                                                      Booster development test n e d t a t e d by
                                  B                                                                                         MR-2 flight.
                                                cury flight.            Redstone
                        _______ P-14                                      (AMR).
M ~ 25
    I                                                                                                                     Maaetometer probe. IIighly eccentric orbit
                                     Scientiflc satellite-               Thor-Delta
             EXPLOBER X
                                                                                                                            (145,000-milcapogee).
             Mercury___________ MA-3
                                       probe.                              (AMR).
                                                                                                                          Failure in 1st stage. Abort suecossful.
d p r 25                             Orbital Mercury cap-                RIercury-
                                      sule test.
                      X I _____ 5-16
                                                                          Atlas (AMR).
Apr 27                                                                                                                    Gamma-ray orpcriment.
                                                                     Juno 1 (APR).
                                     Scientific earth satel-               1
             LXPLORER
                                      lite.
Apr 28       Little Joe 5B . _ _ _ _                                                                                      One booster eneine fired late. Repeat of Mer-
                               LJ-5B Suborbital Mercury              Little Joe
                                                                                                                            cury escape system test.
                                      capsule test.                       (WS).
                           _______
May                            MR-3
             1REEOOM 7                                                                                                    First U.S. suborbital manned spaceflight;
         6                           Suborbital manned               Mercury-
                                                                                                                            dhepard flight.
                                      Mercury flight.                 Redstone
                                                                          (AMR).
                                                                                           .-.
                                                                   JUnO II U M R I
May 2
    4
                                                                                                                   3rdStag0 failm. Vehicle test and micromote
                                                                                     --.
Tun 8
    C                                                              scout   (WE).
                                                                                                                    orite experiment.
                                                                                           ._.                     One oamera system failed by end of July.
Jul                                                                Thor-Delta
      12                                                                             X
                                                                                                 ___ ____
                                                                     (AMB).
                                                                                                                   Orissom flight.
                                                                                     x
Jul                                                                Mercury-Red
      21                                                            S h l e UMB)
                                                                                           ._.
                                                                                     x                                               enta including enemetic par-
bog 1 6                                                            ThoIcDelta
                                           Ute.
                                                                                                      ____
                                                                     (AYE).
                                          SdentiBc lunar probe.                                  x                 First spaoe teat of Ranger instrumentation
                                                                   Atlas-Agena             X
bug 2a
                                                                                                                    only partial mccess slnm Agens failed to re-
                                                                     B   (AMB).
                                                                                                                                        &
                                                                                                                             Remained       DarkiIln orbit. OI'kIl-
                                                                                                                    ntart.

                                          Bdentific earth sstal-   8cout ( w a .
bug 26
                                           litc.
                                                                                           ._.
                                          Orbltal Mercury cap
   ia                                                              Mercury-At-
B~P                                                                                  X
                                                                                                 ___ ____            work checked.
                                                                    1a.B (AMR).
                                           sule teat.                                                                                 '
                                                                                                                   Reached 4,281 miles. Electron density meas-
                                                                   scout (WS).
Oct 1                                     Sdentiflc geoprobe.
     9                                                                               X
                                                                                                 ___ ____           urement, vetude test.
      n                                   Launch vehicle de-       Saturn c-1                                      1st stage only.
Oct                                                                                  X
                                           vdo mentteat.             (AUB).
Nov 1                                                                                               x              Destroyedafter30 seconds; Force-launched.
                                          Orbit3 Mercury net-      Mercury-                                                                 Air
                                                                                                 --.
                                           work check.              scout
                                                                     (AMR).
                                                                                                 ___ x
                                          ScientiOc lunar probe.                                                   Space test of Ranger instrumentation unsuc-
                                                                   Atlas-Agena
Nov 18
                                                                                                                    cessful since Age118 failed to restart. Re-
                                                                    B (AMB).
                                                                                                                    mained i parking orbit.
                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                 ___ ____          Two orbits. Enos, the chimpanzee, was
Nov 29                                    Orbital Mercury cap-     Mercury-          X
                                                                    Atlas                                           recovered.
                                           sule test.
                                                                     (AMB).
  106.9
                                          Suborbital communi- Thor (AMB).                        x    _ . Canister           ejection and opening successful, but
J W 16                                                                                     I
                                                                                     X                 ..
                                                                                                                     135-foot sphere ruptured.
                                           cations test.
                                                                                                       ____
                                                                                     __                            First Ranger attem t at moon; Atlas oyer-
                                                                                                 x
                                          Scientiac lunar lander. Atlas-Agena
Jan   26                                                                                   X
                                                                                                                     accelerated; m i s e $ moon by 22,862 miles;
                                                                   B (AMR).
                                                                                                                    gamma-ray sensor worked.
                                                                                                 _ _ _ ____
                                                                                                     11
                                                                   Thor-Delta
                                          Meteorological earth                                                     Performed 88 planned.
       8
Feb                                                                                  X
                                             satellite.              (AMR).
                                                                                                 ___ _ _ _ _       First U.S. manned orbital flight; Glenn a g h t ,
                                          Orbital manned Mer-      Mercury-
Feb 20                                                                               X
                                                                     Atlas (AMR)
                                             cury flight.                                                           3orbits.
                                                                                                 x ____            Reentry speed lower than planned.
Mar                                       28,OOO ftlsec re-entry   scout (WE).
       1
                                             test.
                                                                   Thor-Delta
                                          Sclentlflcearth
       7
Mar                                                                                  X

                                                                                                               I
                                             satellite.              (AUR).
                                                                                                 __.I
                                                                   scout (WE).
                                          Scientiac geoprobe.                                            Reached 3,910m l s
                                                                                                                       ie.
Mar 29                                                                               X                .._.

  8ee footnotes at end of table, p~ 305
                                                                                                       Performance
                                                                                                                         Mission
                                                                               Launch
                                                                                                         /I
                                                                               Vehicle                                   Results
                                       NASA
                                                     Qeneral Mission
 Date             Name                                                                       Vehicle           Payload                                Remarks
                                        Code

                                                                                   (Site)
-.

 1068
                         ________                                                                                                  First U.S spacecraft to land on moon. crashed
Apr 22                                             Scientificlunar lander. Atlas-Agena
                                       P35
            RANGER I V
                                                                                                                                     onto moon, timer failure causing 10;s of con-
                                                                            B (AMR).
                                                                                                                                     trol over spacecraft. no midcourse correction,
                                                                                                                                     TV, or lunar-capsuie separation.
                     _______
Apr 2:                                                                       Saturn C-1                                            1st stage only. Project Highwater utilized
            Saturn                    SA-2
                                   ..
                                    ._
                                                                                       .
                               ~




                                                                                                                                     dummy upper stages.
                                                                               (AMR)
                                                                                                                                   First international satellite; explored iono-
Apr 2t                                                                       Thor-Delta
                        5-51
            ARIEL I _____._.._.
                                        lite.                                                                                        suhere (UK X1).
                                                                               (AMR).
                       ____ ____
            Centaur- -
May f                                 Launch vehicle de-                     Atlas-Centaur                                         Centaur exploded before separation.
                                       F-1
                                                                                       .
                                        velopment test.                        (AMR)
            AURORA 7_________
May 2                                 Orbital manned Mer-                    Mercury-                                              Carpenter fiight, 3 orbits.
                               MA-7
     6
                                        cury fiight.                          Atlas (AMR).
            TIROS V.. ____ ____                                                                                                    Orbit more elliptical than planned; infrared
Jun                                   Meteorological earth                   Thor-Delta
                               A-50
      1s
                                        satellite.                                                                                   system failed prior to launch.
                                                                               (AMR).
            TELST.4R I_________
Jul                                   Communications                         Thor-Delta                                            First active communications satellite; owned
      1(                       A40
                                       earth satellite.                                                                              by AT&T launched by NASA
                                                                               (AMR).
            Echo (test) _______
Jul                            AVT-2 Suborbital commu-                                                                             Inflation buccessful; radar indicated sphere
                                                                             Thor
      If                                                                          (AMR).
                                                                                                                                     surface not as smooth as planned.
                                        nications test.
Jul                                                                                                                                Atlas deviated from course, was destroyed by
      2:                              Scientific Venus probe                 Atlas-Agena
                               P-37
                        I_ _ _ _ . _ _ _
            MARINER
                                                                                                                                     Range Safety Officer.
                                                                               B (AMR).                                                                                         D-
                         ________
            MARINER n
Aug 2:                                                                                                                             First spacecraft to scan another planet; passed
                                                   Scientific Venus probe    Atlas-Agena
                                       P-38
                                                                                                                                     21,100 mi. from Venus on December 14;
                                                                               B   (AMR).
                                                                                                                                     extended space communications record to
                                                                                                                                     54.7 million mi.
                       ____              -- ----
Aug 3
    1       Re-entry                                                         scout                                                 Tardy 3rd-stage ignition; desired speed not
                                                                                     (WS).
                              ._
                               ..---.
                                                                                                                                     achieved.
Sep 1                                                                                                                              Performed as planned.
                                                                             Thor-Delta
    1                     A-51
            TIROS VI ___..__._.
                                                                               (AMR).
                                                                                                                                   Ionosphpre sounder satellite built by Canada.
Sep 2                                                                        Thor-Agena
    1                      s-27
            ALOUETTE I _._..__
                                                    lite.                                                                            First NASA satellite launch from PMR.
                                                                              B (PMR).
        :                                                                                                                                                               -"
Oct                                                Scientific earth satel-   Thor-Delta                                            Energetic oarticles satellite. Hiehlv eccentric
                                       S-3a
            EXPLORER XIV----
                                                                                                                                     orbit.
                                                                               (AMR).
        :
Oct                                                                                                                                Schirra flight, 6 orbits; first astronaut recovery
                       M AE
                          -                                                  Mercury-
            SIGMA 7___._____._
                                                                                                                                     ._ - -
                                                                                                                                     in Parific
                                                                              Atlas (AMR).                                              -
Oct                                                                                                                                Payload, including mid-course guidance, did
                                                                             Atlas-Agena
      li                   P-36
            RANGER V _ _ _ _ . _ _ _
                                                                                                                                     not function because spacecraft failed to get
                                                                              B (AMR).
                                                                                                                                     Dower from solar cells. Passed within 450
                                                                                                                                     miles of the moon.
          EXPLORER XV -....-
OCt 27                      S-3b          Scientific earth satel-   Thor-Delta       X
                                           lite.                     (AMR).
Nov 16 Saturn _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - S A_ _
                                __ 4      hunch vehicle devel-      Saturn C-1       X
                                                                                                                                                              -
                                           opment test.                                                                           dummy upper stages.
                                                                     (AMR).
Dec 13    RELAY I_ _ _ _A-15 _ _ _ _ _ _
                               Communications
                        _.                                          Thor-Delta                                                  First launch with uprsted Delta. Power sup
                                                                                     X
                                           earth satellite.                                                                       ply voltage originally too low for communi-
                                                                     (AMR).
                                                                                                                                  cations experiments voltage built up and
                                                                                                                                  early in an. I trdsatlantic TV transmis-
                                                                                                                                                B
                                                                                                                                  sions began.
Dec 16                         S-55b     Scientific earth satel-
          EXPLORER XVI-----                                         scout                                                       Micrometeoroid satellite.
                                                                                     X
                                                                            (U’S).
                                          lite.
                                                                                     -
    May 28, 1959. Included In the nose cone of an Army-launched (from AMR) Jupiter          4 Sep 24 1959 An Atlas-Able vehicle scheduled to launch a Pioneer lunar-orbit pay-
IRRM were m e d i d experiments sponsored by NASA. Two monkeys, Able and Baker,           load, explbded bn the launching pad (it AMR) while being static-tested.
were successfullyrecovered after a 1.700-mile flight.                                         May 9 1860. The flrst production model of the Mercury capsule was tested in a
    Aug 21, 1969. While a Little Joe was being readied for firing (at ws) a malfunction   “pad abort” test (at WR). The escape rocket was used rather than a launch vehicle.
caused the Mercury escspe rocket to Are. The vehicle was undamaged but the capsulc          8 Nov 21 1860. Upon being flred (from AMR) a Mercury-Redstone (MR-1) row one
wan lost In the oman.                                                                     inch stopied 5ring and settled back on the laurhing Dad; was Rred again on December
  * 8ep 16,1959. An A m y Jupiter IRBM, containing 8 NASA biological experiment, was      19. %heMercury dapsule rocket also fired. The eaDsule was recovored and also reused
destroyed by the Range Safety Offlcer shortly after launch (from AMR).                    on December 19.
                                INDEX

A-2. See Polaris.
A-3. See Polaris.
A-5A (A3J) (Vigilante), 272
A-60 (U.K. supersonic transport design), 65
        See American Association for the Advancement of Science.
AAAS.
Aachen, Germany, 218
       See American Astronautical Society.
AAS.
Abbott, Ira H., 69
Abelson, Philip H., 264
Accelerator, electron, 189
Accra, Ghana, 93
Acids, amino, 141
A.C. Spark Plug Division (GM), 72
Activation Analysis Laboratory (Texas AILM), 234
AD-6, 74
Adaptive control system, 47, 99
Aden, 44
Adler, Dr. Fred P., 194
       See automatic data processing.
ADP.
Advanced Research Projects Agency (AEPA). See ARPA.
Advent, Project, 1 98, 191
                    ,
Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research and Development (AQARD), 282
       See Atomic Energy Commission.
AEC.
Aerobee, 87, 129, 162, 180, 203, 223, 242, 246
     Hi, 4
    100, 175
    150. 106. 110. 143. 197. 252. 265
Aero Club (Washington, D:C.), ‘101, 125
Aeroflot, 134
Aerojet-General corp., 96, 1 1 256
                             1,
    Apollo, 256
    contracts, 70, 146
    development, 17, 98
    proposal, 137, 155
    strikes, 121, 208, 210, 214
Aeromedical Research Laboratory (USAF), 136
Aeronautical Research Laborator (Univ. of Kentucky), 196
                                80.).   See Ford Motor Co.
Aeronutronic Div. (Ford Motor
Aeros, 30
Aerospace Corp., 193
Aerospace Education Council, 212
Aerospace engineer and pilot. See Astronaut.
Aerospace Industrial Life Sciences Association, 178
Aerospace Industries Association, 258, 265
“Aerospace Island”, 140
Aerospace Luncheon Club, 213
Aerospace Medical Association, 50, 52, 178
Aerospace Medicine, School of (SAM, USAF), 3, 4, 50, 110, 180, 215, 283
Aerospace Museum of San Diego, 204
Aerospace plane, 117 127, 177, 265
Aerospace Research h o t School (USAF), 105, 129, 148
       See Air Force Association.
AFA.
         See Air Force Ballistic Systems Div.
AFBSD.
         See Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories.
AFCRL.
        See Air Force Communications Service.
AFCS.
         See A r Force Flight Test Center.
              i
AFBTC.
                                                                      307
308                                 INDEX

Afghanistan, 99
AFOAR. See Air Force Office of Aerospace Research.
APOSR. See Air Force O5ce of Scientific Research.
Africa, 93, 165
AFSC. See Air Force Systems Command.
AFSC Management Conference, 68
         See Air Force Space Systems Div.
AFSSD.
AGARD. See Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research and Development.
Agate (missile), 44
Agena B. (See also Thor-Agena, Atlas-Agena), 28, 59, 61, 164, 267
Agena D, 237, 266
     tests, 168
Ahmedabad, India, 91
AIAA. See American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
Air age, 55
Aircraft
     construction, 67, 130, 238, 249
     records, 116
     rocket, 246
Aircraft Industries Association, 244
Aircraft Propulsion Laboratory (University of Michigan), 97
Aircraft, supersonic transport, 109, 188
     competition, 238
     European, 65, 235, 241
     U.S., 8, 65, 249
     research, 272
     studies of, 135, 241
     U.S.S.R.. 47
Air densit{-681 82
Air Force Association (AFA), 195, 196
Air Force Ballistic Systems Div. (AFBSD), 79, 146
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories (AFCRL)
     balloon. 70. 84. 90. 120. 135. 248
                              ,   ,
                     ,   ,
     radiation, 111
     radiotelescope, 221
     rocket, 70, 104, 215, 270
     solar studies, 13, 25, 85
Air Force Communications Service (AFCS), 3
Air Force Flight Test Center (AFFTC), 129
Air Force Logistics Command (AFLC), 115
Air Force Office of Aerospace Research (AFOAR), 86, 108, 131, 248, 252, 256, 269
Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR)
     contracts, 112, 134
     meetings, 99, 208
Air Force Space Plan, 17
Air Force Space Systems Division (AFSSD), 62, 254
Air Force Systems Command (AFSC)
     development, 55, 106, 243
     invention, 200
     management, 68, 104
     organization, 40, 43, 47, 131
     research. 51. 246
     training: 129
Air France, 94
Airglow, 93, 110, 117, 175, 198, 209
Airports, 137
Airport Surface Detection Equipment             55
Air Rescue Service (ARS), 91, 125
Airresearch Manufacturing Co., 56
Alabama Research Institute, Univ. of,
Alabama, Univ. of, 274
Alaska, 208
Alaska Data Acauisition Facility, 91
Alaska, University of, 91, 227
Albatross. See UF-2G.
Albus, James S., 24, 52
Alexander, W. M., 264
                                                                              309
                                     INDEX

Alexandria Virginia, 51
Alfred A. 6unninghsm Trophy, 196, 231
Algae, 54
Algeria, 124, 254
Algol, 146
Allen, H. Julian, 230
Allgood, Clarence W., 161
Alloy, 51
Alluisi, Earl, 151
ALOUETTE I, 239
     launch, 202
     plan for, 165, 197, 201
Alpha Theta, 131
Alsop, Joseph, 2
Ambroz, %on, 262
Amelco, Inc., 156
America, Latin, 97
American Airlines, 22, 27
American Assembly-British Institute for Strategic Studies Forum, 77, 80
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), 199, 258, 268, 276,
  277, 279,280, 281
American Astronautical Society (AAS), 5, 10
American Bar Association, 138
American Broadcasting Co. (ABC), 50
American Cable & Radio Corp. (ITLT), 156
American Chemical Society, 180
American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, 133
American Geophysical Union, 2, 63, 278
American Helicopter Society, 91
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) , 87
American Institute of Biological Sciences, 107, 165
American Institute of Physics, 228
American Legion, 211
American Management Association, 61, 104, 177
American Meteorological Society (AYS), 115
American Newspaper Publishers Association, 61
American Nuclear Society, 232, 253
American Ordnance Association, 81, 262
American Philosophical Society, 63
American Physical Society, 25, 228
American Radio Relay League, 93
American Rocket Society (ARS), 61, 87, 108, 122, 123, 168, 203, 239, 241, 243, 245,
  246,263
“American Roulette 500 Miles Up”, 71
American Societies for Experimental Biology, 54
American Society for Engineering Education, 48
American Society for Public Administration, 54
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 134, 253
American Telephone and Telegraph Co. ( A T ~ T )
     Bellcom, Inc., 40
     contracts, 29
     Telstar agreement, 117
           cooperation, 11, 95, 107, 156
           o eration, 202, 280
Amery, Ju?    ian, 177, 235
Ames, Milton B. Jr., 34
Ames Research denter (ARC), 110, 256
     awards, 18, 25, 208
     facilities, 163, 231, 244
     research
           aerodynamic, 111
           life science, 48, 122, 123, 138, 145, 147, 149, 179
           lunar landing. 264
           re-entry, 34 ”’
Ammonia, 147
        See Atlantic Missile Range.
AMB.
Amrehn, F’ranz, 131
310                                  INDEX

     See American Meteorological Society.
AMS.
Amundsen, Roald, 50
Anchorage, Alaska, 96
Anders, Dr. Edward, 70
Anderson, Dr. Ernest C., 187
Anderson, Dr. H. R., 278
Anderson, John D., 278
Andoeya, Norway, 157, 270
Andover, Maine, 50, 117, 119, 122, 156, 162, 165, 175, 269
Andreyev, Maj. Yevgeny M., 241
Andromeda Nebula, 250
Anfuso, Rep. Victor L., 16, 101, 124, 182
Angele Wilhelm, 25, 76, 103
Anna (Army-Navy-NASA-Air Force), hoject, 63
    classification of, 257
    management, 38, 79, 142, 273
ANNA IA, 74
ANNA I B
     launch, 225, 295
     performance, 230, 233, 235, 238
     plans for, 164, 218, 219, 221
Anna olis, Md., 222
Ann tfrbor, Michigan, 21
Anniversary, 87, 111, 113, 228, 258
Antarctica, 155, 235
Antares (rockets), 17
Antenna, 227
ADes. 135
Abolio (program), 56
     astronauts for, 93, 123, 125, 146, 218
     contracts, 15, 27, 45, 72. 76
     decision on, 105,' 118, 234
     facilities, 126, 216
     life science, 179, 233
     propulsion, 191
     statement on, 2, 19, 171
     support, 11, 131
Apollo (spacecraft)
     modules
           command, 47, 146, 167, 274
           lunar excursion, 237
           service, 256
     spacesuit, 211, 253
     use of, 65, 112, 256
Applications, industrial, 247
Applied Physics Laboratory (Johns Hopkins Univ.), 230, 233, 235, 238
Applied Physics Letters, 228
        See Automatic picture transmission.
APT.
        See Auxiliar power unit.
APU.
                 d.     P., 210
Arabashov, Prof.
ARC. See Ames Research Center.
Arc, 66
Arcas, 7, 116, 235
Archer (sounding rocket), 227
Arctic Circle, 128
Arctic Ocean, 127
Argentina, 136, 253
Argo D-4, 64
Argonne National Laboratory (AEC), 257
ARIEL I
    launch, 62
    launch vehicle, 118
    performance, 63, 64, 90, 273, 288
    radiation, effect on, 165, 169, 178
    results of, 115, 137
    transmission, 189
                                                                    311
                                 INDEX

Arizona. Univ. of. 220
Armed Forces Ridio Network, 222
Armor. 56
Armo& Research Foundation, 196, 234
Armstrong, Neil A.
      as astronaut, 125, 191
      as X-15 pilot, 47, 58, 75, 100, 107, 131, 205
Army Air Forces, 64
Army Corps of Engineers, 216
      construction, space, 106, 127, 201, 204, 222
      research 260
Army Map dervice, 11
Army Materiel Command, 137
Army Missile Command, 152
Army-NaVy-NASA-Air Force. See Anna, Project.
Army Ordnance Missile Coplmand (See also Army Materiel Command, successor
   organization), 137
Army Signal Corps, 118
Army Signal Research and Development Laboratory, 9, 122
Army Transportation Command, 100
Army Transportation Research and Engineering Command, 116
Arnold Air Society, 54
Arnold, Gen. H. H. (USAF Ret.), 53
AEFA (Advanced Research Projects Agenc ), 98, 233
ARS. See Air Rescue Service; American gocket Society.
Arthur D. Little, Inc., 145
Arthur S. Flemming Award, 16
Arutyunov Dr. Georgi, 150
Ascension fsland, 184, 233
Ascher, Marcia, 250
Ascher, Prof. Robert 250
          See Airport durface Detection Equipment.
ASDE.
Association of Military Surgeons of the United States, 241
Astatine, 110
Asteroid, 227
Astin, Dr. Allen V., 77
Astronaut (See also individual astronauts), 106
      appearances, 23, 93
      equipment, 71, 243
      escape system, 200
      investments, 212
      radiation, 140, 191
      research, 151, 279
      scientist as. 120. 224. 240. 277
      selection of, 56,'93, i16, i24, 125, 142, 146, 189, 191, 218
      stories by, 116, 193, 249
      training, 132, 148, 226, 281, 283
      woman-as, 124, 125, 244 '
      X-15, 4
Astronautics, 65, 203
Astronautics Award (ARS), 246
Astronautics Engineer Award, 37
Astronautics Medal, 134
Astronaut wings, 32
Astronomical unit, 13, 72
Astronomy, 57, 65, 90, 138, 142, 171
Astroplane, 155
A T ~ T . See American Telephone and Telegraph Co.
Atlantic City, New Jersey, 50, 54
312                                    INDEX

Atlantic Missile Range (AM&
      launches
            interplanetary, 128, 164
            lunar, 10, 59
            manned space flight, 85, 208
            missiles
                  USA, 6, 18, 47, 56, 73, 94, 101, 110, 266
                 USAF,2, 10, 15, 16, 32, 36, 39, 50, 51, 76, 82, 96, 97, 119, 120, 184,
                    195, 214, 217, 219, 222, 234, 247, 263, 264, 269, 272, 274
                  USN, 44, 94, 110, 143, 146, 165, 177, 211, 233, 246, 263, 273
            satellite,
                 DOD, 74, 225
                  NASA, 14, 30, 62, 105, 192, 207, 223, 267
                  USN, 8
            sounding rocket, 81
            test, 5, 52, 61, 72, 125, 244
Atlantic Ocean, 18, 28, 59
Atlantic Research Corp., 227
Atlas (See also Agena-€3; Centaur)
      booster, 71, 256
            manned space flight, 10, 12, 18, 27, 52, 71, 79, 82, 85, 89, 179, 208, 286,
               289, 294, 301, 302, 303, 304
            unmanned space flight, 7, 10, 48, 49, 50, 52, 56, 59, 62, 72, 102, 126, 127,
               128, 139, 164, 218, 238, 271
      missile, 17, 50, 52, 76, 108, 120, 126, 195, 267, 272, 275
            n, 17, 40, 145
            E, 15, 24, 32, 121
            F, 136, 146, 150, 219, 234, 241, 263
      site, 188,.265, 273
      standardized space vehicle, 224
Atlas-Able, 301, 302
Atlas-Big Joe, 300
Atlas-Agena B, 241
      interplanetary, 128, 164, 241, 292, 304
      lunar, 10, 59, 63, 218, 286, 294, 303
      USAF unidentified, 32, 50, 63, 102, 126, 139, 238, 271, 289, 291, 296
Atlas-Centaur. See Centaur; Atlas.
Atmospheric density, 7, 34, 40
“Atmospheric Sciences, 1961-70, The”, 130
Atomic clock, 38
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC)
      artificial radiation, 55, 158, 169, 177
      facilities, 14, 17, 136
      generator, nuclear, 30, 214
      information, 103
      organization, 81
      reactor, nuclear, 3, 81, 182, 186, 214, 253, 258, 277
      study, 104, 111, 145, 234
      U.S. tests, 47, 50, 90, 189, 208, 212, 216, 221, 223
      U.S.S.R. tests, 163, 171, 191, 201, 220, 223, 224, 228, 231, 232, 247, 275, 276
Atomic Industrial Forum, 252, 254
Atomic Support Agency, 129
ATMOS, 284
A T ~ T . See American Telephone and Telegraph Co.
Attitude control, 52, 85
Atwell, Capt. Alfred L. (USAF), 219
Auger, Pierre V., 20, 79, 100
Augsberg, West Germany, 134
Auriol, Jacqueline, 107
Aurora, 23, 85
Aurora australis, 245
AURORA^, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 95, 289
Austin, Texas, 255
                                                                                      313
                                            INDEX

    Australia
        launch, 90
        research, 55, 190
        sites, launch, 25, 43, 55, 149
        space participation, 66, 126, 175, 199, 242, 265
    Australian National Observatory, 82
    Austria, 21, 37, 44, 100
    Automatic data processing (ADP) (See also computers), 214
    Automatic Picture Transmission (APT), 258
    Auxiliary power unit (APU)
         fuel cell, 45
         nuclear, 214, 250, 252, 259
    Aviation and Space Writers Association, 87
    Aviation Week and Space Technology, 13, 124, 259, 266
    Award of Honor, 25
    Awards
         academic, 82, 98, 101
         civic, 90, 93, 108, 167, 241
         government
              international, 92
              local, 27, 94
              U.S., 16, 24, 40, 52, 60, 63, 76, 88, 109, 119, 125, 127, 196, 214, 216, 221,
                 231, 236, 256, 259, 273
         institutions
              general, 25, 147, 223, 263
              scientific, 50, 105, 203, 217
         societies
              aviation, 54, 91, 101, 114, 125, 132, 161, 166, 202
              career, 34
              education, 100
              engineering, 92, 134
              general, 51
              scientific, 8, 52, 63, 268
              space, 37, 107, 134, 161, 168, 196, 246
    Azuza, California, 210
    B-17 Flying Fortress), 148
    B-25 {Mitchell), 132
    B-52, 4 43, 57, 62, 96, 107
    B-58 (Ihstler), 25, 29, 39, 63, 97, 147, 194
    Babcock, Dr. Horace D., 248
    Bahama Islands, 18, 86
    Baker, Dr. James G., 217
    Baker, Estin N., 25
    Balast, 90
    Balcones Research Center, 2
    Baldwin, L. A., 119
    Ballast, 61
    Ball Brothers Research Corp., 155
    Ballentine, Frank M., Jr., 208
    Balloon
        fiights, 29, 34, 84, 91, 95, 106, 115, 120, 121, 125, 129, 138, 140, 145, 147, 149,
           267
        plans for, 62, 90, 202, 205, 248
        records, 39,40, 91, 106, 120, 163
    Baltimore, Maryland, 179
    Baltimore Sun, 238
    Bangalore, India, 121
    Banshee, Project, 129
    Barbados, British West Indies, 171
    Barkly East, South Africa, 89
a



    Barnes, L/C Charles M. (USAF), 241
    Barnhart, George C., 64
    Baroco Electrical Construction Co., 152
    Barre, Dr. Robert L., 146
    Baseball, 128
    Bassett, Capt. Charles A. (USAF), 218
    Bathyscaphe, 40
          913
          77
           3-
    314                                         INDEX

    Batterson, Sidney A., 25
    Bauer. Dr. Siegfried J.. 215
    BayeGsky, Ra;, 150 '
           See British Broadcasting Corp.
    BBC.
    Beacon, 300
    Bcar, 39, 48
    Beehler, Capt. Cecil C. (USAF), 283
    Beeson, Dr. Paul, 45
    Beetles, 123, 138
    Behavioral Science Laboratory (Wright-Patterson AFB), 142
    Belaunde, Dr. Victor A., 260
    Belgium, 21, 43, 55, 95, 100
    Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 84, 93
    Bell Aerosvstems Co.. 112
    Bellcom. I&., 40, 272'
    Bellcom, I&.. 40.
    Bell, Dkvid E., lh. 174
    Bell. David E.. 10,
        I   -   -   -   -   -   I   -   >   -

    Bell Helicopter Co., 247
    Bellinger, V/Adm. Patrick N. L. (USN Ret.), 90
    Bell, Lawrence D., 81
    Bell Telephone Laboratories (BTL), 61, 166
                                       .. .
                                   (BTL),
                                   ,
         Bellcom, Inc., 40
         Bellcorn,
         Telstar.
           .~  ..~
              launch. 116
              performance, 251
    Bendix Corp., 12, 4G, 96
    Bendix Trophy, 63
    Benediktov; Iban A,, 275
    Benefield, Mai. Tommie D. (USAF), 219
                                        ,.
    Berger, Harold, 257
    Beriev. 92
    Berklibm, 110
    Berkner, Dr. Lloyd V., 63, 114
    Bermuda, 7, 12, 96, 106
    Bernardo; James V:, 100
    Berry, Dr. Charles A., 210
    Beverly Hills, California, 271
    Bevins, Reginald, 133
    Big Ben, 128
    Big Joe, 300
    Big John, 48
    Big Shot, 5, 125
    Big Spring, Texas, 39
    Bikle, Paul F., 125, 204
    Bioastronautics. See Life science; Bioscience.
    Biology, molecular, 1
    Bioscience
         control of, 150
         experiments, 121, 123, 141, 152, 182, 243
         facilities, 244
         flights, 121, 138, 145, 147, 149
    Bio-telescanner, 200
    Birmingham University (U.K.), 115
    Bisplinphoff. Dr. Raymond L.. 69
    Bla'ck grant, 101, 267
    Blackburn Nimbus (engine), 134
    Blacksburg, Virginia, 149, 151, 152, 154, 157
    Blagonravov, Dr. Anatoli A., 13, 22, 41, 44, 67, 69, 97, 147, 170, 262
    Blanchard, W. S., Jr., 274
    Bland, William M., Jr., 274
     Blank, Rabbi Sheldon H., 48
    Blaze, C. J., 119
     Blimn. 282
     Blue'Scout, 52, 63, 85, 91, 161, 248, 271, 289, 292, 296, 297
     Blue Scout, Jr., 129, 290
     Blue Streak (missile), 43, 102, 218
I
     Blue Water (missile), 146
     Bock, Capt. Charles C., Jr. (USAF), 58
                                                                     31 5
                                     INDEX

Boeing Airplane Co., 107, 224
     contract, 11, 140
     research, 227
     strikes, 187, 208, 233, 279
Boeing-Vertol, 94
Bogafev, Viktor, 84
Bolilen, Charles, 243
Bohr, Dr. Niels, 247
Boley, Oklahoma, 39
Bolling AFB, Va., 131
Bolometer, 2
Bomarc. 118
Bomba);, India, 91, 275
Bond Club, 241
Boone, V/Adm. Walter F. (USN, Ret.). 247
Boosters, recoverable
         ’

     concepts, 137, 155
Borha. 182
BormAn,- Maj. Frank (USAF), 191
Bossart, Karel J., 134, 263
Boston, Mass., 101, 102, 115, 131, 162, 207
Bothwell, Dr. Frank E., 109
Boulder. Colo.. 89. 93
Boundary layer, 266
Bourdeau, Robert E., 221
Boyden, Raymond P., 92
Boys Clubs of America, 51
Boys Nation, 130
Bracalente, Emcdio M., 274
Braokctt. Ernest. 177
Bradbury, Norris, 186
Braiko, Col. Gen. Pyetr, 160
Brazil, 95, 114, 175
Brward Engineering College, 101
Brigliton, U.K., 77, 80
Bristol Siddeley (U.K.), 171
British Association for the Advancement of Scienice, .66, 171, 173
British Broadcasting Corp. (BBC), 66, 119
British Columbia, Canada, 142
British Columbia Forest Products, Ltd., 237
British Columbia Telephone Co., 142
British Intarplanetary Society, 134
British Post Office DeDartment.’ 156
Bronk, Dr. Detlev W.: 209
Brooks AFB, Texas, 3, 50, 180, 283
Brookhaven National Laboratory (AEC), 258
Brouwer, Dr. Dirk, 86
                              ,.
Brown. Dr. Harold. 49. 101. 187. 215
Brown; William D.; 254
Brussels, Belgium, 11, 218
BTL. See Bell Telephone Laboratories.
Buckley, D. H., 119
Buckley, Edmond C., 32, 72
Buckner, Capt Boyce B. (USA), 54
Budget, Bureau of, 257
Bugaev, Dr. Viktor A., 59, 148
Builders and Contrartors Exchange, 7
Bulgaria, 166, 203, 227
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 47, 49
Burke, Dr. Bernard, 204
Burke, J. Russell, 271
Burma, 1, 115
Burttschell, Cdr. Simon J. (USN), 24, 31
Buryan, Edmund F., 14
Busemann, Dr. Adolph, 241, 274
Bvrd. Adm. Richard E., 50
B$rd’ Station, Antarctica, 245
Gl. See Saturn (-)  3.
                     1
316                                   INDEX

C-I (rocket stage). See Saturn (C-1).
C-IC (rocket stage). See Saturn (C-1B).
C-1B. See Saturn (C-IB).
C-5. See Saturn, Advanced.
C-123, 99
C-l30B, 28, 81
        See Civil Aeronautics Agency.
CAA.
        See Civil Aeronautics Board.
CAB.
Cairo, U.A.R., 12, 99, 127, 129
Caleb, 130
Calderara, Mario, 55
California, 91, 167
California a t Los Angeles, Univ. of. See UCLA.
California Institute of Technology (Cal Tech), 22, 75, 165, 231, 255, 282
California, Univ. of (at Berkeley), 4, 8, 39, 50, 83, 97, 110, 138, 170, 198, 267
Californium, 110
Cal Tech. See California Institute of Technology.
Calvina, South Africa, 140
Calvin. Dr. Melvin. 141-2
Cambridge, Mass., '175, 189
Camera, 66, 112
Camp Parks, Calif., 60
Canada, 6, 14, 87, 101, 145, 184, 202, 208, 267-8
Canadian Defence Research Board. 28
Canadian Institute of Forestry, 237
Canadian International Air Show, 167
Canal Zone, 248
Canberra, Australia, 82
Cannon, Sen. Howard W., 37, 88-9, 158
Canoga Park, Calif., 136
Canogo Electronics Corp., 232
Cape Canaveral (see also Atlantic Missile              24, 93, 275
     ceremonies, 20-1
     construction, 106, 129, 204
     land, 44, 102
     organization of, 31
     press conference, 88
     strikes, 201, 210, 254
     tours of, 44, 70. 174, 181
Cape Colony Inn, 212
Capsule, escape, 97
Capt. Wm. J. Kossler Award, 91
Career Service Award, 34
Carlsbad, New Mexico, 235
Carnegie Institution, 204, 264
Carney, L/C Francis M. (USAF), 91
Carpenter, LCdr. M. Scott (USN), 88-9
     awards, 88, 89, 90, 94
     condition, 82
     flight, 86
     flight preparations, 36, 69, 79, 80
     landing, 187
     pilotage, 159
     scientific observations, 93, 117, 19s-9
     statements on astronauts, 125
Carswell AFB, Texas, 147
Carter, Arlen F., 241, 274
Carter, Dr. Launor F., 64
Casey, Rep. Bob, 57
Cassidy, Dr. William A., 136
Castor, 1
Cat, 20
Catalogue of Astronomical Photographs, 238
Catalytic Construction Co., 14
Catledge, Turner, 218
Cedar City, Utah, 70
Celebrezze, Anthony J., 192
                                                                 317
                                      INDEX

Cell, fuel, 45
Cells, solar, 35, 218
Centaur (see also Atlas)
     Congress on. 79. 82. 114
                   ,  ,    ,
     engiie, 201
     funding, 14
     management, 11, 78, 203, 267
     status, 167, 243, 248
     Surveyor, io8 .
     test, 15, 48, 49, 52, 56, 58, 59, 202,
Centaur (French sounding rocket) , 253
Centaurus A, 190
Central Labor Union (U.S.S.R.), 47
                                                 17
Central Radio Propagation Laboratory
Centrifuge, 263
Centurv 21 Exhibition, 57, 214
                       I   ,



Ceramfcs, 51
Chad, 95
Chamberlain, Dr. Joseph W., 23
Chamberlin, Clarence C., 94
Champs ElysBes, 128
Chance Vought Corp., 256
Change, technolo ‘cal, 97-8
                 #,
Charles, Robert        215
Charyk, Dr. Joseph V., 168
Chesapeake Bay, 1, 163
Chesapeake Beach, Md., 155, 221
Chicago and Midwest Space Month, 271-2
Chicago, Illinois
      communications, 128
      meetings, 47, 52, 200, 208, 213, 221, 222, 225, 226, 229
      publications, 132
Chicago, Univ. of, 23, 46, 69-70, 130, 198, 258
 Chico, California, 29, 34, 70, 86
 Chief ’scientist, USA< 64.
 Chilton, R. G., 273
 Chimpanzee, 7
      research, 135
 China, Communist, 181, 189
 China Lake, Calif., 196, 247, 269
 China. Nationalist, 181, 188
 Chincoteague ~ ~ ~ , . V i r g i n29 ,
                                    ia
 Christmas Island, 28, 47, 61, 127
 Chromosphere, 13
 Chrysler Corp., 140
 Churchill, Sr Winston, 66
              i
 Cincinnati. Ohio, 208
 Civil Aeronautics Agency (CAA), 122
 Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB),        64
 Civil Service Commission
      NASA ositions, 116
 Clamann, S r . Hans-Georg, 4
 Clark, Dr. John F., 83, 255
 Clark, Albert E., Jr., 208
 Clarksburg, W. Va., 203
 Clark, Sen. Joseph S., 138
 Claus, Dr. George, 69-70
 Cleveland, Mississippi, 86
 Cleveland, Ohio, 32, 121, 122-3, 123-4, 148, 249
 Cleveland Plain Dealer, 249
 Cleveland Press, 139
 Cloudcroft, New Mexico, 99
 Clouds
      noctilucent, 84-5, 122, 141, 147, 219
      photography of, 201, 209
 Clubs of Young Cosmonauts, 35
 Coan, Capt. Richard H. (USAF),100
318                                INDEX

 Cobb, Miss Jerrie, 124, 144
Cochran, Miss Jacqueline, 59, 124, 147, 218
Cockcroft, Sir John, 166
Cockett, Capt. T. K. (USAF), 283
Coffee, Claude W., Jr., 68
Cohen, Benjamin V., 143
Coleman, Dr. P. J., 276-7
Collar, flotation, 1, 86
Collar, Stulken. See Collar, flotation.
College of Aeronautics, Cranfield, U.K., 65
College of William and Mary, 237
Collier Trophy, 81, 114, 125
Collins, Capt. Michael (USAF), 219
Collins Radio Corp., 232
Colorado, 90
Colorado Springs, Colorado, 108
Colorado, Univ. of, 89, 98, 129, 281
Colosseum, 128
Columb-Bechar, Algeria, 124
Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), 50
Columbia, District of, 103
Columbia Univ., 111, 136
Commerce, Department of, 50, 137, 144
Commission for Synoptic Meteorology (U.N.), 41
Commission on Research and Development, 187
Commission on Science and Technology, 144
Committee on Space Research (COSPAR)
     meetings, 21, 59, 73, 79, 84
     reports to, 22, 63, 67, 68, 70, 72
     U.S.S.R., 44
     visits, 57, 64, 70
Commonwealth Scientific Research Organization, 190
Communication Institute, 190
Communications, space
     between spacecraft, 117, 250
    study of, 44, 60
    transatlantic, 117-18, 119, 121, 126
Communications Satellite Program, DOD, 98
Compact, Southern Interstate Nuclear, 94
Complex 39, 127
Composite I, 8
Computer
    conferences, 214, 216
    contracts, 137, 216
    use of, 131, 133, 134, 141, 150, 260-1
CONAD. See Continental Air Defense Command.
Conaway, Donald F., 133
Conflict of interest, 191
Congressional Record, 146
Connecticut, 13
Connor, L/C Joseph A., JR.(USAF), 236, 281
Conrad, Earl W., 119
Conrad, Lt. Charles, Jr. (USN), 191
Conseil International d u Sport Militaire, 222
Consolidated Steel Co., 8
Continental Air Defense Command (CONAD), 269
Coonabarabran, New South Wales, 82
Cooper, Brian, 190
Cooper, Maj. Leroy Gordon, Jr. (USAF), 109, 213, 240, 249
Coopers Island, Bermuda, 7
Copenhagen, Denmark, 179, 247
Corcoran, William J., 232
Cord, John N., 112
Cornell Univ., 250
Cornwall (U.K.), 50
Corona, 13, 62
                                                                 319
                               ENDEX

Corporation, Communications Satellite
    board, 210, 220, 252, 265, 275
    Government participation, 170
    legislation, 42, 156, 164, 166
Corporation, Satellite Communication. See Corporation, Communications
  Satellite.
Corpus Christi, Texas, 141
Corson, Blake W., Jr., 208
Cortright, Edgar M., 276
Corvallis, Oregon, 165
Cosmic dust detector, 164
Cosmic ray, 36, 140, 227, 238
Cosmonaut
    awards, 18
    danger to, 180
    experiences of, 153
    lost, 21, 34, 48, 67, 78-9, 262-3
    training, 47
COSMOS I, 36, 37, 48, 287
COSMOS 11, 48, 287
COSMOS 1 1 60, 288
         1,
COSMOS IV, 61, 62, 64, 288
COSMOS v, 89, 289
COSMOS VI, 111, 290
COSMOS VII, 131, 291
COSMOS VIII, 157, 292
COSMOS IX, 201, 293
COSMOS x, 217, 204
COSMOS XI, 219, 295
COSMOS XII, 275, 297
           See Committee on Space Research.
COSPAR.
Cotton, L/C Joseph F. (USAF), 184
Coverington, Ozro M., 149
Covin ton, Virginia, 203
Cox, fir. Hiden T., 17, 107
Crane, Robert D., 146
Cranfield, U.K., 65
Craven, T. A. M., 48
Crews, Capt. Albert H., JR. (USAF), 58, 195
Crirnean Astro hysical Observatory (U.S.S.R.), 66, 231, 247, 248
Crossfield, A. &ott, 114, 125, 204
Crusader (F8U). See F8U
Cuba, 219
Curium, 110
Curtis, Judge Jesse, 259
Custer, Levitt Luaern, 167
Cyclotron, 110, 118
D-558, 81
Daddario, Re . Emilio Q., 13, 56, 76
Daingerfield gland, 76
Daisy (storm), 206
Dalmo-Victor Co., 156
Daniel Guggenheim Medal, 152
Danish-Soviet Friendship Advancement Society, 179
 Dartmouth College, 98
 Davidsen, Jess S. W., 24-5
 Davies, Dr. Rodney D., 237
 Dawson, Eugenc K., 121
 Day, Melvin S., 188, 226-7
 Dayton, Ohio, 158, 167
 DC-1, 132
 DC-2, 132
 DC-7, 29
 Dcbus, Dr. Kurt H., 31, 196
 Deep Space Instrumentation Facility (DSIF), 35, 175
 Deep Space Net, 72
 Defense Communications Agency, 98
320                                 INDEX

Defense, Department of (DOD)
     agreements, 29, 40, 47, 50, 109, 150
     aircraft, 249-50
     basic research. 114
     contracting, 46, 91, 112, 186, 191, 193
     Defense Industry Council, 88
     Defense Research Office (Rio de Janeiro), 97, 114
     facilities, 136
     information, 52, 60, 79, 103, 215, 221
     missiles. 7. 263
     NASA support, 22, 34, 273
     R L D budget, 2, 6, 38
     space projects
           begun, 159
           canceled, 126, 259, 281
           reoriented, 165, 277
           transferred, 98, 273
     statements on
           artificial radiation, 158, 169, 177
           comsat, 137
           military space program, 80, 99, 101
           Nike-Zeus, 126
           R & D projects, 49, 75
           strikes, 246-7, 250
           U.S.S.R. space activity, 156
Defense Industry Council, 88, 219
Defense Research Office, 97
de Florez, R/Adm. Luis, 262
de Gramont, Duke Armand, 137
Delamar Lake, Nevada, 151
DeLaVaulx Medal, 202
Delta Persei, 223
Demler, M/G Marvin C. (USAF), 131
Denmark, 21 100, 148, 157
DeOrsey, C. Leo, 212
Density, air, 58
Denver, Colo., 90
Denver, University of, 11
Department of Commerce Gold Medal, 16
Department of Posts and Telegraphs (Brazil), 95
Detroit, Michigan, 54, 58
De Vancoulers, Dr. Gerald, 55
DeWitt, Nicholas, 5
Diborane, 180
Dicke, Dr. Robert H., 38
Diode
     gallium arsenide, 117
Dirksen, Sen. Everett M., 147
Disarmament
     conferences on, 117, 122
Discoverer (program), 52, 237
DISCOVERER XXXVII, 4
DISCOVERER XXXVIII, 23, 28, 109, 287
Disorientation, 18
Distinguished Civilian Service Award (USN), 109
Distinguished Service Award (Lower Virginia Peninsula), 93
Distinguished Service Medal (NASA), 20, 88, 125, 214
Distinguished Service Medal (USAF), 146
Distinguished Virginian Award, 108
Dixon, Thomas F., 7, 12, 19, 107, 131, 144, 208, 224, 233
Dobrichovsky, Adeneck, 227
Dobronravov, V., 37
Dolphins, 190
Dominican Republic, 233
Dominic, Operation, 61, 71, 106, 116, 130, 185, 218, 223, 228, 265
Dominion Astrophysical Observatory, 281
                                                             321
                                  INDEX

Douglas Aircraft Co., 111, 132, 222
    contract. 144-5
    Saturn stage (S-IV), 231, 245
   strikes, 121, 123
   tests, 156, 210
   Thor-Delta, 118
Douglas, Donald W., 132
Douglas Missile and Space Systems Co., 199
Douglas, Sen. Paul H., 10
Doulla, Cameroons, 29
Douthett, Col. Elwood M. (USAF), 277
Downey, California, 76
Downing, Rep. Thomas N., 48, 108
Drag, aerodynamic, 149
Drake, Dr. Frank, 203
Dr. Alexander Klemin Award, 91
Draper, Dr. C. Stark, 3, 92, 283
Drinkwater, Fred J., 111, 264
Dr. Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award, 36
Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, 36
Dryden, Dr. Hugh L.
     awards, 14, 63, 221, 223, 263, 273-4
     comsat, 23, 142
     Centaur, 226
     instrumentation, 215
     manned space flight, 153
     space cooperation, 37, 38, 41, 44, 97, 186, 262
     space program, 30, 54, 170, 235, 245, 280-1
     university, 229
         See Deep Space Instrumentation Facility.
DSIF.
DuBridge, Dr. Lee, 75
Duke University, 80-1, 146
Dunn, Dr. Richard, 13
Dupont de Nemours & Co., E. I., 4
Durban, South Africa, 190, 199
Dusseaulx, Roger, 235
Dust, space, 55, 231, 264, 268
Dyalpur meteorite, 271
Dyer, Dr. Edward R., Jr., 64-5
Dykstra, John, 262
Dynamic model 70
Dyna Soar (X-h0). See X-20.
6 1 6 6 , 91, 116
Eagle (missile), 34
Early Birds, 55, 167
Earth, 9, 33-4, 50, 60, 249
Earthquake, 50
Eastman, Ford, 106
Echo (program), 108, 204
      Big Shot, 125
      cooperative use of, 261
      Echo, Advanced, 202
      plans, 202
      tests1.2l9
ECHO I, 5, 25, 33, 60,118, 125, 149, 219
Echo 11. 5. 44
Eclipse, ‘13, 208
Ecole Polytechnique (Paris) , 73
Ecumenical Council, 214
Edelson, LCdr. Burton (USN), 112
Edmonton, Alberta, 121
Education, 58, 114, 130, 229
Educational Testing Service, 49
“Education and Professional Employment in the U.S.S.R.”, 5
Education, engineering, 48, 52
Education, scientific, 1, 4, 5, 17, 43, 48, 49, 52, 57, 63
322                                 INDEX

Edwards AFB, Cali.
     ejection test, 25, 39, 48, 97
     paraglider, 221
     rocket test stand, 222
     USAF, 105, 129, 148, 195, 254
     X-15, 57, 58
Edwards, Calif., 16-17, 88, 109
Edwards Rocket Site, Calif., 15
Edward Warner Award, 92
Eggers, Alfred J., Jr., 8
Egleet (lens), 116
Eglin AFB, Fla., 214, 232
Ego (Eccentric Geophysical Observatory), 91
Egypt. See United Arab Republic.
Einstein, 38
Eiseley, Dr. Loren K., 280
Eisenhower, President Dwight D., 118, 129, 133, 142, 154, 225
Eisleben, Germany, 94
Ejection seat capsule, 25, 39, 48, 97
Ekonomicheskaya Gazela, 54, 111
Electrocardiogram package, 243
Electrodynamics, 46
Electrojet, 89
Electro Mechanical Research Corp., 232
Electron
     collision, 101
     density, 7, 43, 62, 101, 182, 197, 211, 216, 234, 240, 257, 262
     temperature, 62
Electronics Industry Association, 190
Electro-Optical Instruments Inc., 66
El Kaher (Conqueror), 127
Elliott Cresson Medal, 217
El Zahir (Victorious), 127
Emmy Award, 68
Engineers, Scientists and Architects Day, 19
Engineer shortage, 129, 194, 207, 253
Engine, rocket (see also specific engine designations, e.g., 5-2, RL-10, etc.; and
  specific rockets, e.g., Saturn (C-1), Nova, etc.), 233
England. See United Kingdom.
Engle, Capt. Joe M. (USAF), 219
Eniwctok, 228
Enos, 7, 135, 232
Enrico Fermi Award, 242-3, 259
Enrico Fermi Institute for Nuclear Studies, 46
        See Rendezvous, earth-orbit.
EOR.
Escape velocity, 31
Eshkol, Levi, 198
         See European Space Research Organization.
ESRO.
Esso Rescarch, 69-70
Ets-Hokin and Galvin, Inc., 8, 175
Europe, 25, 77, 95, 174
European Broadcasting Union, 11, 50, 107, 119, 120
European Council for the Construction of Spatial Vehicles, 100
European Launcher Development Organization (ELDO), 43
European Satellite Launcher Development Organization, 55
European Space Research Organization (ESRO), 20, 21, 79, 100
Eurovision, 120, 128, 209
Evans, Albert J., 239
Evans, David G., 241
Evans, Robert Mayer, 201
Evans, William H., 83
Evely, Maj. C. E. (USAF), 4
Everest, Willis F., 116
Exceptional Scientific Achievement Award (NASA), 221
Exhibit, space, 57, 76, 78, 84, 90, 93, 97, 99, 115, 139, 179, 243, 249
Explorer (program), 52
              11
EXPLORER I,
                                                                        323
                                     TNDEX

EXPLORER VI, 300
EXPLORER VII, 300
EXPLORER VIII, 301
                     68, 302
EXPLORER IX, 34-5,
           x, 9, 118, 302
EXPLORER
           XI, 302
EXPLORER
           XII, 7, 22, 111, 118, 303
EXPLORER
           XIII, 303
EXPLORER
           XIV, 207, 210, 226, 240, 294,  304
EXPLORER
             xv, 223, 224, 228, 240, 295, 305
EXPLORER
             XVI, 270, 297, 305
EXPLORER
Explorers Club, 40, 230
F-1 (rocket engine), 3, 114, 233
     facilities, 222
     production, 136
     test, 88
F4H (Phantom), 28, 47, 53, 76, 91, 116, 202
F5D, 100
F8U (Crusader), 6
F-86 (Sabrejet), 132
F-104, 28, 147
F-106, 99
F-110, 28
        See Federal Aviation Agency.
FAA.
Faget, Maxime A., 222, 273
Fairbanks, Alaska, 6, 91
Farber, Milton, 252
Farnsborough, U.K., 171
Federal Aviation Agency (FAA), 47
     aircraft, supersonic transport, 47, 272
     airports, 137
     contracts, 65, 135
     noise, aircraft, 184
     safety, air, 2, 99, 111
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 42, 48, 51, 128, 169, 200
Federal Council for Science and Technology, 5, 77
Federal Mediation Service, 248
Federal Radiation Council, 191
Federal Women’s Award, 24
FBd6ration Aeronautique Internationale (FAX)
     award, 92, 202
     records, aircraft, 28, 91, 116
     records, space, 33, 161
Federation of American Scientists, 60
Fedorov, Yevgeny K., 63
Fedotov, A., 91
Fedynsky, Prof. Vsevoldod, 263
Ferguson, L/GJames (USAF), 17
FERRJW, 277
Fesenkov, Dr. Vasily Grigoryevich, 249
Fibrillation, atrial, 119
Findlay, Dr. John W., 204
Finger, Dr. Harold B., 31, 186
Finn, J a y s C., Jr., 165
“Fireflies, 67
Firefly, Project, 214, 233, 270
Fire, Project, 17, 43, 222, 256
First International Symposium on Rocket and Satellite Meteorology, 59
First Woman’s Space Symposium, 20
Fischer, Irene, 11
Fishbowl, Project, 90
Fitch, Dr. Frank W., 70
Flap, split-edge wing, 64
Flare, solar
      effect of, 4, 41, 122
      measurement, 33, 84, 104, 279
     prediction of, 25, 85, 232
      study of, 13, 155, 248
                                       INDEX

Fletcher, Capt. Carl C., Jr. (USAF), 1So
Flexwing, 116
Flight, 36
Flight, drifting, 209
Flight Research Center (FRC), 144, 251
     aircraft, 272
     awards to, 92, 93, 114, 125, 204
     “lifting body”, 238
     paraglider flights, 11, 186
     X-15, 266
Flight Test Engineering Fellowship, 92
Florida, 33
Florida State University, 171
Floyd Bennett Field, N.Y., 185, 190
Flux, micrometeroid, 91
Flux, solar, 143
Flying Fortress. See B-17
Flying Tiger Pilot’s Trophy, 132
Ford Motor Co., 262
     Aeronutronic Div., 142, 283
Fordham Univ., 70
Forrester, Theodore, 246
Fort Churchill, Canada, 87, 245, 260
Fort Dix, New Jersey, 1
Fort Monmouth, N.J., 9, 122
Fort Sill, Oklahoma, 101
Fort Wayne, Indiana,, 82
Fort Worth, Texas, 54, 58
Foster, John V., 208
Fragments, 52, 62
     MA-6 booster, 129
     MA-7 booster, 89
     SPUTNIK IV, 175, 187, 188, 212
France
     agreements, space, 21, 43, 55, 95, 100
     defense, 273
     facilities, space, 118, 124
     launching, 253, 254
     space program, 20, 44, 90, 161, 263
     supersonic transport, 65, 243
     transatlantic communications , 11, 118, 119, 120
Frank G. Brewer Trophy, 100
Frank, Dr. L. A., 278
Franke, LCdr. Fred A. W. (USN), 184-5
Franklin, Dr. Kenneth L., 204
Franklin Institute, 109, 217
Franz, Julius, 220
        See Flight Research Center.
FRC.
Frederick L. Feinberg Award, 91
Freeman, Gordon, 161
Freeth, Denzil, 137
Friedlander, Michael, 140
Friedman, Dr. Herbert, 13
Friedman, M/G Robert J. (USAF), 104
                          18, 20, 57, 72, 78, 84, 90, 93, 97, 99, 115, 286
FRIENDSHIP 7 (MA+,
Fritz, Dr. Sigmund, 8
Frogman. 1
Froit, Robert, 115
Frnit flies, 69
Fubini, Eugene C., 198
Fuel sloshing, 61
Fulton, Maj. Fitzhugh (USAF), 184, 194
Fulton, Rep. James G., 12, 37
Fusion power, 47
G forces, 50
                                                              325
                             mx
                              E
Gagarin, L/C Yuri A.
      appearances, 84
      awards, 18,-53,.121, 161
      records, 33, 41
      U.S.manned space flight, 12, 49, 179
      U.S.S.R. manned space flight, 48, 67, 88, 139, 160
Galabert Prize, 44
Galaxy, 65, 97, 142, 162
Galileo, 60
Gamble, Maj. William, 28
Gamma ray, 30, 65, 214
Gamma Cassiopeia, 223
Gander, Newfo~ndland~l.59
Gantry, 44
QAR-S, 34
Garland, Maj. Neil R. (USAF), 219
Gardner, Richard N., 37
Gardner, Trevor, 61
Garner, H. Douglas, 24, 52
Gary AAF, Texas, 256
Gatlinburg, Tenn., 232
         See General Dynamics/Astronautics Corp.
QD/A.
GE. See General Electric Go.
G. Edward Pendray Award, 246
Gegenschein, 249
Gell, Dr. Charles M., 178
Gemini, Blue, 18, 266,
Gemini, Project, 1
     astronauts, 93, 125
      booster, 32, 36
     control, flight, 11, 216
     facilities, 106, 126
     landing, 132
     mock up, 193
     rendezvous, 266
     statements on, 19, 80, 140, 141, 150, 191
     support, 12, 131
Gemini spacecraft , 43, 199
      b
General ynamics)Astronautics Corp. ( Q D / A ) , 134
      Astronautics Div., 82
      contracts, 11, 82, 224, 250, 256
      Convair Div. 249
     laser, 214
     research, 256
     rocket test, 202
      strikes, 121, 128, 182, 187, 192, 194, 227
General Electric Co. (GE), 1, 200, 208
      contracts, 15
      development, 66, 113, 228
      General Engineering Laboratory, 50
      Missile & Space Vehicle Center, 111
     tests, 143
General Electric Forum, 141, 143, 282
General Mills, 175
General Motors Co. (GM), 72
General Post Office Facilities (U.K.), 50, 95
General Telephone & Electronics, Inc., 221 1
General Thomas D. White Space Trophy, 105
General Tire & Rubber Co., 192
Geneva, Switzerland, 40, 250
      conferences, 44, 69, 79, 84, 95, 97, 99, 122, 180
Geodesy, Intelligence, and Mapping Research and Development Agency
  (GIMRADA), 216
Geodetic Institute (Denmark). 148
                                ,,
Geology, 63
Geomagnetism, 15, 41
Geophysical Institute (Univ. of Alaska), 227
326                              INDEX
Geophysics, 63, 99
Geophysics Corp. of America, 82, 234
Georgetown University Observatory, 76
Georgia Nuclear Laboratories, 143
Georgia Technological Institute (Georgia Tech), 221
Gcphart, Dr. Landis S., 20, 47
German Rocket Society, 196
German, Sir Ronald, 121
Germanium, 166
Gerrity, L/G Thomas P. (USAF), 146
Getting, Dr. Ivan A., 193
Ghana, 90
Giacconi, Riccardo, 162
Gillespie, Warren, Jr., 208
Gill, William L., 233
Gilmore Creek, Alaska, 6
Gilpatric, Roswell L., 75, 80, 99, 174, 275
Gilruth, Dr. Robert R., 23, 244
     Apollo, 167
     astronauts. 189. 191
     awards, 8,’20, 27, 37, 82, 127, 142, 246
     Gemini, 245
              See Geodesy, Intelligence and Mapping Research and Development
GIMRADA.
  Anencv.
        See Goddard Institute for Space Studies.
GISS~
Givens, Capt. Edward G. (USAF),       219
Glennan, Dr. T. Keith, 249
Glenn, Dr. William G., 200
Glenn effect, 48, 67.
Glenn, L/C John H., Jr. (usfiic)
     appearances, 12, 13, 22, 23, 24, 27, 32, 50, 68, 70, 75, 189
     astronauts, 125
     awards, 21, 27, 32, 50, 51, 55, 87, 93, 196, 230, 238, 246
      condition, 19, 191
     flight, 18, 21, 32, 52, 61
     flight preparations, 10, 15, 16
     remarks on, 18, 66, 77. 78, 88, 89, 187
     scientific observations,‘ 48, 67, 93, 117, 160, 198
Glenn, Mrs. Clara, 87
Glider, 100
GLOTRAC (Global tracking network, USAF),82
GM. See General Motors Co.
Gnome, Project, 235
Goddard Day, National, 114
Goddard, Dr. Rohert H., 115
Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) 9, 36
Goddard Historical Essay Contest. See Dr. Robert H. Goddard Historical
  Essay Contest.
Goddard Memorial Dinner. See Robert H. Goddard Mcmorial Dinner.
Goddard Memorial Medal. See Robert H. Goddard Memorial Mcdal.
Goddard Memorial Trophy. See Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy.
Goddard, Mrs. Robert H., 10
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC),15, 36, 101, 165
      awards, 24, 119, 208
      contracts. 6. 8. 131. 155. 232
      experiment;, 129, if51,- 223,226, 239, 247, 257, 262
      research, 68, 101, 122, 215, 219, 234, 271
      satcllites, 62, 87, 104, 278
      tracking, 62, 91, 149, 152, 235
Godfrey L. Cahot Award, 101
God’s Lake, Manitoba, 149
Goett, Dr. Harry, 87
Goldberg, Arthur, 159
Goldberg, Dr. Leo, 60
Gold, Dr. Marvin H., 256
Gold Mcdal (New York City), 94
Goldstein, Richard H., 280
                                                                   327
                                    IN'DEX

Goldstone Tracking Station, 61, 75, 169, 172, 175, 224, 234, 270
Goldstone, Calif., 35
Goldwater, Sen. Barry, 124
Goodcll, Rep. Charles E., 255
Goodyear Aircraft Cor     137, 256
Goonhilly Downs (U.&: 117, 165, 175
Goose Bay, Labrador, 121, 138, 145
Gordon, Maj. Henry C. (USAF), 195
Gore, Senator Albert, 104, 258-9
Gorshkov, Adm. of the Fleet Sergei G., 132
GOSS,Dr. Wilbur H., 217
Gough, Melvin N., 64
Graduate Rescarch Center of the Southwest, 242
Graham, Philip L., 220
Grand Canar Island, 12
Grand Turk lsland, 18, 19, 86, 195
Grants (non-Government) , 4
Graves, George B., Jr., 221
Gravitational clock, 38
Gravity, 38, 78
Gravit base measuring station, 227
Great 6ritain. See United Kingdom.
Grcater Hartford (Conn.) Chamber of Commerce, 206
Grcater Los Angeles Press Club, 68
Great Radiation Belt. See Radiation belt.
Green Bank, West Virginia, 9, 126, 195, 203, 223
Green Bay, Wisconsin, 175
Grecnhut Construction Co., 95
Greenland, 148, 248
Greenstein, Dr. Jesse L., 163, 255
Griffith, George E., 208
Gringaua, Dr. K., 22
Grissom, Maj. Virgil I. (USAF), 99, 221
     appearances, 23, 24, 102
     awards, 101, 105, 122
     remarks on, 20, 88
Grissom, L/C. J. R. (USAF), 96
Grover E. Bell Award. 91
Gross, Courtlandt S., 192
Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., 173, 234, 249
         See Goddard Space Flight Center.
QSFC.
Guaymos, Mexico, 12   ~




Gubser, Rep. Charles S., 231
Guidance, 43, 72, 94
Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratories (Cal Tech), 282
Guggenheim International Astronautics Award, 161, 203
Gun, 171
Gurley, Capt William F. (USA), 58
Gyro&ope,-211
H-1 (engine), 27, 155
H-43B (Huskie). 100. 115
Hadinotb, Dr., 224 '
Hagen, Dr. John P., 40
Hahn, Walter, 1
Hailstorm, 244
Haines, Charles R., 194
Halaby, Najeeb E., 47, 65, 238, 241, 249
Halifax (bomber), 59
Hall, Al/C Henry W., 180
Hallbach, Edward A., 175
Ham, 135
Hamilton, Mass., 221
Hamilton Standard Div. (United Aircraft Corp.), 211, 256
Hammack. Jerome B.. 273
Hampton Roads, Va.,'171
Hamster, 121, 138, 145, 147, 149
Hanford, Washington, 201
328                                lNDEX

Handley Page Ltd., 59
Handley Page, Sir Frederick, 59
Hangar-S, 12
Hanover, Germany, 59
Hansen, Grant,L., 82
Harmonjhternational Trophy, 147, 218
Harp (high altitude research project), Operation, 171
Harris, Dr. Isadore, 122
Hartford, Conn., 206
Hartgering, Dr. James, 45
Hart, Mrs. Jane B., 124
Harvard College Observatory, 60
Harvard University, 5, 52, 189
Harvey, Douglas G., 8
Haskins, Caryl P., 264
Hasp (high altitude sounding rocket), 79
Hatanaka, Takeo, 95
H a t Creek, California, 97, 142
H a t Creek Radio Astronomy Facility, 97
Havana, Cuba, 118, 281
Hawaii, 281
Hawker Siddeley Aviation Co. (U.K.), 67, 171
Haworth, Leland, 186-7, 189
Hawthorne, California, 11
Hayes, B/G T. J., 1 1 (USA), 25
                     1
Haze (see also Airglow), 93, 117
Heaton, Col. Donald (USAF), 97
Heat, atmospheric solar, 122
Heat shield, 166, 221
Heat transfer, 126
Heberlig, Jack, 274
Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, 48-9
Heidman, Marcus F., 119
Heitsch, Airman John T. (USAF), 85-6
Helgeson, Bob P., 102, 211
Helicopter, 134
      development, 94, 247
      record, 13, 100, 115
      uses of, 142
Helium, 215, 232
Helium tunnel, 244-5
Helms, Ward, 245
Henry V I I I , 56
Henry, J. C., 106-7
Heppner, Dr. James P., 15
Hermann Oberth Award, 263
Hero of the Soviet Union, 157
Herzfield, Dr. Charles M., 198-9
Hesburgh The Reverend Theodore M., 98
Heusch, herman, 218
Heyden, Father Francis J., 76
HF-24, 121
Hibbs, Dr. Albert R., 241
Hickam AFB, Hawaii, 211
Hidden Hills, Calif., 143-4, 165
Hiestand, Rep. Edgar, 91
High Water, Project, 61, 69, 244
Hill AFB, Utah, 115
Hill, Paul, 64
Hi-Hoe, Project, 130
Hindu, 12
Hines, Colin O., 279
Hodges, John, 150
Hodges, Luther, 208
Hoering, Thomas C., 264
Hoffman, LCdr. Richard A. (USN), 190
                                                           329
                                     INDEX

Hoffman, Samuel K., 134, 246
Holifield, Rep. Chet, 252, 281-2
Holloman AFB, N.M., 135, 232
Holloman, Dr. J. Herbert, 50, 200
Hollywood-by-the-Sea, Florida, 208
Holmedel, New Jersey, 117-118
Holmes, D. Brainerd, 224, 257
     astronauts, 123, 155
     economic payoff, space, 242
     management, 19, 40
     managers, 236
     lunar-orbit rendezvous, 119, 123, 234
     manned orbital flight, 31, 61, 109, 153, 158-9, 209
     moon laboratory, 260
Honeywell 1800, 141
Honeywell Electronic Data Processing, 141
Hongyee, Dr. Chiu, 9
Honolulu, Hawaii, 210, 211
Hoover, Lcdr. Lloyd N. (USN), 58
Horizon, Project, 199-200, 214
Horton, Donelson B., 208
Houbolt. Dr. John C.. 65
Hound Dog (missile),’l07
Houston, Texas, 82-3, 174, 181, 191, 244
Hovercraft (SRN 1, 2), 134; 204’
Hovercraft Development, Ltd., 134
Howard, Dr. Robert, 248
Howard N. Potts Medal, 217
Howard, R. C., 237
ass-7 (Sea King), 13
Hubbard Medal, 50
Hughes Aircraft Co.
     Advanced Syncom, 104
     research, 188, 243
     Surveyor, 243
     Syncom, 138, 194, 237
Hughes, Billy C., 76, 103
Hughes Research Laboratories, 175
Humason comet, 163
Hummingbird (VZ-10). See VZ-10.
Humphrey, Sen. Hubert H., 16, 103, 174, 188, 266-7
Hungary, 95, 282
Huntsville, Alabama, 152, 161, 162, 174, 175, 181, 274
Hurricane, 190
Huskie. See H-43B.
Hustler. See B-58.
H annis Port, Mass., 121
“dybrid,” 196
Hycon Manufacturing Co., 61
Hydrogen, atomic, 143
Hvdrogen-flourine. 81
Hidrogen, gas, 147
Hydrogen, liquid. See 5-2, M-1, RL-10, etc.
Hynek, J. Allen, 269
Hypertension, 7
       See International Astronautical Federation.
IAF.
        See International Association of Machinists.
IAM.
IAS. See Institute of the Aerospace Sciences.
         See International Air Transport Association.
IATA.
        See International Business Machine, Inc.
IBM.
Ide, John Jay, 4
Idlewild International Airport, New York, 99
Igor I. Sikorsky International Trophy, 91
IOY. See International Geophysical Year.
Illinois, Univ. of, 237


      8372
      71-2
330                                   INDEX

            See Integrated Mission Control Center.
IMCC.
I m p (inflatable micrometeoroid paraglider), 91
Imshenetskiy, A., 274
India
        aircraft, 121
        meteorite, 271
        space program, 95, 145, 150, 187
Indiana Technical College, 82-3
Indiana, Univ. of, 247
Indian Ocean, 57-8, 165, 208-9
Indonesia, 1, 244
Industrial Research Institute, 156
Industry, space
        growth, 192, 242
        mobilization, 262
        patents, 222-3, 265
        strikes, 121
Information
        lag, 200
        release, 60, 178, 213, 214, 221, 255, 257
        retrieval, 103, 144, 188, 215, 226-7
        sale of, 190-1, 249
Infrared, 66, 100-1, 231, 258
Ingomish, Nova Scotia, 274
I N J U N , 16G, 169, 211, 240, 281, 296
Institute for Fluid Dynamics and Applied Mathematics (U. of Maryland), 151
Institute for Strategic Studies (U.K.), 237
Institute of Education (London, U.K.), 171-2
Institute of Environmental Sciences, 52
Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics (Univ. of Calif.), 50
Institute of Meteorology (Univ. of Stockholm), 219
Institute of Technology (Univ. of Minnesota), 61
Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (IAS), 4, 8, 32, 65, 67-8, 81, 92, 107, 112,
    161, 167, 194, 283
Institute of Theoretical and Applied Optics, 137
Institute of World Affairs, 168
Institutes, teachers, 2G5
Instrument-Automation Conference and Exhibit, 215
Integrated Mission Control Center (IMCC), 216
International Air Transport Association (IATA), 188, 238, 239
International Association of Machinists ( I A M ) , 121, 127, 128, 182, 187, 192, 195,
    196, 208, 210, 214, 220, 222, 227, 233, 247, 248, 253,255, 259, 279
International Astronautical Congress, 166, 199, 203
International Astronautical Federation (IAF), 199, 227
International Astronomical Union, 33
International Atomic Energy Agency, 195
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, 152, 161
International Business Machine, Ino. (IBM), 112, 131, 216, 228
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), 92
International Conference on the Ionosphere (London), 115
International cooperation, space (see also International space programs), 102, 111
        communications, 72, 74, 99, 195, 199, 233
        launch vehicles, 218
        launch sites, 99
        magnetic field, 74, 99, 195
        manned space flight, 68, 69
        need for, 57, 78, 87, 276
        satellites, 62, 202
        sounding rockets, 84, 141, 147, 167, 216, 219, 254, 265, 267-8, 270
        tracking, 149, 150, 151, 274
        weather, 72, 74, 84-5, 99, 115, 195
International Geophysical Year (IGY), 262
International Latex Corp., 211, 256
International Rocket Club, 217
International Space Science Symposium, 57
                                                                         331
                                   INDEX

International space programs (see also European Space Research Organization;
  International cooperation, space), 170
     U.N.-India, 145, 150, 179, 187
     US.-Australia, 265
     U.S.-Canada, 202, 267, 274
     U.S.-Denmark, 157
     US.-France, 20
     U.S.-Italy, 165
     U.S.-Japan, 61, 91
     U.S.-Norway, 157, 270
     U.S.-Pakistan, 96, 98
     U.S.-Sweden, 84-5, 92, 122, 141, 147, 167
     U.S.-U.K., 63
     U.S.-U.S.S.R., 195, 261
International Telecommunication Union, 40
International Telephone & Telegraph Co. (IT&T), 95, 156, 175, 189, 193
International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, 59
International Union of Operating Engineers, 201
International Year of the Quiet Sun (IQSY), 59, 99, 187, 227, 261, 262
Interstate Scientific Assembly of D.C. and Virginia Physicians, Second, 215-16
Invention and Contribution Award (NASA), 52
Ion
       belt, 115
       density, 43, 257
       engine, 275
       measurement of, 62, 130, 161, 216
       research, 252
Ion chamber, 164
Ionosphere
       and communications, 17
       and radioastronomy, 197
       electrons in, 43, 101, 234, 254
       study of, 62, 89, 227, 242, 270
Ion shield, 175, 221
Iowa, State Univ. of, 41, 104, 161, 166, 198
IQSY. See International Year of t h e Quiet Sun.
Iran, 99
Iraq, 33
Iris, 68
Iroquois (YHU-1D). See YHU-1D.
Israel, 198
Istres, France, 107
Italian Space Commission, 173
Italy, 11, 21, 43, 55, 57-8, 89, 95, 100, 165, 173, 218
I T ~ T . See International Telephone & Telegraph Co.
Ithaca College, 250-1
Iowa Jima, 91, 106
Zzueslia, 22, 126, 147, 156, 177, 275
5-93 (engine), 113
Jackass Flats, Nevada, 17, 134, 254, 264
Jack, John R., 7
Jackson, Sen. Henry M., 21
Jacksonville, Florida, 99
Jaffe, Leonard, 194
Jamaica Bay, New York, 27
James H. Wyld Memorial Award, 246
J A N A F (Joint Army-Navy-Air Force), 233
Japan, 60, 61, 64, 79, 83, 91, 95, 214, 218, 233
Japanese Meteorological Observatory, 276
Japanese Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, 233
Jarman, Dr. Bernard L., 122
J e t Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), 175, 282
       Mariner, 16, 165, 169, 170, 175, 200, 231
       radar, 70, 72, 224
       Ranger, 12, 218
       tracking, 35
J e t Star, 59
332                                 INDEX

J. Lawrence Smith Medal, 60
Jicamarca, Peru, 267
Jodrell Bank Experimental Station:(U.K.), 39, 49, 152, 164
Johannesburg, South Africa, 35, 65, 175, 270
John XXIII, Pope, 130, 179, 276
John Adams Fleming Award, 63
John Glenn,Day, 55
John J. Carty Medal, 40-1
John J. Montgomery Award, 204, 205
Johns,Hopkins University, The, 110, 138,5225-6
Johnson. C. C.. 273-4
Johnson; Dr. -Howard W., 240
Johnson, John A., 41, 138-9
Johnson, R. L., 119
Johnson,,Vice President Lyndon B.,’-l, 2, 74, 117-8, 173, 174, 179
     awards from, 36-7, 125
Johnson, Vincent, 167
Johnston, A. M., 220-1
Johnston Island, 28, 50, 71, 90 94, 106, 116, 127, 130, 136, 181, 185-6, 208, 212,
   218, 223, 232
Joint Army-Navy-Air Force. See JANAF.
Joint Task Force 8, 60, 216, 265
Joint Working Group (NASA), 252
Jokkmokk, Sweden, 122
“Joliot-Curie Crater,” 119-120
Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp., 156
Jordon, Eric W., 115
Journal of Geophysical Research, 106-7
Journeyman, 197
       See Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
JPL.
Juno 11, 300, 301, 302, 303
Jupiter (planet), 76, 83, 132, 204, 223, 239
Jupiter (missile), 56, 95
Jupiter C, 300
Justice, Department of, 137, 200-01
Kano, Nigeria, 12
Kapitza, Dr. Peter L., 47, 49, 54
Kappel, Frederick, 117-8
Karachi, Pakistan, 96, 98
Karth, Rep. Joseph E., 147, 239
Katzenbach, Nicholas, 51
Kazakhstan, U.S.S.R., 153
Keating, Gerald M., 68
Keating, Sen. Kenneth B., 46
Kefauver, Sen. Estes, 23, 44, 104, 145, 265
Kehlet, A. B., 273-4
Keldysh, Matislav, 53, 68-9
Kelley, Dr. Albert J., 190, 272
Kellogg, Dr. William W., 2, 8
Kennebec, Iowa, 163
Kennedy, Mrs. John F. (Jacqueline), 68
Kennedy, President John F., 2, 11, 43, 94, 166, 201, 216
     appointments, 50, 97, 118, 209, 210
     astronauts, 249
     awards from, 20-1, 125, 142, 218, 259, 263, 282
     comsat. 12. 128
     defense; 100, 137, 160-1, 219, 273
     disarmament, 121
     manned lunar landing, 3-4
     manned space flight, 15-16, 18, 19, 86, 149, 153, 183-4
     nuclear facilities tour, 264, 266
     nuclear test, 28, 60, 73
     nuclear test ban, 172, 185-6, 232
     patents, 73
     scientists shortage, 5, 77
     space cooperation, 38, 39, 85
     space facilities tour, 174, 181, 183-4
     space funds, 6, 13, 33, 257, 275
                                                       333
                                    INDEX

Kennedy, Robert F., 138
Kentucky, Univ. of, 196
Kerr cell framing camera, 66
Kerr. Sen. Robert S.. 6. 9. 172
                    ,   I   ,


Keyes, R. J., 117
Key West, Florida, 96
                                  -
KFC-600. See Kerr cell framing camera.
Khentu, 12
Khrushchev, Premier Nikita, 34, 38, 53, 97, 127, 153
      military development, 36, 123
      6 ace cooperation, 18-19, 38
    8.S.   space program, 75, 89
Kilgore, Rep. Joe M., 57
Killian, Dr. James R., Jr., 129
Kinard, William H., 24-5
Kindelberger, James H., 132, 152
Kindley AFB, Bermuda, 7, 91, 106, 120
King, David, 144
Kirtland AFB, N.M., 212, 248
Kiruna Geophysical Observatory (Sweden), 219
Kiruna, Sweden, 79
Kitten er, Ca t. Joseph A., Jr. (USAF), 75, 269
Kitty bawk, k.C., 271
Kiwi B, 17, 134
Kiwi B-lB, 182
Kiwi B 4 A , 254
Klimov, M/G Vhdimir Y., 181
Knauf, Col. George M. (USAF), 231
Knole, Maj. Byron F. (USAF), 58
Kochendorfer, F. D., 119
Kohler, George M., 227
Kollsman Instrument Division, 11, 72
Komsolsknya Pravda, 154-5, 270
Konecci, Dr. Eugene B., 109-10, 248
Kopal, Zdenek, 124, 152
Koppenhaver, James T., 47
Korchin, Dr. Sheldon J., 279
Kordes, Eldon E., 208
Korth, Fred, 216
Krasnaya Zvezda, 156, 214
Krieger, Dr. F. J., 158
KronogLrd, Sweden, 141, 147, 167
Kuchel, Sen. Thomas H., 147
Kuettner, Dr. J. P., 2
Kuiper, Dr. Gerald P., 219-20
Kurochkin, Gen. Pavel, 198
Kwajalein Atoll, 30, 126, 267, 275-6
Kwasan Observatory (Kyoto, Japan), 222
Lacklen, Robert J., 52
Lacrosse, Wisconsin, 175
h e , New Guinea, 13
Lake Michigan, 175
Lambertsen, Dr. Christian J., 71
Lamb, Dr. Lawrence E., 215-0
Lamont Geological Observatory, 136
Landau, Dr. Lev Davidovich, 228
Landovitz, Dr. Leon, 204
Lanford, Wade E., 76
Lange, Prof. K. O., 196
Langley AFB, Va., 90, 93, 99, 108
Langley Gold Medal, 63
                                      INDEX

Langly Research Center (Lam), 16-17, 24-25, 25, 65, 76, 108, 109
      awards to, 24-25, 108, 208
      conferences, 138, 149, 210
     research
          aircraft, 249-50
          atmospheric winds, 116
          facilities, 237
          paraglider, 91
          re-entry, 17
          rocket vibration test, 70
          Rogallo wing, 116
          space crew, 179
          space station, 64, 138, 203
Langmuir probe, 62
Language, foreign, 121
Language, universal, 172
Lam. See Langley Research Center
Lascelles, Reginald, 169
Laser (light amp!ification by stimulated emission of radiation)
     development, 9, 214, 216, 228
     experiments, 66, 163
     use of, 141, 199, 235
Las Vegns, Nevada, 14, 186, 195, 196
Launching site, international, 89, 99
Launch Operations Center (LOC), 31, 127, 181
Launch platforms, floating, 57-8, 112
Laurence G. Hanscom Field, Mass., 35
Lausanne, Switzerland, 179
Law, international, 218
Lawrence B. Sperry Award, 8
Lawrence, Ernest O., 110
Lawrence Radiation Laboratory (U. of Cal.), 70, 234
Leavy, William A., 208
Lebede Institute of Physics (U.S.S.R.), 251
Lederbe'sg, Dr. Joshua, 204
Legion of Merit (USAF), 236
Leighton, Robert B., 22
        See Module, lunar excursion.
LEM.
LeMay, Gen. Curtis E. (USAF)
     aerospace plane, 265
     awards from, 126
     missiles, 24
     RS-70, 80
     space, military use of, 42, 07-8
Lehingrad Medical Exhibition, 72-3
Leningrad Radium Institute, 232
Levine, Charles A., 94
Lewis, Dr. George W., 53-4
Lewis Research Center (LRC), 7, 34
     awards, 16, 119, 208
     Centaur, 226
     exhibits, 137, 139
     management, 203
     programs, 267
     research
          engines, liquid-hydrogen, 106, 246
          mace station. 137
Liberty eigine, 58
Liberty Marine engine, 58
Lick Observatory, 238
Lieb, Judge Joseph, 201
Life
     extraterrestrial, 69-70, 83, 141-2, 190, 206, 243, 250, 251, 274
          on Mars, 55, 115
     plant, 264
                                                                              335
                                     INDEX

Life science (see also Bioscience), 78
     diet, space, 150
     equipment, 150
     information, 45, 49
     heart, 152
     space trip, simulated, 179
Lights, high-intensity, 190, 199
Lilly, Dr. John C., 190
Lincoln Laboratory (MIT),60, 106, 117
Lindbergh, Charles A., 3, 20, 50, 94
Linde Co., 95, 96
Lindsay, John C., 221
Lingle, Walter L., Jr., 108, 155
Ling-Temco-Vought Co., 178
Lipschutz, Dr. Michael E., 271
Liquid Propulsion Symposium, Foqrth Annual, 233
Little, Dr. C. Gordon, 130
Little Joe, 300, 301, 302
Little Joe 11, 83, 146, 256
LOC. See Launch Operations Center.
Lockheed Aircraft Corp., 181
     Ferret, 277
                                                                     250, 253, 255 ,
     strikes, 121, 128, 182, 187, 192, 196, 220, 227, 246 247   i
                                                                ,
                                                       8,


        2 59
Lockheed-Georgia Co., 146, 221
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., 10, 81, 143, 161, 195, 231,        277
Lockheed Propulsion Co., 77, 130
Logistic vehicle, lunar, 118, 174, 256
Logvinov, Dr. Konstantin T., 59
Loki, 79
Lompoc, California, 83
London Daily Telegraph, 284'
London, U.K., 33, 44, 59, 67, 78, 93
     communications, 126
     meetings, 43, 55, 172, 262, 266
London, Tower of, 56
Long, Sen. Russell B., 104, 265
Longton, Cdr. D. M. (USN), 28-29
Look, George F., 208
Look Magazine, 114, 199
LOR. See Rendezvous, lunar orbit.
Los Alamos, N.M., 264
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, 134, 186, 187
Los Angeles, Calif., 29, 49, 56, 79, 96, 182
     meetings, 20, 30, 103, 112, 239, 241, 243, 246
Los Angeles Times,250
Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award, 8, 283
Lovelace Foundation, 124, 224
Lovelace, W. Randolph, 11, 224
Lovell, Sir Bernard, 39, 49, 67, 71, 90, 169
     MARINER 11, 164
     space race 154, 284
Lovell, LCdr. james A., Jr. (USN), 191
Low, George M., 65, 105, 125, 216, 221
Lowell Observatory, 144
Lowry AFB, Colorado, 56
Loyola Univenit (Los An el-), 103
LRC. See Lewis kesearch &enter.
Lubanky, Dr. Bernard, 16
Lubbock, Texas, 48, 77
Ludnicki, 69
Lunar. See Moon.
Lunar and Planetary Laboratory (U. of Arizona), 219
    Lunar excursion module. See Module, lunar excursion.
    Lunar Exploration Conference, 149, 151, 152, 154, 155, 157
    “Lunar Flight Exploration,” 149
    Lundquist, Dr. Charles, 69
    LUNIK 1 , 157
            1
    LUNIK 1 1 219
            1,
    Lutsky, Velery, 87
    Lyman alpha, 143
    Lyness, L/C Charles J. (USAF),  114
    M-1 (engine), 8, 70, 96, 203
    M-10 (U.S.S.R.), 92
    MA-5. See Mercury-Atlas 5.
    MA-6. See Mercury-Atlas 6.
    MA-7. See Mercury-Atlas 7.
    MA-8. See Mercury-Atlas 8.
    MA-9. See Mercury-Atlas 9.
    McCarthy, Michael W., 177
    McClellan, Sen. John L., 46, 130, 141
    McCloy, John J., 77
    McClure, S/Sgt. Ray E. (USAF),   86
    McCurdy Medal, 167
    McDivitt, Capt. James A. (USAF),    191
    MacDonald, Capt. Robert (USAF), 29
    MacDonald, Dr. Gordon J. F., 50
    McDonald, Glenn E., 119
    McDonnell Aircraft Corp., 28, 43, 91, 111, 215
    McFarland, Dr. Ross A., 52
    McGhee, George C., 25
    McGill University (Canada), 171
    McGraw, L/C W. C., Jr. (USMC), 29
    McGregor Missile Range, Texas, 261
    Mach number, 139
    McIntosh, Capt. Robert H. (USAF),    58
    McKay, John B., 110, 126, 202, 205, 212, 236, 251, 254
    McKee, Col. Daniel (USAF),   140
    Macmillan, Prime Minister Harold, 273
    McMurdo Station, Antarctica, 66, 235
    McNamara, Robert S., 150, 174, 199
        comsat, 143
        nuclear, 265
        RS-70, 38, 251
        Skybolt, 266
        U.S.S.R. space activities, 157, 159
        VTOL, 67
    McNeely, Eugene, 121
    Macomber, Mark M., 63
    Madrid, Spain, 4, 93
    Magnetic field
        discovery of, 190
        effect of, 37, 78
        measurement of, 30, 36, 38, 48, 97, 99, 164, 225, 237, 264, 269
        radiation, 15
        structure of, 7, 9
    Magnetometer, 164, 268, 269
    Magnetosphere, 7, 22
    Magnet, Project, 121
    Mahon, Rep. George H., 49
    Maine, 208
    Malagasy Republic, 66
    Malinovsky, Marshal Rodin, 156
    Mallick, Donald L., 179
     Malmgren, Bjoern, 263
     Malstrom AFB, Montana, 266
     Management Council (NASA),    107, 119




I              _-                                                -~
                                                                             337
                                     INDEX

Management Intern Program (NASA), 122
“Man and Bo Award,” 51
Manchester, J K . , 166
Manchester, Univ. of (U.K.), 152, 173, 222
Manitoba, 147, 149
Mann, David J., 180
Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC), 1, 30, 181
   astronauts, 93, 189, 191
   awards to, 8, 127, 208, 221, 273-74
   conferences, 138, 232
   facilities, 126, 216
   guidance, 72
   paraglider, 100
   personnel, 2
   research, 134, 256
Manned space flight, U.S.
   benefits of, 216
   cooperation, 31, 75, 281-82
   flares, solar, 284
   funds, 129, 275
   performance, 231
   program, 24, 29, 63, 78, 118-19, 171, 178, 242, 251
   rendezvous, 27
   trackinn. 62-~
             01
         ~




    weightlessness, 47
Manned SDace Flight Conference, 67
Man Out of Space-Easiest. See Moose.
Mansfield, Sen. Mike, 147
Manufacturing Chemists’ Association, 248
Maps, lunar
   manned space flight, 123-24
 .
Mare Novum, 220
Marette, Jacques M., 119, 121
Marietta, Georgia, 146
Marine Aviator of the Year, 196, 231
Mariner (program), 154, 156, 204
MARINER I, 16, 127, 128, 131, 133,354
MARINER I1
   data, 175, 213
   flight, 164, 165, 169, 181, 192, 200, 201, 210, 225, 238, 247, 258, 270, 278
   maneuvers, 169, 170, 172
   performance, 225, 230, 234, 239, 264
   plans for, 154, 156, 163, 169, 238, 248, 249, 270
   records, 188, 242, 250, 268
   results, 225, 231, 264, 276, 278, 279
Mariner B, 115
Maritime Administration, 236
Markley, J. Thomas, 167, 216
Mars
   astronomy, 90, 138
   communications to, 17
   life on, 8, 55, 83, 280
   manned flights to, 20, 36, 75, 195, 266
   meteorites, 231-32
   unmanned flights to, 115, 173, 228, 230, 239, 248
   water on, 204
MARS I
   flight, 230, 231,233, 236, 239, 241, 260
   launch, 228, 295
   performance, 269
   photos of, 247
   plans for, 228
Marshall, Dr. Leona, 204
Marshall Islands, 136
338
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), 2, 9, 12, 95, 111, 181, 222, 245
    awards, 25, 44, 76, 103, 205
    construction. 44
    contracts, 8,’10, 27, 70, 95, 140, 174, 207, 277
    facilities. 83
    management, 11, 31, 78, 108
    production, 140
    programs, 55, 70, 203, 248, 267
    research, 2, 134
    strikes, 152, 159, 161, 164
    tests. 86. 194
    tests; statir, 51, 70, 134, 179, 237
Martin Co., The
    contracts, 134
    research, 179
Martineck, Hans G., 76, 103
Martin, Glenn L.. 132
Martin; James A’, 139
Martin-Marietta Corp., 252
    contracts, 10, 17, 30, 159, 207, 245
Martlett (missile), 171
Maryland, University of, 57, 151, 243
Maser (molecular amplification by stimulated emission of radiation), 40, 74, 166,
  199
Masevitch, Dr. Alla G., 25
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 9, 40, 69, 9 s
    conference, 240
    equipment, 141, 189
    guidance, 72
    management, space, 66
    maser, 74
Massey, Sir Harrie, 63
Mastodon (rocket), 136
Mathematics, 49, 83, 134
Matranga, Gene J., 92
Matsch, Or. Franz, 37, 44
Matveyev, V., 126
Mauritius, 66
May, Mrs. Herbert, 275
Me-262, 134
Mcader, Rep. George, 157
Meckling, William H., 75
Medal of Honor (New York City), 27
Meehan, Dr. John P., 7
Meeker, Leonard C., 37, 90
“Meet the Press,” 128
Meinchein, Dr. Warren G., 70
Melbourne, Australia, 55
Melbourne, Florida, 101
Mendeleevium, 110
Mendoza, Dr. Eric, 173
Menlo Park, Calif., 252
Mercury (spacecraft), 199
    boilerplate, 256
    mating, 1
    performance, 18, 48, 85, 95, 208-9
    recovery, 1, 18
    repairs, 7
    tests, 100
    tour; 57, 99
Mercurv-Atlas 1 (MA-1). 301
Mercuri-Atlas 2 (MA-2); 302
Mercury-Atlas 3 (MA-3), 302
Mercury-Atlas 4 (MA-4), 303
                                                                             339
                                     INDEX

Mercury-Atlas 5 (MA-5), 7, 303
Mercury-Atlas 6 (MA-6)
    booster fragments, 129
    flight, 18, 20-21, 32, 42, 49, 286, 303
    flight preparations, 1, 7, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16
    results, 48, 191
Mercury-Atlas 7 (MA-7)
    booster fragments, 89
    flight, 86-87, 187, 289, 304
    flight preparations, 36, 69, 71, 76, 79, 80, 81, 821 8 5
    results, 159
Mercury-Atlas 8 (MA-8)
    flight, 208-9, 294, 304
    flight preparations, 109, 115, 148, 155, 158--9, I.77, 179, 1   194, 197, 199,
       201, 202, 206
    use of, 209
Mercury-Atlas 9 (MA-9), 213, 240, 249
Mercurv Control Center. 62
Mercuri, Project
    conclusion of, 199, 209
    control room, 51
    medical, 4
    pilot, 36
    program, 19
    results, 48
    team, 20, 22, 27, 28, 69, 93
    tracking, 62
Mercury-Redstone, 301, 302, 303
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner, and Smith, Inc., 177
Messerschmitt Aircraft. 134
Meteor, 52, 60,70
Meteorites
    composition, 60, 70
    diamonds in, 271
    frequency, 231
    locating of, 131, 136, 203, 276
    satellite impact with, 150, 159
Methane. 147 .
      .~~ ~~




Meyer, Andre J., Jr., 273, 274
Meyers, Tedson J., 119
Mi-1 (U.S.S.R.), 100
Miami Beach. Florida, 33
Miami, Florida, 99, 101
Michaelson, Dr. Sol M., 50
Michigan, Univ. of, 82, 97, 247
Michoud Operations (NASA), 201
    facilities, 134. 226
    location,' 71 '
     production, 10, 140
Micrometeorite, 39
Micrometeoroid, 180, 270
Micro-organism, 157, 182, 200
Microscope, 137
Microwave, 50
Midas (military defense alarm system), 136, 179
Middlebury College, Vermont, 115
Middletown, Ohio, 167
Midway Island, 109
MiG-15, 181
MiG-17, 181
Mikhailov, A., 159, 171
Mikoyan, Artem, 246
Mil, Mikhail L., 91
Mildura, Australia, 55
340                                   INDEX

Milky Way, 162, 237, 250
Miller, Dr. Neal E., 58
Miller; Dr. Stanley,' 141
Miller, Rep. George P., 37
     award, 168
     bills. 9
     spackprogram, 5, 88, 124, 149, 163, 171, 172, 176, 202
Millsaps, Dr. Knox, 79
Mills, Dr. Bernard Y., 251
Millstone Hill, 60, 106
Milwaukee Astronomical Society, 175
Miniaturization, 46
Minitrack, 156, 272
Minneapolis, Minnesota, 84
Minnesota, 49
Minnesota, Univ. of, 61
Minow, Newton N., 48, 119, 128, 138. 199
Minshall, Rep. William E., 57
Minuteman
     launch, 2, 16, 32, 39, 76, 82, 97, 110, 195, 202, 217, 247, 264, 266, 269, 274
     operational sites, 266
     plans for, 24, 112, 266
Mirage 111, 107
Mirror, 11
Missile
     competition for, 198, 237
     global, 36
     international discussions on, 266
     operational, 265
     strength, 274
Missile and Space Vehicle Center IGE), 11
Missile, antimissile
     U.S., 126
     U.S.S.R., 123
Missile, antisatellite, 2
Mission Control Center, 126
Mississippi, 44
Mississippi River, 103
Mississippi State College, 51
Mississippi Test Facility ( N A S A ) , 71 102, 200-01
MIT. See Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Mitchell. S.P - _ _
                  ~
              . . R-25.
Mitchell, Indiana, 102
Mitchell, M/G C. H. (USAF), 3
M I T School of Industrial Management, 236
M.M. Sundt Construction Co.. 222
Mobile mid-range ballistic missile (MMRBM), 7
Module, lunar excursion (LEM)
     contract, 234
     decision on, 118-19
     development of, 130, 174
Moeckel, Wolfgang E., 7
Moffet Field, California, 2, 231, 248
Molecular bombardment, 256
Mongolia, 214
Monkey, 121, 138, 145, 147, 149
Mono Lake, California, 100
Monomethylhydrazine, 180
Monroe, R/Adm. J. P. (USN), 108
Montand, Yves, 120
Mont-de-Marsan, France, 124
Monterey, California, 68
Montgolfier Award, 39
Moody, Capt. Alton B. (USNR), 213
                                                                         341
                                 INDEX

Moon
     base on, 4, 36, 42, 165, 217, 260
     composition, 50, 60, 67, 152
     distance, 11
     experiments, 12, 74, 118
     life on. 157
     logisti& 144
     manned flight to, 32, 68, 142, 179, 182, 183, 208, 227
     manned investigation, 3, 65, 105, 112, 149, 158, 199-200, 251
     orbit of, 3, 68
     radiation from, 104-5
     surface of, 2, 55, 106, 196, 231, 234
     tracking to, 35-6
     unmanned flight to, 7, 10, 30, 61, 75, 219
     use of, 177, 199
     water on, 124, 253
“Moon as an Earth Satellite, The,” 149
Moonquake, 50
Moonwatch, 175
Moore, LCdr. Donald E. (USN), 185
Moose (Man Out of Space Easiest), 200
Mordell, Dr. D. L., 171
Morgan, Homer G., 70
Mormon Tabernacle Choir, 128
Morozov, Platon D., 37, 180, 188
Morozumi, Henry, 245
Morrell, Gerald, 119
Morris, Re Thomas G., 57
Morrison, Er. Richard B., 97, 133
Morris, Thomas D., 186
Morse, J. G., 252
Morse, Samuel, 10
Morse, Sen. Wayne, 23, 104, 138, 150
Morton, Dr. Jack, 3
Moscow Planetarium, 87
Moscow University (U.S.S.R.), 236
Moscow, U.S.S.R., 15, 35, 40, 63, 78, 263, 278
     air terminal, 118, 134
     communications, 238, 270-71
     conferences, 117, 238
Moskovsky Komsomolets, 35
MOSOIOV, Georgy, 116
           L/C
Mossino, Ralph L., 25
Moss, Rep. John E., 199, 255
Motion sickness, 82
Motorola, Inc., 8, 35
Mt. Rushmore, 128
Mount Wilson Observatory, 22, 147, 163
        See Manned Spacecraft Center.
YSC.
         See Marshall Space Flight Center.
MSFC.
Mud Lake, Nevada, 3, 236
Munch, Guido, 147
Murray, Bruce, 231
Murray, CWO Edward J. (USAF), 25, 97
Mulligan, James E., 72
Murrow, Edward R., 26, 129
Mustang. See P-51.
Myasnikov, Prof. Alexander, 152
NAA. See North American Aviation Co.; National Aeronautic Association.
NACA. See National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics.
Nagy, Dr. Bartholomew, 69-70
Nagy, James, 239
Nainital, India, 150
Nairobi, Kenya, 81
NANA. See North American Newspaper Alliance.
        See National Academy of Sciences
NAS.
342                                  INDEX

          See National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NASA.
        Group Achievement Award, 107, 221
NASA
        Industrial Applications Advisory Committee, 145, 156
NASA
        Management Conference, 210
NASA
 NASA-University Conference on the Science and Technology of Space Exploration,
   229, 230
 Nassau, B.I., 273, 275
 Nasser, President Gama1 A., 99, 127, 130, 198
 National Academy of Sciences (NAS), 63, 68-9, 255
                                          2,
      awards, 40, 60
      conferences, 104
      lectures, 15, 23, 34, 55
      reports, 2, 8, 130, 240
      West Ford, Project, 33, 108
National Advanced Technology Management Council, 178
National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics (NACA), 30, 69, 109, 259
                                                           4,
National Aeronautic Association (NAA),       4
      awards, 39, 114, 125
      meeting, 220
      records, 160, 161
National Aeronautics and Space Act, 9, 41, 56, 206
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), 9, 35, 127
                                                              2,
     agreements, 21, 84-5
      appropriation, 44, 55, 75, 86, 101, 167
      awards, 8, 16, 24-5, 52, 90, 98, 100, 101, 103, 105, 107, 119, 125, 196, 231,
         236, 241, 246, 263, 273-4
           non-governmental, 114, 167, 202
      balloons. 115, 138. 145. 219
      budget, 8, 13; 23 ‘75, 59 86, 255, 257, 275
      conferences, 48, &I-2, 214, 229, 233, 240
     construction
           Merritt Island, 127
..-~       Mississippi Test Facility, 200-01
     contracts
    a      antenna, 2
           basic research, 66, 134, 229-30
           communications, 190
           computer, 216
           facilities, 28
  i
           handling of, 115, 177, 186
           management, 15, 29, 66
ka         rocket engine, 3, 27, 95-6, 114,’155, 222
-          rocket stages, 10, 81, 82, 140, 144-45, 224-25, 281
    7
           space equipment, 11, 39, 43, 45, 72, 104, 211, 256
           tracking, 12, 35, 96
     facilities, 7
           damage to, 34
           land, 44
           launch, 44
           stage construction, 231, 248
           training. astronaut, 227
     field offices, 76
           Launch Operations Center, 31
           Operations Office, 115, 128, 131, 216
           Kuclear Rocket Development Station, 17
           Pacific Launch Operations Office, 24, 127-28
           Western Operations Office, 127
     grants, 52, 57, 104, 151, 198, 229-30, 242, 247,275,276
     international cooperation
           agreements, 84-5, 95, 111, 237
           launchings, 66, 96, 141, 147, 157, 167, 202, 254
           launchinps, . .         .    .
           research.-219
           research. 219
           sites, 274
                                                                               343
                                      INDEX

National Aeronautics and Space Administration-Continued
    launches, 277
         balloons, 121, 125, 140, 147
         interplanetary, 128, 164
         lunar, 10, 59, 218
         manned, 18, 85-6, 208-9
         satellite, 14, 30-1, 105, 117, 207, 223, 267
         sounding rocket, 4, 7, 27, 28, 40, 41, 55, 62, 79, 81, 82, 87, 95, 101, 106,
            110, 116, 130, 143, 161, 197,203,223,234,247,252,265, 268,270
         test, 5, 51, 72, 158, 244
    organization, 54, 224
    participation, launch, 225, 239
    patent, 41, 56, 222-23
    personnel
         appointment,s, 1, 30, 83, 97, 102, 107, 108, 109, 231, 247
         astronauts, 36, 44, 56, 69, 93, 190-91
         grades, 116
         military, 43
         recruitment, 52, 255
         training, 62, 122
     press conferences
          Apollo program, 118-19
          ARIEL I, 63
          EXPLORER IX, 34-5
          EXPLORER X I I , 7
          MARINER 11, 268
          Mercury, 21, 88
          U.S.S.R.  tandem flight, 153-54
     programs
          advanced research, 17, 39, 233
          Anna, 79, 233, 273
          Apollo, 2, 3
          Centaur, 79
          Dyna-Soar, 25
          Gemini, 1
          micrometeorite satellite, 280
          Ranger, 272
          reactor, nuclear, 277-78
          unmanned lunar, 215
          X-15 Follow-on, 53, 266
     studies
          booster fragments, 52
          contracting, 186
          lunar logistics, 144
          lunar surface, 196, 234, 260
          radiation, artificial, 148, 158, 177-78
          rendezvous, 27
          space applications, 11
National Aeronautics and Space Council, 2, 5, 54, 61, 131, 234
National Association of Broadcasters, 47
National Association of School Administrators, 17
National Aviation Day, 158
 National Broadcasting Co. (NBC), 50, 158
National Bureau of Standards, 1, 17, 112, 130, 267
 National Capital Planning Commission, 76
 National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), 93
 National Center for Space Studies (France), 20
 National Center for Telecommunications Studies (France), 95
 National Civil Service Lea ue, 34, 129
 National Committee for a bane Nuclear Policy, 84
 National Committee on Space Research (U.K.), 63
 National Conference on Application of Electrical Insulation, 20
 National Conference on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Second, 71, 72, 74, 75, 76
 National Defense Education Act, 114
 National Educational TV Network, 49
 National Electronics Conference, 213
 National Father of the Year, 87
344                                   IND,EIX

National    Geographic Society, 50, 105, 144
National   Industrial Conference Board, 282
National   Institutes of Health (NIH), 97, 114, 279
National   Labor Relations Board, 233
National   Launch Vehicle Program, 20, 71
National    Meteorological Center, 66
National Observer, The, 170
National Park Service, 76
National Patent Development Corporation, 15
National Propulsion Meeting (IAS), 32
National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO), 195, 203, 223
National Research Corp., 182
National Rocket Club, 36-7, 105, 124, 193, 217, 273
National Rocket Club Award, 37
National Safety Council, 25
National Satellite Weather Center, 166
National Science Foundation (NSF)
     announcements, 2, 273
     conferences, 104, 149
     facilities, 9, 126, 237
     function, 43, 97, 114
     grant, 49, 136, 265
     publications, 5, 132
     research, 115
National Society of Aerospace Professionals, 204
National Society of Professional Engineers Award, 92
National Symposium on Reliability and Quality Control, 4
National West Side Award, 240
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization), 56, 67, 273, 282
Navaho, 132
Naval Air Missile Test Center, 83
Naval Ordnance Laboratory (NOL), 79
Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake, 130
Naval Post Graduate School, 68
Naval Research Laboratory (NRL), 13, 130, 155, 221
Navigation, 2, 72, 121
Navy Astronautics Group, 83
Navy Hydrographic Office, 121
Navy Meritorious Public Service Citation, 256
       See National Broadcasting Co.
NBC.
NC-1, 90
Nebulosity, 65
NEC-I, 91
Nehru, Prime Minister Jawaharlal, 12, 91, 145
Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award, 37
         See Northeastern Operations Office.
NEOO.
Neptune, 83
Neptunium, 110
Nerva (nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application), 3, 10, 81, 134, 186, 248, 266
Netherlands, 21, 43, 55, 100
Nettles, John C., 119
Neubeck, Capt. Francis G. (USAF), 219
Neutrinos, 9, 111
Neutron, 238, 257, 258
Nevada, 116, 223
Nevada Test Site, 14, 182
New Brighton, Minnesota, 175
New Concord, Ohio, 28
Newell, Dr. Homer E., 31, 37, 48, 54, 79, 89, 229, 268, 272, 277
New England, 216
Northeastern Operations Office (NEOO), 115, 128, 131, 216
New England Regional Conference on Science, Technology, and Space, 240
Newman, Lt. A. (USN), 130
New Mexico, 269
New Orleans, Louisiana, 59, 71, 101, 140
Newsweek Magazine, 117, 277
New Eork Academy of Sciences, 69
                                                                             345
                                    INDEX

New  York International Airport, 27
     York Medical College, 173
New
New  York NAS, N.Y., 185, 190
New  York, New York, 4, 15, 27, 29, 36, 94
    communications, 67, 126, 131, 156, 158, 162, 174, 177, 265
    meetings, 4, 5, 8, 9, 38, 40, 61, 64, 102, 104, 194, 215, 241, 253
    publications, 132
New York State Associated Press Association, 216
New York Times,37, 120, 162, 170, 195, 212, 218, 223, 248, 257
New York Univ., 70
New Zealand, 66, 116
Nicks, Oran W., 225
Nicolayev, Maj. Andrian G.
    activities, 156, 157
    awards, 157
    condition, 152, 159, 177
    flight, 146, 148, 149, 151, 152-53
    landing, 165
    re-entrv. 167
NiemaG, D .Fred L., 216
             i
Nike, 34, 47, 81, 97
Nike- Apache
    launches, 95, 101, 161, 216, 234, 254, 257, 262
Nike-Asp, 55, 95
Nike-Caj un
    launches, 28, 40, 41, 55, 62, 79, 82, 95, 96, 141, 147, 57, 67, 232, 234, 254,
       257, 260, 262, 263
    use of, 84, 122, 219
Nike-Hercules, 44, 261
Nike-Zeus
    development, 11, 14, 32, 53, 73, 88, 253, 271, 273
    interceptions, 30, 44, 47, 77
    program, 34, 165
Nimbus (program)
    facilities, 6, 44, 91, 274
    snectrometer. 272
    status, 29, 30, 166
    t,est. 11. 201
     ----,--, - - -
Nippon Electric Co. of Japan, 91
Nitrogen, solid, 198
Nobel Prize, 60, 87, 141, 151, 199, 228, 233, 247
NOL. See Naval Ordnance Laboratorv.
Nonprofit organizations, 57
Non-torque tools, 2
NORAD. See North American Defense Command.
Nordberg, LCdr. D. W. (USN), 29, 54
Norlin Award (University of Colorado), 98
 North American Aviation, Inc. (NAA), 111, 132, 134, 204
     contracts, 38, 45, 100
     Rocketdyne Div., 114, 134-35, 136, 142, 155, 212
     Space & Information Div., 76, 224, 232, 274
     strikes, 121, 128, 182, 187, 192, 194, 208, 222
 North American Defense Command (NORAD), 170, 182
 North American Newspaper Alliance ( N A N A ) , 262
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( N A T O ) . See NATO.
 Northeast Commerce and Industry Exposition, 207
 Northeastern University, 102
 Northrop Aircraft Corp., 17, 274
 Northrop Space Laboratories, 173
 Norton AFB, California, 79
 Norwalk, Conn., 205
 Norway, 21, 100, 157
 Norwegian Committee for Space Research, 157
 Norwegian Defense Research Establishment, 157
 Nose cone, 47, 87
 Notre Dame, University of, 98
         See Naval Ordnance Test Station.
 NOTS.
      97317-63-23
346                                   INDEX

Nova, 28, 31, 32, 70, 119, 137, 207
Novaya Zemlya (U.S.S.R.), 163, 171, 191, 223, 275
Novosti, 280
NRAO. See National Radio Astronomy Observatory.
        See Naval Research Laboratory.
NRL.
Nuclear, 258, 265
     anniversary, 228, 258
     auxiliary power, 251, 252
     detonations, detection of, 116
     detonations, U.K., 264
     detonations, U.S., 208, 222, 228, 232
          aerial 61, 71, 116, 180, 181, 208, 212, 217, 218, 223,, 228, 232
          underground, 189, 223
     detonations, U.S.S.R., 127, 148, 163, 201, 222, 223, 228, 232, 251, 275
     future of, 250
     peaceful uses of, 201, 253
     propam, 183, 252
     reactors, 143, 145, 182, 191, 241, 253, 254, 278
     rocket, 81, 143, 182, 195, 196, 211, 248, 254, 264, 277
          tests, 250, 265
     test ban, international, 232
Nuclear age, 54, 94
Nuclear Rocket Development Station (NRDS),17, 102, 211
     tests, 134
Null, George, 278
Nutley, New Jersey, 175, 267, 269, 271
Nuttle, E., 21
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (AEC), 232
Oao (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory), 6, 11, 143, 223
Oberth, Prof. Hermann, 154
O’Brian, Dr. Brian, 166, 169
Octave Chanute Award, 107
Odishaw, Dr. Hugh, 2
Office of Naval Research (ONR), 115, 256
                                  20,
     contracts, 134
     research, 97, 142
     support, 86, 237
Office of Naval Weapons (ONW), 63
Office of Science and Technology (White House), 43, 80, 97
Ogden, Howard F., 208
Ohio Congressional District 23, 57
Ohio State University, 97
Ogonyok, 25
Okanagan Helicopters, Ltd.. 142
O’Keefe, Dr. John A., 48, 129
Okinawa, 4
Old Salty, 27
Oliphant, Sir Mark, 67
Oliver, Dr. Clarence P., 140
Olson, Franz, 265
Olympic Games, 91
O’Neil, M. G., 192
Oparin, A., 274
Operations Research Society, 73
Opik, Dr. E. J., 243
Optique et Precision de Levallois, 137
Oradell, N.J., 214
Orbiting Astronomical Observatory. See Oao.
Orbiting Solar Observatory. See Oso.
Order of Lenin, 278
Oregon Department of Planning and Development, 74
Orgueil, Franc,:, 70
Orly Field, Paris, 94
Orman, Col. Leonard M. (USA), 114
Orpheus (engine), 121
OSCAR I, 1, 15, 93
OSCAR 11, 19, 106, 289
Oscar, Project, 1, 15
                                                                   347
                                  INDEX

Os0 (Orbiting Solar Observatory) (program), 19,23,155
os0 I (Orbiting Solar Observatory), 114
    flight, 30-31,46,77, 8 ,108
                            4
    launch vehicle, 118
    results, 104
O’Sullivan, William J., Jr., 68,108,208
Outstanding Leadership Award. (NASA), 125,221
Oxygen difluoride, 180
Oxygen, molecular, 66
Ozone, 39,248
P-21 (probe), 303
P-21A. 287.303
P2V-1;4 ’
P-51 (Mustang), 132
P-59A, 207
“-1127, 67,171
Pacific Launch Operations Office (NASA), 31,83,127-28
Pacific Missile Range (PMR), 24,52,63,70,83,84,88, 130,203,241,248,275
Pacific Ocean, 28,47,50,61,208
Pacific Science Cent-r Foundation, 214
Packard Motor Car Co., 58
Pakistan, 96,98
     Upper Atmosphere and Space Research Committee, 96
Palestine, Texas, 205,267
Palewski, Gaston, 90
Palo Alto Airport, 2
Palo Alto, Calif., 221
Palomar Observatory, 147,163
Pan American Management Club, 182
Pan American World Airways, 87
Paperclip, Project, 262
Parachute, 100,116
Paraglider, 11, 91,100, 180,221
Pararescue, 86
Paresev (paraglider research vehicle), 186
Parin, Vassily V., 69
Paris, France, 79,93,243
     communications, 129,162,177
     conference, 33,100
Pan‘s- Presse, 282
Parker, Patrick L ,. 264
Parkes, New South Wales, 190
Parks, Robert J., 239
Parliament (U.K.), 133
Particle, 238
Particle flux detector, 164
Pasadena California, 64,236
Pastore, den. John O., 102,1 4
                             0
Patent, 7,15,40,96
     law, 142,147,155
     regulations, 56,73,76,222-23,265
Patrick AFB, Florida, 99
Patton, Prof. Bruce, 171-72
Patuxent, Md., 163
Paull, Stephen, 208
Payne, Ca t. William R. (USAF), 194
Payne, L / 8 William R. (USAF), 147,218
PCM. See Pulse code modulation.
Peake, Harold J., 208
Pearl Harbor, 20
Pearson, Drew, 21,78
Peary, Adm. Robert A., 50
Pegasus (jet engine), 171
Pennsylvania, University of, 71,279
Peninsula Distinguished Service Awards, 90
Pensacola, Florida, 1 1
                      9
Pentagon, 32
348                                  INDEX

Perkin-Elmer Corp., 76
Pershing (missile), 6, 18, 34, 47, 73, 94, 101, 266
PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique), 109
Peru, 260
Petersen, Cdr. Forrest 8. (USN), 3, 10, 75, 114, 125, 205
Petrie, Dr. Robert M., 281
Petrovich, Prof. G. V., 154
Pettengill. G. H., 106
PetterGen, Dr. Sverre, 9, 130
Peyrefitte, Alain, 90
Pezdirte, George F., 208
          See Preliminary flight rating test.
PFRT.
Phantom 11. See F4H.
Philadelphia, Penn., 63, 246, 276-77, 280, 281
Philco Corp., 4, 97
Philippines, 281
Phillips, Franklyn W., 131
Photosynthesis, 78
“Photographic Study of the Brighter Planets, A,” 144
Photometer, 223
Photons, 203
Photosphere, 60
Physical Review Letters, 228
Picatinny Arsenal, New Jersey, 84
Piccard. Don. 163
Piccard; Prof: Auguste, 40
Piccioni, Attilio, 173
Pic-du-Midi Observatory, 222
Pickering, Dr. William H., 12, 75, 231, 268
Pierce, Dr. John R., 61
Pilots,’ 220
PIONEER I, 300
PIONEER 11, 300
PIONEER 1 1 300
            1,
PIONEER IV, 300
PIONEER v, 33, 242, 250, 301
Pisgah National Forest, 6
Pittendrigh, Dr. Colin S., 78
Planet, 2, 20, 29, 35, 39, 50, 55, 60
Plasma, 66, 112, 151, 164, 264, 268
Plasma sheath, 117
Plastic, 51
Plastinauts, 188, 212
Platform, motion simulator, 226
Plattsburg AFB, N.Y., 273
Pleumeur-Bodou, France, 117, 119, 158, 175, 179, 269
Plimpton, Francis T. P., 37, 44, 180, 181-2, 188-9
         See Pacific Launch Operations Office.
PLOO.
Plutonium, 111
Pluto, Project, 186-7
        See Pacific Missile Range.
PMR.
Pogo (Folar Orbiting Geophysical Observatory), 44, 91, 225
Point Arguello, Calif.
     Atlas-Agena B launching, 31, 50, 102, 126, 238, 271
     Blue-Scout launching, 85, 91, 161, 271, 272
     Blue-Scout, Jr., launching, 129
     Terrier-ilsp I V launching, 35
Point Mugu, Calif., 24, 31, 32, 53, 73, 76, 83, 84, 227, 273
Polaris, 109
     launches, operational, 71, 93, 120, 146
     launches, R & D, 44, 73, 93, 110, 143, 156, 165, 177, 211, 233, 246, 263, 273
     use of, 137, 266, 273
Polar Orbiting Geophysical Observatory. See Pogo.
Polikarpov, Nikolai, 108
Poll, 57, 85, 91
Pollux, ‘ 1
Polycarbutene, 130
                                                                         349
                                   INDEX

Pope AFB, North Carolina, 99
Popovich, L/C Pave1 R.
    activities, 156, 159, 281
    awards, 157
     condition, 152, 159, 177-8
    flight, 148, 149, 151, 153
    landing, 165
    re-entry, 167
    remarks, 162
Porter, Dr. Richard W., 67
Powers, Francis Gary, 172-3
Powers, L/C John A. (USAF), 10, 82, 115
Prague, Czechoslovakia, 227
“Prairie network”, 276
Prather, LCdr. Victor A. (USN), 147, 218
Prather, Wesley E., 200
Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Co., 45, 145
Pravda, 53, 78, 103, 108, 132, 150, 159, 167, 177, 219, 252
Preliminary flight rating test (PFRT), 113, 201
President’s Aerospace Board, 194
President’s Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service, 127, 142
President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, 101-02, 161-2, 164, 254
President’s Scientific Adviser, 45
President’s Science Advisory Committee, 58, 122, 281
Price, Marcus, 190
Priester, Dr. Wolfgang, 122
Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, 121-2, 138
Princeton Laboratories (RCA), 96
Princeton University, 38, 78, 267
Probe, interplanetary, 115
Probe, space, 23, 33, 34, 46, 129
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 204
Proctor and Gamble, 108
Program Evaluat.ion and Review Technique (PERT). See PERT.
Project 60, 91
Project stabilization agreement, 254
Prokhorov, A., 152
Prokofief, Vladimir K., 248
Promise, 24
Pronulsion Award CARS). 246
Proton,-7, 25, 28, 46, lii, 238
“Providing U.S. Scientists with Soviet Science Information”, 132
Proxmire, Sen. William, 119
Public Affairs Press, 249
Puerto Rico, 203, 206
Puffin, 68
Pulkovo Observatory (U.S.S.R.), 270
Pulse code modulation (PCM), 232
Purcell, Rep. Graham B., 57
Pysin, K. G., 211
Quality assurance, 20, 58
Quality Publications (NASA), 58
Quantum theory, 65
Quiet Sun Year. See International Year of the Quiet Sun.
 Quimby, Dr. Freeman H., 280
 Quist, T. M., 117
Raborn, V/Adm. William F. (USN), 246, 284-5
Radar
     developments, 55, 122, 155, 251
     moon, signals off, 106, 117-8
     Venus, signals off, 225
Radcliffe, Capt. Chester R. (USAF), 115
Radiation belts, 7, 47
     cause of, 162, 238
     events, 72, 166
     measurement, 36, 48
     shape of, 7, 22, 28, 41, 111
350                                  INDEX

Radiation, Inc., 232
Radiation, nuclear, 47, 49, 55, 179, 184, 192, 248, 266
Radiation pressure, 149
Radiation satellite, 184, 198
Radiation, space, 40
     artificial, 67, 68, 73, 90, 124, 148, 158, 166, 169, 177-8, 180, 181, 184, 198,
        211, 219, 223, 241, 281
     cosmic, 40, 60, 62, 67, 121, 188, 225, 253
     effect, 7, 50, 258, 281
     experiment, 145, 212
     facilities, 237
     manned space flight, 50, 124, 158, 177, 180, 188, 190, 191, 210, 219, 232
     measurement, 2, 60, 143, 157, 187, 208, 213
     satellites, effect on, 164, 165, 169, 177-8
     study of, 150
Radiation, thermal, 217
Radioactive waste disposal, 47, 49
Radio astronomy
     endangered, 169, 177-8, 204
     discoveries, 190, 237
     mapping, 142, 197
Radio Attenuation Measurement. See Ram-B.
Radio Corporation of America (RCA), 37, 42, 145, 220-1
     contract, 12, 112, 256
     R h D , 122, 216, 220-1, 277
     Relay satellite, 175, 267
Radio Free Europe, 174
Radio Liberty, 174
Radiometer, 164, 268
Radiotelescope, 2, 9
     construction, 97, 126, 221, 237, 251
     experiments, 195
     results, 2, 223, 255
     satellite-borne, 269-70
Radio transmission, 48
Radio wave, 65-6
        See Royal Air Force (U.K.).
RAF.
“Rainbow” bomb, 67
Rainfall, 177
RAND Corp., 8, 158
RAF Upper Heyford (U.K.), 157
Ram-B (radio attenuation measurement), 197
Ramo, Dr. Simon, 3
Range and range-rate tracking system, 8
Ranger (program), 12, 214-15
     camera, 283
     facilities, 204
     manned lunar flight, 123-4
     review of, 19, 50, 218, 260
     test, 272
RANQER I, 303
RANGER 11, 303
RANGER 111, 7, 10, 12, 214, 283, 286, 303
RANGER IV, 59, 61, 75, 157, 283, 288, 304
RANGER V, 283, 294, 304
     flight, 219, 304
     launch, 218, 260, 294
     plans for, 214-5, 217
Ranger VI 272
Rangoon, burma, 115
Rasquin, John R., 76, 103
Rat, 23
Rauh, Jose h L., Jr., 143
           6,.     Arthur E., 30
Raymond,
Raytheon Co., 72, 258
RCA. See Radio Corporation of America.
RD-9, 121
                                                                  351
                                    INDEX

Reactor. See Nuclear.
Reactor-in-Flight-Test (Rift). See Rift.
Ream, Harold E., 179
“Red Space Failures”, 34
Red Star (Krasnaya Zvezda), 198
Redstone, 18, 95, 132
Re-entry, 8, 167, 246
    communications, 256
    heating, 17, 34, 43, 51, 1 8 222
                              5,
    test, 7 27
           ,
    vehicle, 256
Rees. Dr. Eberhard. 149
Regina Observatory (Canada), 150
Regulus 11, 76
Rehbar I, 96
Rehbar 11, 98
Reichelderfer, Dr. F. W., 33
Reid. Henrv J. E.. Jr.. 24. 52
                  ,    ,  ,
Reindeer, 1 %
Relativity, theory of, 65
Relay (program), 11, 95, 175
           95, 296, 305
RELAY I,
     launch, 267, 296, 305
     performance, 270, 271, 278-9
Reliability, 3 104, 124, 218, 258
               ,
Reliability, space, 3
     communications, 194
     electronics, 190
     sterilization, effect of, 276
Religion and space, 48, 162, 195
Rendezvous, earth-orbit (EOR)
     Gemini, Project, 1 265
                         ,
     study of, 65, 80, 119-20, 136
Rendezvous, lunar-orbit (LOR)
     decision for, 119, 122, 123, 217
     development, 3, 130
     explanations of, 31, 65, 119, 123
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 198
Republic Aviation Corp., 43, 155, 211, 222, 256
Research and development, 127, 223
     investment in, 57, 240, 273
     non-profit, 57, 65- .
Research and Technology Division (AFSC), 47, 131
Research Award (A&, 246
Research, basic, 252
Research, biological, 64
Research Flight Facility (USWB), 16
Research Institute for Advanced Studv (The Martin Co.). 134
                                       -.             ..
Research, medical, 64
Research Triangle Committee of North Carolina, 107
Retraining, 115
Retrorocket, 21, 95
Reuter, Paul Julius, 218
Reuters, 56, 126
Reynolds, Dr. Orr E., 20
Rhodes, Rep. John J., 85
Rhvl. Wales. 204 -
                ~-
              I

RiG&off,-Abraham A., 114
Rice University, 12, 212
Richmond, Virginia, 218
Richter, C. G ,119
               .
Riehlman, Rep. R. Walter, 57
Rift, Project, 10,27, 31, 81, 134, 143, 231, 248, 266
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 97, 114, 175
Ritchie, Vir ‘1 S., 208
Ritland, M E 0 J. (USAF), 62, 146
                  .




                                                              1
                      1
     352                                    INDEX

     RL-10, 95, 253
          tests. 15. 134. 179. 190. 201. 210
                               I   ,


          variable’thrust, 145
     Robert H. Goddard Memorial Award, 246
     Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, 36
     Roberts, Rep. Ray, 57
     Robinson, Gilbert G., 25
     Robinson, L/C Robert G. (USMC), 116, 161, 202
     Rochester, University of, 50
     Rockefeller, Govcrnor Nelson,, 216
     Rockefeller Public Service Awards, 223, 263
     Rocket, electrothermal, 7
     Rocket, nonchernical, 44
     Rocket Power, Inc., 252
     Rocket, use of, 244, 250
     Rocket, weather research, 96, 244
     Rogallo, Vernon L., 208
     Rogallo wing, 11, 91, 116, 132, 141, 171
     Rogers, Maj. Russell L. (USAF), 195
     Rogers, Dr. Terence A., 48
     Rogers Dry Lake, California, 11
     Rohr Aircraft Corp., 6
     Roman, Capt. James A. (USAF), 219
     Roman Catholic Church, 195
     Roman, Dr. Nancy, 24
     Romania, 95
     Rome, Italy, 128, 173
     Roosevelt Field, L.I., 94
     Rosman, N.C., 6
     Ross, Cdr. Malcolm D. (USNR), 75, 147, 246
     Ross, Chandler, 155
     Rossi, Dr. Bruno, 9
     Roswell, N. M., 265
     Roudebush, Rep. Richard L., 57
     Rover, Project, 14, 81, 134, 254, 264, 266
     Rowen, L/C Burt (USAF), 4
     Royal Aero Club, 36
     Royal Aeronautical Society, 4, 68, 81
     Royal Air Force (RAF), 44, 59, 157
     Royal Technical University (Denmark), 157
     Roy, Maurice, 73
     RS-70, 24, 38, 80, 113, 227, 243, 251
     Rubel, John H., 3, 16, 29, 172, 213
     Ruff, Dr. George, 279
     Rushville, Indiana, 184
     Rushworth, Maj. Robert (USAF), 72, 84, 143-4, 158, 165, 205, 210, 220
     Rusk, Dean, 87, 137, 140
     Russian Research Center. 5
     Ryan Aircraft Corp., 100, 116, 128, 182, 187, 192, 222
     Ryan, Rep. William F., 56, 68
     Ryle, Martin, 67
     S-62 (helicopter), 87
     S-66 (ionowhere beacon satellite), 225
                                       I.



     Saab Aircrift Co., 92
     Sabana, Dominican Republic, 233
     Sabrejet. See F-86.
            See Strategic Air Command.
     5AC.
     Sacramento, Calif., 96, 156, 199, 210
     Sacramento Peak Observatory, 13, 25, 85
     Saenger, Dr. Eugen, 149
     Sagamore Hill Observatory, 221
     Sagan, Dr. Carl, 8, 83, 157, 204, 243
     Sahara Desert. 44
     St. Johns Uni;.<N.Y.),     212
     St. Lawrence, Gulf of, 14
     St. Louis, Missouri, 28, 43, 65, 67, 113, 174, 201




*.
                                                                                353
                                      INDEX

Saint, Project, 259
St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, 190
Sakhalin Island, 172
Salaries, scientists and engineers, 77, 85
Salina, KaDsas, 188
Salinger, Pierre
     on international communications, 119
Salisbury, Harrison E., 14
Salt Lake City, 115
        See Aerospace Medicine, School of.
BAM.
San Bernardino, Calif., 79
Sandborn, V. A., 119
Sanderson, Kenneth C., 25
Sandhous, Dr. Charles, 4
San Diego, Calif., 60, 100, 105, 204
“Sandwich construction”, 51
San Francisco, California, 71, 80, 87, 138, 175, 233, 255
San Jose, California, 19
San Juan, Puerto Rico, 101
Santa Monica, California, 64, 76
San Salvador, 125
Santa Fe Engineers, 222
Santa Rosa island Aerospace Facility (USAF), 214
Santa Susana, California, 191
Santiago, Chile, 270
Sarabhai, W. A., 95
Sarnoff, David, 42
Satan (satellite automatic tracking antenna), 156
            See U.S. Army Satellite Communications Agency.
SATCOM.
Satellite, communications (see also Advent; Echo; Relay; Syncom; Telstar;
   Corporation, Communications Satellite)
     contracts, 193
     equipment, 227, 251
     facilities, 1, 42
     frequencies, 132
     international, 1, 31, 38, 48, 99, 194, 199, 262
     joint use, 50, 95, 133, 233
     program, 4, 22, 23, 51, 98, 128, 147, 179, 189, 194
     status, 33, 104
     synchronous, 138, 221
Satellite, detector-interceptor, 259
Satellite, geodetic (see also Anna, ANNA IB), 34, 38, 60, 63, 73, 74, 79, 218
Satellite, micrometerite, 280
Satellite, navigational, 84, 213
Satellite Situation Report (QSFC), 108, 209
Satellite, unidentified
     U.S., 20, 32, 50, 56, 63, 64, 79, 90, 93, 103, 104, 108, 109, 126, 131, 136, 161,
         165, 169, 179, 191, 203, 213, 222, 232, 238, 249, 260, 266, 269, 287, 288,
        289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296
     U.S.S.R., 169
Satellite, weather (see also Aeros, Nimbus, Tiros), 14, 31, 33, 38, 84, 85, 99
     joint program, 195, 261-2
     pictures, 116, 258
     program, 76
     results, 46
           storm detection, 101, 172
           weather analysis, 59, 66, 116
Saturn (C-1), 24, 303, 304, 305
     Centaur, 226
     engines, 155, 179, 210
     facilities, 8, 28, 95
     launches. 24. 61. 244
     launch preparations; 194
     production, 20, 32, 140
     stages, 95, 156, 199, 222, 224-5, 237, 244
     testing, 5i, 69,‘86, i34 .
     use of, 69, 112, 280
354                                   isnm
Saturn (C-1B)
     and Apollo program, 118
     Centaur, 226
     spacecraft bus, 144
     stages, 231
     testing, static, 134
Saturn, Advanced ( 0 5 ) , 9
     Apollo program, 118
     contracts, 145
     engines, 212
     funds, 14
     launch complex, 127
     production, 3, 136, 144
     spacecraft, 144
     stages, 76, 248
     testing, 175, 200
Saturn (planet), 147
Savoia, Umberto, 55
Sayers, Prof. James, 115
S band, 35
Schaefer, David H., 119
Schaefer, Dr. Hermann J., 191
Schawlow, Arthur L., 217
Schenectady, New York, 50
Schirra, LCdr. Walter M. (USN), 36, 109
     appearances, 128, 187, 188, 212, 214
     awards. 216
     flight, 155, 177, 180, 190, 197, 199, 201, 202, 203, 208
     post flight, 210, 211, 212, 213
Schmidt. J.. 21
Schnapper, ’MrB., 249
Schnitzer, Emanuel, 208
Schoendiest, Capt. Floyd J. (USAF), 96
Schriever, Gen. Bernard A. (USAF), 103, 141
     management, 73, 105
     materials, 51
     NASA-USAF, 43
     propulsion, 145
     satellites, 136
     space race, 20, 67, 86, 150
Schwinghamer, Robert J., 76, 103
Science, 141
Science, 176, 204, 264, 270
Science Advisor (State Dept.), 114
Science Advisory Committee, 5, 95
“Science and Foreign Relations”, 114
Science and technology foundation (N.Y.), 216
Science and Technology, Office of (White House), 118, 126
Science Service, 129, 208
Scientific Advisory Board (USAF), 64, 131
Scientists, 98, 279
     as astronauts, 240, 277
     shortage of, 5, 52, 88, 129, 208, 253
“Scientists for Survival”, 102
Score, Project, 118
Scorpius, 105
Scottsdale, Arizona, 8
Scott, Walter C., 35
Scout (see also Blue Scout, Blue Scout, Jr.), 7, 17, 27, 43, 91, 158, 166, 173, 270,
  275, 297 301, 302, 303, 304, 305
Screvane, baul R., 131
Seaborg, Dr. Glenn T., 81, 195, 196, 250
Sea Dragon, 137, 155
Sea, launch from, 137
Seale, Leonard M., 112



                                                                                       i
                                                                   355
                                  INDEX

Seamans, Dr. Robert C., Jr., 24, 63, 110, 224
     Agena B, 267
     awards from, 221
     computers, 260
     manned space fight, 153
     Nova, 16, 122
     reliability, 3, 32
     X-15, 125
Sears, Frederick J., 177
Seattle, Waahin ton, 57, 71, 72, 80, 167, 178, 214
Seattle W o r l d ’ s h r , 71, 74, 87
Secrecy, 49
Security, military, 49, 57, 60
Sedov, Dr. Leonid I., 48
See, Elliot M., Jr., 191
Seifert, Dr. Howard S., 246
Seismometer, 50
Seita, Dr. Frederick, 200, 209, 255
“Self-maneuvering unit,” 106
Semenov, Nikolai N., 199
Semipalatinsk, U.S.S.R., 163, 247
Semyonov, Nikolai, 252
Sensor, solar aspect, 52
Sergeant, Augmented, 301
Sergeant (rocket), 218
Serpukhov, U.S.S.R.,251
Seventh Symposium on Ballistic Missile and Space Technology, 168
Severny, Dr. Andrei B., 247, 248
Seville, Spain, 50
Seydoux, Roger, 263
Seymour-Johnston AFB, N.C., 96
Shabad, Theodore, 35
Shannon, Ireland, 59
Shapley, Alan H., 17
Shea, Dr. Joseph F., 123-4, 266
Shepard, Cdr. Alan B., Jr. (USN), 20, 79
     appearances, 23, 24
     award, 101, 161, 202
     back-up pilot, 240,-249
     training, 1
Shklovsky, Dr. Iosif Samuilovich, 250
Shoemaker, Dr. Eugene, 252
Short take-off and landing. See STOL
Shotput, 301
Sidney Smith Mountain, 82
Sierra Mountains, 29
BIQMA 7, 194, 208, 294
Sikora, Paul F., 208
Sikorsky, 142
Silverstein, Abe, 5, 34
Simons, Col. David (USAF), 75
Simons, Howard, 56, 268
Simplicio, Silvio, 29
Simpson, Dr. George L., Jr., 107
Simpson, Dr. John A., 46
Singer, Dr. Fred, 166, 172
Singer, Dr. Stanley, 252
Sioux City, Iowa, 163
Sissakian, M., 230
Sistine Chapel, 128
Site, missile, 56
Skin divers, 5
Skybolt, 107,
     and U.K., 137, 266, 273
     cancellation, 281
     development, 34
     funds, 263
     test, 57, 188, 200, 253, 275
356                                 INDEX

Sky Shield 111, Operation, 133, 170
Sky Top, 90
Slayton, Maj. Donald K. (USAF). 36. 102
     astrona6t coordinator; 119,’ 191‘
Slidell, Louisiana, 134
Sloop, John L., 32
Smith, Capt. Dean B. (USAF), 180
Smith, Capt. Robert W. (USAF), 58
Smith, Frank, 25
Smith, George h.,    241
Smith, Joseph R., Jr., 208
Smith, Sen. Margaret Chase, 37, 46
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, 34, 131, 150, 175, 188, 189, 275
Smithsonian Institution, 55, 57, 63
Smull, Dr. T. L. K., 226, 299
Smullin, Dr. Louis, 74
Snap (system for nuclear auxiliary power), 30, 277-8
Snap-8, 191
Snap-SA, 214
Snap-1OA, 241
Snap5O/Spur, 277
Snapshot, Project, 241
         See Space Nuclear Propulsion Ofice.
SNPO.
Snyder, Dr. Conway W., 278
Sobotovich, Emblem, 232
Social Science Research Council, 58
Society of Photographic Instrumentation Engineers, 141
Sohio Research Center, 148, 149, 151
Sokolovsky, Marshal V. D., 198
Solar energy, 16
Solar heat energy, 68
Solar physics, 84
Solar radiation, 15, 30-1, 36, 60, 62, 67
Solar storms, 35
Solar system, 55, 60, 155
Solid propellant
     development, 32, 112, 275
     firings. 17, 66. 77. 98. 130. 196
     program, i44,’ 145, 159, 256, 268
Sondestrom, Greenland, 96
Sonic boom, 29, 188
Sonnett, Dr. Charles P., 256
Soodnizin, Nikolai V., 40
Sorlie, Maj. Donald M. (USAF), 58
Soul6, Hartley A., 37, 125
Sounding rockets (see also individual rockets)
     sites, international, 174, 182
     use of, 227
South Africa, 27, 199
South Bend, Indiana, 174
Southern California, University of, 7
Southern Governors’ Conference, 208
Southern Rhodesia, 264
Southwest Center for Advanced Studies, 242
Soviet Academy of Sciences, 37, 41, 53, 63, 64, 67, 69, 171, 228, 230, 238, 251,
   269, 278
Soviet Academy of Sciences Proceedings, 22
Soviet Air Force Day, 157
Soviet Astronomical Council, 25
Soviet Corps of Engineers, 181
Soviet Embassy (Washington), 68
Soviet Federation of Aviation Sports, 35
Soviet Hydrometeorological Service, 59
“Soviet Mountains, The”, 220
Soviet Navy, 132
Sowers, Capt. Robert (USAF), 29
                                    INDEX                                    357
Space, 43
Space Act. See National Aeronautics and Space Act.
Space age, 54
Space-age religion, 48, 49
Space biology, 69
Space Construction Office (USA), 25
Spacecraft
    aerodynamics, 230
    escape system, 200
    sterilization of, 157
Spacecraft bus, 144
Space, economic payoff of, 192, 208, 237, 245
Space environment
    dust, 231
    simulated. 134
Space environmental simulator, 16
Space, exploration of, 5, 20, 22, 38, 39, 41, 47, 55, 56, 75, 81, 97, 260
Space-General Corp.. 91. 227
                    -.    .
Space, impact of
    on foreign relations, 120, 157, 177
    on imagination, 115
    on industry, 191, 192, 208, 240
    on public, 26, 179, 201
    on science, 252
Space law, 38
    need for, 78, 87, 104, 116, 138-9, 146
    U.N., 4-5, 180, 185-6, 264
Space medicine. See Life science; Bioscience.
Space, military uses of, 57
    bombs, 87, 94
    building blocks, 213
    capability, 43, 158
    electronic interception, 277
    manned apace flight, 17-8, 99, 101, 141, 156, 157, 185
    moon, 42
    need for, 42, 67-8, 86, 195, 241
    policy, 30, 61, 77, 103, 108, 174, 196-7
    satellite interception and inspection, 2, 75, 117
    status, 100, 106, 153-4
    threat, 3, 193-4
Spacemobile, 100
Space Museum (MSFC), 83
Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (SNPO), 102, 211
Space, peaceful uses of. See International cooperation, space; International space
  programs; Space law; United Nations.
Space pilot, 58
Space power, 209
Space power unit reactor. See Spur.
Space program, national
    DOD-NASA relations, 131
    economics of, 75, 130, 143, 208
    future. 226. 245. 271
    objectives,’3, 5,‘11, 19, 30, 99, 174, 181, 182, 193, 195, 206, 208, 259, 281
    pace of, 10, 13, 143, 149, 196, 282
    progress, 12, 14, 46, 71, 124, 131
Space race
    boosters, 150, 153, 160
    failures, 173. 177
    investment, ‘280
    manned space flight, 149, 153
    military, 154, 198
    oversimplification, 206
    space science, 154
    totalprograms, 2, 14, 74, 171, 179, 181, 244
Space Research Institute (Duke U.), 146
358                                  INDEX

Space results
    ion belts, 115
     magnetic field, interplanetary, 225, 268, 276
     mass, Venus, 278
     particle density, 213, 264, 268, 278
    radiation strength, 28, 47, 213, 216, 225, 278
     radiation sources, 162
    solar flares, 278
    solar wind, 225, 268
Space Science Award (ARS), 246
Space Science Board (NAS) 2, 8, 33, 34, 64
Space Science Fair, 249
Space Science Summer Study, 104
Space station
     program, 49, 184, 233, 244
    research, 64, 137, 138
     study, 203
Spacesuit
     development, 56, 211, 253, 256
     performance., 209. 212
                       ,
Spa$ summary
    for 4 vears. 229
    for 5 ;ears; 209
     for Jan.-Aug. 1962, 213
     for 1962, 67, 282
Space technology, 61
Space Technology Center (General Electric), 200
Space Technology Laboratories (STL), 155, 173
Spain, 21, 100
Sparkman, Sen. John J., 10, 137
Sparobee, 247
Sparrow 111, 76
Spectrograph, 66, 269
Spectrometer, 164, 214, 272
Spectrophotometer, 129
Sperry Gyroscope Co., 211
Spesuti Island (Md.), 238
Spilhaus, Dr. Athelstan F., 61
Spinrad, Hyron, 147
Spirit of St. Louis Medal, 134
Springfield, Minn., 115
Spur (space power unit reactor), 277
SPUTNIK I, iii, 201, 209
SPUTNIK IV 175, 212
SRN 1, 2. gee Hovercraft
SST. See Aircraft, supersonic transport.
Stack, John, 8, 34, 53, 81, 109, 166, 259, 271
Stafford, Capt. Thomas P. (USAF), 191
Staley, Dr. Eugene, 1
Staliu Prize, 278
Stamps, space
     France, 179
     U.S., 18
      U.S.S.R., 152
Stanford Research Institute, 1, 2
Stanford University, 162, 198, 221, 278
Star, 9, 29, 39, 64-5, 115
Starbird, M/G A.D. (USA), 60
Stargazer, Project, 29, 34, 90, 269
State Board of Education, Minnesota, 49
State, Department of, 50, 51, 57, 97, 114
State of the Union message, 3-4
Statue of Liberty, 128
Stearman, 186
Stecher, Theodore P., 72
Stelle, Charles C., 78, 79
Sterilization, 276
                                                                  359
                                   INDEX
 Sternberg Astronomical Institute (U.S.S.R.), 250
 Stevenson, Adlai E., 20, 155, 262
 Stevenson, Capt. William M. (us&, 96
 Stevenson, Earl P., 145
 Stevens, Robertson, 70
 Steward, Rodney D., 253
 Stinnett, Glenn W., 48, 179
        See Space Technology Laboratories.
 STL.
 Stockholm, Sweden, 92, 122, 133, 276
 Stockholm, Univ. of, 219
 STOL (short take-off and landing), 67, 109
 Stoller, Morton J., 27, 30
 Stolte, Ino., 222
 Stoolman, Dr. Leo., 243
 Storm, 203
 Strassberg, Bernard, 200
 Strategic Air Command (SAC), 24, 108, 188, 264
 Stratoscope 11, 115, 205
 Strauss, Lewis L., 208
“Strengthening the Behavioral Science”, 58
 Stromlo. Mount. 82
 Strong, Dr. Joh&l38
 Stroud. William G.. 37
 Stuart ’Ballantine Medal, 217
“Studies of the Lunar Surface’, 149
                                  ,
 Studitsky, Dr. A. N., 64
 Stuhlinger, Dr. Ernst, 44, 263
 Stuttgart Institute of Physics, 1.49
 Submarines
      Polaris, 120, 137
      Polaris-type, 132
Sugar Grove, W. Va., 126
Suitland, Md., 126
Suits, pressure, 134
Sukarno, President Achmed, 1
Sun, 9, 12, 20
      eclipse, 13
      flux, 143
      observation of, 22, 30, 114
Sun cycle, 30, 35
Sunday Observer (London), 71
Sunnyvale, Calif., 12
Sun spots, 60, 68
Super Caravelle, 65
Superconductor, 173
Super Constellation, 121
Supreme Court (New Jersey), 84
Supreme Soviet (U.S.S.R.), 18, 57
Surveyor (program), 19, 30, 32, 108, 123, 243
Svenska AB Gasaccummultator (Aga), 92
Svenska Flygmotor AB, 92
Sverdrup and Parcel, 28, 201
Sveriges Mekanforbund, 92
Sweden, 21, 100, 128, 141, 147, 162, 219, 263
Swedish Committee for Space Research, 84, 122
Swedish Society of Engineers, 81
Swenson, Prof. George W., Jr., 237
Swiss National Trade Fair, 179
Switzerland, 21, 40, 100
Sycamore Canyon, Calif., 202
Sydney, Australia, 190
Sylvanus Albert Reed Award, 8, 81
Sylvester, Arthur, 198
Symposium on Advanced Propulsion Concepts Third, 208
Symposium on Protection against Radiation dasards in Space, 232
Synchrotron, 251
Syncom, 104, 194, 237
360                                   INDEX

Syncom, Advanced, 104, 138
System Development Corp., 51
System for nuclear auxiliary power. See Snap.
T-38 (Talon), 17, 28, 147
Tacan, 99
Tactical Air Command (TAC), 11
Tactical Fighter, Experimentat. See TFX.
Talladega, Alabama, 184
Talley, Cdr. George (USN), 6
Talon. See T-38.
Tanjug, 166
Tapco Division (Thompson-Ram0 Wooldridge), 45
Tass, 7, 13, 15, 37, 49, 60, 64, 66, 127, 154, 215, 217, 231, 233, 236, 239, 260
       See Thrust-Augmented Thor.
TAT.
Tave (Thor-Agena Vibration Experiment), 239
Taylor, William B., 216
Tegea (lens), 116, 190, 257
Teague, Rep. Olin, 57
Tektites, 129
Telefon A 3 LM Ericcson. 92
Telemetry, 192
Tclescope, 66, 82, 231
     balloon-borne, 29, 34, 74, 115, 267, 269
Telespaaio (Italy), 95
Television
     balloon, 175
     closed-circuit, 117
     spacecraft, 60, 148, 152, 249, 269
     transatlantic
          by TELSTAR I, 50, 117, 119, 122, 128, 129, 133, 209
Television Academy, 68
Teller, Dr. Edward, 42, 207, 242, 253, 259
Telstar (program), 11, 240
             -     ..  .
TELSTAR--I
    experiments, 117, 150, 156, 162, 165, 211
    imnact. 121. 133. 201
    international use of, 95, 107, 117, 118, 119, 128, 150, 158, 162, 174, 177, 179,
       195, 209, 214, 218, 222
    launch, 116, 117
    launch vehicle, 118
     NASA-ATLT agreement on, 117
    orbital data, 117
    ownership of, 117, 119
    performance, 117, 119, 126, 128, 131, 133, 156, 165, 202, 230, 251
    radiation, 165, 211
    statements on, 128, 129, 130, 194
Temperature, 2, 62, 235
Tenth Conference on Science and World Affairs, 172
Tepper, Dr. Morris, 166
Terrier-Asp IV, 35
Test Support Office (NASA), 31
Tetrahedral Research Satellite. See TRS.
Texas A L M College, 25, 234
Texas Associated Press Broadcasters Association, 115
Texas Technological College, 48
Texas, University of, 2, 55, 140
Textron Electronics, Ine., 226
TFX (Tactical Fighter, Experimental), 11, 249, 259
Thailand, 115
Thant, U, 27
Thatcher, John W., 175
Thermosphere, 122
Thermosphere Probe, 247
Thiokol Chemical Corporation, 84, 110, 180
Third International Symposium on X-Ray Optics and X-Ray Microanalysis, 162
Thomas, Shirley, 20
Thompson, Floyd L., 237
Thompson, Milton O., 186, 195
                                                                               361
                                      INDEX

Thompson Ram0 Wooldridge, 45
Thor, 71, 132, 137
     booster, 5, 47, 260, 267
     launches, space, 125, 303
     nuclear test, 94, 106, 116, 130, 216, 223, 228
Thor-Able, 118, 300, 301
Thor-Able-Star, 8, 74, 225, 260, 295
Thor-Agena B, 24, 44, 239
     launch
          NASA. 202. 293. 304
          USAF; 20, 56, 64, 79, 90,93, 104, 108, 126, 131, 136, 169,191,203,213,222,
            232, 239, 249, 260, 269, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 293, 295, 296
Thor-Agena D, 104, 109, 165, 289, 290, 291. 292
Thor-Agena Vibration Experiment. See Tave.
Thor-Delta, 23, 51, 91
     launches
          ARIEL I, 62, 304
          Echo, 301
          ECHO I, 301
          EXPLORER v, 302
          EXPLORER XII, 303
          EXPLORER XIV,207, 294, 304
          EXPLORER XV, 223, 295, 305
          os0 I, 30, 287, 303
          RELAY I, 267, 296, 305
          TELSTAR I, 117, 290, 304
          TIROS 11, 302
          TIROS 111, 303
          TIROS IV, 14, 286, 303
          TIROS v, 105, 290, 305
          TIROS VI, 192, 293, 304
     launch history, 118, 260
Thorneycroft, Peter, 137, 266
Thrust-Augmented Thor (TAT), 237
Tilghman’s Island, Md., 163
Times, The (London), 222
Tirec, Project, 14
Tiros (program), 2 9 , 3 0 , 3 7 , 4 6 , 166, 172, 190, 258
TIROS I, 46, 82, 301
TIROE 11, 46, 66, 118, 302
TIROE 111, 8, 46, 101, 118, 303
TIROS IV, 13, 14, 46, 54, 66, 90, 100, 118, 286, 303
TIROS V
    launch, 105, 290,304
    launch vehicle, 118
    results, 172
    transmission, 116, 190
    use of, 126, 177
TIBOS VI
     flight, 192, 293, 304
    performance, 257
     plans for, 190
“Tissue-equivalent ionization chambers,” 188
Titan (program), 71
Titan I, 21, 32, 70, 98, 262
Titan 11, 1
     Centaur, 226
     launches (R&D), 96, 119, 120, 184, 214, 222, 263, 272
                       36,
    tests, 32, 86
Titan I11
     contracts, 17, 54, 73, 159, 245
    program, 98, 179, 185
    use o f , 159
Tito, President, 84
Titov, Maj. Gherman S., 41, 48, 53, 57, 78, 82, 88
    appearances, 1, 53, 64, 68, 70, 71, 139, 160, 182
     awards, 18,33, 161
      97317---83---24
362                                INDEX

Tokyo, Japan, 88
Tools
     space, 134
Topchiev, Alexander V., 278
Tornabene, Russell, 150
Toronto, Canada, 167
Townes, Dr. Charles H., 40, 217
Townsend, John W., Jr., 221
Townes, M. C., 15
TRAAC, 116, 165, 169, 178
Tracking. space
     exercise, 202
     manned flights, 232
     Minitrack, 156
     radar, 122
     Satan, 156
     sites, 148, 150, 233
Training (see also astronauts)
     communications, 189
     intern program, 122
     international program, 165, 233
     physical, 132
Trakowski, L/C Albert C. (USAF),211
Transducer, 56
Transit (program) 84, 213, 214, 257
TRANSIT IV-A, 236
TRANSIT IV-B, 165, 169, 178
TRANSIT V-A, 271, 273, 297
Tregaron, 275
Trinity Bay, Virginia, 100
Tri-Service Conference on Electromagnetic Compatability, 225
Trotter, Dr. Herbert, Jr., 221
TRS (Tetrahedral Research Satellite), 239, 297
“Truculent Turtle”, 4
Trud, 47, 48, 152
Truman, President Harry S., 94
Trussell, Donald H., 208
TU-114, 118
Turner, Dr. Howard S., 156
Turtle, John, 245
Twinting, Capt. William T. (USAF), 58
Tycho, 106
Typhoon Joan, 116
U-2 (aircraft U.S.), 157, 172, 177, 181, 188, 189
U-2 (aircraft U.S.S.R.), 108
U.A.R. See United Arab Republic.
         See United Auto Workers.
UAW.
UCLA (University of California at Los Angeles), 132
UF-2G (Albatross), 185, 190
Uhalt, Capt. Alfred H. (USAF), 219
U.K. See United Kingdom.
Ultraviolet, 30, 62, 72, 90, 141, 143, 175, 197
U.N. See United Nations.
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization), 84
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. See U.S.S.R.
United Aerospace Workers, 121
United Aircraft Corp., 45, 211
United Arab Republic (U.A.R.), 33, 95, 99, 127, 129, 149
United Auto Workers (UAW),128, 182, 187, 192, 208, 222
United Carbide Corp., 95
United Kingdom (U.K.), 66, 67, 201
     aircraft, 59, 65
     defense, 146, 273
     facilities, space, 11, 117, 133
     nuclear, 264
     space cooperation, 4, 21, 43, 55, 95, 184
     space program, 39, 62, 63, 90, 100, 102
     transatlantic communications, 95, 117, 122, 175
                                                                                363
                                      INDEX

United Nations (U.N.), 1, 27, 49
     Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 26, 37, 44, 51, 69, 95, 99, 187,
       188, 269
          launch site, 179, 182, 187
          space law, 4, 38, 90, 106, 180, 184, 264
          space nuclear tests, 181
          space registry, 29, 35, 41, 42, 213
     General Assembly, 20, 115
     Political Committee, 232, 258, 260, 264
    space, 41, 59, 145, 261, 269
United Republican Fund, 208
United Technology Corp. (UTC), 54, 66, 73, 112, 232, 245,375
University, 88, 198, 272, 275
Upper Mantle Project, 258
Uppsala Univ. (Sweden), 276
Uranus, 83
Urey, Dr. Harold C., 60, 70, 151, 251
“U.S. Aeronautics and Space Activities”, 11
USAF Academy, 108
USAF Nuclear Effects Research Laboratory, 248
U.S. Air Force (USAF)
     awards, 62, 146
    budget, 24, 227
    contracts
          aircraft, 38, 94, 110
          auxiliary power, 151
          boosters, 73, 224
          life science, 142
          radar, 46
          site, launch, 87
          tracking, 82
    facilities
          communications, 189
          research, 135
          rocket firing, 254
          tracking, 35
          training, astronaut, 226
    flight records
          aircraft, 243
                altitude, 194
                distance, 4, 96, 100
                speed, 29
          balloons, 90, 106, 120
     Gemini, Blue, 266
    launches, balloon, 84, 91, 106, 269
    launches, missile
          Atlas, 17, 24, 40, 50, 52, 76, 120, 121, 145, 146, 150, 195, 219, 234, 241,
             267, 272, 275
           Minuteman, 39, 76, 82, 97, 110, 195, 202, 217, 247, 264, 266, 269, 274
          Skybolt, 57, 188, 200, 253, 275
          Titan I, 21, 70, 98, 262
          Titan 11, 36, 86, 96, 119, 120, 184, 214, 222, 263, 272
    launches, apace
          probes, 91, 129, 248, 272
          satellites, 20,32,50,56,63,64,79,90,93,102, 104,108,109,126,131,139,
             161, 165, 169, 191,203, 213,222,232,238,239,249,260, 266,269,271
    NASA-WAF, 30, 43, 71, 127
    pilot, space, 36, 44, 58, 105
    propulsion, 110, 268, 275
    research
          aircraft, 11, 39, 97
          astronomy, 90
          helium layer, 215
          life science, 106, 151
          radiation, space, 25, 28, 162, 188, 211
          rockets 7. 17. 214. 275
                      ,    I


    sites, missile, 56
    X-15,266
364                                    INDEX

U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, 77
U.S. Army (USA),47, 87, 98, 101, 113
      and space, 1, 24, 43, 199, 214
       construction, 25
       helicopter, 54, 58
      launches
            Nike-Hercules, 261
            Nike-Zeus, 14, 30, 32, 44, 47, 53, 73, 77, 88, 126, 253, 267, 271, 273, 275
            Pershing, 6, 18, 47, 73, 94, 101, 266
U.S. Army Satellite Communications Agency (SATCOM), 273
U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, 238
U.S. Congress
      Joint activities, 2, 43, 189
      Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, 186
      Joint Economic Committee. 10
U.S. congress, House of Representatives
      bills introduced, 13, 14, 187
      bills passed, 38, 55, 69, 80, 82, 86, 94, 114, 129, 133, 136, 164
      Committee on Appropriations, 44, 78, 102
      Committee on Commerce, 57
      Committee on Education, 255
      Committee on Government Operations, 133
      Committee on Post Ofice and Civil Service, 85
      Committee on Science and Astronautics. 101. 142. 200. 202. 214. 255    ---
                                                                   ~-~ ,
                                                                     ---I
                                                                 I
                                                    I    I   ~




            bills approved, 75, 129, 142, 155, 194
            hearings, 23, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 42, 43, 79, 124, 130, 133, 140, 144, 145,
               155, 166, 172, 194, 198, 201, 226
            reports, 38, 56, 114
U.S. Congress, Senate, 18, 130, 141, 155, 157, 158, 194
      bills passed, 55, 119, 129, 136, 156, 167, 184, 200
      Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, 147
            bills approved, 42, 72, 102, 129
            hearings, 23, 24, 29, 99, 101
            publications, 171
      Committee on Appropriations, 24, 146, 164
      Committee on Commerce, 51, 63
      Committee on Foreign Relations, 136, 137, 138, 140, 142, 143, 146
      Committee on Government Operations, 188, 226
      Committee on Small Business, 41
      comsat debate, 102, 104, 132, 136, 138, 145, 146, 147, 150, 151
U.S. Geological Survey, 252
          See U.S. Information Agency.
USIA.
U.S. Independent Telephone Association, 221
U.S. Information Agency (USIA),50, 57, 129, 177, 201
USMC gold medal, 238
U.S. Military Space Academy, 168
USN Air Crew Equipment Laboratory, 246
U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, 283
U.S. Naval Observatory, 1
U.S. Naval Ordnance Test Station, Calif., 196, 247
U.S. Navy, 1, 4, 10, 11, 14, 24, 28, 40, 43, 53, 84, 196, 282
      launches
            missiles, 44, 71, 73, 93, 94, 110, 120, 130, 143, 165, 177, 211, 233, 263
            satellites, 8, 271
            sounding rockets, 35
      records
            altitude, 184
            speed, 190
            time t o climb, 28, 44, 47, 53
      space facilities, 126, 231
      weather control, 283
USN Biophysics Branch, 191
U.S. N e w s and World Report, 34
U.S. Post Office. 18
U.S.S. Constellaiion, 74
U.S.S. Enterprise, 6
U.S.S. E t h a n Allen, 71
                                                                                 365
                                      INDEX

U.S.S. Intrepid, 86
U.S.S.John Marshall, 120
U.S.S. Kearsarge, 209, 210, 211
TJ.8.8. Non. 18
      -  .
       ~




U.E.S. Pie&; 8 6
“U.S. Space Legal Policy-Some Basic Principles”, 146
U.S. Savings and Loan League, 235
1J.S.S.R..
- .._. ._
      .-   .
      aircraft, 47, 121, 172, 177, 246
                            --
      air routes, 118, 184
       armament, 2, 33, 123, 127, 132
                                                                    59, 69, 75, 77, 84,
       cooperation in space, 15, 19, 20, 23, 33, 38, 41, 42, 46,
          85, 97, 102, 129, 150, 209, 224, 261
       cosmonauts, 18, 262
       facilities, 64, 80, 150, 158, 171, 182, 195, 199, 2 :51,252
                                                         ‘
       launches
             manned, 146, 148
             unmanned, 36, 48, 60, 62, 89, 111, 131, 157, 201, 217, 228, 275
       launch failures, 15, 21, 34, 48, 163, 169, 172, 173
       nuclear tests, 94, 127, 137, 140, 163, 171, 180, 181, 191, 201, 220, 231, 232,
          247, 275, 276
       patents, 15
       propulsion, 154
       records, flight
             aircraft, 116
             helicopter, 115
             manned space flight, 33, 153
             parachute, 241
       scientists, 14
       space, 47
             interplanetary flight, 210, 230
             medicine. 173
             objective’s, 158, 198, 227
             plans, 56, 67, 275
             radio astronomy, 280
             rocket, 215, 244
             training, 35, 47, 263
       statements on
             disarmament, 79, 122
             discoveries, 13, 22, 66, 69, 112, 214, 248, 249
             information, technical, 111, 243
             manned lunar flight, 7 49, 136, 157
                                      ,
             manned space flight, 51, 53, 88, 147, 148, 149, 156, 219, 226
             Polaris, 7, 275
        U.N., 37, 38, 41, 95
U.S.S.R. Astronomical Institute, 270
U.S.S. Sam Houston, 73
U S S Seadragon, 160
  ...
U.S.S. Skate, 160
U.S.S. Thomas Edison, 93
            See U.S. Weather Bureau.
USWB.
U.S. Weather Bureau (USWB), 147, 177
        awards, 16
        contracts, 82
        spectrometer, 272
        weather satellite use, 8, 14, 33, 54, 59, 101, 126
 Uttar Pradesh State Observatory (India), 150
 Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, 11
 Van Allen belt. See Radiation belts.
 Van Allen, Dr. James A., 83, 104
        awards, 161, 203
        belt, radiation, 41, 124
        radiation
              artificial, 68, 124, 240, 281
        space research, 78
 Vancouver, B.C., 237
                                       INDEX

Vandenberg AFB, Calif., 44, 272
     launches
           missile, 17, 21, 24, 40, 52, 70, 76, 108, 120, 121, 126, 136, 145, 146, 150,
             202, 263, 266, 267, 272, 275
          probe, 91, 129
           satellite, 4, 20, 56, 64, 79, 90, 93, 104, 108, 109, 126, 131, 136, 139, 161,
              165, 169, 191, 202, 222, 232, 249, 260, 266; 269
Vanguard brogram). 118  ,,
VANGUARD i^, 37
VANGUARD 11, 300
VANGUARD 111, 300
Variable fuselage, 8
Variable wing, 8
Varna, Bulgaria, 199
Varvarov, N., 226
Vatican, 128, 214, 276
Vehicle Research Corp., 236
Velocity package, 256
Venus
     astronomy, 66, 138, 195, 248
     communications, 17, 70
     data on, 2, 8, 76, 90, 278
     flight to, 128, 149, 154, 163, 164, 169, 173, 239, 270
     life on, 83
     photos of, 143
     probe, 16, 34
     radar astronomy, 13, 41, 72, 223, 280
     rotation, 280
Vermilion River Observatory, 237
Vernov, Dr. Sergei N., 238
Veronique, 43, 218
Vertical take-off and landing. See VTOL
Very low frequency (VLF),245
Vestnik Akademii Nauk, 64
Vickers Armstrong, Ltd., 204
Victor, W. K., 70
Vidsel, Sweden, 84
Vienna, Austria, 195
Vigilante. See A-5A.
Vincent, Jessie G., 58
Vinson, Rep. Carl, 38
Virginia Capes, 6
Virginia Polytechnic Institute (VPI), 149, 237
Virginia Psychological Association, 218
Virginia State Exchange Clubs, 108
Virginia, Univ. of, 237
Vitkevich, Dr. Viktor V., 251
V.K. (jet engine), 181
        See very low frequency.
VLF.
Voas, Dr. Robert B., 19, 88, 218
Voice of America, 2, 13, 15, 17, 18,23, 33,138, 46, 50, 60, 64, 71, 78,83, 129, 177,216
von Braun, Dr. Wernher, 103, 143, 154, 186, 189, 217
von KBrmLn, Dr. Theodore, 282
von KiirmBn Lecture, 245
VOSTOK 11, 69
VOSTOK I11
 - .~~




    flight, 148, 149, 151, 153, 182, 219, 291
    launch, 146
VOSTOK IV, 148, 149, 151, 153, 182, 219, 291
VTOL (Vertical take-off and landing), 109
    demonstration. 171
    development, 67, 110, 111
    flight-test, 146
    research vehicle, 264
Vu1ca.n (bomber), 44
VZ-10 (Hummingbird), 146
Wadena, Minnesota, 175
Wagner, Mayor Robert, 27, 94
                                                                               367
                                      INDEX

Wagner, Dr. Bernard M., 173
Wahiawa (Oahu), Hawaii, 84
Wake Island, 116
Walker AFB, N.M., 265
Walker, Joseph A., 75, 80, 139, 220
    awards, 98, 125, 205
    flights, 57, 64, 96, 109, 122, 137, 151, 273
Wallasey, U.K., 204
Wallen, Saul, 279
Wallops Station (WS), 39, 60, 62, 64, 70, 112, 214
    awards, 107
    construction, 218
    damage, 29
    facilities, 12, 235
    launches, 70, 268
          Aerobee, 4, 106, 110, 129, 143, 197, 203, 223, 242, 248, 265
          Argo D-4, 68
          Black Brant 1 1 268
                         1.
          Iris, 68
          Journeyman, 197
          Nike-Apache, 95, 101, 161, 216, 234, 254, 257, 262
          Nike-Asp, 55, 95
          Nike-Cajun, 28, 40, 41, 55, 62, 79, 82, 95, 96, 141, 147, 167, 167, 232,
             234, 254, 257, 260, 262, 263
          Ram-B, 197
          Scout, 7, 27, 43, 158, 173, 270
          Sparobee, 247
Walter Boothby Award, 52
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, 184
Walton, Capt. John (USAF),29
Warren AFB, Wyoming, 76
Warsaw, Poland, 97
Warwick. James W., 281
Washington and Jefferson College, 98
Washington, D.C., 198, 253
    ceremonies, 22, 57, 63, 105, 238
    Communications Satellite Corp., 265, 275
    international meetings, 40,41, 44, 57, 59, 63, 67, 79
    meetings, 3, 4, 60, 63, 105, 213, 214, 220, 235, 239, 263
    publications, 132
Washington Evening Star, 274
Washington National Airport, 76
Washington Planetarium and Space Center Corp., 76
Washington Post, 49, 198, 222, 237, 268, 275
Washington Univ., St. Louis, 140
Wasielewski, Eugene W., 273
Watkins, Cdr. George C. (USN), 74
Watson-Watt, Sr Robert, 102
                 i
Wayne, Maj. James C. (USAF),92
Weather
    control of, 115, 211, 283
    mearch, high-altitude, 167, 179
   etudy, 9 , 4 2
Webb, James E., 21, 31, 151, 172, 173, 249, 257
   announcements, 52, 115, 126, 146, 203, 221, 242, 256, 271
   applications, 74
   awards from, 88, 125, 214
   awards to, 130, 167, 214, 240
   budget, 6, 23
   comsat, 5.1
   impact, space, 17, 102, 240
   manned space fight, 99, 153, 234
   MARINER 11, 268
   objectives, space, 206, 207, 230
   organization, 54, 80
   personnel, 85
   science, space, 47
   U.S.S.R.space program, 102, 173
   vehicles, launch, 71, 118
368                                  INDEX

Weber, R. J., 119
Weddell. Dr. James B.. 232
Weidman, Deene J., 208
Weightlessness
      effects of, 19, 21, 88, 150, 212
      experience with, 18, 148, 150, 153, 209
                                          .
                       .   .     .   .
      research, 2
Welsh, Dr. Ewdard C., 5, 54, 61, 195, 211, 254
West Berlin. 131. 157
West Coast,’44 ’
West Coast Rcliability Symposium, 20
Western Electric Corp., 40
Western Omrations Office (woo). 76, 127
                                    ., ,
                               ,
Westford, Mass., 6 0 ,
West Ford, Project, 33, 198, 204, 257
West German Post Office, 95
West Germany, 11, 21, 43, 55, 67, 95, 100, 149, 218, 222
Westinghouse Electric Corp., 3, 39, 112, 145
Westinghouse Research Laboratories, 151
Westrex Corp., 156
West Side Association of Commerce (New York), 240   ,.
Wexlcr, Dr. Harry, 59, 84, 147
. . _. . W. .---, - - -
     -_ _ .
Wheelinv. . Va.. 131
White, &pt. Edward H., I1 (USAF), 191
White,Dr, Paul Dudley, 102, 119
White, Gen. Thomas I). (USAF, Ret.), 117
White, Maj. Robcrt M. (USAF), 4, 64, 75, 109, 139, 144
      awards, 114, 125, 126, 132, 204-05
      flights, 93, 99, 107, 123, 269
White Sands Missile Range (WSMR),        202, 284
      facilities, 191, 216, 255
       launch, balloon, 129, 219
       launch, rocket, 14, 44, 77, 104, 116, 175. 252
       parachute development test, 116
       paraglider, 180
White, William C., 269
Whittier, Calif., 214
Whittier (Calif.) Civic Center, 214
Wichita, Kansas, 107
Wiesner. Dr. Jerome B.. 9. ,95., 97. 118. 126. 130, 133, 253
                             ,         ,I    .    .   I



Wight, Isle of, 134
Wildey, Robert, 231
Wiley, Sen. Alcxander P., 149, 157
Wilhelm, L/C Leland F. (USA), 54
Williamsburg, Va., 49, 118
Williams, B/G Robert R. (USA), 91
Williams, Walter C., 16, 88, 120, 206, 209, 271
Wilson, Capt. Jack (USAF), 28
Wilson, L/G Roscoe C. (USAF, Ret.), 265
Wilson, Rcp. Robert, 168
Wilton, Conn, 75
Wimpenny, John C., 68
Winckler, Dr. John R., 246
Wind, 60
       atmospheric, 40, 55, 106, 116, 232, 257, 263, 279
       ionospheric, 234
Wind, solar
       effects of, 122
        measurement of, 9, 225, 278
        study of, 151
Wind tunnels, 111, 163, 256
Wings, astronaut, 123, 126
Wing, slotted, 59
Wing, variable geometry, 250
Winkfield, U.K., 64
Winter Harbor, Maine, 84
Wirte, W. Willard, 255
                                                                          369
                                      INDEX

Wisconsin, 212
Wisconsin, University of, 33, 223
          175
WKBT-TV,
       See World Meteorological Organization.
WMO.
Wolf, Mrs. Constance, 39
Women’s Advertising Club, 44
Women’s National Press Club, 20
woo. See Western Operations O f c .
                                  fie
Wood, Col. Floyd, 148
Wood, George P., 241, 274
Wood, Maj, James W. (USAF), 195
Woollard, Dr. George P., 33
Woolson, Ferdinand C., 274
Woomera, Australia, 25, 35, 43, 90, 175, 199, 270
Woodwell, George M., 258
Worcester, Massachusetts, 42
World Meteorological Organization (WMO) ,59, 84, 97
World Mother of the Year. 87
World Peace-Congress, llf, 123
World’s Fair, 140
World’s Fair Corp., 140
World War I, 58
World War 11, 59, 60
“World weather watch”, 59
Wright-Bellanca, 94
Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy, 166
Wright Memorial Dinner, 166
Wright, Orville, 158
Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, 51, 142, 226, 246
Wright, Wilbur, 55
WS. See Wallops Station.
x-l,81
X-14A, 264
X-15, 10, 75, 80, 81, 84, 100, 139, 144, 251
    and astronauts, 123, 125
    awards. 107. 116. 125. 126. 132. 204
                      ,     ,   ,    ,
    equipment, 242
    flights
         canceled, 43, 62, 86, 120, 201                  ,
         successful
               No. 1, 3, 57, 64,84, 96, 109, 122, 131
               No. 2. 72, 93. 126. 143. 158. 165, 202.2112,236
               NO. 3; 6,47,58, io7, 1’23, i37, i51,2‘10, 220, 269, 2 73
    Follow-On program, 53, 266
    heat transfer, 126, 143, 158, 165
    program, 19, 43, 197, 239, 254
    reactive control, 107, 210
    records
         altitude, 64, 123
         speed, 107, 109
    re-entry control, 109, 131, 202, 212, 220, 236, 269, 273
    stability augmentation system, 93, 122, 151
x-19, 110
X-20 (Dyna Soar), 257
    booster, 159
    boost-glide, 177
     communications, 256
    equipment, 47
    pilots, 36, 195, 219
    program, 100, 108, 109, 179, 197, 265
X-ray, 30, 50, 62, 67, 104, 162, 258
Yagoda, Herman, 111
Yale University, 9, 45, 58, 86
Yarov-Yarovoy, Mikhail, 270
Yeager, Col. Charles E. (UBAF), 81, 129
Yerkes Observatory, 23
YHU-1D (Iroquois), 54, 58
370                                 INDEX

YJ85, 111
Young Communist League, 35
Young, LCdr. John W. (USN), 28, 47, 191
Young, Rep. John, 57
“Youth Days”, 139
Yugoslavia, 166, 182
Zanzibar, 12
Zellmer, Maj. Robert W. (USAF), 50
“Zena”, 97
Zimmdrman, Charles H., 109
Zorin, Valerian A., 23
Zuckert, Eugene M.
    announcement, 245
    military space program, 24, 217
    national space program, 30, 77, 105, 196
    space missions, 141
Zworykin, Dr. Vladimir K., 96

                                      CJ