1957
October 4: SPUTNIK I, tbe first man-uiuiie earth satellite, launched by U.S.S.R. «iul remained in orbit untU January 4, 1158. (For details see Appendix A)
•	The National Rocket Club was organized In Washington, D.G.
October 6: Eighth IAF Congress began at liurcclona, Spain.
October 9: President Elsenhower in a While Rouse press release congratulated tin- Soviet scientists on SPUTNIK I. He rave a brief history of the development of the U.S.-IGY satellite program and printed to the separation of Project Vanguard from work on ballistic missiles.
October 11: Tbor missile launched at Capo Canaveral, the second tested, achieved its designed 1,560-mlle range.
October 14: USAF and NACA reviewed preliminary studies dating from 1954 on a boost-glide research vehicle to follow the X-15; ail studies were combined into ■ single plan which was accepted by the Air Force and later designated as Dyna-Hour.
•	American Rocket Society presented
l» President Elsenhower a program for oulcr space development which proposed establishment of an Astronautlcal Research and Development Agency similar lo NACA aud ASO with responsibility for •II space projects except those directly reiuted to the military defense.
October 16: USAF successfully launched liellcts at a speed faster than 33,000 mph (some 8,000 mph faster than the velocity necessary to escape from the earth) by an Atrobce recket to a height of 35 miles; llic nose section tben ascended to a height of 51 miles where shaped charges blasted I ho pellets into space.
October 18: Lt Oomdrs. Malcolm Ross ‘ (USNR) and L. Lewis (USN) ascended to unofficial two-man altitude record of HI,700 feet in STRATO-LAB HIGH II lail loon.
October 18-20: NACA "Round Three” filming Committee met at Ames Laboratory.
October 22: Army Jupiter (IRBM) missile successfully fired at Cape Canaveral, Fla.
•	Four-stage recket fired from a balloon at 100,000 feet above Eulwetok, In Operation Far Side, penetrated at least 2,700 miles into outer space.
October 23: IGY Vanguard prototype (TV-2) with simulated second and third stage successfully met test objectives, by reaching 109-milealtitude and 4,250 mph.
October 24: Tbor long-range flight test successful from AMR, Impacting 2,645 miles downrange.
October 26: SPUTNIK I ceased transmissions.
October 31: Snark intercontinental missile launched from Cape Canaveral first flew 6,000 miles, to a target near Ascen-slon Island.
During October: Aerospace Medical Center’s SAM continued experimental studies with space-cabin simulator with 20 Strategic Air Command volunteers, each man completing the full-scale run of 7 or 8 days of confinement in the cabin simulator.
November 3: SPUTNIK II, the world’s second manmade satellite, launched by U.S.S.R. and remained in orbit until April 13, 1958, carrying a dog named “Lilka.’’ It was the first vehicle to carry a living organism into orbit. (See Appendix A.)
November 7: President Eisenhower in major address on science and security announced that scientists had solved the problem of balUstlc missile reentry and showed tbe nose cone of an Army Juplter-0 missile wblcb was Intact after a flight through space. Be announced tbe creation of tbe office of Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology and the appointment of James R. Killian, president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, to the new post.
November 8: Secretary of Defense Me-lilroy directed the Department of the Army to launch a scientific satellite with the modified Juplter-C test rocket The satellite, carrying instruments selected by the Nulional Academy of Sciences, would lie a part of this country’s contribution to the IGY. William M. Hola-day. Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Guided Missiles, was given authority for coordinating this ABMA-JPL project with the overall U.S.-IGY satellite program.
November 10: SPUTNIK II ceased transmissions.
November 11: KC-135 tanker flown 6,350 miles from Westover AFB, Mass., to Buenos Aires, In 13 hours 2 minutes, by Gen. Curtis LeMa.v, a world record for nonstop nonrefueled jet flight.
November 13: President Elsenhower, In a speech on future security, proposed adoption of a formula for decisions on undertaking space projects, which would Include the following criteria: “If the project is designed solely for scientific purposes, its size and its cost must be tailored to the scientific job lt Is going to do. If the project lins some ultimate defense value, Us urgency for this purpose Is to be judged In comparison with the probable value of competing defense projects.”
•	1,000-in lie, Navy Regulus II fired
In first launch with rocket boosters at Edwards AFB, and returned to base by control aircraft after a 48-mlnute flight-
November 15: William M. Holaday, special assistant to the Secretary of Defense, was named Director of Guided Missiles by Secretary of Defense Mc-Elroy. Under terms of the Defense department directive: “The Director of Guided Missiles will direct all activities In the DOD relating to research, development, englnecrlng, production, and procurement of guided missiles.’’
November 19: An ANP (Aircraft, Nuclear Powered) project, an Integrated AEC-DOD atomic aircraft project within the AEC, was announced, with Maj. Gen. Donald Kcirn (USAF) us Its head.
November 21: The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics authorized establishment of a special committee on space technology, headed by II. Quyford Stevcr. This committee would both supervise and help formulate a space research program and would be assisted by specialized subcommittees.
November 22: First hydrogen-fluorine recket engine successfully operated at NACA Lewis Laboratory, demonstrating a 40-pcrcent performance Improvement over other propellant combinations.
November 25: USAF awarded contract for a surveillance satellite to Lockheed.
•	The Preparedness Investigating
Subcommittee of tbe Senate Committee on Armed Services began extensive hearings on the Nation’s satellite and missile programs.
November 27: Thor and Jupiter IRBM’s ordered Into production for ultimate deployment by the USAF.
During November: NACA 1057 Flight Propulsion Conference at Cleveland was review of analysis of space missions, nuclear propulsion systems, chemical propulsion systems, electrical propulsion systems, auxiliary power systems, and propellants.
•	First Baker-Nunn precision optical
satellite tracking camera Installed at White Sands, N. Mcx., the first of 12 6uch optical tracking Installations as a part of the IGY under the supervision of tho Smithsonian Astropliyslcal Observatory.
•	Development of satellite launch
vehicle focused upon all solid fuel systems at NACA Langley, a major step in the origin of Scout
December 4: Tbe American Rocket Society's proposal for an Astronautlcal Research and Development Agency, which was presented to President Elsenhower on October 14,	1957, was
announced.
December 6: IGY Vanguard (TV-3), the first with three live stages, failed to launch a test satellite.
December 9: Secretary McElroy ordered acceleration of the Polaris program.
December 13: The Air Force order of December 16 creating a Directorate of Astronautics under Brig. Con. Homer A. Boushey was suspended by Secretary William II. DouglaB, as creation of such a group before establishment of the proposed Advanced Research Projects Agency was considered premature.
December 17: First successful test firing of USAF Atlas ICBM, the missile landing in the target area after a Sight of some 500 miles, on the 54th anniversary of the Wright brothers’ first flight.
December 18: First full-scale production ' of electricity for commercial use by civilian nuclear power station, at Shipping-port, Pa.
December 19: A Thor missile, the eighth tested and the fourth successfully, completed the first fully-guided Thor IRDM flight using an all-lnertla! guidance system.
December 23: USAF awarded B-70 Mach 3 bomber development contract to North American Aviation.
December 28: World altitude record of 30,335 feet for helicopters set by Capt. J. B. Bowman (USA) in a Cessna YH41 Seneca at Wichita, Kana.
During December: Maxlme Faget of NACA Langley proposed ballistic shape of Mercury capsule, while A. Eggcrs of Ames and XI. S. Love and J. V. Becker of Langley proposed gilder configurations of manned spacecraft later incorporated in D.vna-Soar and Apollo studies.
During 1957: NACA Technical Note, “A Comparative Analysis of Long-Range Hyperveleclty Vehicles,” by Ames scientists Eggers, Allen, and Netce prepared and Issued. It was considered a landmark In the development of scientific thought on manned reentry.
•	Experiments at USAF School of
Aviation Medicine showed that soil bne-' terla could not only survive but also
multiply under certain simulated Martian atmospheric conditions.
•	NACA Lewis Laboratory completed major phases of pioneering research on hlgb-cnorgy turbojet and ramjet fuels Including boron. This rcscurch included flight test In piloted alrcruft and air-launched free flight models. Theoretical performance and experimental thrust chamber injector experiments were also performed at NACA Lewis, aiding In design of X-15 recket engine.
•	Single-spool J93 turbojet engine
placed under Intensive development at General Electric. The J79 turbojet, the first hlgh-compression variable-stator engine built In United States by GE, powered most Mach 2 U. S. aircraft. Including the F-104, B-58, F11F-1F, F4H, and A3J, as well as the Regulus II missile.
•	First operation by the NACA
Lewis Laboratory of a 20,000-pound thrust hydrogen-oxygen rocket engine completely self-cooled by the liquid hydrogen, which led to Centaur engine development
•	The NACA proposed and led in
the development of the Polaris reentry body based on the work done at Langley Laboratory, 1952-56.
•	State University of Iowa completed balloon-launcbed rocket (Rockoon) research at high latitudes begun in 1052. James A. Van Allen reported that principal scientific measurements attained Included: first latitude survey of total cosmic-ray intensity at high altitude and high latitude; survey of latitude variation of heavy nuclei In primary cosmic radiation; discovery of X-radlatton associated with aurorae; first arctic measurements of atmospheric density, pressure, and temperature at high altitudes; measurement of ultraviolet and soft X-radlntion during solar flares; first measurements of terrestrial magnetic fields at high altitudes In the auroral zone.
