1958
January 1: Strategic Air Command assigned res|M)nsil>ility for U.S. operational ICBM capability; while the 672ud Strategic Missile Squadron, first to be equipped with USAF Douglas Thor IRBM, was activated.
January 4: SPUTNIK I reentered the atmosphere and disintegrated. -
•	American Rocket Society and the
Recket and Satellite Research Panel issued a summary of their proposals for a National Space Establishment. Preferably independent of the Department of Defense, but in any event not under one of tbe military services, this establishment would be responsible for the "broad cultural, scientific, and commercial objectives’’ of outer space development.
January 9: In his state-of-the-Union message, President Elsenhower reported: "In recognition of the need for single control in some of our most ndvanccd development projects, the Secretary of Defense has already decided to concentrate into one organization all antimissile and sat-eUite technology undertaken within the Department of Defense.”
January 11: James II. Doolittle, Chairman of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, announced that a special committee on space technology was formed on November 21,1957.
January 12: President Elsenhower, in answering the December 10, 1057, letter of Soviet Premier Nikolai A. Bulganin regarding a summit conference aud disarmament, proposed that tbe Soviet Union and the United States “agree that outer space should be used only for peaceful purposes.” This proposal was coinpnred with the 10-10 offer of tbe United States to cease production of nuclear weapons and dedicate atomic energy to peaceful uses, anoffer which was not nccepted by the Soviet Union.
January 13: Secretary of Defense Nell H. McElroy testified before the House Armed Services Committee: “Such long-range programs as the antimissile missile and the military satellite programs are In the research and exploratory development stages. They nre Important and must be
pursued, but they must not distract us from the speedy development of our other missile systems. To handle them, I am establishing within the Department of Defense an Advanced Research Projects Agency, which will be responsible to tbe Secretary of Defense for tbe unified direction and management of the antimissile missile program and for outer space projects.”
•	In his budget message to Congress,
President Elsenhower stated: “Funds are provided for an expanded research and development effort on military satellites and other outer space vehicles and on antlnilssile-mlsslle systems, to be carried out directly under the Secretary of Defense.” The budget for fiscal year 1959 showed that $340 million In new obliga-tlonal authority was being asked for the Advanced Research Projects Agency. No new authorizations were sought for the International Geophysical Year, but estimated obligations for earth satellite exploration of the upper atmosphere under this program were (8,139,834 for fiscal year 1958 aud $21 million for fiscal year 1059.
January 14: NACA Issued a staff study entitled “A National Research Program . for Space Technology.”
•	Senator Lyndon B. Johnson In a
CBS radio address urged the United States "to demonstrate Us Initiative before the United Nations by inviting aU member nations to Join in this adventure iuto outer spuce together.”
January 15: 4751st Air Defense Missile Wing to develop and conduct training program for Bomarc units, and the 864th Strategic Missile Squadron to be equipped with Jupiter IRBM, were both activated.
January 16: The NACA adopted resolution recommending that national space program can be most effectively Implemented by the cooperative effort of tbe Department of Defense, the NACA, tbe National Academy of Sciences, and the National Science Foundation, together with universities, rcscurch institutions, and Industrial companies of tbe Nation, with military development and operation of space vehicles a responslbllty of the
Department of Defense, and research and scientific space opera lions the responsibility of the NACA.
•	Special Subcommittee on Outer
Space Propulsion created by the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy, Senator Clinton P. Anderson as chairman.
•	Secretary of State Duties proposed
the formation of an international commission to insure the use of outer space exclusively for peaceful purposes.
January 17: First launch of Navy Polaris test vehicle at Cape Canaveral.
January 27: Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Director of the NACA, in a speech to the Institute of the Aeronautical Sciences, stressed the Importance of a well-planned and logical space program embracing both civilian and military uses. He stated that the uatloual space program should be under the Joint control of the Department of Defense, the NACA, the National Academy of Sciences, and the National Science Foundation; in addition to research flights, the NACA would ‘‘coordinate and conduct research in space technology In its own laboratories and by contract in support of both military and nompllltary projects.*’
January 28: Thor IRBM successfully fired from Cape Canaveral, flew prescribed course, and impacted in preselected area.
January 29: The DOD announced plans to establish the National Pacific Missile Range (PMR) as part of tbe Naval Air Missile Test Ceuter at Point Mugu, Calif., the range to be designed for long-range guided missile and ICBM testing.
January 31: EXPLORER I, first U.S. earth satellite, launched by modified ABMA-JPL Jupiter-C, with US-IGV scientific experiment of James A. Van Allen, which discovered the radiation belt around the earth. (See Appendix A.)
February 3: Soviet Premier Nikolai A. Bulganin In a letter to President Eisenhower stated that the Soviet Union "is ready to examine also tbe question of tbe Intercontinental rockets if the Western powers are willing to reach agree-
ment to ban atomic and hydrogen weapons, to cud tests thereof, aud to liquidate foreign military bases in other nations’ territories. In that case, an agreement on the use of outer space for peaceful puri>oses only would unquestionably meet no difficulties."
•	Scientists at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology reported that initial data from EXPLORER I showed that cosmic radiation on its orbit did not exceed 12 times the amount on earth.
February 4: President Elsenhower directed James R. Kiiilan, Jr., to head a committee to study and make recommendations on the governmental organization of the Nation’s space and missile program.
February 5: Trial firing of IGY Vanguard (TV-3Bu) satellite failed at Cape Canaveral, Fla., 57 seconds after launch.
February 6: The Senate passed S. Res. 256, creating a Special Committee on Space and Astronautics to frame legislation for a national program of space exploration and development.
February 7: The Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) was established by tbe DOD, and Roy W. Johnson, a vice president of General Electric Co., was appointed by Secretary of Defense McElroy as its Director. ARPA was placed in charge of the Nation's outer space program.
February 10: First successful radar returns from Venus (27,530,000 miles away) detected by MIT's Lincoln Laboratory Millstone Hill. It took 1 year to process confirmation of this event.
•	Airman I/O Donald G. Farrell
spent the week of February 10-16 in a space-cabin simulator at SAM, Randolph AFB, Tex.
February 14: “Basic Objectives of a Continuing Program of Scientific Research in Outer Space," a report by the Technical Panel on the Earth Satellite Program of the National Academy of Sciences IGY Committee, was published. It proposed a program of space research extending beyond the International Geophysical Tear.
February 17: In a loiter to Soviet Premier Nikolai A. Bulganin, President Elsenhower repealed Ills plea for the dedication of outer space to peaceful uses. Denying that tills proposal was intended "to gain strategic advantages for the United States,” he stressed the urgency of dealing with outer space before its use for military purposes had, like nuclear weapons, advanced to the point where complete international control was almost impossible.
February 18: USAF revealed that an airflow specd of 32,400 mph had becn attained for one-tenth of a second in a wind tunnel test at the Arnold Engineering Development Center, Tullahoma, Tenn., on an undisclosed date.
February 21: U.S.S.R. fired a single-stage rocket to 294-mite altitude with 3,340 pounds of experiments for measuring ion composition of the atmosphere, pressure, temperature, micrometeorites, etc., according to the Soviet IGY Committee.
February 26: James n. Doolittle, Chairman of the NACA, testified before Senate Committee on Appropriations that “four years ago, about 10 percent of our activities were associated with space: two years ago, about 20 percent; and in 1959 we will be devoting almost half of our time on missiles, antimissiles, and satellites and other spuce objectives."
February 23: Department of Defense assigned responsibility tor land-based ICBM/IRBM development to the USAF, and directed lt to develop Mlnuteman solid-propellant ICBM capable of being lnuncbed from underground sites.
During February:	NACA Langley’s
PARD conceived and placed in operation the “opposed gun” technique for studying projectile Impacts.
March 5: EXPLORER II launched by Army Juplter-0 failed to orbit due to failure of last stage to ignite, a Joint JPL-ABMA project.
•	H. Res. 496, passed by the House
of Representatives, established a Select Committee on Astronautics and Space Exploration to Investigate tbe problems of outer space and to submit recommendations for the control and development of ftstronautlcal resources.
March 15: U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry statement proposed that ban on use of outer space tor military purposes, os suggested by President Elsenhower, be coupled with the liquidation of foreign military bases in Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa.
•	Contract awarded for inertial
guidance system for the Titan ICBM to American Bosch Arma by the USAF.
March 17: Second U.S.-IGY satelUte, VANGUARD I, launched Into orbit with life expectancy of perhaps a 1,000 years, a highly suecessful scientific satellite which proved that the earth Is slightly pear shaped. Operating on solar-powered batteries, lt was still transmitting after 3 years in orbit. (See Appendix A.)
•	An experiment testing the behavior
of crews under conditions of long confinement was concluded at Wright Air Development Center, as five Air Force officers ended a 5-day simulated space flight.
March 18: Dr. Herbert F. York was appointed as Chief Scientist for DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency.
March 19: Space program for the United States proposed by the U.S.-IGY Satellite Panel.	,
March 21: Two-stage monorail rocket-' propelled sled exceeded 2,700 mph at Holloman AFB.
March 23: Navy demonstrated first dummy test of Polaris missile from “popup” launcher oil San Clemente Island, from submerged launching platform.
March 26: Third U.S.-IGY Satellite, EXPLORER III, a Joint ABMA-JPL project, successfully launched by Army Juno II, yielded valuable data on radiation belt, mlcromoteorite Impacts, and temperature before returning to earth on June 27.
•	President Eisenhower in a brief
statement released the President’s Science Advisory Committee’s report, "Introduction to Outer Space: an Explanatory Statement.” This report set forth tbe basic factors making the advancement of space technology a national necessity and explained to the nontechnl-
cal reader the principles and potentialities of space travel. The many uses of space technology for scientific and military purposes were summarized, and a timetable for carrying out these objectives was Included.
•	Military telephone and telegraph
system using the troposphere to bounce radio signals over long distances, called "White Alice,” was activated.
March 27: President Eisenhower gave his approval to the plans for outer space exploration announced by Secretary of Defense Neil H. McElroy. The Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) was lo undertake several space projects including the launching of certain earth satellites and five space probes as a part of this country’s contribution to the IGV program. The Air Force Ballistic Missile Division was authorized by ARPA to carry out three lunar probes with a Thor-Vanguard system, and lunar probes utilizing the Jupiter-C rocket were assigned to the Army Ballistic Missile Agency.
April 2: In a message to Congress, President Elsenhower proposed the establishment of a National Aeronautics and Space Agency into which the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics would be absorbed.. This agency was to have responsibility for civilian space science and aeronautical research. It would conduct research in these fields in its own facilities or by contract and would also perform military research required by the military departments. Interim projects pertaining to the civilian program which were under the direction of the Advanced Research Projects Agency would be transferred to the civilian space agency. A National Aeronautics and Space Board, appointed by the President and composed of eminent persons outside the Government and representatives of interested Government agencies (with nt least one member from tbe Department of Defense), was to assist the President and tbe Director of tbe National Aeronautics and Space Agency.
•	Original budget request of $340
million in new obligatlonal authority for the Advanced Research Projects Agency for fiscal year 1959 was raised to $520 million for advanced research projects in a letter from tbe Director of the Bureau
of the Budget, Maurice II. Staus, which was transmitted to Congress by President Eisenhower.
April 3: In a message to Congress on tbe organization of the Nation’s Defense Establishment, President Eisenhower recommended creation of the position of Director of Defense Research and Engineering, which would have a higher rank and replace the present Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering.
April 5: USAF Atlas ICBM was successfully flown from Cape Canaveral, Fla., to the impact area some GOO miles away.
April 8: USAF KC-135 Stratotauker ended a nonstop, nonrefueled record distance jet flight of 10,228 miles, from Tokyo to Lajes Field, Azores.
April 13: SPUTNIK II reentered earth’s atmosphere.
April 14: Proposal for a National Aeronautics and Space Agency drafted by the Bureau of the Budget was submitted to the Congress by the President, and was contained In the following congressional bills:
S. 3000, Senator Lyndon B. Johnson and Senator Styles Bridges H.R.	11881,	Representative	John	W.
McCormack
H.R.	11882,	Representative	Leslie	O.
Arcnds
H.R.	11887,	Representative	Harry	G.
Haskell, Jr.
H.R. 11888, Representative Kenneth Keating
H.R. 11946, Representative William EL Natcher
H.R. 11961, Representative Peter Fre* llnghuysen, Jr.
H.R.	11964,	Representative	James	G.
Fulton
H.R. 11996, Representative Gordon L. McDonough
April 15: Select Committee on Astronautics and Space Exploration of the House of Representatives opened hearings on outer space leading toward formulation of a national space program.
April 16: Grumman F11F-1F Super Tiger flown to world altitude record of 76,828 feet for ground-launched planes, piloted by Cdr. George O. Watkins, at Edwards AFB.
April 17: Simulated 7-day trip to the moon made by six Navy men in chamber at Philadelphia Naval Ruse.
•	British Skylark reached an altitude of 90 miles at Woomera, Australia.
April 23: USAF Thor-Able missile was launched from Cnpe Canaveral in a reentry test; flew short of Its goal and the nose cone was not recovered. The nose coue carried a mouse as a biomedical experiment
April 24: Navy rocket sled attained speed of 2,827.5 mph at China Lake, Calif.
April 25: First successful launching and erection in space of a 12-foot inflatable sphere for air density measurements, using a Nlkc-Cajun booster system, by NACA Langley’s PARD at WaUops Island, Va.
April 27: Pravda reported on Soviet satellite findings that Laika's heartbeat had taken three times as long as expected to return to normal. Weightlessness affecting the nerve centers was suggested as the cause. The Soviet report disclosed that the density and temperature of the atmosphere at a given altitude were not uniform, and that cosmic ray luteuslty was 40 percent greater at 400 miles than at 135 miles.
April 28: Vanguard (TV-5) failed to orbit due to malfunction of minor components in the firing circuit of third stage.
May 1: Scientific findings from the two Explorer satellites disclosed an unexpected band of higb-lntcuslty radiation extending from 000 miles above earth to possibly an 8,000-mlle altitude. The radiation wus described by Dr. James A. Van Allen as “1,000 times as intense as could be attributed to cosmic rays.”
•	Responsibility for tbe Project Vanguard portion of the U.S.-IGY scientific satellite program was transferred from Navy to Advanced Research Project Agency monitorshlp by the Department of Defense.
May 6-7: Lt Comdr. M. Ross (USNR) and A. Mlkesell (Naval Observatory) used open gondola STRATO-LAB balloon ' to reach 40,000-feet altitude from Crosby,
Minn.; Mikcsoll becoming tbe first astronomer to observe stratosphere, and It was first flight In which crew remained In stratosplicro In open basket after sunset.
May 7: Flying a Lockheed F-101A Stur-flgbtcr at Edwards AFB, Calif., Maj. Howard C. Johnson (USAF) Bet a 91,249-foot world altitude record for ground-launched planes.
May 11: Lt Comdr. Jack Nelinan completed 44-hour simulated high altitude flight at between 80,000 and 100,000 feet in pressure chamber at NAS Norfolk.
May 14-17: Symposium on "Possible Uses of Earth Satellites for Life Sciences Experiments” held In Washington, D.C., under sponsorship of National Academy of Sciences, National Sclcuce Foundation, and American Institute of Biological Science.
May 15: SPUTNIK III placed Into orbit by the U.S.S.R. with a total payload weight of about 7,000 pounds, and called a "flying laboratory.” (See Appendix A.)
May 16: In level flight over a 10-mlle course at Edwards AFB, Calif., Capt. Walter W. Irwin (USAF), flying a F-104A Starfighter, set a world speed record of 1,404.19 mph.
May 18: First U.S. full-size tactical nose cone was recovered from the Atiautlc Ocean 4,/> hours after launching from Cape Canaveral on a Jupiter missile.
May 20: NACA-USAF Memorandum of Understanding signed, “Principles for Participation of NACA In Development and Tcstlug of the Air Force System 4(ML Hypersonic Boost Glide Vehicle (Dyna-SonrU.”
May 24: Gravity load of 83 g’s for a fraction of a second withstood by Capt. E. L. Breeding In deceleration of a rocket sled at Holloman AFB.
May 27: First USAF Republic F-105 Thunderchlef fighter-bomber delivered to the USAF.
•	First launching of production Vanguard satellite vehicle (SLV-1) generally successful with exception of second-stage burnout which prevented achievement of satisfactory orbit
no
During May: Four-stnge rocket launched a 9-pound inflatable sphere to 50-mlle altitude at NACA Wallops Island.
•	Dr. Abe Sllverstcln, Associate Director of Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory, was transferred to NACA head-ilimrters to help plan the organization mid programs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, subsequently becoming Director of the Office of Space Flight Programs.
June 3: USAF and NACA jointly announce details on the Inertial guidance system to be used on the X-15 research ulrcraft, a flight Instrument system to ullmv the pilot to prevent the aircraft from reentering dense atmosphere too steeply or too shaUow.
June 4: USAF Thor flight tested for the first time from a tactlcal-tyi« launcher nt Cape Canaveral.
June 8: Test firing of a full-scale upper Kluge recket under simulated altitude conditions was made in an engine test •ell at the USAF’s Arnold Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn.
June 16: Phase I development contract for Pyna-Soar boost-glide orbital spacecraft awarded by USAF to two teams of contractors beaded by Martin Co. (Bell, American Machine A Foundry, Bendix, Ooodyear, and Mlnncnpolis-Honeyweil) and the Boeing Co. (Aerojet. General Klcclric, Ramo-Wooidrldge, North American, and Chance Vought).
•	Pacific Missile Range, Point Mugu,
Cuilf., officially established under Navy management to provide range support to ilia Department of Defense and other governmental agencies engaged In missile, satellite, and space vehicle research, development, evaluation and training.
June 26: Production Vanguard satellite (SI.V-2) failed to orbit due to failure of second stage, but demonstrated structural integrity of tankage which with-' stood pressure exceeding design values.
successfully completed first military launch of a Snark Intercontinental missile at Cape Canaveral.
June 27: First successful launching by NACA Langley's Aircraft Research Division of a Mach 18 five-stage rocket vehicle at Waliops Island, Va.
•	USAF strategic missile squadron successfully completed first military launch of a Snark intercontinental missile at Cape Canaveral.
June 28: EXPLORER III reentered the earth’s atmosphere.
June 30: The NACA reported that 50 percent of Its research effort was being devoted to problems associated with missiles and space vehicles.
During June: Space Science Board of 10 members established by National Academy of Sciences, with Dr. Lloyd V. Berk-ner as Chairman, to advise and assist In formulation of U.S. post-IGY space research program and to foster cooperation with space scientists In other nations.
•	NACA-USAF meetings concerning applicability of all solid-propellant launch vehicle (later named Scout) to meet USAF requirements.
•	Recovery of first data capsule at
AMR after successful separation from a Thor IRBM at reentry.
July 1: Japanese Kappa-6tw two-stage recket flown to 30-mlle altitude over Mlchlkawa Recket Center, Japan.
July 8: First launching of a 10-lnch-dlameter spherical recket motor with spin stabilization, at NACA WaUop8 Island.
July 9: Second AF Thor-Able reentry test vehicle was launched, traveling 6,000 miles (no nose cone recovery).
July 17: Nose cone of Jupiter missile successfully recovered after Intermediate range flight.
July 21: Standing Committee on Science and Astronautics established by House of Representatives.
July 23: Thor-Able reentry test vehicle made another successful 6,000-mile flight; the nose cone and mouse passenger were not recovered.
July 23-31: Feasibility of creating or destroying cloud formations by release of carbon black was established in tests conducted off Florida coast by tbe Navy Weather Service’s Comdr. N. Brango and Dr. Florence Van Stratcn.

July 24: Senate established Standing Committee on Aeronautical and Space Seieuces.
July 26: EXPLORER IV, fourth U.S.-IGY satellite, successfully launched by Army Jupitcr-C. (See Appeudlx A.)
•	Cnpt. Ivan C. Klncheloe (USAF)
killed when F-104 crushed at Edwards AFB. Ho had been, scheduled to test-fly the X-15.
July 26-27: Comdrs. M. Ross and L. Lewis (USN) reached maximum altitude of 82,000 feet in STRATO-LAB HIGH III flight from Crosby, Minn., which set new unofficial record for stratospheric flight of 34.7 hours.
July 29: President Eisenhower signed H.It. 12575, mAking it the Notional Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 (Public Lnw 85-568). In his statement, he said: “The present Natlonnl Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) with Its large and competent staff and well-equipped laboratories will provide tbe nucleus for NASA. Tbe NACA has an established record of research performance and of cooiicratlon with the armed services. The coordination of space exploration responsibilities with NACA’s traditional aeronautical research functions Is a natural evolution . . . [one which] should have an even greater Impact on our future.”
July 30: President Kiscnhower requested $125 million to initiate the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).
•	Successful proof tests subjecting
humans to over 20 times the force of gravity were conducted, with NACA’s Maxlme Fnget conceiving concept of the contour couch on centrifuge at Navy AMAL, Johnsville, Ta. This couch became integral part of the Project Mercury concept.
July 31: Army Redstone No. 50 successfully fired off Johnson Island in the South Pacific as a part of Project Hardtack.
•	First comprehensive Sputnik data
was released by U.S.S.R. to foreign scientists.
August 1: AFBMD announced development of a complete Inertial guidance system to replace radio inertial system now in use.
August 2: First full-powered flight of USAF Atlas ICBM using both the sus-talucr and booster engines.
August 6: Roclcetdyne Division of North American announced an Air Force con-tract for a 1-mllliou-pound thrust engine.
August 7: First launching of USAF Do-tnarc interceptor missile from Cape Canaveral on a signal sent by tbe SAUK Control Center at Kingston, N.Y.
August 8: President nominated Dr. T. Keith Glcnnan to be Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden as Deputy Administrator.
August 11: Army Redstone No. 51 successfully fired off Johnson Island in tbe South Pacific as a part of Project Hardtack.
•	After program review and discussions, NACA drafted specifications of tbe Scout launch vehicle based upon preliminary designs for a bypervcloclly research vehicle and orbiting system.
August 14: Nominations of Dr. T. K. Clennau and Dr. H. L. Dryden were approved by the Senate Special Committee on Space and Astronautics.
August 15: Saturn Project Initiated by ARPA order to Army Ordnance Missile Command, and it was assigned to Itcd-stoue Arsenal.
•	Dr. T. Keith Glennan confirmed
by tbe Senate as Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
•	Federal Aviation Agency created
with passage by Congress of tbe Federal Aviation Act.
August 17: USAF Thor-Able-1 launch vehicle with first U.S.-IGY lunar payload exploded 77 seconds after launch because of a failure of first-stage engine.
August 19: Ur. T. Keith Glennan sworn in as Administrator, and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden as Deputy Administrator, of tbe

National Aeronautics ami Space Administration ; 40 days later, as of October 1, IMS, NASA was declared to be ready to function.
•	Navy Tartar surface-to-air missile
made successful first lligbt and interception at NOTS China Lake, Calif.
August 21: The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics held its final meeting, aud Invited Dr. T. Keith Glennan, newly appointed Administrator of NASA, to receive best wishes for the future.
August 24: EXPLORER V successfully launched by ABMA-JPL Jupltcr-0 and ail stages fired, but orbit not achieved because of collision between parts of booster aud Instrument compartment
August 25: Ninth IAF meeting began at The Hague, which witnessed the first colloquium on space law.
August 26: Gen. Thomas D. White, USAF, wrote James H. Doolittle, Chairman, NACA: “There was regret at the passing of an agency that for 43 years haB set the world’s standard in aeronautical research. . . . There has always been for us In the Air Force, the knowledge that NACA was ready to help in any aerodynamic trouble.”
•	Two mice lived 36 days sealed in
a chamber and dependent upon oxygen production of algae In an experiment at tbe University of Texas.
August 27:  The first Argus experiment (ARPA) was conducted (based upon October 1957 proposal of N. C. Christefiles of the University of California, Livermore), in which a small A-bomb was detonated beyond the atmosphere over the South Atlantic.  Launched from the rocketship Norton Sound, the initial flash was followed by an auroral luminescence extending upward and downward along the magnetic lines where the burst occurred.
•	Soviet Union reportedly sent two
dogs to nn altitude of 2S1 miles and wifely returned them to earth, single-stage rocket boosting a total payload of 3,726 pounds.
•	President Eisenhower signed Public Law 85-700 which included $80 million for NASA, including $50 million for research and development, $25 million for construction and expenses, and $5 million for salaries and expenses.
August 29: Second full-powered flight of USAF Atlas ICDM traveled 3,000 miles with radlo-lnertlal guidance.
August 30: The second Argus small A-bomb detonation beyond the atmosphere was conducted In the South Atlantic.
During August: In 3-week period, 19 five-stage Argo E5 sounding rockets were launched In USAF-NACA program to measure radiation caused by Project Argus, rockets reaching 500-mile altitude and were launched from Wallops Island, AMR, and Ramey AFB, Puerto Rico.
•	Experimental “weightlessness"
flights in C-131B aircraft began at Wright Air Development Center.
September 2: U.N. Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge announced that United States would propose a plan for International cooperation in the exploration of outer space to the United Nations.
September 4: President Elsenhower appointed Detlev W. Bronk, president of the National Academy of Sciences; William A. M. Burden; Jnines H. Doolittle; and Alan T. Waterman, Director of the NSF, to the National Aeronautics and Space Council. Additionally, tbe Space Council Including the Administrator of NASA, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of State, and the Chairman of the ARC as statutory members.
September 6: The third of the Argus small A-bomb detonations beyond tbe atmosphere was conducted over tbe South Atlantic. Instruments of EXPLORER IV satellite recorded and reported to ground stations resultant electron densities, subsequently reported by James Van Allen.
September 7: Black Knlgbt missile of tbe United Kingdom was launched from the Australian range nt Woomera to an altitude of over 300 miles.

September 8:  Unmanned ONR balloon carried telescope and camera to an altitude of over 300 miles.
September 8: Wearing a Goodrich lightweight full-pressure suit, Lt. It. II. Tabor (USN) completed n 72-hour simulated flight in pressure chamber at NAS Norfolk, In which he was subjected to altitude conditions as hi^li as 139,000 feet.

September 17:	Joint NASA-ARPA
Manned Satellite Panel established to make final recommendation for manned spnee flight program.
September 24: First senior staff meeting of the newly created National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) hold, with I)r. T. Keith Cleunau ns Administrator, and Dr. Hugh L. Drydeu as Deputy Administrator.
•	KC-135 Jet Stratotunker lifted
77,350-pound payload to an altitude of 1.25 miles.
•	First use of Sidewinder aircraft
recket with heatseeker nose, by Chinese Nationalist F-8G’s over the Formosa Straits. Chinese NationaUsts claimed 10 Communist planes.
•	General Electric delivered first
prototype of MIT-developed Polaris guidance system.

September 25: Dr. T. Keith Glennan signed proclamation declaring that "as of the close of business 	
September 30, 1958, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has been organized and is prepared to discharge the duties and exercise the powers conferred on it." Entered upon the Federal Register, this proclamation Instituted the National Aeronautics and Spnee Administration as of October 1, 1958.
•	First launching of an Exos sounding rocket in USAK-NASA joint effort from Wallops Island, Va.
September 26:	Vanguard (SLV-8)
reached 265 miles’ altitude and was destroyed 9,200 miles down range over Ccutral Africa on reentry Into the atmosphere.
•	Boeing B-52D set a world distance
in a closed-circuit record of 0,233.981 miles, with Lt. Col. V. L. Snndacz at the controls.
September 28: Nike-A6p test lllglit from Navy LSD Point Defiance near Puka Island I’cuchcd 800,000 feet, the highest altitude ever reached by ship-lauuchcd rocket, in preliminary test of Nike-Asp for use In 1GY solar eclipse studies.
September 29: United States announced as policy that all measures to prevent contamination of the moon would be taken In all lunar probes.
During September: Saturn design studies authorized to proceed at Redstone Arsenal for development of 1.5-mlIllon-pound-thrust clustered first stage.
•	Dr. W. Albert Noyes was appointed chalrmun of U.S. committee to drnft proposals for International cooperation In the space sciences for the consideration of the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU).
October 1: First official day of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Existing NACA facilities, personnel, policies, and advisory committees were transferred to NASA, and the NACA laboratories were renamed Research Centers.
•	By Executive order of the President, DOD responsibilities for tbe remaining U.S.-IGY satellite and space probe projects were transferred to tbe National Aeronautics and Spaee Administration; included were Project Vuu-gunrd, and the four lunar probes and three satellite IGF projects remaining, which had previously been assigned by ARPA to AFBMD and ABMA. Also transferred were a number of engine development research programs.
October 2: Executive Board of the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) proposed a plan to establish a Committee on Space Research, which became known as COSPAR.
October 4: Vandenberg AFB, first operational ICBM base In free world, was dedicated.
•	Jet transatlantic passenger service inaugurated by British Overseas Airways.
October 7: NASA formally organized Project Mercury to: (1) place a manned
spnce capsule in orbital flight around the earth; (2) Investigate man’s reactions to ami capabilities In this environment; nmi (3) recover capsule and pilot safely.
A NASA Space Task Group organized ut I.angley Research Center drew up specifications for the Mercury capsule, bused on studies by tbe National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics during the preceding 12 mouths, and on discussions with the Air Force which bad been conducting related studies.
October 8: U.S.S.R. supplied telemetry code of SPUTNIK 111 to other 1GY members, covering only radiation measurements.
•	In MAN HIGH III balloon
launched from Holloman AFB, Lt. Cllf-urn M. McClure attained a near-record altitude of 99,900 feet.
October 11: PIONEER I, U.S.-IGY space probe under direction of NASA and with llic AFBMD as executive agent, launched from AMR, Cape Cauaveral, Fla., by a Tlior-Able-I booster. It traveled 70,700 miles before returning to earth, determined radial extent of great radiation belt, first observations of earth’s and Interplanetary magnetic field, and first measurements of mlcrometeorlte density iu interplanetary space.
October 12: Naval Research Laboratory rocket firings in Danger Island region of the South Pacific from U.S.S. Point D' flance. reached 139, 148, 152, and 160 miles altitude to chart solar spectrum in tbe ultraviolet and X-ray portion.
October 14: NASA requested transfer of Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the space activities of Army Redstone Arsenal to .NASA.
October 15: First of a series of three X-15 experimental rocket - powered manned research aircraft was rolled out , at the Los Angeles plant of North American Aviation, Inc., in the joint USAF-U8N-NASA program.
October 21: Three weeks after NASA officially began operating, prospective roulractors were Invited to a briefing at NASA headquarters on development of 1 '/.-nillllon-pound-thrust engine.
•	First launching of two USAF
Boinarc missiles within less than 10 seconds of each other ut Cape Canaveral; launches signaled from SAG1C at Kingston, N.Y., and both missiles scored successful Intercepts against different target aircraft.
October 23: NASA—with the Army as executive agent—attempted to launch a 12-foot-dlameter Inflatable satellite of mlcro-thln plastic covered with aluminum foil known as BEACON. Launched from AMR by a Juno I—a modified Redstone, the payload prematurely separated prior to booster burnout.
October 26: Pan American World Airways began regular dally jet service be-twecn New Fork and Paris using Boeing 707’s.
October 30: WlUlam M. Holaday appointed by the President to be Chairman of the NASA-DOD Civilian-Military Liaison Committee (CMLC).
During October: Air Force awarded contract to Pratt & Whitney for Centaur vehicle with hydrogen-burning chamber based on research of Lewis Research. Center between 1953 and 1957. Centaur project later transferred to NASA.
November 6: Army completed Redstone flight testing with a perfect 250-in lie shot.
November 7: Bidders conference held by NASA on roanned-sutelllte capsule for Project Mercury.
November 8: Second U.S.-IGY space probe under direction of NASA with Air Force as executive agent, PIONEER II, was launched from AMR. Unseparated third aud fourth stages reached an altitude of about 1,000 miles and flew some 7,500 miles before burnlug out.
November 14: First launch of a 3,750,000-cublc-foot plastic balloon at Holloman AFB; payload was a parachute test vehicle for development of hlgh-Mach parachute systems.
November 15: First meeting of COSPAR (Committee on Space Research) proposed bylaws and rules for the approval of the ICSU, nt London.

November 19: United Slates and 19 other nations jointly Introduced resolution in U.N. General Assembly calling for creation of ad hoc committee to bring about full international cooi>eratlon in the peaceful uses of outer space.
November 21: NASA formed new Special Committee on Life Sciences to provide advice on human factors, medical, aud allied problems on NASA’s manned space vehicle program.
November 26: Project Mercury, U.S. manned-sntelllte program, was officially named by NASA.
November 28: USAF Atlas made Its first successful operational test flight In a 6325 statute-mile flight, landed close to Its target
During November: NASA requested DX priority for 1.5-miUlon-pound-thrust F-l engine project aud Project Mercury.
•	Second International Symposium
on Physics and Medicine of the Atmosphere and Space was held at San Antonio, Texas.
December 3: President transferred tbe functions and facilities of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory of the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, Calif., from the Army to NASA. JPL built, designed, and tested upper stages, payloads, and tracking systems for the first 1GY Explorer satellites.
•	NASA and the Army reached an agreement whereby ABMA and its subordinate organizations at Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, Ala., would be responsive to NASA requirements.
•	DOD announced details of Project
Discoverer, series of polar orbiting satellites.
December 3: Modified Navy Terrier rocket with camera launched to an altitude of 86 miles from Wallops Island, providing a 1,000-mile composite photograph of a frontal cloud formation.
December 6: The third U.S.-IGY space probe—tbe second under direction of NASA and with the Army as executive
agent—was launched at 12:45 a .in., from AMR by Juno II recket. The primary mission of PIONEER III, to place the scientific iiayiond hi the vicinity of the moon, was not accomplished although an altitude of 63,580 miles was achieved aud lt discovered that radiation belt was comprised of at least two bands.
December 9: The first meeting of the new NASA Inventions and Contributions Board was held to evaluate scientific or technical contributions and to recommend monetary awards.
December 10: First domestic jet airline passenger service, by National Airlines between New York and Miami.
December 12-16: SMALL WORLD balloon with four passengers failed In transatlantic attempt, lifting from Canary Islands and landing at sea northeast of Barbados.
December 13: U.N. General Assembly adopted resolution bringing into being an 18-member Ad Hoc Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
•	Squirrel monkey Gordo made 1,500-
mllo flight in nose cone of Army Jupiter with no known adverse effects, but flout mechanism failed and nose cone was not recovered.
December 16: Two Thor shots, one from Cape Canaveral and one from Vandenberg AFB, were successful. Intermedi* ate range ballistic missile portion of PMR was Inaugurated with successful firing of USAF Tbor from Vandenberg AFB.
•	MATS C-133 Cargomaster lifted
117.000	pounds of cargo to 10,000 feet, s weight-lifting record, at Dover AFB, Del.
December 17: NASA awarded contract to Rocketdyne of North American to build single-chamber 1.5-milUon-pouml-thrust rocket engine.
•	Project Mercury announced as
name of U.S. man-ln-space program by NASA.
December 18: Plastic balloon flight No.
1.000	launched by tbe Balloon Branch of the Missile Development Center at Holloman AFB, a series beginning in July 1050.
•	Entire USAF Atlas boosted Into
orbit communications relay satellite, PKOJECT SCORE or the “talking atlas.” A total of 8,750 pounds were placed in urlilt, of which 150 pounds was payload.
December 19: President Elsenhower’s Christmas message beamed from PROJ-KCT SCORE satellite In orbit, the first video beamed In from space.
•	BOLD ORION (WS-199) launched
from B-58 Hustler traveling at about 1,100 mph over Cape Canaveral, Fla.
December 20: White Sands Proving Ground announced missile range firing record: 2,000 "hot” firings in 1 year.
•	First Titan test launch exploded
on tbe pad at Cape Canaveral.
•	New voice and teletype messages
were received and rebroadcast on command by PROJECT SCORE satellite, and a series of experiments were continued in subsequent days.
December 23: First Atlas-0 fired successfully at AMR.
December 24: Dr. Herbert F. York, Chief Scientist of ARPA, was named as Director of Defense Research and Engineering for the Department of Defense by President Eisenhower.	,
December 27: Federal CouncU for Science and Technology to be headed by Dr. Juines R. Killian, Jr., was approved by President Elsenhower.
•	PIONEER III data Indicated that
the earth is surrounded by two bands of rudlallon.
December 31: PROJECT SCORE ceased transmissions, concluding 12 days of operations and 9T successful contacts.
•	IGY scheduled to close, but in
October 1058 tbe International Council of Scientific Unions, meeting in Wash-
ington, approved extension of IGF through December 1959 under name of International Geophysical Cooperation— 1959 (IGC-59) and also approved establishment of Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) to continue international cooperation la the scientific exploration of space. National Academy of Sciences Is U.S. adhering body to COSPAR.
During December: National booster program developed by NASA and DOD to provide basis for long-range planning.
•	First vacuum tank for use in ion
and plasma electric propulsion research received at NASA Lewis Research Center, three more of which were later put to research, and two large models to be completed by 1962.
During 1958: NASA Langley research scientists, Paul Purser and Maxima Fa-get, conceived Little Joe research rocket; the Scout vehicle system was conceived from PARD’s multistage hypersonic solid-propellant rocket program.
•	Twistor and other thln-film semiconductors were developed suitable as memory elements.
•	NASA Lewis Research Center completed 14 years of extensive research on all U.S. turbojet engines.
•	NASA Lewis Center successfully
demonstrated first use of fluorine gas to provido reliable Ignition for practical hydrogen-oxygen engine (20K thrust) ; sumo year first throttling of hydrogen-fluorine thrust chamber demonstrated over wide range.
•	First year that the total number
of transatlantic air passengers excecded the number of sea passengers.
•	Experimental tests for launching
satellites via rocket fired from fighter aircraft conducted by Navy Project Pilot.
