1959
January 2: U.S.S.R. launched LUNIK I into a solar orbit, with a total weight of a reported 3,215 pounds, the first man-mnde object placed In orbit around tbe snn. It was called MECIITA ("dream") by the Russians. (See Appendix A.)
•Defense officials indicated fiscal
year 1960 budget would begin major Integration of long-range missiles into weapons arsenal and replacement of manned aircraft on a large scale.
January 4: Vandenberg Air Force Base and tbe Pacific Missile Range declared officially operational for firings.
January 5: LUNIK I transmissions censed 373,125 miles from earth.
January 8: NASA requested eight Redstone-type launch vehicles from the Army to be used In Project Mercury development flights.
January 9:	NASA-DOD agreement
signed for a “National Program To Meet Satellite and Space Vehicle Tracking and Surveillance Requirements’* for fiscal year 1959 and fiscal year 1960.
January 12: NASA announced selection of McDonnell Aircraft Corp., as source for design, development, and construction of Mercury capsule.
January 15: First successful castings of molybdenum made at U.S. Bureau of Mines Laboratory at Albany, Oreg.
January 19: Tbe A EC demonstrated a 5-watt radioisotope thermoelectric generator (designated SNAP 3) to President Elsenhower as an example of the potential use of radioisotopes and static thermoelectric conversion for providing long-lived electric power for space.
January 21: First Chrysler-made, operational version of Army Jupiter IRBM, successfully launched from AMR.
January 23: Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator, announced appointment of chairmen of 13 new research advisory committees to provide technical counsel from Industry, universities, and government organizations.
January 28: Nlke-Cajun successfully launched 12-foot-diameter test inflatable sphere to a height of 75 miles over NASA Wallops Island, the sphere Inflating satisfactorily.
•	One hundred ten candidates were
selected by NASA in the first screening for Project Mercury astronauts from Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps test-pilot echools.
January 29: First Jet passenger service across the United States begun by American Airlines with Boeing 707’s.
During January: Recketdyne demonstrated 1-mllUon-pound-thruat Uquld-propellant rocket combustion chamber at full power.
February 2: First annual report on Aeronautical and Bpace Activities, covering all U.S. activities during tbe year 1958, was forwarded to the Congress by the President
February 6: First test launch of USAF Titan ICBM (A-3) from Cape Canaveral.
February 11: Army announced that a weather balloon, launched at tbe Signal Research and Development Laboratory, Fort Monmouth, N.J., had established a world altitude record of 146,000 feet.
February 17: VANGUARD II (SLV-4), the fifth U.S.-IGY satellite, suecessfully launched payload containing photocells designed to produce cloud cover images for 2 weeks; precesslng or wobbling prevented significant Interpretation of data. (See Appendix A.)
•	USAF Committee presided over by
Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Associate Director of tbe Smithsonian Astropbysical Observatory at Cambridge, Mass., recommended that the USAF continue to take a positive approach to UFO's, Investigate reported slgbtlngs by all scientific means, and keep the public fully Informed of existing policy. Of the unknown objects sighted, it reported, no scientific evidence supports the conclusion that tbe objects were spacecraft.
February 19: Monorail two-stage rocket-research sled attained 3,090 mph, or roughly Mach 4.1, at Holloman AFB.
February 20: NASA awarded $105 million in contracts for 1959 projects (15 satellites).
February 23: Navy revealed development of steerable molybdenum nozzle used In tbe solid-propellant Polaris missile.
February 28: DISCOVERER I, ARPA satellite weighing 1,450 pounds, successfully luunched into polar orbit by USAF Tbor-Uustler booster from Pacific Missile Range; stabilization difficulties ham-I>cred tracking acquisition. (Sec Appendix A.^
March 1: "Poor man’s recket,” Scout, was jointly announced by NASA and AF. The concept of Scout originated at Langley Research Center in 1058, based upon extensive experience with staged solid-propellant reckets.
March 3: PIONEER IV, fourth U.S.-IGY space probe, a joint ABMA-JPL project under direction of NASA, was launched by a Juno II rocket from AMR and achieved earth-moon trajectory, passing within 37,000 miles of the moon before going into permanent solar orbit. Radio contact was maintained to a record distance of 406,620 miles. It was tbe first U.S. sun-orbiter. (See Appendix A.)
•	NASA’s Langley Research Center
launched first In n series of six-stage solid-fuel rocket research vehicles, tbe world's first, from Wollops Island, Va., to a speed of Macb 20 in a reentry physics program.
March 4: British National Committee on Space Research, II. S. W. Massey as chairman, held Its first mectlng.
March 6: Radio signals received from PIONEER IV from a distance Of 466,020 miles from earth, a new communications record.
March 7: First French Veronlque sounding rocket launched from Columb Rechar to an altitude of 153 miles.
March 10: First captive flight of X-15 (No. 1) under modified B-52 with A. Scott Cros8fleld in the cockpit; additional captive flights were made on April 1, April 10, and May 21.
March 11: NASA granted $350,000 to National Academy of Sclences-National Research Council for program of research appointments In theoretical and experimental physics to stimulate basic research in the space sciences.
March 12: Second British Black Knight rocket reached 350-mlle altitude at \\corner a, Australia.
March 12-14: Second meeting of COSPAR held at Tbe Hague, the Netherlands.
March 13: The President announced the establishment of the Federal Council for Science and Technology to promote closer cooperation among Federal agencies in planning their respective research and development programs.
•	From an altitude of 123 miles
boosted by an NRL Aerobee-Ili recket, fired from White Sands, N. Mex., the first ultraviolet photo3 of the sun were taken and recorded.
March 14: National Academy of Sciences delegate to COSPAR transmitted to COSPAR President the offer of NASA to carry experiments by scientists of other nations In U.S. space vehicles.
March 15: Army Redstone ejected miniature TV camera which transmitted pictures of its target Impact area.
March 17: First flight launching of a spin-stabilized 20-inch-diameter spherical rocket, by NASA Langley's PARD at Wallops Station, Va.
•	ARPA announced tbat DISCOVERER I was no longer in orbit.
March 18: Army Signal Corps and RCA announced development of micromodules for electronic devices which ultimately could permit 500,000 components to be packed into a cubic inch of space.
March 19: Deputy Secretary of Defense Quarles announced that three atomic blasts were fired in space (Project Argus) in 1053, using modified X-17 rockets.
March 20: MIT announced successful radar signal returns from Veuus had been performed on February 10 and 12, 1958, return signals being oue ten-mll-llonth as strong ns transmission signals.
March 24: NASA announced thut Wallops Statlou had made over 3,300 rocket firings since 1945.
April 2: Seven astronauts were selected for Project Mercury after a series of the most rigorous physical and mental tests ever given to U.S. test pilots. Chosen from a field of 110 candidates,’ tbe finalists were all qualified test pilots: Cupts. Leroy Q. Cooper, Jr., Virgil I. ‘Grissom, and Douald K. Slayton, (USAF); Lt. Malcolm S. Carpeuter, Lt. Comdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Lt. Comdr. Waiter M. Schirra, Jr. (USN) ; and Lt. Col. John H. Glenn (USMC).
•	Lt. Gen. Rernnrd A. Schrlever,
Commander AFBMIJ, was named Commander of Air Research and Development Command.
•	USAF Bold Orion ballistic missile
test launched from R—17 jet bomber.
April 7: ARC Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory announced development of plasma thermocouple for direct conversion of energy from a nuclear reactor into electricity, offering potential auxiliary power source for space applications.
•	First operational flight of USAF
Snark to target on AMR.
April 8: Reentry body of USAF Thor-Able recovered at tbe far end of the Atlantic Missile Range: first recovery after an ICBM range flight by AFMTC task force.
April 13: DISCOVERER II satellite sue-cessfuUy placed into polar orbit by Thor-Agena A booster, but capsule ejection malfunctioned causing lt to Impact In vicinity of Spitsbergen on April 14 Instead of vicinity of Hawaii. It was first vehicle known to have been placed in a polar orbit and was tbe first attempt to recover an object from orbit
•	VANGUARD (SLV-5) failed to
achieve payload orbit because of loss of second-stage pitch attitude control.
April 16: First Thor IRRM launched by British crew at Vandenberg AFB.
April 17: United States formally requested that the United Nations Commit-
tee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space eonveuo in New York on May 6.
April 20: NASA announced acceptance of proiiosals by the Canadian Defense Research Telecommunications Establishment for continuing Joint recket and satellite ionospheric experiments of a nonmiiltary nature.
April 23: Fourth recovery of a data capsule at AMR, USAF Thor 1,500-mile accuracy test flight
•	President announced the resignation of Richard IS. Horner, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development, to become Associate Administrator of NASA effective July 1st.
•	First test flight of USAF GAM-77
Hound Dog at AMR.
April 24: Dr. Hugh L. Dry den and Loftus E. Becker appointed to assist Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge in the forthcoming meetings at tbe United Nations of the Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
April 27: Meeting of DOD working group on Project Mercury search and recovery operations was held at Patrick Air Force Base, with major emphasis placed on the first two ballistic Atlas shots, and command relationships.
•	The 1958 Annual Report of the
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, the 44th and final report of NACA established in 1915, was submitted to Congress by the President It contained historical sections by Jerome C. Hunsaker and James H. Doolittle.
•	DX priority (highest national
priority) assigned to Project Mercury.
April 28: NASA announced the signing of a $24 million contract with Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., for a three-stage Thor-Vanguard launching Tccket called Delta.
April 29-30: Symposium sponsored by the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences, NASA, and the American Physical Society, held in Washington to review space research findings and the objectives of future research programs in tbe space sciences.
During April: The Tiros meteorological satellite program was transferred from tiie Department of Defeuse to the ro-siionsiblllty of NASA for the national meteorological satellite program. At the snine time, a Joint Meteorological Satellite Advisory Committee was established.
May 1: NASA’s Administrator announced the naming of Goddard Space Flight Center under construction near Grecn-bclt, Md., In commemoration of Robert H. Goddard, American pioneer In recket research. Dr. Harry J. Goett was op-{minted Director In September.
•	Smithsonian Optical Tracking Station at Woomera, Australia, successfully photographed VANGUARD I earth satellite at the apogee of its orbit, nearly 2,500 miles from earth. Compared to taking picture of golf ball 600 miles away, this feat was repeated on May 3 and 4.
May 3: Dr. Otto Struve of the University of California was appointed Director of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, to be located at Green Bank, W. Va.
May 4: National Bureau of Standards released details on the effect on the ionosphere of the hlgh-altltude nuclear shots called Teak and Orange on August 1 and 12,1958, over Johnston Island.
May 6: NASA created a committee to study problems of long-range lunar exploration to be headed by Dr. Robert Jastrow.
•	ABMA Jupiter IRBM made successful 1,500-mlle flight at Cape Canaveral and was declnred operational by the USAF.
•	NASA awarded contract to Con-
valr for development of Vega launch vehicle for deep space probes and satellites.
May 6-Jane 25: Ad Hoc Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space of 'U.N. met in session at U.N. headquarters in New York.
May 12: NASA announced training program for seven Project Mercury astronauts to provide them with technical knowledge and skills required to pilot tbe Nation’s manned orbital capsule.
•	University of Minnesotu scientist
under ONR contract launched unmanned balloon to 100,600 feet, where first post-tivo measurement of intense solnr protons associated with a solar ilare was made.
•	USAF Thor launched GE Mark 2
nose cone 1,500 miles down AMF, recovered data capsule contained photograph of the earth from 300-mlle altitude.
May 13: British plan for launching an earth satellite was revealed by Prime Minister Harold Macmillan before tbe House of Commons.
May 14: Use of moon as relay station for intercontinental transmission made from Jodrell Bunk, England, to the USAF Cambridge Research Center at Bedford, Mass.
May 15: Lt. Gen. Bernard A. Schrlever, Commander of ARDO, unveiled first reentry vehicle ever to be recovered after a full intercontinental range flight.
May 18: NASA announced formation of Committee on Long-Range Studies headed by John A. Johnson to fulfill charge of National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 (sec. 102), calling for “cstab-Ushment of long-range studies of the potential benefits to be gained from, the opportunities for, and the problems involved in the utilization of aeronautical and space activities for peaceful and scientific purposes.”
May 26: ABMA static fired a single H-l Saturn engine at Redstone Arsenal, Ala.
May 27: First flight test of USAF Bo-marc B long-range interceptor missile.
May 28: Dr. George B. Kistiakowsky of Harvard University named special assistant to the President for science and technology, replacing Dr. James R. Killian, Jr.
•	Army Jupiter IRBM launched a
nose cone carrying two living passengers—Able, an Amerlcan-bom rhesus monkey, and Raker, n South American squirvcl monkey, to a 300-mlle altitude, and both were recovered alive. Tbe medical portions of the experiment were carried out by the Army Medical Service and Army Ballistic Missile Ageucy, Army
Ordnauce Missile Command, with the cooperation of the USN School of Aviation Medicine and the USAF School of Aviation Medicine.
June 1: Rhesus monkey Able died from effects of anesthesia given for removal of electrode instrumentation, autopsy revealing no effects from flight on May 28, at Array Research Laboratory, Fort Kuox, Ky.
June 3: Moon relay transmission of President Eisenhower’s voice by recording was made from Millstone Hiii Radar Observatory, Westford, Mass., to Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, Canada.
•	DISCOVERER III failed to
achieve orbit
June 5: Construction at Cape Canaveral for the Saturn begun.
June 6: Army announced that sea urchin eggs fertilized before Jupiter nose cone flight continued to grow normally.
June 8: X-15 (No. 1) research airplane made Its first glide flight with A. Scott Crossficld as pilot, after being carried by the B-52 mother ship to an altitude of 38,000 feet.
•	Mall carried by missile as 8,000
letters were delivered by a Regulus I from the submarine Sarbero to NAS Mayport, Fla.
June 9: First Polarls-carrler nuclear submarine launched at Groton, Conn., the Qeorgc Washington.
June 12: Scientific subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space proposed creation of a center to promote International cooperation In outer space research.
June 17: First USAF test firing of an experimental escape capsule.
June 18: Six U.S. Navy enlisted men began an 8-day experiment in a simulated space cabin at the Air Crew Equipment Laboratory of the Naval Air Material Center at the Philadelphia Naval Base.
June 22: VANGUARD (SLV-fl) satellite designed to measure the radiation bal-
ance of the earth, its atmosphere, and tho solar energy flux, failed to go into orbit.
June 23: USAF Arnold Engineering Development Center was directed by ARDC to prepare operating and design requirements for a “Large Space Environments Test Facility” for testing and developing military space weapons.
June 25: DISCOVERER IV fulled to achieve orbit
June 29: NASA welcomed announcement of United Kingdom approval of proposals for cooperative scientific research In space with the United Statea pending formal arrangements.
June 30: Considerable effort devoted to determining the causes of the malfunctions that resulted in the explosion of four out of five Atlas missiles launched before June 30.
During June: NASA issued Research Memo (4-17-69L) entitled "Airplane Measurements of Atmospheric Turbulence at Altitudes between 20,000 and
55,000	feet for Four Geographic Areas,” analysing data acquired by Lockheed U-2 aircraft over western United States, England and Western Europe, Turkey, and Japan.
•	Deployment of first USAF operational Thor IRBM squadron to the United Kingdom.
•	Operating velocity of Mach 6 was
achieved In AEDC wind tunnel with a 40- by 40-lnch test section at Tullahoma, Tenn.
July 1: The first experimental reactor (Klwl-A) in the nuclear space rocket program operated successfully at full temperature and duration at Jackass Flats, Nev.
July 6: Comdr. M. Lee Lewis (USN) killed In accident shortly before scheduled launching of high-altltude balloon at SL Paul, Minn. He is credited with originating the Rockoon concept.
July 7: Four-stage Argo D4 recket with an ARDO Javelin payload fired from Wallops Island to an altitude of 750 miles, first in a series of USAF-NASA launchings to measure natural radiation surrounding the earth.
July 8: As developmental planning for Project Mercury evolved, NASA notified tiie Army that to reduce the variety of launching vehicles the Jupiter missile would not be used for Project Mercury tests.
July 9: NASA Lewis Research Center operated a research model of an ion rocket in a newly completed electric-rocket test facility designed for basic investigations into tbe problems associated with a reliable ion recket with e. minimum life of 1 year.
July 10: A 16-page report of Soviet, British, and United States scientists recommended that satellites be used to detect nuclear explosions in space.
July 11: ONR STRATOSCOPB I balloon with camera to photograph the sun was launched from St Paul, Minn., to on altitude of 81,250 feet
July 13: Largest plastic balloon to date (6 million cubic feet) launched by Office of Naval Research with 173 pounds of instruments, at Fort Churchill, Canada.
July 14: U.N. Assembly Document No. A/4141, Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, was released.
July 16: NASA, with Army as executive agent of a Joint ABMA-JPL project, attempted Explorer satellite launch with Juno II booster, but it was destroyed 5Vj seconds after launch by range safety officer.
•	Second largest reflector telescope
in the world, the 126-inch telescope at the Lick Observatory; was dedicated.
July 20: NASA selected Western Electric Co. to build worldwide network of tracking and ground Instrument stations to be used In Project Mercury.
July 21: A full-scale USAF Atlas ICBM nose cone recovered for the first time after flight down the AMR.
July 24: USAF Thor data capsule recovered near Antigua which contained movie film showing nose cone separation.
July 29: Two-stage Nike-Asp fired from Naval Missile Facility, Point Arguello,
Hie first of 12 designed to record radiation 150 miles up and also the first ballistic missile fired from this new facility.
During July: Project Mercury astronauts completed disorientation flights on three-axis space-flight simulator, tbe MASTIF (Multiple Axis Space Test Inertia Facility), at NASA Lewis Research Center.
•	Portion of Chlncoteague (Va.)
Naval Air Station transferred to NASA, for use in connection with Wallops Station recket range.
August-December: Conference of the International Telecommunications Union which was held at Geneva, Switzerland, allecated radio frequency bands for space and earth-space use.
During summer: Under Joint sponsorship of National Science Foundation and the Office of Naval Research, Princeton University scientists successfully photographed sunspots with unprecedented clarity by means of 12-inch solar telescope, STRATO SCOPE I, mounted on a balloon platform at an altitude of near
80,000	feet (See July 11 and 13.)
August 3: First flight test of Navy Sub-roc antisub missile from NOTS, China Lake, Calif.
August 7: EXPLORER VI, popularly called the “Paddlewhcel Satellite," launched by NASA Thor-Able 3, contained 14 experiments, and a photocell scanner which transmitted a crude picture of the earth’s surface and cloud cover from a distance of 17,000 miles. Placed in highly elliptical orbit (26,000 miles out, 150 miles in), It gave a broad samplo of readings, (See Appendix A.)
•	Comdr. M. Ross (USNR) and R.
Cooper (High Altitude Observatory) flew STRATO-LAB open gondola balloon to 88,000 feet for solar studies with a coronagraph.
•	USAF launched 39-Inch weather
balloon with radar reflector (Robin) from rocket at 50-mile altitude.
August 10: USAF canceled research program to develop exotic chemical fuels for proposed Mach 8 B-70 bomber and F-108 Interceptor.
August 13: DISCOVERER V placed into polar orbit by AF Thor-Ageua A, but reentry capsule not recovered due to postejection malfunctions.
August 14: Willi Army ns executive agent of ABMA-JPL Project, Beacon satellite launched by Juuo II failed to go into orbit.
•	While EXPLORER VI satellite
was passing over Mexico at an altitude of about 17,000 miles, it successfully transmitted a crude picture of a sunlit, cresceut-sbnped portion of the North Central Pacific Ocean. The area of earth photographed was 20,000 square miles.
August 17: First of NIKE-ASP sounding rockets to provide geophysical information on wind activity between 50 and 150 miles high was launched successfully from NASA Wallops Station.
August 19: DISCOVERER VI satellite orbited successfully, but reentry capsule not recovered.
August 21: Launching of Mercury capsule niockup from Wallops Station to test the escape and recovery systems; emergency escape rocket accidentally fired 36 minutes before scheduled firing of the Little Joe booster.
•	NASA established Bloscienee Advisory Committee, headed by Dr. Seymour S. Kety, to study U.S. capability In space-oricntod life science research and development and to recommend future NASA role in this area in terms of a national space program.
August 24: USAF fired Atlas-0 5,000 miles and recovered nose cone camera with photographs of one-sixth of earth's surface taken from 700 miles up, near Ascension Island.
August 25: NASA Western Operations Office. Santa Monica, Calif., made responsible for liaison, administrative, and management support west of Denver, Colo., for rapidly expanding NASA research and development activities.
•	Reflected signals off the moon successfully received ut tbe University of Texas from the Royal Radar Establishment at Malvern, England.
August 27: Satellite tracking station at Woomcra, Australia, successfully photographed EXPLORER VI at a distance of 14,000 miles.
•	First British Commonwealth Symposium on Space Flight began In London.
August 29: Navy technician withstood record 31 g’s in centrifuge at AMAL,
Jobnsville, Pa.
August 31: Tenth IAF meeting opened in London.
September 1: USAF Atlas ICBM officially declared operational and taken over by the Strategic Air Command, at Vandenberg AFB.
September 2: Dr. Theodore von K&rmfin named chairman of a committee to establish an International Academy on Astronautics.
September 4: ONR SKYHOOK unmanned balloon launched from Sioux Falls, S. Dak., by Raven Industries, establishing new unofficial altitude record of
148,000	feet for unmanned balloon.
September 9: NASA boilerplate model of Mercury capsule successfully launched on an Atlas (Big Joe) missile from AMR and recovered in South Atlantic after surviving reentry heat of more than 10,000* F.
•	First launch of operational AF
Atlas ICBM from Vandenberg AFB was successful, and second Atlas ICBM fired from Cape Canaveral tbe same day.
September 12: Russia’s LUNIK II launched with n total payload weight of 858.4 pounds, became the first manmade object to bit tbe moon on tbe following day. Its launcblng coincided wltb tbe departure of Premier Nikita Khrushchev for tbe United States in turboprop Tu-114. (See Appendix A.)
September 15: First static test firing of USAF Mlnutcman, a second generation solid-fuel ICBM.
•	Premier Khrushchev presented
President Eisenhower with a replica of the Soviet coat of arms iupneted on tbe moon on September 13.
September 16: Army Jupiter launched with NASA biomedical experiment from Capo Canaveral, destroyed by a range officer after lisbtuillDg.
•	Full-sized USAF Mlnuteinau ICBM
model launched from underground silo.
Scptetnber 17: ARPA-Navy TRANSIT IA navigation satellite was successfully launched by Thor-Abie booster, but did not orbit due to third-stage malfunction.
•	First powered flight of X-15 (No.
2) research airplane, released from its B-52 mother ship approximately 36 minutes after takeoff (Interim Thlokol-RMD XLR-11 engines), A. Scott Crossfield as pilot.
September 18: VANGUARD III, sixth U.S.-IQV satellite, successfully injected into orbit, marking tbe end of Vanguard launching activities. VANGUARD III provided comprehensive survey of magnetic field, lower edge of radiation belts, and accurate mlcrometeorlte impacts.
•	Secretary of Defense McElroy issued order entitled “Satellite and Space Vehicle Operations,*’ assigning basic responsibilities.
September 22: Nuclear submarine Patrick Henry launched at Groton, Conn.
September 23: Director of Defense Research and Engineering, Ur. Herbert F. Fork, announced reorganization of mlU-tary space and missile program, with major rolo going to Air Force. Four ARPA space projects were to be transferred to the services.
September 24: NASA Atlas-Able-4 launch vehicle, minus Its payload, undergoing static tests at AMR, exploded while being prepared for tbe launch of a 375-pound satellite Into a lunar orbit In October.
September 27: NASA renamed High Specd Flight Station at Edwards, Calif., to be NASA Flight Research Center, f consistent with mission responsibility for all but STOL and VTOL flight research at low-speed ranges conducted at NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
September 28: Pictures taken from satellite EXPLORER VI over Mexico at 19,500 miles altitude on August 14, were
released by NASA. Picture showed crescent shape of the sunlit portion of the earth and crude cloud-cover Image.
During September: Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, took part In n number of discussions wlt'i European scientific community to assess space Interest there and to Indicate NASA’s desire to work out possible cooperative space research programs.
October 1: NASA personnel total reached 9,347.
October 2: AFMTO Commander MaJ. Gen. Donald N. Yates, appointed Department of Defense representative for Project Mercury support operations.
October 4: NASA LITTLE JOE launch vehicle carrying a boilerplate Mercury capsule with a dummy escape system successfully launched from Wallops Station, Va.
•	LUNIK III, Russia’s translunar
earth sateUlte began photographing trip around the moon, wbUe Premier Khrushchev was visiting Peiping. (See Appendix A.)
October 6: EXPLORER VI ceased transmissions.
•	USAF launched an Atlas ICBM
and a Thor IRBM at their full range from Cape Canaveral.
October 8: PIONEER IV reached first aphelion (estimated 107,951,000 miles) in Its orbit around tbe sun at 8 p.m., e.s.t. Since launch on March 3, PIONEER IV was tracked by JPL’s Golds tone tracking station to 407,000 miles from earth.
October 13: EXPLORER VIII, tbe seventh and last U.S.-IGY earth satellite, and now under direction of NASA with the Army as executive agent, launched into an earth orbit by modified Army Juno II. By late December, data from the satellite indicated possible relationships between solar events and geomagnetic storms, and revealed Information about trapped radiation and cosmic rays near the eartb. With launching of this ABMA-JPL project, all experiments for the U.S.-IGY space program bad been successfully placed Into orbit.
October 13: USAF Bold Orlou launched from B—17 near Patrick AFB passed within 4 miles of EXPLORER VI at an altitude of 160 miles in test firing.
October 14: First successful flight test of Nlke-Zeus at WSPG.
October 17: A second powered free flight of the X-15 (No. 2) research airplane accomplished most planned objectives.
October 18: LUNIK III provided man’s first look at 70 percent of the backside of tbe moon, 2 weeks after launch, by transmitting automatically taken pictures. Pictures were released on October 26.
October 21: Tbe President by Executive Order indicated that tbe Development Operations Division of ABMA would be transferred to NASA, subject to the approval of Congress.
October 26: USSR released photo of the far side of tbe moon taken by LUNIK III.
October 28: 100-foot-dlameter Inflatable sphere launched on a suborbltal test flight from NASA Wallops Station, Va., to an altitude of 250 miles by a first Sergeant-Delta recket; aluminum-coated Mylar-plastic sphero to be used as passive electronic rcficctor in Echo was de--veloped by NASA Langley’s Space Vehicle Group under the direction of William J. O’Sullivan.
October 29: USAF Atlas successfully launched from Cape Canaveral carrying a nose-cone camera which took a series of pbotogruphs of the earth’s cloud cover from a 300-mlle altitude.
November 2: President Elsenhower announced his intention of transferring the Saturn project to NASA, which became effective on March 15,1900.
November 4: NASA launched a second LITTLE) .TOE from Wallops Station, to test the Mercury escape system under severe dynamic pressure; launch vehicle functioned perfectly, but tbe escape recket ignited several seconds too late,
November 5: Third powered flight of the ”-35 (No. 2).
November 7: USAF DISCOVERER VII satellite placed into polar orbit, but capsule recovery not achieved.
November 9:. Entire outer Van Allen radiation belt broke up and disappeared for several days, according to data analysis from EXPLORER VII reported at AAAS meeting in New Fork, December 29, I960.
November 10: Five-stage sounding recket launched from NASA Wallops 'Island to an altitude of 1,050 miles to measure density of electrons in upper atmosphere.
•	The AEC's SNAP 2 Experimental
Reactor (SER) achieved initial design power of 50 thermal kilowatts in developmental tests at the Atomics International, Santa Susana, Calif., test site. SER, the first reactor designed for use In space, was being developed for Air Force surveillance satellite systems.
•	Air Force placed contracts for
Dyna-Soar project with Boeing and Martin.
November 11-22: Under sponsorship of COSPAR, an internationally coordinated program of scientific rocket soundings of the upper atmosphere was conducted. Tbe U.S. contribution included 10 recket firings.
November 13: National Science Foundation and the Oflke of Naval Research released select photographs from the more than 1,009 taken of the sun on Strato-scopo balloon flights over Minnesota on July 11. August 17, and September 4.
November 14: World’s largest balloon (10T cubic feet) launched from Strato-bowl near Rapid City, S. Dak., by Winzen Research, reaching maximum altitude of near 118,000 feet with a 1-ton payload suspended.
•	New Aerospace Medical Center
dedicated at Brooks AFB, Tex.
November 16: Capt. Joseph W. Klttinger, Jr. (USAF), made record parachute Jump from open balloon gondola at an altitude of 70,400 feet (EXCELSIOR I).
November 17: Based on September decision that all Department of Defense satellite and space vehicle programs would be assigned to the military service
of primary interest, various projects were assigned. Discoverer, Midas, and Samos were transferred from ARPA to the Air Force.
•	Pending formal transfer of the
Saturn project, the Asseciote Administrator of NASA requested the Director of Space Flight Development to form a study group with membership from NASA, the Directorate of Defense Research and Engineering, ARPA, ABMA, and the Air Force to prepare recommendations for the development, and selection of upper stage configurations.
November 18: Nike-Asp sounding recket fired from NASA Wallops Station emitted sodium vapor at 56-mile altitude to 156 miles, revealing powerful windshear effects.
•	NASA-DOD memorandum of understanding signed providing for interim management of Project Saturn pending its formal transfer to NASA.
November 19: Second sodlum-vapor-trall experiment in Nike-Asp launch from Wallops Island waa not successful.
November 20: DISCOVERER VIII satellite successfully placed into polar orbit, but capsule was not recovered.
•	Polaris test missiles successfully
launched from launching ship. Observation Island, oft Cape Canaveral.
November 26: Pioneer lunar probe was normally lifted by Atlas-Able 4 luuuch vcbicle, but failure of plastic fairing covering payload (at 45 seconds after launch) caused payload to break away.
November 27: Hiller X-18 tllt-wlng research transport made first fllgbt at Edwards AFB.
November 28: Duijng severe geomagnetic storm, two Geiger tubes on EXPLORER YII found anomalies In tbe outer radiation zone at about 1,000-km altitude, which appeared to be correlated in space and time with optical emissions from the atmosphere below. Very Intense narrow zones of radiation were detected over a visible aurora during one orbit
November 28-29: Comdr. M. Ross and Dr. 0. B. Moore flew ONR STRATO-LAB HIGH IV balloon to an altitude of 81,000 feet, using a lG-lnch telescope and spectro-
graph, and observing water vapor in the atmosphere of the planet Venus.
During November: Prototype Goodrich full-pressure Mercury astronaut suits (modified Navy Mark IV) were delivered to NASA. Navy Air Crew Equipment Laboratory (NACEL) of Philadelphia fitted suits and indoctrinated tbe astronauts on their use.
•	Cooperative space efforts were discussed with Soviet scientists attending the American Rocket Society meeting in Washington, D.G.
December 1: 12 nations (including United States and U.S.S.R.) signed Antarctic Treaty promoting scientific research and barring any military activity in the area.
•	New Bureau of Naval Weapons,
consolidating the Bureau of Ordnance and the Bureau of Aeronautics, began functioning.
•	USAF reduced order for the B-70
bomber to only two prototypes.
December 2: Construction of a missile tracking station on Rol Namur Island near Kwajalein In the Central Pacific was announced by DOD.
December 4: Third LITTLE JOE successfully launched at NASA Wallops Station as part of Project Mercury development program, curried a monkey named "Sam" 55 miles into space which was recovered safely.
December 7: Unofficial altitude record of 08,560 feet set by Navy McDonnell F4II carrier Jet at Edwards AFB, Comdr. L. E. Flint as pilot
•	Administrator of NASA, Dr. T.
Keith Glennan, offered services of U.S, worldwide tracking network in support of any manned space flight the U.S.S.R might plan to undertake, in a speech before the Institute of World Affairs in Pasadena, Calif.
•	Nine nations Including the Soviet
Union approved a new charter for COSPAR at The Hague, which opened membership in COSPAR to all national academies of science engaged in space research, and created a nine-representative executive board. The U.S.S.R. had not participated in COSPAR deliberations since November 1058.
December 8: Mnj. (leu. Don R. Ostrander (USAF) mimed Director of NASA’s Office of I.numii Vehicle Programs and re-S]K>nsiblo for launch vehicle development aud operations.
•	Brig. Gen. Austin W. Betts (USA)
was named Director of ARPA to replace Acting Director, Gen. D. Ostrander (USAF).
December 9: USAF Goodyenr unmanned balloon launched from Akron, Ohio, to an altitude of 100,006 feet, where radar photographs of the earth's surface were taken.
•	Kaman H-43B established new
helicopter altitude record of 30,160 feet.
December 10: U.S. Ambassador Lodge presented a resolution to the Assembly of tbe United Nations recommending that an international conference on the peaceful uses of outer space be convened In 1960 or 1961.
December 11: Capt. J. Klttinger (USAF) fiew EXCELSIOR II balloon from Holloman AFR to an altitude of 74,700 feet and bailed out, establishing stable free fall for 55,000 feet.
•	New world specd record for 100-km
closed course set by llilg. Gen. J. H. Moore (USAF) In F-105B, at 1,216.48 mph.
•	NASA discontinued multistage
Vega vehicle program to reduce number of rocket vehicles and to exploit reliability fnctor In futuro satellite and space projects.
December 12: First Titan ICBM launching testing second stage was unsuccessful at AMR.
•	United Nations created permanent
24-nation committee to study Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and to arrange for nn international conference.
December 14: Lockheed F-1040 piloted by Capt J. B. Jordan (USAF) climbed to new world’s record for Jet aircraft of 103,389 feet.
December 15: Convalr F-106A broke straightaway course record at 1,525.95 uiph, piloted by MaJ. J. W. Rogers (USAF).
•	NASA released detailed comparison of United States and U.S.S.R. space sciences programs prepared by Dr. Homer E. Newell, which pointed up the Importance of leadtime in vehicle technology.
Mid-December: NASA team completed study design of upper stages of Saturn launch vehicle.
December 16: Transmitters of VANGUARD III, launched on September 18, becauio silent after providing tracking signals and scientific data for 85 days. Satellite was expected to remain In orbit 40 years.
December 17: Launching of NASA-AFBMD Thor-Able space probe designed to boost 90-pound payload to explore space between Barth and Venus was postponed.
December 18: Atlas IOBM made second successful 0,325-mlie flight at AMR.
December 19: The Chairman, ABC, in a letter to the Administrator of NASA, proposed a flight test objective be established for the nuclear recket program and proposed a technical program and division of agency responsibilities to achieve those objectives.
December 20: Ur. Melvin Calvin reported that molecules In meteorites resembled basic constituents of genetic material found on earth.
December 22: In a United States-Cana-dian cooperative project, NASA launched the first four-stage Javelin sounding recket from Wallops Station to an altitude of 560 miles to measure the intensity of galactic radio noise.
December 27: NASA proposed joint space efforts with other nations to promote international cooperation in space research.
December 30: U.S.S. George Washington. the first fleet Polaris submarine, was commissioned.
•	Scientists associated with EXPLORER VII experiments reported their preliminary finding* in a press conference at NASA Ilendquurters, which iudl-calcd sporadic hurst of rudlallou from the sun could luilueuce manned space iiight
December 31: Mercury astronauts completed basic and thecretlcal studies in i their training program and started practical engineering studies.
•	More than 160 drop tests of boller-
j plate Mercury capsuleB had been com-| pleted from aircraft to test and develop the parachute system.
•	Approximately 300 U.S. research
rockets were launched during the 30-; month IGY/IGC-59 period: 221 of these were launched during the IGY. This compared with the some 400 U.S. re-I search reckets fired during the entire preceding 12-year period from the beginning of high-altitude rocket research circa 1945 to July 1,1957.
•	The IQT/IGC-69 program ended,
but international cooperation In geophysics was to continue without a formal name under the sponsorship of International Council of Scientific Unions. NASA continued to make dnta from scientific satellites and space probes available to the world scientific community utilizing COSPAR and World Data Centers established during the IGF.
During December:	National Radio
Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., placed its 85-foot cquatorially mounted radio telescope in full operation and continued construction of its 140-foot telescope which was planned for operation in 1001. All qualified U.S. astronomers have access to these facilities sponsored by the National Science Foundation, with priorities determined by the scientific merit of their respective projects.
•	USAF Test Pilot School at Howards
AFB proposed curriculum for Space Research Pilot Course In defining training needs for 1960-65.
•	Briefing on the orbiting Astronomical Observatory Satellite (AOS) pro-i gram was given for Interested members of industry at NASA headquarters.
During 1059: Lewis Research Center developed general method for automatic compulation of theoretical recket performance for propellant combinations involving up to 10 chemical elements; method permitting rapid performance calculation for virtually uny conceivable fuel-oxidant combination.
•	Pratt & Whitney conducted thrust
chamber tests of high-energy upper stage recket engine using liquid hydrogen (RCIO).
•	Previous experience led NASA
Lewis Research Center to design and construct experimental high-temperature jet engine which demonstrated feasibility of gas turbine operation at inlet gas temperatures up to 2,500* F, almost 1,000* above conventional gas-turbine engine. This test engine had a cooled turbine.
•	Aeromedlcal Laboratory completed
development and testing of the fuil-prea-sure pilot suit for use by pilots of the X-15.
•	The National Science Foundation
sited a national observatory on Kltt Peak, Ariz., 40 miles southwest of Tucson, for construction of a 36-inch reflector and an 80-inch telescope, and a 60-inch solar telescope. The solar telescope is scheduled for completion in 1961 and will be several times larger than the largest instrument of its kind in existence.
•	NASA Lewis Research Center first
operated hydrogen fluorine thrust chambers at simulated high-ullltudc conditions obtaining unusually high performance.
•	Aeromedlcal Field Laboratory at
llollomau AFB began trnlnlug of chimpanzees for flights in ballistic and orbital flights for Project Mercury.
•	School of Aviation Medicine undertook to evolve a system for maintaining animals in sealed, self-contained ecological systems under a variety of physical conditions, such as weightlessness, acceleration, vibration, and spinning.
•	Transatlantic atr passengers totaled 1,367,000 persons on scheduled flights and 173,000 on charter and special flights for the year, as compared to 884,-000 sea passengers.
