X-15 (No. 1) with interim engines and with MaJ. Robert M. White (USAF) at the controls, established a new altitude record for a manned vehicle of 136,506 feet. This topped Captain Klncheioe’s record altitude of 126,-200 feet attained on September 7, 1956, in the X-2 rocket research aircraft.
NASA established Test Support Office at the Pacific Missile Range (PMR), to function under Launch Operations Directorate, Marshall Space Flight Center.
The President formaUy asked Congress to amend tbe National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, "to clarify management responsibilities and to streamline organizational arrangements concerning the national program of space exploration.”
Space Technology Labora-tories was selected by NASA for contract negotiations for an orbiting geophysical observatory (OGO) satellite program. To be managed by GSFC, OGO will be NASA's first standardized satellite, often referred to as the "streetcar" satellite, capable of placing 50 different geophysi-cal experiments on any one flight.
NASA LITTLE JOB test flight of Mercury capsule, capsule did not separate from booster.
Goddar<} Space Flight Center scientists, Robert Jastrow and Robert Bryant, reported that atmospheric drag acting on ECHO I during the severe solar storm of November 12, was increased by about a factor of two. Scientists bad previously noted the rise and fall of the density of the upper atmosphere, and the heating effect of a solar fiare had been noted on the orbit of SPUTNIK III in 1059.
NASA launching record for the year: 22 major space flight attempts, over two-thirds of which were fully successful.
To date, the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had photographed approximately 17,200 satellite passages with the Baker-Nunn Optical Network, and had recorded 17,000 visual observations by Moonwatch.
NASA scientists Increased the speed of spin of TIROS II by means of ground radio command.
Atmosphere entry simulator at NASA Ames Research Center completed first successful launch and recovery of test model launched at satellite speed of 17,000 mph. First proposed by A. Eggers In 1955, lt bad previously provided important Information at ballistic speeds. Throughout 1959-00, Ames scientists contributed to understanding of flight characteristics nt altitudes over 100 miles, using low density research apparatus. During 1960: NASA Lewis Re-, search Center completed flight safety research program involving over 30 full-scale experimental crushes and laboratory studies leading to improved criteria for survivability.
NASA announced creation of Launch Operations Directorate (LOD) to become operational on July 1, to be beaded by Dr. Kurt Debus of Marshall Space Flight Center, who headed the Army launch operations of EXPLORER 1 and the first American payload to orbit the sun, PIONEER IV.
First Industry Conference conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.
Lewis Research Center began testing of high-energy hydrogen-oxygen engines in on altitude test facility capable of subjecting an entire propulsion system to a space environment On June 17, LRO began similar testing of hydrogen-fluorine engines.
X-15 (No. 2) flown on final contractor’s test flight by A. Scott Crossfleid, making two midair engine shutdowns and restarts.
Smithsonian Astrophyslcal Observatory reported tbat solar pressure was pushing ECHO I’s perigee 116 miles closer to the earth every 24 hours.
Donald Piccard established Class I world altitude record of 3,740 feet in plastic balloon HOLIDAY, from Minneapolis, Minn.
Research Division created in USAF Research and Development Command to coordinate basic research. January 16:	Second Sergeant-Delta launched 100-foot-dinmeter Inflatable sphere to an altitude of 250 miles from Wallops Station, a development flight of Project Echo.
Panel on Science and Technology of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics held its second meeting in Washington.
NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, with Dr. Wemher von Braun as Its Director, officially opened with formal transfer to NASA from ARMA, at Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, Ala.
X-15 (No. 2) flown on second test flight with XLR-90 engine by A. Scott Crossfield, restarting the engine in flight for the first time.
House Science and Astronautics Committee announced members of its Panel on Science and Technology to provide consultation on major problems.
NASA announced establishment of the Office of Life Sciences to provide fecal point for broad-based scientific study of life processes provided by the space exploration program, not to duplicate existing effort In military laboratories. Ur. Clark T. Randt was named as Director.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced selection of Biaw-Knox Equipment, Hughes Aircraft, North American Aviation, and Westlnghouse Electric to study feasibility of a large space-tracking antenna.
Prof. A. Gib DuBusk, geneticist at Florida State University, reported that bread mold specimens, rocketed to 1,200-mtie altitude on Argo D-8 capsule on September 19, had shown 30 times as many changes as control cells.
NASA presented Its 10-year plan of space activities to Congress; the plan Included 25 major vehicle launchings per year of Increasing mission capability as research and development programs proceed.
First flight and first powered flight of the X-15 (No. 1) in the NASA/USAF research program, NASA'b Joseph A. Walker as pilot.
Aero Cominauder 680F set a world class altitude record of 36,932 feet for light aircraft, Jerrle Cobb as pilot.
President Elsenhower formally dedicated the NASA George O. Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala.
Project Ozmn initiated to listen tor possible Blgnal patterns from outer space other than natural “noise," at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va.
Aerospace Corp., a nonprofit civilian organization to manage engineering, research, and development aspects of missile and military space programs, was established by the USAF.
North American A3-J Vigilante set a world altitude record with
X-15 (No. 2} with new XLR-99 engine (57,000-pound thrust) flown to nearly 80,000 feet and 2,000 mph on first test flight by A. Scott Crossfleld at Edwards AFB, Calif. Earlier interim engine, XLR-11 with one-quarter of the thrust of the XLR-99, had pushed the X-15 to new world speed and altitude records of 2,196 mph and 136,500 feet
George C. Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala., named by Executive Order of tbe President.
NASA’s Blosclence Advisory Committee submitted its report recommending establishment of an office to concern Itself with the role of life sciences in space exploration.
USAF announced consideration of proposals for “aerospace plane” capable of scooping up tons of oxygen in upper atmosphere before space flight, theu reentering for landing as an airplane. During October: Construction of space simulator began at Rye Canyon Research Center of Lockheed for study of disintegration of materials at simulated 800,000 feet at temperature of —320° F.
