NASA informed Marshall Space Flight Center that management of the Agena B vehicle system would be retained at Marshall Space Flight Center.
NASA selected Hughes Aircraft Co. for placing of a major subcontract by Jet Propulsion Laboratory to build seven Surveyor spacecraft designed for soft landings on the Moon.
The Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Foundation announced openings for 18 young scientists and engineers for graduate study in rockets, jet propulsion, space llight and space structures at Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Aerospace Laboratory at Princeton, and the Institute of Flight Structures at Columbia. Established in 1949, Guggenheim fellowship program in the aerospace sciences has provided financial aid to 142 students to date.
Saturn SA-T2 booster successfully static tested for 111 seconds at Marshall Space Flight Center.
Scientists at Nagoya University, Japan, were reported to be training monkey for space flight next year, hopefully in conjunction with Japanese Government-financed rocket program carried out by Tokyo University’s Institute of Industrial Science.
NASA announced that a Life Sciences Research Laboratory would be established on February 1 at NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
NASA announced that a two-stage Saturn C-l will be used for the first 10 research and development flights.
Dr. Joseph F. Shea was appointed Deputy Director for Systems Engineering, Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA headquarters, reporting to D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA’s Director of Manned Space Flight. Dr. Shea came to NASA from Space Technology Laboratories.
President Kennedy directed the National Aeronautics and Space Council to undertake a full study of the Nation’s communications satellite policy, stated that leadership in science and technology should be exercised to achieve worldwide communications through the use of satellites at the earliest practicable date. While no commitments as to an operational system should be made, the President stated that the Government would “conduct and encourage research and development to advance the state of the art and to give maximum assurance of rapid and continuing scientific and technological progress.”
USAF announced expansion of gaseous physics research activities with the construction of a $636,000 laboratory at L. G. Hanscom Field, Bedford, Mass., as a part of the Cambridge Research Laboratory.
NASA Administrator Webb, speaking to the American Rocket Society, said NASA scientists “are going to consider the rendezvous technique with great care before going ahead with Nova.” Decision on whether to give priority to the rendezvous technique would probably be made by the end of 1961, he said.
NASA outlined specifications for a low-altitude active communications satellite Project Relay at Goddard Space Flight Center.
Inhouse procurement policies and practices of NASA reviewed by headquarters and field personnel in conference at Lewis Research Center.
Japan’s launch facilities for its rocket research program would be moved from Akita on the northwest coast of Honshu to Kagoshima on the southern tip of Kiushu, according to an announcement by Hideo Itokawa at the Thul International Symposium on Rockets and Astronautics in Tokyo.
Explorer XIII (S-55A) placed into orbit by NASA Scout from Wallops, a micrometeorite counting satellite developed by Langley Research Center and Goddard Space Flight Center.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory awarded contract to Beckman Instruments for design studies on equipment to analyze the surface of the Moon.
NASA Space Task Group selected John H. Glenn, Jr., Virgil I. Grissom, and Alan B. Shepard, Jr., to begin special training for first manned Mercury space flight.
NASA Robert H. Goddard Space Flight Center officially dedicated at Greenbelt, Md., dedication address delivered by Dr. Detlev Bronk, President of the National Academy of Sciences. It was the 35th anniversary of Dr. Goddard’s successful launching of the world’s first liquid fuel rocket. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard accepted the congressional medal honoring her husband.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory briefed NASA headquarters on the Venus radar tracking experiment, after 2 months of intensive study begun on March 10.
Freedom 7, manned Mercury spacecraft (No. 7) carrying Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as pilot, was launched from Cape Canaveral by Mercury-Redstone (MR-3) launch vehicle, to an altitude of 115.696 miles and a range of 302 miles. It was the first American manned space flight. Shepard demonstrated that man can control a vehicle during weightlessness and high G stresses, and significant scientific biomedical data were acquired. He reached a speed of 5,100 miles per hour and flight lasted 14.8 minutes.
NASA Administrator Webb announced that location of the new Manned Spacecraft Center would be in Houston, Tex., the conclusion of an intensive nationwide study by a site selection team. The Manned Spacecraft Center would be the command center for the manned lunar landing mission and all follow-on manned space flight missions. This announcement was the third basic decision on major facilities required for the expanded U.S. Range and the establishment of the spacecraft fabrication center at the Michoud Ordnance Plant near New Orleans, La. Center at the Michoud Ordnance Plant near New Orleans, La.
NASA announced first success in immediate detection in real time of radar signals off planet Venus by Jet Propulsion Laboratory Goldstone, as part of 2-month research program.
Long duration static test of the S-I stage (SA-2 vehicle) occurred at Marshall Space Flight Center, for a period of 120 seconds.
Lewis Research Center scientists, G. B. Brown and E. E. Callighan, reported at 1961 International Conference on High Magnetic Fields at MIT, that NASA was constructing a magnetic shield of superconducting alloys for future manned spacecraft.
Last of second series of static firings of Saturn completed at Marshall Space Flight Center for 110 seconds, approximately full duration.
NASA Launch Operations Directorate announced establishment of Offices of Financial Management and of Procurement and Contracts to support NASA activities at Cape Canaveral, previously done by Marshall Space Flight Center.
White House issued statement by President Kennedy on “Communication Satellite Policy,” which outlined governmental responsibilities for research and development “to give maximum assurance of rapid and continuous scientific and technological progress,” and which affirmed that “private ownership and operation of the U.S. portion of the system is favored” within eight policy requirements. The President’s statement said that through this country’s leadership, communications through the use of space satellites should be developed “for global benefit at the earliest practicable date.” He invited “all nations to participate in a communication satellite system in the interest of world peace and closer brotherhood among peoples throughout the world.” And, during present phase of research and development, “no arrangements between the Government and private industry [should] contain any commitments as to an operational system.” In conclusion, the President said that “I am anxious that development of this new technology to bring the farthest corner of the globe within reach by voice and visual communication, fairly and equitably available for use, proceed with all possible promptness.”
William J. O’Sullivan, Jr., of Langley Research Center awarded the Second NASA Invention and Contribution Award for conception and development of the inflatable space vehicle. Proposed in January 1956 to the U.S. IGY Committee, O’Sullivan’s invention led to two successful NASA experiments, Echo I and Explorer IX, and U.S. Patent No. 2,996,212, entitled “SelfSupporting Space Vehicle ” issued to the NASA Administrator in behalf of the United States on August 15, 1961.
NASA established a Management Council to ensure the orderly and timely progress in the manned space flight programs. The Council, composed of senior officials from NASA headquarters, Marshall Space Flight Center, and the Manned Spacecraft Center, and chaired by D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of the Office of Manned Space Flight, would meet at least once a month to identify and resolve problems as early as possible and to coordinate the interface problems.
Reported from Stowe, Vt., that unofficial American-Soviet discussions on cooperative space exploration were near agreement, and that internationalized status for space similar to that achieved by treaty for the continent of Antarctica was under consideration. Delegations included seven members of President Kennedy’s Science Advisory Committee and six members of the ruling body of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. The Stowe Conference was sponsored by the National Academy of Arts and Sciences of Boston, with costs defrayed by the Ford Foundation.
Anniversary of the first flight of the USAF-USN-NASA X-15 powered with the XLR-99 engine (15 flights total to date). A $225 million research program under NASA management, test data indicated that X-15 would exceed its design limits by 100 percent in altitude and 17 percent in speed. The X-15 had already pushed near its design altitude limit of 250,000 feet (reached 217,000 feet October 11, 1961) and passed its maximum design speed of mach 6 (reached mach 6.04 November 9, 1961).
NASA’s Incentive Awards Committee determined that Dr. Henry J. E. Reid, Director Emeritus of the Langley Research Center, would receive NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal.
Ambassador Adlai Stevenson introduced a resolution before the U.N.’s Political Committee for a U.N. space program guided by four considerations: (1) Application of the principles of international law to outer space and celestial bodies to ensure against sovereignty claims in space; (2) making the U.N. a clearinghouse for use of outer space, including information on satellite launchings and cooperation for peaceful use of outer space; (3) international cooperation on weather satellite information; (4) international cooperation on communications satellites. Ambassador Stevenson said: “There is a right way and a wrong way to get on with the business of space exploration. In our judgment, the wrong way is to allow the march of science to become a runaway race into the unknown. “The right way is to make it an ordered, peaceful and cooperative and constructive forward march under the aegis of the United Nations.”
NASA Director of the Office of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, said, in an interview, that at least 10 Apollo spacecraft would be ordered in the manned lunar vehicle prime systems contract to be awarded in December 1961.
NASA Aerobee-Hi successfully reached 96 miles above Wallops Station in test of behavior of liquid hydrogen in zero gravity for Lewis Research Center hydrogen propulsion development.
Senate Government Operations Subcommittee on National Policy Machinery released report on “Science Organization and the President’s Office.” This study recommended that a new Office of Science and Technology be created in the Executive Office of the President.
Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, Harlan Cleveland, outlined in a speech at St. Louis University the seven-point program that the United States will propose to the United Nations General Assembly for guaranteeing peace and world cooperation in space: (1) Explicit confirmation that the U.N. Charter applies to the limits of space exploration; (2) a declaration that space and heavenly bodies are not subject to claim of national sovereignty; (3) an international system for registering of all objects launched into space; (4) a specialized space unit in the United Nations Secretariat ; (5) a world weather watch using satellites; (6) a cooperative search for ways toward weather modification; and (7) a global system of communications to link the world by telegraph, telephone, radio, and television.
New wind tunnel became operational at Ames Research Center, capable of research on reentry problems at speeds of mach 7.5, 10, and 15.
NASA’s Space Task Group, charged with carrying out Project Mercury and other manned space flight programs, officially became a separate NASA field element.
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory reported that Earth is a slightly irregular ellipsoid according to new calculations.
USAF reorganized its research and development activities, creating the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) to replace parts of the Air Research and Development Command and the Air Materiel Command, to be commanded by Lt. Gen. Bernard Schriever. Also separately created was the Office of Aerospace Research (OAR) to function as a separate air command reporting directly to Chief of Staff, USAF.
Joint F A A - DOD--NASA “Commercial Supersonic Transport Aircraft Report,” prepared by a joint task force, said that the development of a commercial transport airplane to fly three times the speed of sound tmach 3) was feasible and could be developed by 1970-71.
NASA selected Pearl River site in southwestern Mississippi, 35 miles from the Michoud plant in New Orleans, for static test facility for Saturn and Nova-class vehicles, completed facility to operate under direction of Marshall Space Flight Center.
Radar tracking of planet Venus for 7 weeks by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists had proved “astronomical yardstick” of 93,498,125 miles as the distance between the Earth and the Sun (within 1,000 miles of error).
NASA Administrator Webb issued a statement concerning the 2-year Mercury manned space flight program, which said, in part: “NASA has not attempted to encourage press coverage of the first Mercury-Redstone manned flight. It has responded to press and television requests, with the result that over 100 representatives of the press, radio, and TV are now at Cape Canaveral. * * * We must keep the perspective that each flight is but one of the many milestones we must pass. Some will completely succeed in every respect, some partially, and some will fail. From all of them will come mastery of the vast new space environment on which so much of our future depends.”
Life Sciences Laboratory established by NASA at Ames Research Center to augment, lead, direct, encourage, and coordinate biomedical research related to the space program.
Draft text of program of the Soviet Communist Party to be presented to its 22d Congress in October was released in English by Tass, official Soviet press agency. This new program, the first proposed since the one submitted by Lenin and adopted in 1919, made no direct or indirect reference to space exploration. On the role of science, it stated: “The party will do everything to enhance the role of science in the building of Communist society, it will encourage research to discover new possibilities for the development of the productive forces, and the rapid and extensive application of the latest scientific and technical achievements, a decisive advancement in experimental work, including research directly at enterprises, and the efficient organization of scientific and technical information and of the whole system of studying and disseminating progressive Soviet and foreign methods. Science will itself in full measure become a productive force * * *.”
In a brief ceremony, a bust of Samuel P. Langley was presented by Paul Garber, Curator of the National Air Museum, to the NASA Langley Research Center, during which Dr. Langley’s first demonstration of mechanical flight with his “Aerodrome” model in 1896 and his scientific contributions to astrophysics (i.e., the thermopile and the bolometer) were reviewed by Garber and Deputy NASA Administrator Dryden.
After a series of six static firings, the Saturn SA-T2 booster was removed from the static test tower at Marshall Space Flight Center.
U.S.S.R. announced policy of resumption of nuclear weapon testing which had been suspended March 31, 1958, and that bombs can be delivered anywhere in the world by “powerful rockets like those Majs. Yuri Gagarin and Gherman Titov rode to begin their unrivaled space flights around the Earth.” During August: NASA site selection team headed by John F. Parsons, Associate Director of Ames Research Center, toured possible sites for a manned spacecraft center.
National Bureau of Standards broke ground for new research facility at Gaithersburg, Md., which will include a megapound deadweight testing machine to provide measurement standards for multimillion rocket thrust requirements.
DOD revised its patent policy on space research and development contracts in accordance with present NASA patent provisions, such provisions already having been written into space communications contracts (i.e., Government retains royalty-free exclusive title to patents developed under contract).
Soviet astronomers claimed to have discovered the presence of oxygen in the atmosphere of Venus. Dr. Brian Warner of the London Observatory correlated and reinterpreted spectrographic data gathered earlier by Soviet Astronomer Nikolai Kozyrev.
Astronomers of Lick Observatory positioned 36-inch refractor telescope so as to intersect the path of Echo I at its predicted point of maximum elevation. Prediction of Goddard Space Flight Center was confirmed at exact time and within 10 minutes of arc.
First test inflation of 135-foot rigidized inflatable balloon • satellite hi' ■dirigibte’>bang&T, conducted by NASA Langley Research Center and G. T. Schjeldahl Co. at Weeksville, N.C.
MR-4 Liberty Bell 7, manned by Mercury Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, made successful 15-minute, 118-mile-high and 303-mile-long flight down Atlantic Missile Range, premature blowout of escape hatch flooding capsule and making helicopter pickup of Grissom difficult. Capsule sank in 18,000 feet of water after warning light indicated helicopter engine was overheating and the capsule was cast loose. This was the second successful manned suborbital space flight.
NAA delivered X-15 No. 2 with XLR-99 engine to NASA for the initiation of the NASA flight research program.
X-15 flown to announced record 4,070 miles per hour (later revised to 4,093) by Maj. Robert White, U.S. Air Force, in top-speed test flight, making safe landing with outer right windshield cracked.
Director of Marshall Space Flight Center directed that further engineering work on Saturn C-2 configuration would be discontinued, and that efforts would be applied to clarification of the Saturn C-3 and Nova concepts.
New organization of NASA headquarters became effective, which established four major program offices (Manned Space Flight, Space Sciences, Advanced Research and Technology, and Applications), and provided center directors with direct line to the Office of the Associate Administrator.
Construction of dynamic test stand for Saturn completed at Marshall Space Flight Center.
Ablation model test with electric arc attained 4,000° F. for 105 seconds at Langley Research Center, one of a series of tests begun in September 1960.
NASA announced accelerated recruiting of qualified scientists and engineers at its field centers to fill anticipated manpower requirements in the expanded space exploration program. During 1960 NASA interviewed 3,000 persons on 100 college campuses.
NASA and the Argentine Comision Nacional de Investigaciones Espaciales signed a memorandum of understanding for a cooperative space science research program using sounding rockets.
Largest known rocket launch to date, the Saturn 1st stage booster, successful on first test flight from Atlantic Missile Range. With its eight clustered engines developing almost 1.3 million pounds of thrust at launch, the Saturn (SA-1) hurled water-filled dummy upper stages to an altitude of 84.8 miles and 214.7 miles down range. In a postlaunch statement, Administrator Webb said: “The flight today was a splendid demonstration of the strength of our national space program and an important milestone in the buildup of our national capacity to launch heavy payloads necessary to carry out the program projected by President Kennedy on May 25. We in NASA deeply appreciate the contribution by the military services and American industry in achieving this important milestone. * * *” Development of Saturn had begun under Advanced Research Projects Agency auspices in 1958.
Celestial simulator” at Jet Propulsion Laboratory in final checkout, an “instant universe” chamber which can duplicate white light and infrared point sources of solar system bodies likely to be used for navigation and attitude control of spacecraft.
President Eisenhower in his state of the Union address to Congress reviewed U.S. progress in space exploration, stating, “These achievements unquestionably make us pre-eminent in space exploration for the betterment of mankind.”
Wind tunnel testing of model of the first Saturn (SA-1) began at Arnold Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn.
Saturn static firing of 44.17 seconds’ duration to test-fire detection system at engine position No. 2 was successful, the second SA-1 flight qualification test at Marshall Space Flight Center.
USAF completed Titan I research and development test flight program of 40 launches at the Atlantic Missile Range; of the 40 launches 4 had been failures.
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratory successfully flighttested largest plastic balloon (318 feet in diameter and 434 feet long).
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket fired from Eglin Gulf Test Range by Cambridge Research Laboratory with micrometeorite counting payload.
In testimony before House Appropriations Committee, Hugh L. Dryden revealed that simulated free-flight speeds just under 30,000 miles per hour had been achieved at NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
Biomedical results of Mercury-Redstone space flight of Alan B. Shepard, Jr., publicly reported at a special conference in Washington sponsored by NASA, National Institutes of Health, and the National Academy of Sciences. Shepard’s heart reached a maximum of 138 beats per minute during the flight.
NASA announced decision to launch manned lunar flights and other missions requiring Saturn and Nova class vehicles from expanded Cape Canaveral facilities. Based upon national space goals announced by the President in May, NASA plans call for acquisition of 80,000 acres north and west of AFMTC, to be administered by the USAF as agent for NASA and as a part of the Atlantic Missile Range. Decision followed intensive NASA-DOD survey for launching facilities, including trajectory advantages, overflight or booster impact hazards, air and water transportation, instrumentation support, and cost, time, and land availability advantages. Expansion of Cape Canaveral was noted as first of three major steps in accelerating the U.S. space program, the remaining two steps being a manned space flight research center, and a booster fabrication and test facility.
World altitude record for aircraft of 113,891 feet (34,714 meters) flown by G. Mussolov in Soviet E-66A.
Dr. Sydney Chapman of the British Royal Observatory reported at Langley Research Center-National Research Founda-tion-Virginia Polytechnic Institute conference that evidence suggested existence of a third radiation belt surrounding the Earth—except for areas above the poles—at altitudes between 20,000	and 28,000 miles.
Announced that the largest quartz lens ever ground had been completed by Bausch & Lomb for use in NASA’s optical solar simulation system at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The lens is 36 inches in diameter, 6 inches thick at the center, and weighs 350 pounds.
Collapse of a lock in the Wheeler Dam below Huntsville on the Tennessee River interdicted the planned water route of the first Saturn space booster from Marshall Space Flight Center to Cape Canaveral on the barge Palaemon.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that construction was underway on the first large space simulator in the United States capable of testing full-scale spacecraft of the Ranger and Mariner classes with the three primary space effects—solar radiation, cold space heat sink, and a high vacuum equivalent to about one part in a billion (1:1,000,000,000) of the atmospheric pressure on the Earth.
Administrator Webb announced major organizational changes and top-level appointments in NASA. Keyed to the Nation’s accelerated civilian space program, changes provided clearer focus on major programs, and provided center directors with a louder voice in policymaking and program decisions. Effective November 1, major headquarters program offices would be headed as follows: Ira H. Abbott, Director of the Office of Advanced Research and Technology; Homer E. Newell, Director of the Office of Space Sciences; D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of the Office of Manned Space Flight; and an Office of Applications Programs with no director yet named. Thomas F. Dixon was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator. Abe Silverstein was named Director of the Lewis Research Center and Robert R. Gilruth, Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center.
In a speech at Naval Research Laboratory, Harold Brown, Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said Government labs would hereafter be the “primary means” for carrying out military weapon programs; that DOD would seek an increase in the number of supergrade scientific positions and would ask for the same top pay for scientists as NASA has; that labs would be given increased status in the chain of command; and that lab directors will be given funds they can spend for research without prior approval.
NASA Ames Research Center measured the intensity of radiation from the hot gas over the nose of a model flying through the air at 42,300 feet per second. This speed was in excess of parabolic atmospheric entry speed and the data are significant in relation to development of lunar spacecraft. The speed, 11,100 feet per second higher than maximum air speed obtained previously, was achieved by firing the model from a light-gas gun into a highspeed jet of air flowing in the opposite direction from a shock-driven wind tunnel.
NASA Langley Research Center awarded contract to Marquardt Corp. to increase structural wind tunnel testing temperature from 600° to 2,000° F.
NASA announced establishment of Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) in New York City, which would be an extension of the Theoretical Division of Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. It will be headed by Dr. Robert Jastrow.
First flight model of Saturn booster (SA-1) installed on static test stand for preflight checkout, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville.
NASA Agena B management meeting was held at Marshall Space Flight Center with representatives from MSFC, NASA headquarters, AFSSD, LMSD, JPL, and GSFC.
Paul F. Bikle set world glider altitude record of 46,267 feet in Schweizer 1-23-E sailplane, beating record of 42,100 feet set by W. S. Ivans in 1950. Bikle is Director of NASA Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif., which is conducting the X-15 flight research program.
Dr. Edward R. Sharp, Director Emeritus of the NASA Lewis Research Center since his retirement in January, died. Joining NACA in 1922, Dr. Sharp was the first Manager of the Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in 1941, and became its Director in 1947. He had received the U.S. Medal for Merit from President Truman in 1947.
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) awarded contracts to North American Aviation and Ryan Aeronautical to develop paraglider recovery system for the Saturn booster, based upon concept developed by Francis M. Rogallo of NASA’s Langley Research Center.
Javelin launched 70.6-pound payload to an altitude of 475 miles in beginning of Goddard Space Flight Center program to measure the density of electrons in the ionosphere.
Final report of House Committee on Science and Astronautics relating to their hearings on “Commercial Applications of Space Communications Systems” released, having among its conclusions: (1)	Because of worldwide interest and potential usefulness of a space communications system, the U.S. Government must “retain maximum flexibility regarding the central question of ownership and operation of the system.” (2)	NASA will not only evaluate the various commercial proposals but will “conduct all space launches and retain direct control over all launching equipment, facilities, and personnel.” (3)	Research and development of military space communications systems should continue to be conducted by DOD but all research and development in space communications “should be conducted under the general supervision of NASA in accordance with its statutory mandate to 'plan, direct, and conduct aeronautical and space activities’ ” as well as evaluate the technical merits of proposed systems.
Kordylewski, of the Cracow Observatory in Poland, was reported to have photographed two cloudlike objects, possibly natural satellites of the Earth.
The second static firing of the Saturn SA-T2 test booster was successfully completed at Marshall Space Flight Center in an eight engine test of 119 seconds’ duration.
FAI (Federation Aeronautique Internationale) officially recognized the first space flight records claimed by U.S.S.R. and the United States: Yuri Gagarin (April 12, 1961): Duration in orbital flight, 108 minutes; greatest altitude in Earth orbital flight, 203 miles; greatest mass lifted in Earth orbital flight, 10,395 pounds. Alan Shepard (May 5, 1961: Altitude without orbit, 115.696 miles; greatest mass lifted without Earth orbit, 4,031.7 pounds.
Dr. George N. Constan of Marshall Space Flight Center named as acting manager of the new NASA Saturn fabrication plant near New Orleans by Director von Braun of Marshall Space Flight Center.
U.S.S.R. revealed first details concerning Cosmonaut Gagarin’s orbital space flight on April 12, when application was made to the International Aeronautical Federation (FAI) to have flight made an official world record: Duration, 108 minutes; maximum altitude, 203 miles; launch site, cosmodrome at Baikonur (near Lake Aral); landing site, near village of Smelovka in Seratov region; launch booster, six-engine rocket with total boost of 20 million horsepower.
Secretary of Defense McNamara issued directive (5160.34) assigning research, development, and operational responsibilities for DOD reconnaissance, mapping, and geodetic programs. The USAF was assigned responsibility for reconnaissance satellite systems as well as research and development of instrumentation and data processing associated with these satellite systems. The U.S. Army was assigned responsibility for establishment and management of a worldwide master geodetic control system, and necessary R. & D. and library support, while the USAF was made responsible for launch and recovery of geodetic payloads. The U.S. Navy was assigned responsibility for R. & D. and operation of all oceanographic and geodetic programs at sea.
Scientists and engineers of Langley Research Center and the Space Task Group were guests of the Peninsula Chamber of Commerce honoring the 46 years of NACA and NASA on the Virginia Peninsula.
The Freedom 7 Mercury capsule in which Alan B. Shepard, Jr., made the first suborbital space flight, was presented to the National Air Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. In his presentation, NASA Administrator Webb said: “To Americans seeking answers, proof that man can survive in the hostile realm of space is not enough. A solid and meaningful foundation for public support and the basis for our Apollo man-in-space effort is that U.S. astronauts are going into space to do useful work in the cause of all their fellow men.” “Such flights as those of Freedom 7 are not stunts. They are not antithetical to sober scientific and technological research. Interpreted properly, these dramatic events can add much to public understanding and excite creative interest in extending the base on which public support must rest.”
Saturn H-l engine drop-tested into salt water at Cape Canaveral, then returned to Marshall Space Flight Center for inspecting, cleaning, and static firing.
NASA announced that top speed of X-15 on Major White’s record flight was revised to 4,093 miles per hour (mach 6.04), reached at 95,800 feet. (White also held altitude record of 217,000	feet (41 miles), flown on October 11).
USAF Aerobee-Hi with Cambridge Research Laboratory payload designed to trap space dust, reached 101 miles over White Sands Missile Range.
Navy-sponsored Hypersonic Propulsion Research Laboratory, for simulating flights at speeds up to mach 10, was opened at Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins University.
Marshall Space Flight Center’s Procurement and Contracts Office reported that a contract was let to the Noble Co. for disassembling the Redstone gantry at Atlantic Missile Range and reassembling and erecting it at Pacific Missile Range. This gantry would be erected on pad 75-1-1 at Vandenberg Air Force Base for use with Thor-Agena B launches after January 1962.
Nuclear Vehicles Project Office established at Marshall Space Flight Center, Col. Scott Fellows, U.S. Air Force, named as Chief.
Dr. Vladimir A. Kotelnikov, of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, told the IAF that Russian radar returns from Venus indicated a value of 149,599,500 kilometers for the astronomical unit. This was a major revision of the value of 149,469,500 kilometers first released by the Russians in March. The Russian value compared with 149,598,820 kilometers obtained by Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the figure of 149,597,850 kilometers obtained by Lincoln Laboratory. Disagreement remains on whether Venus day is a 9-to-l 1-earth-day period or 225-earth-day period.
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory scientists reported that Discoverer XVII nose cone (launched November 12, 1960, from Pacific Missile Range) had picked up tritium—product of a solar flare in which hydrogen and helium combine at high energies. While recovered satellite capsules often pick up some tritium, capsule of Discoverer XVII had 100 times the normal amount.
NASA revealed it had selected 12 women airplane pilots to undergo tests to determine space flight research capability.
NASA directed Marshall Space Flight Center to enter contract negotiations with contractors for procurement of five operational Atlas-Centaur vehicles. These launchings were planned to begin in second quarter of 1964.
Preproposal conference on the contract for design, research, development, fabrication, and testing of the reactor-in-flight-test (Rift) vehicle was held at Marshall Space Flight Center. This vehicle would test-fly the Nerva nuclear engine now under development. Twenty-nine firms were invited to attend this preliminary conference at which they were furnished general information on the project. Interested firms would then have 30 days to file information on their capabilities and experience. Then a smaller number of firms would be invited to submit detailed bids. Purpose of the two-step evaluation was to enable firms not in a competitive position to avoid the expense of entering detailed proposals.
A new world aircraft altitude record for sustained horizontal flight was claimed by Comdr. George W. Ellis, U.S. Navy, who flew an F4H Phantom II at 66,443.8 feet over Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.
Explorer XII (S-3) placed into highly eccentric orbit by Thor-Delta from Atlantic Missile Range, which would provide detailed evaluation of behavior of energetic particles between 170- and 50-000-mile altitude. Under Goddard Space Flight Center, this “windmill” satellite carried six experiments developed by Ames Research Center, State University of Iowa, University of New Hampshire, and Goddard Space Flight Center. Several days were required to confirm orbit.
Hypersonic wind tunnel at Douglas Aircraft became operational at El Segundo, reportedly the largest industry-owned tunnel in the United States (36 inches long, 6-inch diameter, capable of mach 10).
Eight-engine static test of Saturn SA-T2 of 29.9 seconds’ duration successful at Marshall Space Flight Center.
Reuters reported that the United States pays about $140 per hour for use of the Jodrell Bank Observatory in England, while the U.S.S.R. pays nothing. Sir Bernard Lovell explained that “the Americans occupy the telescope for long periods, where the Russians scarcely use it.”
Alexander Topchiev, Vice Chairman of the Soviet Academy of Science, stated in Moscow that Western reports that some Soviet astronauts had perished in space flight attempt were “a complete fabrication * * * entirely and absolutely unfounded.” Occasion was press conference at the Academy of Science on the subject of the imminent flight of man into space, at which four space dogs and six offspring were televised.
NASA’s Explorer XII satellite returned voluminous data revising previous information on the Van Allen radiation belts and showing them to be no substantial problem to manned space flight. Launched on August 15, 1961, and transmitting until December 6, 1961, Explorer XII returned information amounting to 5,636 telemetry tapes (2,400 feet each). Of principal interest was its finding that the Van Allen belts consist of a preponderance of protons over electrons in a ratio of 1,000 to 1. Since the protons are of less than 1 million electron volts energy, they do not themselves offer a serious radiation problem and serve to slow the velocity of other radiation.
Meeting to examine the modification of C -IX] aircraft for carrying Saturn S-IV stages was held at NASA Langley Research Center.
In-house testing of Ranger I spacecraft completed at Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
First U.S. showing of films of Vostok II space flight by Gherman Titov, before the Maryland Academy of Sciences in Baltimore, was canceled at the last minute by a Soviet Embassy official. Film had been shown to press correspondents in Moscow on October 9.
The American Rocket Society presented its major annual awards as follows: Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Medal to Dr. Weraher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center; Astronautics Medal to Comdr. Alan B. Shepard, Mercury astronaut, for his MR-3 flight of May 5; James H. Wyld Memorial Medal to Harrison A. Storms, Jr., of North American Aviation; Propulsion Medal to Robert B. Young of Aerojet-General Corp. for his role in development of Titan II engine; G. Edward Pendray Award to Kraft Ehricke for his contribution to astronautical literature; and Research Medal to Dr. James Van Allen of State University of Iowa for basic research.
Dr. Edward R. Sharp, former Director of Lewis Research Laboratory (1942-61), was presented NASA’s first Outstanding Leadership Medal by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden.
Atlas E fired successfully from Atlantic Missile Range. May 26-June 4: Freedom 7, Mercury spacecraft in which Alan B. Shepard, Jr., made his space flight on May 5, was a major drawing card at the Paris International Air Show. Details of the spacecraft and of Shepard's flight were related to about 650,000 visitors.
Soviet press conference at Soviet Academy of Sciences in Moscow, at which Biochemist N. M. Sisakian announced that all six of Strelka’s pups, on exhibit, were developing normally: “Our research on these animals, just completed, has proved that no dangerous consequences to the functioning of their organs have stemmed from the space flight. This problem has an important bearing on our preparations for man’s orbiting.”
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded contract to Douglas and Chance Vought to study launching manned exploratory expedition into lunar and interplanetary space from Earth orbits.
Centaur vehicle C-l was tested and accepted by Marshall Space Flight Center.
At the request of Senator Paul H. Douglas, the membership of the American Astronautical Society was polled by the University of Illinois Observatory as to their opinion regarding the “scientific value” of the U.S. space program to land on and return one or more men from the Moon.
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that 1,640,000 pounds thrust was achieved in test of F-l rocket engine thrust chamber static firing at Edwards, Calif., a record thrust for a single chamber.
Eberhardt Rechtin, of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, questioned the Soviet calculations on the rotation speed of the planet Venus and the astronomical unit, and suggested that the Soviet scientists may have been influenced by earlier MIT studies (1958). Completion of extensive radar studies of Venus by Jet Propulsion Laboratory Goldstone, he submitted, provided more accurate information. The differing figures as reported are— U.S.S.R (1961): 9 to 11 days’ rotation—A.U. 92,812,797 miles. Jet Propulsion Laboratory (1961): About 225 days’ rotation—A.U. 92,956,000 miles.
Reported that ONR-supported radio observatory at Cal Tech’s Owens Valley, Calif., had expanded the radius of the observable universe 27 times (36 sextillion miles, the distance traveled by light at a speed of about 186,000 miles a second in 6 billion years).
Mercury-Redstone 6 was static tested for 30 seconds at Marshall Space Flight Center to ensure satisfactory operation of the turbopump assembly.
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center selected Chance Vought Corp. to build 42 fuel and liquid oxygen tanks for the Saturn booster program.
State Department ruled that Soviet space scientists would not be allowed to visit the American Rocket Society’s Space Flight Report to the Nation in New York on October 9-14, a reciprocal action prompted by Soviet restrictions on American scientists in the U.S.S.R.
NASA announced consolidation of nuclear-electric propulsion program at Lewis Research Center by transfer of the Marshall Space Flight Center Research Projects Division under Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger to Lewis within 3 months.
Legislature of the State of Alabama considered investment of $3 million in establishing a Space Research Institute at Huntsville as a joint University of Alabama and Auburn University center.
Dr. Arthur Rudolph was appointed Assistant Director of Systems Engineering in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight. Operating out of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. Rudolph would serve as liaison between vehicle development at Marshall and the manned space flight program at the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston.
First four U.S. Nike-Cajun rockets arrived in Norway for use in research program off Andoeya Island early next year.
Charles J. Dolan named Associate Director of NASA’s Langley Research Center. He had been associated with the NASA Space Task Group since its formation at Langley in November 1958.
NASA announced the completion of the preliminary flight rating test of the Nation’s first liquid-hydrogen rocket engine. The engine, the RL-10, was designed and developed by Pratt and Whitney, of United Aircraft, for the Marshall Space Flight Center, and 20 captive firings were completed within 5 days under simulated space conditions, consistently producing 15,000 pounds of thrust. RL-10, previously known as XLR-115, was initiated in October 1958 and over 700 firings were conducted in its development.
Explosion in hydrogen system canceled full-power run of AEC Kiwi B-1A reactor at Jackass Flats, Nev. Five men were injured, and the reactor was not damaged. NASA announced award of a contract to North American Aviation Co. to study the feasibility of a large erectable manned space station based on Langley Research Center concept.
National Meteorite Symposium held at Arizona State University, Tempe, Ariz.
Saturn booster firing of 30 seconds using timer at predetermined setting was successful in flight qualification test. During April: The Navy reactivated the former NACA hydrodynamic research facilities at Langley Research Center, to conduct R. & D. on hydrofoils, air-cushion vehicles, hydroskis, catamarans, STOL seaplanes, torpedoes, and underwater rockets. NASA continued investigations at other facilities of Langley of ditching and water landing of space vehicles.
House Science and Astronautics Committee released interim report on “Research and Development in Aeronautics,” which concluded that “the welfare of the Nation, in both its economic and security aspects, is dependent in no small degree on continuing aeronautical research of high caliber.”
NASA has assembled an outstanding management team for its stepped-up assault on space, NASA Administrator Webb told the Aero Club of Washington. Citing Associate Administrator Seamans, Deputy Associate Administrator Dixon, and Director of Manned Space Flight Holmes as examples, Mr. Webb added: “These men, and many others associated with them, know the technical side of aeronautics and space and are all experienced in the management of large activities. Each has demonstrated a personal earning capacity far beyond what the Government is able to pay for their services. Each is thoroughly famlliar with the opportunities and problems associated with our most important technical military weapon system development efforts. It is fortunate for this Nation that men with these high qualifications and such experience are willing to forego large earnings in industry and a more normal personal and family life to supply the leadership needed in our national space effort.”
New 20-inch wind tunnel at the Aeronautical Research Laboratory at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base announced as capable of testing at mach 14, at 200,000-foot altitude, and at 2,500° F.	;
NASA awarded contract to Pratt & Whitney for development of space radiators and condensors for the Lewis Research Center.
D. Brainerd Holmes was appointed NASA’s Director of Manned Space Flight Programs. As general manager of RCA’s Major Defense Systems Division, Holmes was project manager for the ballistic missile early warning system (BMEWS).
Gen. Thomas D. White, USAF Chief of Staff, ordered space surveillance functions transferred from Air Research and Development Command to the Air Defense Command at Ent Air Force Base, Colo., as technology in this field moved from research and development to an operational stage. The ADC established Spadats (space detection and tracking system).
Dr. Henry J. E. Reid, senior staff associate and former Director of the Langley Research Center, retired after over four decades of Government service. He began as a junior engineer at Langley in April 1921, became Director in 1926, in which capacity he served for 34 years.
Deputy NASA Administrator Dryden sent an explanatory letter to Chairman Robert S. Kerr, of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on the broad scientific and technological gains to be achieved in landing a man on the Moon and returning him to Earth. Dr. Dryden pointed out that this difficult goal “has the highly important role of accelerating the development of space science and technology, motivating the scientists and engineers who are engaged in this effort to move forward with urgency, and integrating their efforts in a way that cannot be accomplished by a disconnected series of research investigations in several fields. It is important to realize, however, that the real values and purposes are not in the mere accomplishment of man setting foot on the Moon but rather in the great cooperative national effort in the development of science and technology which is stimulated by this goal.” Dr. Dryden pointed out that “the billions of dollars required in this effort are not spent on the Moon; they are spent in the factories, workshops, and laboratories of our people for salaries, for new materials, and supplies, which in turn represent income for others * * *. The national enterprise involved in the goal of manned lunar landing and return within this decade is an activity of critical impact on the future of this Nation as an industrial and military power, and as a leader of a free world.”
Kaman H—43-B Huskie helicopter flown to claimed altitude record of 25,814 feet by Capt. W. C. McMeen (USAF), bettering Russian record of 24,491 feet established on March 26, 1960.
Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Government Operations, Senator Hubert H. Humphrey as chairman, submitted report on “Coordination of Information on Current Research and Development Supported by the U.S. Government.” It recommended innovations be developed to aid the management and conduct of research.
Air Force Systems Command announced consolidation of all USAF research and development in bioastronautics under single management. The new Bioastronautics Division, Air Force Systems Command, would have its headquarters at Brooks Air Force Base, San Antonio, Tex.
Second NASA honor awards ceremony in Washington: Dr. Abe Silverstein, new Director of the Lewis Research Center, received NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal; William O’Sullivan of Project Echo received the NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Award; and George D. McCauley received the Sustained Superior Performance Award. Other NASA personnel who had received NASA or non-Federal awards during NASA’s third year were also recognized.
An eight-engine static test firing of the Saturn test booster (SA-Tl) for 113 seconds was completed at Marshall Space Flight Center. During January: International Committee on Geophysics, successor organization to the IGY, meeting in Paris, endorsed proposal for Quiet Sun Year during 1964-65. (IGY had been selected for its intense sunspot activity.)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Chief of Theoretical Division and Director of the Institute for Space Studies, Goddard Space Flight Center, making the 25th annual Wright Brothers’ Lecture before the Institute of Aerospace Sciences, reviewed progress in the space sciences, said the most exciting and fruitful area thus far had been investigation of “solar control over the atmosphere of the Earth, causes of weather activity in the lower atmosphere, and the structure of the upper atmosphere.”
Four-stage Javelin fired to 560-mile altitude from Wallops Island, testing extension of two 75-foot antenna arms on radio command at altitude, a test flight in the United States-Canadian Alouette satellite development.
Tiny particle of matter from another galaxy hit upper atmosphere of the Earth over New Mexico at a speed close to that of light and split with great force. Resultant particle shower numbered between 20 and 40 billion pieces, according to scintillation counters at the Volcano Ranch Cosmic Ray Research Center near Albuquerque, N. Mex.
President-elect Kennedy announced that Jerome B. Wiesner of MIT would be special assistant to the President for science and technology.
Naval Research Laboratory reported that Lofti, small piggyback satellite on Transit III-B launched on February 21, demonstrated that very low frequency radio signals pass through the ionosphere into space, thus opening new area for communications development.
First manned balloon launched from and landed back aboard a naval vessel, a Stratolab High test flight over U.S.S. Antietam in the Gulf of Mexico (6,000 feet).
First anniversary of Marshall Space Flight Center as a NASA center, and NASA Administrator Webb visited the Huntsville facility.
Jacqueline Cochran set woman’s altitude record of 56,071.3 feet, in Northrop T-38 jet trainer at Edwards Air Force Base.
Final test flight of USAF Atlas D traveled 5,000 miles to target down Atlantic Missile Range, representing 35 successes, 8 partials, and 6 failures in 49 test launchings for D model.
Two X-15 test pilots, USAF’s Maj. Robert M. White and NASA’s Joseph A. Walker, were jointly awarded the 1960 Iven C. Kincheloe Memorial Award as the Nation’s outstanding test pilots; award of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots September SO: NASA received an additional $10 million for salaries in a supplemental appropriation bill approved by Congress, enough to hire an additional 1,250 persons. During September: National Bureau of Standards and the Institutd Geofisico de Huancago of Peru initiated construction of the Jucamarca Observatory, a 6-million-watt pulse transmitter and a 22-acre antenna with 9,216 crossed dipoles mounted above a reflecting screen. Located 17 miles east of Lima, Peru, the Observatory will be used for ground-based exploration of the upper atmosphere and space.
Cleveland extension (SNPO-C) of the joint AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (SNPO) activated, located on Lewis Research Center and headed by John L. Wilson.
Vice Adm. T. G. W. Settle (Ret.) stated in Washington that Navy blimps should have been used in recovery of Mercury capsule, a proposal submitted to Navy 2 years ago, and which would have avoided recovery difficulties of Liberty Bell 7 and Astronaut Grissom. Settle pointed out that Navy had announced the end of its lighter-than-air program in June 1961. During July: Langley Research Center simulated spacecraft flights at speeds of 8,200 to 8,700 feet per second in approaching the Moon’s surface. With instruments preset to miss the Moon’s surface by 40 to 80 miles, pilots with control of thrust and torques about all three axes of the craft were able to learn to establish orbits 10 to 90 miles above the surface, using a graph of vehicle rate of descent and circumferential velocity, an altimeter, and vehicle attitude and rate meters, as reported by M. J. Queijo and Donald R. Riley of Langley Research Center.
Goddard Space Flight Center and Geophysics Corp. launched Nike-Cajun rocket from Wallops Station with 60-pound payload that reached 90-mile altitude in a study of electron density and temperature in the upper level of the atmosphere.
In the message of President Eisenhower accompanying his budget for fiscal year 1962, it was said: “In the program of manned space flight, the reliability of complex booster capsule escape and life support components of the Mercury system is now being tested to assure a safe manned ballistic flight into space, and hopefully a manned orbital flight in calendar year 1961. Further test and experimentation will be necessary to establish if there are any valid scientific reasons for extending manned space flight beyond the Mercury program.”
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory reported that Echo I satellite may remain in orbit another 3 years.
