nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced three-year grant to Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, Dallas, Tex., for development of advanced scientific experiments in lunar, planetary, and space exploration. Major operating division of grcsw was Southwest Center for Advanced Studies (scas), which would “provide research organization structured specifically to design new space experiments and to provide the scientific guidelines for engineering them.”
D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, addressed the Engineers, Scientists, and Architects Day meetmg, in which he said: “as a stimulus to our fervent interest in rocketry have been the realities of life in a world which is divided into two armed camps, one of which has the avowed intention of imposing its own way of life on free peoples everywhere. We are, in short, compelled to achieve and maintain leadership in space research and technology because our own fate as a free nation and, in fact, the fate of human civilization as we know it, wlli depend upon whether the spacecraft of the future are devoted to peaceflli purposes or to the destruction of the human race . . .”
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf), addressing the Society of Photographic Instrumentation Engineers, declared development of the laser may prove more important to the world than “development of the ballistic missile, the discovery of the transistor, or the reality of telstar. ... As a new method for transmission of energy, the Laser has almost infinite potential. The Laser can direct a concentrated beam of light across great distances with extreme precision. It is therefore ideally suited for application in space. In addition, it appears to have many practical applications in research, industry, medicine and communications. . . . “In the Air Force, our current funding for Laser technology is about six mlliion dollars. Our efforts range from instrumentation development to the search for means of using Laser beams in support of our military space objectives. Our budget for Fiscal Year 1964 shollid include an increase for Laser research and development. “The Laser is a striking example of the potential to be found in today’s advanced technology. We must make full use of its possibilities for national security purposes. . . .”
nasa Flight Research Center released photographs of “lifting body” experimental wingless craft to test landing techniques in gliding from altitudes as high as 5,000 ft. The 24-ft.-by-13-ft. craft would begin testing early in 1963, first with truck to tow it aloft and later with airplane as towing vehicle. Made mostly of plywood, the 500-lb. craft suggests shape of missile nose cone cut in half lengthwise.
Goddard Space Flight Center officials reported that they had received “indications the voltage had recovered somewhat” in relay satellite, but doubted that its communications mission would be accomplished.
President John F. Kennedy, in nationally televised address, commented on the “extraordinary achievement of the Soviet Union” in double manned flights of vostok iii and iv. He stated that the U.S. was behind the U.S.S.R. in space exploration, and that it would “be behind for a period in the future. . . . [But] we are making a major effort now, and this country will be heard from in space as well as in other areas in the coming months and years.”
usaf superpressure balloon made a record-breaking nineteen-day flight at a constant altitude of 68,000 feet in a test conducted by Cambridge Research Laboratories. The balloon was launched from Kindley afb, Bermuda, and landed by radio command in the Pacific, near Iwo Jima, 3,600 miles west of Hawaii, covering a total of 9,300 miles. During May: Checkout was completed and the University of Alaska assumed responsibility for the Alaska Data Acquisition Facility near Fairbanks. Part of the gsfc system, the Alaskan facility is an 85-ft. dish and its associated electronics system will be used on tracking and data acquisition of polar-orbiting Nimbus, Ego (Eccentric Geophysical Observatory), and Pogo (Polar-Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) satellites of gsfc.
X-14A vtol aircraft was being used in research for lunar-landing maneuvers at nasa Ames Research Center, it was reported. X-14A pilot Fred J. Drinkwater, III, said that a “great similarity exists between the flight control system of our [plane] and that proposed for a lunar craft. This makes the X-14A a logical vehicle to investigate problem areas connected with the let-down and landing phases of the lunar mission.”
Test flight of first Atlas-Centaur rocket canceled because of heavy cloud-cover at Cape Canaveral.
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Chief of Aerospace Medical Operations Office, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, reported that preliminary readings of a dosimeter indicated Astronaut Schirra had received much smaller radiation dosage than expected. Dr. Berry said post-flight examination of the astronaut determined that he was “in excellent condition and detected no physiological effects from the space flight.”
First full-scale research model of an inflatable space station was displayed at nasa Lewis Research Center. Developed by Goodyear Aircraft Corp. for nasa, the doughnut-shaped, three-story-high structure was made of rubberized fabric and equipped to accommodate three to ten astronauts.
Senator John L. McClellan recommended establishment of a Senate commission on science and technology to study Government’s growing scientific programs, including the desirability of a Cabinet post for science and technology.
nasa's Manned Space Flight Management Council held meeting at nasa Headquarters.
usaf announced names of 10 additional officers to be trained as space pilots, engineers, and program managers for X-20 (Dyna Soar) manned space flight programs: Capt. Alfred L. Atwell; Capt. Charles A. Bassett; Maj. Tommie D. Benefield; Capt. Michael Collins; Capt. Joe M. Engle; Maj. Neil R. Garland; Capt. Edward G. Givens; Capt. Francis G. Neubeck; Capt. James A. Roman, Capt. Alfred H. Uhalt.
Announced that International Association Machinist workers and Lockheed Corp. had agreed to extend their contract indefinitely, thus averting threat of strike in this aerospace industry.
Series of full-scale wind-tunnel tests of vtol fan-in-wing model vehicle at nasa Ames Research Center for Army lift-fan flight research program. Part of General Electric (Cincinnati) research contract, model and test hardware were fabricated by nasa, while GE fabricated and tested propulsion systems including two lift fans, two diverter valves, and two YJ85 engines. Wind-tunnel tests proved acceptability of inlet temperature, control characteristics, transition capability, and aircraft stability.
nasa announced plans to attempt to launch 440-lb. Orbiting Solar Observatory (Oso) containing 13 experiments, within a week.
nasa announced that LCdr. M. Scott Carpenter (usn) would be the pilot on the next Mercury orbital space flight (MA-7). Major Donald K. Slayton (usaf), the astronaut originally scheduled for the flight, was disqualified because of an “erratic heart rate,” after the medical findings had been reviewed by an Air Force medical board and a board of civilian cardiologists. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was named as Carpenter’s backup pilot.
Balloonist Don Piccard set new altitude record in ascent of 17,000 ft. during two-hr. and two-min. balloon flight from Sioux City to Kennebec, Iowa.
usaf Atlas F missile was successfully fired more than 4,000 mi. from Cape Canaveral in test flight.
Dr. John W. Findlay, deputy director of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., said Echo-type reflective orbiting balloon and West Ford-type copper-needle belts were potential threats to science of radio astronomy. Writing in Science magazine, Dr. Findlay said these objects would contribute to “noise” in radiotelescope reception and “would cut down sharply on an antenna’s ability to receive faint signals.”
Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, nasa Office of Space Sciences, was appointed chairman of Joint Working Group of nasa Office of Space Sciences and Office of Manned Space Flight. Group would be responsible for (1) recommending detailed program of scientific exploration in future manned flights; (2) defining information desired from unmanned flights to support manned flights; and (3) establishing and maintaining close liaison with nasa field centers, other Government agencies, and universities in development of integrated scientific program for manned flight. Dr. Shoemaker had been employed by U.S. Geological Survey as Chief of Astrogeology Branch in Menlo Park, Calif.
In nas lecture for Voice of America broadcast, Dr. Joseph W. Chamberlain of the University of Chicago’s Yerkes Observatory predicted that space-age research techniques may soon provide final answers to questions about the aurora that have eluded scientists for centuries. “Better understanding of physical processes producing the aurora,” he said, “should allow the spec-troscopist to derive even more information from his observations of the auroral spectrum about the physics and chemical processes in the high atmosphere.” He suggested that space probes may detect auroras on other planets which wlli provide an entire new set of data different from terrestrial phenomena with which to test hypotheses for auroral bombardment mechanisms.
nasa awarded $1,000 to nasa engineers for inventions contributing to the advancement of aeronautical and space science and technology. Langley Research Center’s Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., and H. Douglas Garner split a $1,000 award for conceiving a simple, lightweight attitude control system to control the axis of a spinning vehicle. Goddard Space Flight Center’s James S. Albus received a $1,000 award for his digital solar aspect sensor that has been flown in several Explorer satellites.
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston invited eleven firms to submit research and development proposals for the lunar excursion module (lem) intended for use in lunar orbital rendezvous (lor) flights of the multimanned Apollo spacecraft.
The Rev. Theodore M. Hesburgh, President of the University of Notre Dame, speaking at the commencement exercises at mit, urged scientists to develop greater moral awareness and a greater use of science and technology “for the true service of mankind.” He told the science graduates: “You should be concerned, you should lead, but the beginning of significant human leadership involves a deep respect for the totality of man’s intellectual and moral heritage, an active cultivation of the wide areas of wisdom above and beyond your science and technology.”
Nike-Apache launch vehicle carried 63-lb. payload to approximately 80-mi.-altitude from nasa Wallops Station, in experiment to measure ion concentration and composition in the upper atmosphere. Impact occurred approximately 67 mi. from the launch site, and no attempt was made to recover the payload. Experiment was conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center in cooperation with Lockheed Missile and Space Co.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., returned to his hometown, Oradell, N.J., for triumphal welcoming ceremonies in honor of his successful MA-8 six-orbit space flight for nasa Project Mercury, nasa Administrator James E. Webb presented Cdr. Schirra with the nasa Distinguished Service Medal.
President Kennedy nominated Dr. J. Herbert Holloman to the new post of Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology. Dr. Holloman was general manager of the General Engineering Laboratory of GE in Schenectady, N.Y.
Donald F. Conaway, national executive secretary of American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, announced he had requested a conference with European counterparts to discuss minimum pay scales for performers appearing on future Telstar satellite relays. He added: “Telstar is a great challenge. We cannot realistically set an international rate for performers until many problems are settled with the countries.” During July: Outfitted in pressure suits in a simulated space environment, five nasa scientists of msfc and msc completed study determining how an astronaut could work on J-2 rocket engine during actual space flight, at Rocketdyne. Maintenance, repair, replacement, and adjustment of components of the hydrogen-fueled J-2 were performed along with research on the design of special tools and pressure suits.
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center (gsfc) announced it was training Italian scientists and engineers for the launching of Italy’s first satellite. The 165-lb. satellite would be launched by 1965 from platform in Indian Ocean off eastern coast of Africa.
Senate confirmed Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner as Director of the Office of Science and Technology.
Col. Daniel McKee, Project Gemini director in nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, reported as saying that two-man Gemini spacecraft might be used for the next four or five years, and describing it as “a reliable and flexible spacecraft which has a lot of potential for scientific investigations of space. If additional applications develop, it would be used for various purposes.” At present, primary goal of Project Gemini is one-week-long, two-man mission with testing of orbital rendezvous operation.
Mercury capsule for orbital space flight MA-8 was named “Sigma 7” by Astronaut Walter M. Schirra. Sigma, the eighteenth letter of the Greek alphabet and an engineering symbol for “many,” symbolized the teamwork involved in the manned space flight; “7” referred to the seven-man Project Mercury astronaut team.
nasa Aerobee 100 sounding rocket launched at White Sands Missile Range (wsmr) by Jet Propulsion Laboratory (jpl), the rocket reaching 46-mi. altitude in successful experiment to measure ultraviolet ray airglow spectrum.
Announced that the opening ceremony of the Roman Catholic Church ecumenical council on October 11 would be televised in the Vatican and relayed to the U.S. via telstar satellite. September 20: World’s largest movable radiotelescope, located at National Radio Astronomy Observatory (nrao), Green Bank, W.	Va., was turned on at midnight for the first time. The 300-ft.-diameter telescope, built for $800,000 in about one year, was expected to be trained on Venus as its first operational target.
nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, announced that Mercury-Atlas 8 manned flight would be programed for as many as six orbits late this summer. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra (Cdr. usn) was announced as prime pilot, with Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (Major usaf) as backup pilot. Capsule No. 16 was scheduled as the mission spacecraft. Holmes said: “We believe that another three-orbit mission wlli increase considerably our growing knowledge of space flight. Anything more than three orbits should be considered a bonus.” A four-orbit mission would bring the spacecraft down about 200 miles east of Midway Island in the Pacific, while a five or six orbit flight would cause it to land 300 miles northeast of Midway.
Congressman Joseph E. Karth (Minn.), chairman of space sciences subcommittee, said in press interview that planned mission schedule for Saturn launch vehicle “doesn’t appear to be the best way to use a vehicle on which we have spent so much money.” Mr. Karth said the powerful vehicle might prove useful in “speeding up the interplanetary research program, which may not be ambitious enough.”
usmc gold medal was presented to Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc) at usmc 187th anniversary dinner, Washington. Medal commemorated Astronaut Glenn’s Project Mercury orbital space flight Feb. 20, 1962 (MA-6).
Drew Pearson referred to Cosmonaut Titov’s recent denial of Pearson’s report of February 23, 1962, that five Russian cosmonauts had been lost in previous manned space flight attempts. He pointed out that the unsuccessful attempts were not orbital shot, rather were suborbital “rocket rides” such as that of Cdr. Alan Shepard.
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, speaking before the ias National Propulsion Meeting in Cleveland, said: “As we move on toward the moon, with Saturn, Advanced Saturn, and Nova as our launch vehicles, the reliability problem takes on a new dimension. “These big space vehicles will be the first developed especially for manned space exploration. The unit cost will be high. Only a few of each version will be produced. The systems and the missions are extremely complex, involving long periods of operation in space and a return launch from the moon without the help, needless to say, of a lunar Cape Canaveral.”
Third test flight of usn Polaris A-3 was partially successflli, the missile functioning properly until second stage went out of control near burnout and was destroyed by range safety officer.
nasa Agena B vehicle program would be transferred from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to nasa Lewis Research Center, Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., announced. Transfer included Atlas and Thor boosters used with Agena B upper stage. Dr. Seamans said the transfer, which would be completed within three months, would allow “Marshall to wholly concentrate its work on the vital Saturn vehicle development for the manned lunar landing program and for the large unmanned scientific payloads of the future. ... In addition, it concentrates at Lewis the two Atlas-based vehicles, Agena and Centaur, which are essential to nasa’s program of space sciences.” Centaur was transferred to Lewis in September.
U.S. Senate passed S. 2771 to establish a Commission on Science and Technology, which wollid coordinate Government research and development programs with those of business and industry and wollid establish coordinated systems of information storage and retrieval.
Announced that 140-million-candlepower lights would burn near Durban, So. Africa, for three minutes during fifth and sixth orbital passes of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra's Mercury space flight (MA-8).
Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center, announced construction of $12.3-mlliion space radiation effects laboratory wollid begin in March and wollid be completed in about two years. Facility, to be operated by nasa and three -Virginia colleges, wollid be used to study effects of radiation on space vehicle materials and components; it wollid simulate radiation hazards astronauts and spacecraft wollid encounter in space. Facility wollid be used also in graduate studies program in conjunction with the three colleges—Univ. of Virginia, College of William and Mary, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute.
usaf announced Deputy Chief of Staff for Research and Development would be focal point for space projects within the Air Staff. Lt. Gen. James Ferguson, dc/s for r&d, would be responsible for such projects as Midas, Titan III, Dyna Soar, communications satellites, and nasa liaison and support.
W. Randolph Lovelace II, of Lovelace Foundation for Medical Education and Research, told 200 space experts from 14 countries that scientists would have to volunteer for space flight teams. “It takes four years of college plus three years or more of further study to reach the doctor of philosophy level. It is a bit too much to ask our test pilots to undergo this further training.” He said that in projects such as two-man Gemini a scientist could make space flights in company of trained flier. Lovelace was addressing an international symposium on environmental problems of man in space, held in Paris.
Faulty valve in MA-8 spacecraft was replaced by technicians, a repair which required removal of Mercury capsule from the Atlas booster. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s orbital space flight was planned for October 3.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, described use of instruments in space exploration, in address at 17th annual Instrument-Automation Conference and Exhibit, New York: “There are three main areas. The first is that of observations of spacecraft by instruments on the ground, and the processing of [such] data. . . . The second area is that of measurements made by instruments in the spacecraft on the space environment . . . and on performance of the equipment m the spacecraft. . . . The third area consists of similar measurements of the performance of the rockets and the acceleration, vibration, and noise environment which they impose on the spacecraft. . . .”
At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation should begin in outer space. “As we attempt to look 25 years into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus—of a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of space—of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space stations or space forts at key locations for the conduct of space research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.” Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented: the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National Rocket Club Award was given to the New York Times; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award was given to William G. Stroud of nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological satellites.
In meeting of U.N. Committee for the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, U.S. offered to U.S.S.R. a 14-lb. metal chunk, believed to be part of sputnik iv, that had landed in Wisconsin September 5. Soviet delegate to the U.N. Platon D. Morozov rejected the offer, saying “We do not know to whom it belongs.” He said it was not necessary to make dramatic gestures to show that falling satellite fragments could do harm, and charged the U.S. with “dramatic staging” to divert the Committee from Soviet proposals on legal principles for use of outer space. Displaying the chunk following the meeting, U.S. delegate Francis T. P. Plimpton said the object weighed 20 lbs. when it fell from the sky, but U.S. scientists of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had retained a six-lb. piece for further examination.
Committee for International Year of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), meeting in London, approved worldwide research program to be conducted during 1964-65 period of minimum solar activity. Proposed program included multi-nation participation in such research areas as meteorology, geomagnetism, aurora, airglow, ionosphere, solar activity, cosmic rays, and aeronomy. Project was outgrowth of International Geophysical Year (igy), 1957-58, considered highly successful both in scientific results and in international cooperation.
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci appointed nasa's Director of Biotechnology and Human Research in the Office of Advanced Research and Technology. Dr. Konecci wlli be responsible for directing research and development of future life support systems, advanced systems to protect man in the space environment, and research to assure man’s performance capabllity in space. In announcing the appointment, Associate Administrator Seamans said: “Our success and progress in manned space flight in the next 10-20 years depend on the human research we do today. The human, man-machine and man-system requirements must be determined through research prior to the design of any manned system. The human capabilities and limitations will directly influence various subsystems of the space vehicle. It is therefore important that work in Biotechnology and Human Research be conducted at an accelerated rate, in order to have the necessary answers for the design of future aero-space vehicles.” The Life Sciences Research Group at Ames Research Center will have a major role in carrying out the programs of Dr. Konecci’s office, along with the other nasa centers and full utilization of the Nation’s military, research, and industrial resources and personnel. Dr. Konecci was Chief of the Life Sciences Section of the Missiles and Space Systems Division of Douglas Aircraft Co. and had previously served as a research scientist at the usaf School of Aviation Medicine and as Chief of Physiology and Technology in the usaf Directorate of Flight Safety before 1957.
Monetary awards under $1,000 were made to nasa employees for patentable inventions: nasa Ames Research Center—Vernon L. Rogallo; Joseph R. Smith, Jr.; John V. Foster; and Albert E. Clark, Jr.; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center—Harold J. Peake, Stephen Paull, and William A. Leavy; nasa Langley Research Center—William J. O’Sullivan, Jr.; George F. Pezdirtz; George F. Look; Frank M. Ballentine, Jr.; Virgil S. Ritchie; Howard F. Ogden; Eldon E. Kordes; Donald H. Trussed; Deene J. Weidman; George E. Griffith; Blake W. Corson, Jr.; and Emanuel Schnitzer; nasa Lewis Research Center—Paul F. Sikora; nasa Manned Spacecraft Center—Warren Gillespie, Jr.; nasa Marshall Space Flight Center—Donelson B. Horton.
nasa Ames Research Center announced its high-altitude radiationresearch balloon was flying at 135,000-ft. altitude over eastern Manitoba and that the balloon’s payload capsules containing two monkeys, four hamsters, and instrumentation would be released early August 12.
Dynamic model” study on one-fifth-scale Saturn rocket at nasa’s Langley Research Center offered useful concept for testing structural characteristics of the future Nova rocket. As reported by Homer G. Morgan, application of varying frequencies to the “Baby Saturn” while suspended as if in free flight provided clues on structural vibration capable of transmitting false indications into the vehicle’s guidance system. The two successful test firings of the Saturn demonstrated value of this research. After test of a “Baby Nova” for structural efficiency, Morgan said, construction of an operational booster could be expedited. A full-scale Saturn model had been similarly tested at msfc.
U.S.S.R. Presidium of the Supreme Soviet declared April 12, anniversary of the first Soviet space flight, to be a national annual holiday in Russia. In announcing ceremonies for Cosmonautics Day m the Soviet Union, Leonid Korneyev reviewed the U.S.S.R.’s space program from its beginning in April 1932, with the formation of a group to study jet propulsion. Between 1932 and 1941, Korneyev pointed out, the U.S.S.R. had developed 118 different liquid-fuel rocket engines.
nasa scientists reported to cospar session that data from explorer ix indicated that the upper atmosphere was heated by sun spot activity. In 1957 and 1958, when solar activity was at the maximum of its 11.1-year cycle, air density at a height of 350 miles was 10 times higher than in 1961 when activity was nearer its minimum. This suggests that “with a decrease in solar activity the upper atmosphere becomes cooler and shrinks to the earth, so that the air density at a given altitude decreases.” Report on explorer ix, the 12-ft. inflated satellite sensitive to density changes, was made by William J. O’Sullivan, Claude W. Coffee, Jr., and Gerald M. Keating.
nasa Langley Research Center announced contract with SpaceGeneral Corp. for the development of an inflatable paraglider to measure micrometeroid flux in the lower regions of space up to 700,000	feet. Inflatable Micrometeroid Paraglider (imp) will test new sensor system consisting of alternate layers of mylar and aluminum and will determine suitability of inflatable re-entry paraglider.
Early tests of pressure and dynamic stability models of the Apollo spacecraft were completed in wind tunnels at jpl and Langley Research Center.
Seven X-15 pilots and Paul F. Bickle, Director of nasa Flight Research Center, were awarded the first John J. Montgomery Award for aerospace achievement by the National Society of Aerospace Professionals and the Aerospace Museum of San Diego. The X-15 pilots were : Scott Crossfield, naa; Maj. Robert M. White, usaf; Neil A. Armstrong, nasa; John B. McKay, nasa; Joseph A. Walker, nasa; Cdr. Forrest S. Petersen, usn: and Maj. Robert A. Rush worth, usaf. During September: Ground rehearsals for onr-nsf-nasa Stratoscope II balloon-carried telescope experiment took place in Norwalk, Conn., the 36-in. telescope focusing on the planet Jupiter. Later in month, telescope was disassembled and transported to Palestine, Tex., where it would remain in hangar until first flight, in February or March 1963. To be lifted above,most of the earth’s atmosphere by two balloons, telescope would be stabilized at 80,000-ft. altitude throughout each observing night, where it will make a variety of astronomical and planetary observations.
Research Center for Celestial Mechanics at Yale University announced by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research and the Office of Naval Research, to be headed by Dr. Dirk Brouwer, Director of the Yale Observatory. The facility, to be opened on July 1, will seek new approaches for problems involving earth satellites, lunar and interplanetary probes, and the predetermination of trajectories for interplanetary vehicles.
A very eventful day in space exploration: launched into orbit were ariel i, cosmos iv, and two unidentified usaf satellites; ranger iv impacted the far side of the moon; and a U.S.-Japa-nese probe was launched from Wallops.
usaf Cambridge Research Lab team, headed by Dr. Richard Dunn of the Sacramento Peak Observatory, successfully observed perfect total eclipse in Lae, New Guinea, making useful observations of the chromosphere (1,000- to 10,000-mile band of energy between sun’s visible surface and the corona) and the sun’s corona.
usaf Minuteman launched from silo at Cape Canaveral in successful test flight.
Third Saturn launch vehicle (SA-3) arrived at Cape Canaveral after 10-day trip by barge from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. Flight test was scheduled for November.
Major problem under study by Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories’ Sacramento Peak Observatory was the prediction of safe intervals for manned space flight. Since March 1961, intensive study has been made of proton showers originating from solar flares and arriving at the earth from 30 minutes to 6 hours after the flare has peaked. One major flare out of every four produces proton showers wnich follow the 11-year cycle of activity. Sunspot maximum occurred in 1957-1958 and the minimum is expected in 1964-1965.
In address to the House of Representatives, Congressman Emilio Q. Daddario pointed to a need for a common patent policy for inventions arising out of research and development financed by Federal funds and cited President Kennedy’s statement at his press conference the day before.
Announced that Boeing had received $15,954,096 supplementary contract from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center for work leading to design, development, fabrication, and test of Saturn C-5 first stage (S-IC).
nasa announced selection of Republic Aviation Corp. as contractor for Project Fire, the flight re-entry research program. Contract would call for construction of two re-entry spacecraft to be flown in the second half of 1963 and re-enter the earth’s atmosphere at a speed of 25,000 mph.
nasa announced selection of International Business Machine Corp. to provide ground-based computer system for manned space flight Projects Gemini and Apollo. The computer complex will be part of the Integrated Mission Control Center (imcc), at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston.
Senate and House space committee conferences approved compromise legislative authorization for nasa in FY 1963 of $3,744,115,250. Bill provided $43,160,750 less than nasa requested. Nearly $1.3 billion was assigned to manned space flight, including the lunar program.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists reported that mariner ii Venus probe was disoriented on Sept. 8, by either a micrometeorite impact or a solar pressure wave, but that automatic devices onboard the craft had restored it to proper orientation.
John Rubel, Director of dod Office of Research and Development, testified before subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics that it was “highly doubtful that dod would undertake a new weather satellite program at this time,” and stated the military interest in weather satellite development was adequately protected by existing nasa and Weather Bureau programs.
Revealed that world’s first attempt to flight-test an ion rocket engine was made on usaf Scout launching from pmr during the past week (perhaps 12/18/62), according to the Washington Post. Malfunction limited value of the test but launching marked beginning of new phase of space flight. Electric propulsion, with low thrust over long periods of time and of light weight, can propel large payloads, once boosted into space, for long distances at greater speeds than heavier chemical rockets with heavy fuels.
First J-2 engine of Block I r&d series of Saturn C-l was successfully test-fired by Rocketdyne Div., North American Aviation. During January: Manned Rogallo-wing paraglider built by nasa’s Flight Research Center launched by automobile tow from Rogers Dry Lake, Calif. Tests may include launch of glider by aircraft tow, leading to development of inflatible paraglider for use with Gemini and Apollo programs.
usaf Titan II flown 5,000 miles down amr on third test flight.
London Times reported that Manchester University team conducting photographic survey of the moon, working at Pic-du-Midi Observatory in the French Pyrenees, and similar Japanese team, working at Kwasan Observatory, Kyoto, would be joined by a third observing station in California. Eight-hour time difference between France and Japan enables the two stations to photograph the moon for 16 hours of night; the California station would be a central point in time between the other observatories, making possible the first round-the-clock photographic survey of the moon. Manchester University program is sponsored by usaf, while Kyoto University program operates under nasa research grant.
National Science Foundation announced FY 1963 expenditures for Government-sponsored research and development would total $14.7 billion, 31% higher than last fiscal year. 95% of the estimated total would be spent by four agencies—nasa, DOD, AEC, HEW.
Dr. James A. Van Allen, State University of Iowa physicist, criticized Government report on atmospheric radiation resulting from U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion in July, which stated radiation levels were much higher than had been predicted and would last longer than had been predicted. Dr. Van Allen charged the Government report was a “hasty and ill-considered” interpretation of the facts; he predicted the bulk of artificially formed radiation would no longer be detectable by summer of 1963. Dr. Van Allen said President’s Science Advisory Committee ignored findings from injun satellite (which he used to study effects of the explosion) and relied instead on data from telstar satellite, launched after the nuclear test. Scientist James W. Warwick of University of Colorado, basing his conclusions on radio measurements from ground stations in Hawaii and the Philippines, said his studies were in general agreement with those of Van Allen and his coworkers and were “inconsistent” with Government estimates .based on telstar data. The two scientists were in Philadelphia for session of American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Testimony by nasa Administrator Webb before House Appropriations subcommittee was released in which he declared that the U.S. has given far more than it has received in exchanges of space flight findings with the Soviet Union. By publicly releasing information gained from space flights, the U.S. is “ . . . cooperating with them, but not getting very much in the way of return cooperation,” he said. Webb defended U.S. policy of making space research results generally available: “We are, in this open way, exposing the problems just ahead of us to the largest number of able minds all around the world. This is really the way mankind has made its forward advance. No one can tell from which mind comes the solution to a problem. “I think the progress which can come from this can never be matched by Russia and the nations which do these things in secret.”
RL-10 rocket engine successfully static-fired in second test at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Cluster of the liquid-hydrogen engines would power second stage (S-IV) of the Saturn C-l.
Two-month Project Firefly series of 27 upper atmosphere chemical releases was completed by usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories, ending four-point basic research program aimed at learning more about the ionosphere.
Subcommittee on construction of President Kennedy’s Missile Sites Labor Commission conducted closed hearing on recent 10-day work stoppage at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. Although electricians and other construction workers had returned to work, the basic labor dispute—union members’ stopping work on vital U.S. missile and space projects because of employment of nonunion members—remained to be settled.
Construction contract for Saturn umbilical tower (Launch Complex 34, Cape Canaveral) was awarded by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to Consolidated Steel and Ets-Hokin-Galvin. Cost of the 240-ft. steel tower was estimated at $504,900.
Ejection capsllie test at Edwards afb, Chief W/O Edward J. Murray (usaf) was ejected from B-58 flying at 565 mph and capsllie parachuted to earth successfully. During February: Kenneth C. Sanderson of nasa’s Flight Research Center was named Chairman of the Dyna-Soar Instrument Development Team, a joint USAF-NASA-Industry group formed to provide technical direction over the development of sensors, communications systems, signal conditioners, airborne recorders and telemetry, ground recovery devices, and data processing equipment. Sanderson succeeded Frank Smith of nasa’s Langley Research Center.
Joseph A. Walker, Chief Research Pilot for nasa’s Flight Research Center, was awarded an honorary Doctor of Aeronautical Sciences degree from Washington and Jefferson College, Washington, Pa. Walker had been graduated from Washington and Jefferson in 1942 with a major in physics.
Titan II rocket launched by usaf from Cape Canaveral scored its fifth successful test flight in seven attempts.
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center selected Rohr Aircraft Corp. to negotiate for the manufacture and erection of three 85-foot-diameter parabolic antenna systems to be located at Pisgah National Forest (Rosman, N.C.), Fairbanks, Alaska, and an undetermined location in eastern Canada. When completed, these facilities in addition to similar system completed at Gilmore Creek, Alaska, would serve as the core of nasa’s wide-band satellite instrumentation network. They would receive and record telemetry from large “second generation” satellites including Nimbus and the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao).
nasa Flight Research Center announced modifications to X-15 (No. 1) had been completed, the modifications providing window and camera in fuselage for Follow-On Program of high-altitude research. Camera with window would be used to study optical degradation resulting from observations through hypersonic boundary layers and shock waves. This project would begin in early 1963 and would include first five flights of the 35 flights planned in X-15 Follow-On-Program, a two-year program sponsored by nasa and usaf.
Sodium-vapor experiment launched with Nike-Apache vehicle from nasa Wallops Station was not successful because the payload did not perform properly. Flight was part of current upper-atmosphere studies being conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center.
First “mystery” satellite in history of space exploration was launched, according to British magazine Flight International. Magazine said satellite orbited at height of 113 mi. and reentered earth’s atmosphere 12 days later. Satellite was listed as belonging to usaf, but spokesman said this was a “scientific guess based on our assessment of previous satellite launchings.” Launching was not confirmed, and no official U.S. listing included such a satellite.
X-15 No. 1 flown to an altitude of approximately 246,700 ft. (46.7 mi.) with nasa’s Joseph A. Walker at the controls. The record altitude was achieved in a climbing attitude of about 38°; top speed attained was 3,443 mph. Previous altitude record was 217,000	ft., achieved on October 11, 1961, by Major Robert White (usaf). The speed record of 4,093 mph was set on November 9, 1961, by Major Robert White.
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, told Aircraft Industries Association Quality Control Committee in Houston that designs, procedures, and schedules in manned space flight program had to be flexible in order to absorb continual changes of rapidly advancing technology. Emphasizing importance of equipment malfunctions that occur during systems development or preflight preparations, Dr. Gilruth said: “In manned flight, we cannot afford to regard any of these equipment malfunctions as a ‘random’ failure. We must regard every malfunction and, in fact, every observed peculiarity in the behavior of a system, as an important warning of potential disaster. Only when the cause is thoroughly understood, and a change to eliminate it has been made, can we proceed with the flight program.... “Rapid corrective response to malfunctions throughout system development and preflight preparations is a critically important requirement of our programs if we are to meet schedules with hardware that is fit to fly. . . .”
U.S.S.R. announced launching of cosmos vi into earth orbit (apogee: 250 mi.; perigee: 126 mi.; period: 90.6 min.; inclination: 49°). As with other unmanned satellites in the Cosmos series which began on March 16, 1962, cosmos vi was stated to be a scientific satellite instrumented to explore radiation and other hazards to manned space flight.
usaf Nuclear Effects Research Laboratory dedicated at Kirtland afb, N.M. Lab was designed to simulate effects of nuclear explosions on ballistic missile systems; study effects of radiation on people and electronic systems; simulate magnetic and radiation effects of high-altitude nuclear explosions; and conceive radiation experiments for space probes.
Congressman Victor Anfuso (N.Y.), speaking before the Pan American Management Club at Cape Canaveral, said: “Recognizing the very significant contrast between our mission in space and that of the Russians, we must do three things: “1. Convince the world that our venture into space is a peaceful one—to bring back benefits which will create a world of abundance, making war and strife among nations unnecessary. . . . “2. We must, at all costs, achieve dominance in all phases of space exploration for our own security and that of all peoples of the earth. “3. We must establish freedom in space and invite all nations of the world, having a contribution to make, to join our efforts. “To accomplish all these three things requires an all-out effort on our part—a mobilization of all our resources—sacrifices on the part of Government, business, industry, and labor. . . .”
First nasa balloon carrying bioscience payload of two rhesus monkeys and four hamsters traveled faster and higher than planned after launch from Goose Bay, Laborador, requiring alternate plan for early jettisoning to effect daylight recovery. Payload was recovered 45 miles north of Prince Albert in Saskatchewan, all animals reported dead upon recovery. Conducted by Ames Research Center Life Science Laboratory, experiment was designed to check primary cosmic radiation.
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center, said in an interview in General Electric Forum that the U.S. space program would be paying for itself within another 10 years. “The real payoff does not lie in mining the Moon or in bringing gold back from the Moon, but in enriching our economy and our science in new methods, new procedures, new knowledge, and advanced technology in general.”
President Kennedy nominated Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner to be director of the Office of Science and Technology.
Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech reported on first direct detection of elastic waves 40 to 50 miles high that carry heat from the sun to its corona. Photographs made through Mount Wilson Observatory detected the energy transfer mechanism of waves which rose and fell at the rate of 1,000 mph and in five-minute periods.
President Kennedy was reported by New York Times to have requested Bureau of the Budget to look into possibility of obtaining extra funds for U.S. manned lunar flight program. An additional $300,000,000 to $400,000,000 was estimated requirement for fiscal year 1963. President’s request came after White House meeting with nasa Administrator James E. Webb and nasa Director of Manned Space Flight D. Brainerd Holmes.
nasa Inventions and Contributions Board made awards of less than $1,000 to the following nasa employees: Wade E. Lanford, Langley Research Center; Billy C. Hughes, John R. Raskin, Robert J. Schwinghamer, Wilhelm Angele, and Hans G. Martineck, Marshall Space Flight Center.
nasa announced mariner ii would miss Venus by 20,900 mi. instead of the 9,000 mi. previously expected, but that the probe would still come “well within the region where the scientific planetary experiments are expected to be very effective.” The added distance was caused by midcourse correction maneuver on Sept. 4 increasing mariner ii’s velocity by 47 mph instead of the intended 45 mph. nasa scientists said telemetry data [from 'mariner ii indicated that (1) solar particle radiation appears to be sufficiently strong to distort solar magnetic fields; (2) some atmospheric gas was present in entire path of the probe; (3) density of small particles in deep space was at least 1,000 times less in interplanetary space than in the near vicinity of the earth.
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Can., under direction of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. Second stage failed to ignite, so rocket reached altitude of only about 9.5 mi.
University of Alabama Research Institute dedicated at Huntsville,
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, predicted U.S. will have as many as 24 men operating a moon station within a decade.
Subcommittee of House Committee on Science ana Astronautics issued report on solid-propellant rocket motors for Nova-class vehicles: “If the cancellation of this development program [solids for Nova] is based on the cost factor alone, then the committee feels that nasa should review the events of the past. For it was this approach in the development of our icbm that gave the U.S.S.R. their superbooster and the resultant lead in space exploration which the U.S. is still struggling to overcome. The United States cannot afford a second setback of this magnitude. . . . “The committee is struck by the large amount of manpower and time that both the dod and nasa have devoted to coordination in trying to reach an agreement and the extended delay in starting even the most basic development program.” Committee recommended giving nasa the funding responsibility for continuation of solid-propelled motor effort, since there exists no direct mllitary requirement for the large boosters.
oso i, the Orbiting Solar Observatory launched March 7, completed 1,000 orbits; approximately 900 telemetry data tapes were acquired and forwarded to all experimenters.
Albert J. Evans, nasa Deputy Director of Aeronautical Research, told iata Public Relations Conference in Washington: “Our understanding of aerodynamics has reached the point where it appears certam that in time an efficient supersonic transport can be developed. . . . There is no question as to whether there wlli be a supersonic transport; the only question is whose. Right now part of my job is to see that the United States is the first to develop a commercially competitive supersonic transport. . . . “In the hypersonic region, the X-15 has given tremendous focus to our efforts. The X-15 has such capability that it wlli be used in furthering certain space research programs. Already we are making radiation measurements—piggy-back experiments along with the hypersonic research program. Our results with the X-15 have been so encouraging that I think we must soon look beyond the transport that goes to Mach 2 or 3, and begin laying the groundwork for the generation to follow. . . .”
injun satellite was apparently unaffected by artificial radiation belt, reported Dr. Brian J. O’Brian, State University of Iowa physicist, injun orbits earth at about 500-mi. altitude, near center of the new radiation belt which had destroyed transmission from satellites ariel, transit iv-b, and traac. Dr. O’Brian speculated that injun transmission survived because satellite used low-efficiency solar cells, not as rapidly affected by radiation as high-efficiency cells used in ariel.
dod released following statement: “Lockheed [Aircraft Corp.] stands alone in refusing to follow the course that the other members of the [aerospace] industry considered reasonable. . . . Should a strike take place at Lockheed, Department of Defense programs of critical urgency to the national defense would be affected. It is imperative in the national interest that the Department of Defense make necessary preparations to minimize to the greatest extent possible any loss of production that might follow a work stoppage. Responsible officials of the Department of Defense are therefore considering whether alternate means of production can be utllized so that work on these vital programs can go forward in the event of a stoppage at Lockheed.”
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced first static test of p&w liquid-hydrogen engine. In first firing of series, which was run in vacuum chamber to simulate space environment, RL-10 ran nine seconds and generated a rated 15,000 pounds of thrust.
India’s first satellite-tracking station had been opened at Uttar Pradesh State Observatory, Nainital, one of 12 such stations established by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory.
Australian National Observatory announced that it would install 40-inch telescope on top of Sidney Smith Mountain at Coona-barabran, New South Wales, one which would have three times the efficiency of its 74-inch telescope at Mount Stromlo near Canberra.
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of nasa’s Lewis Research Center, received the National Civil Service League's Career Service Award, one of 10 Government leaders so recognized.
Research Institute for Advanced Study of the Martin Company was awarded contracts by nasa, afosr, and one for basic research in nonlinear mathematics, an area relating to problems in space flight, long-range communications, and automation.
nasa announced Project Fire, a high-speed re-entry heat research program to obtain data on materials, heating rates, and radio signal attenuation on spacecraft re-entering the atmosphere at speeds of about 24,500 mph. Information from the program would provide technology for manned and unmanned re-entry from lunar missions. Under management of Langley Research Center, Project Fire would use Atlas D boosters and the re-entry velocity package would be powered by Antares solid-fuel motor (3rd stage of the Scout).
At least 15 per cent of the original synchrotron radiation” created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear blast last July could persist for more than a year, American and Peruvian scientists reported. Measurements made at National Bureau of Standards radio astronomy observatory in Jicamarca, Peru, showed that about one half the radiation had decayed within two months of the explosion, but that the rate of decay was “thought to be decreasing.”
Analysis of data from mariner ii interplanetary probe revealed there are 10,000 times as many small dust particles near the earth as there are in interplanetary space, reported W. M. Alexander of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. This was revision of earlier estimate of 1,000 times as many dust particles near earth as in interplanetary space. Other observations from mariner ii included in the report, which was published in Science: solar plasma experiment showed constant presence of solar plasma (or “solar wind”), generally ranging from 850,000 mph to 1,550,000	mph; magnetometer experiment found “convincing evidence” that magnetic fields of at least a few gamma are nearly always present, except perhaps for occasional, transient lulls.
nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced the selection of Motorola, Inc., Military Electronics Division, of Scottsdale, Ariz., as contractor for research and development on the Goddard range and range-rate tracking system. Intended for tracking satellites in near-space and cislunar space, the system will measure spacecraft position to within a few feet and velocity to within fractions of a foot per second by measurements of carrier and side-tone modulations.
Ryan project engineer Willis F. Everest was slightly injured in crash of Ryan Flexwing aircraft undergoing flight-test research at Langley Research Center (LaRc). 40-ft.-wingspan aircraft based on the Rogallo concept had completed aerodynamic tests in Langley Research Center’s full-scale wind tunnel and was to be flight tested by LaRc and the Army Transportation Research and Engineering Command.
Sharp rise in heating of re-entry vehicles returning from manned lunar missions at speeds of 25,000 mph was described to the subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics by Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicle Research and Technology, nasa. Mr. Ames stated that a simulation study at nasa’s Ames Research Center had “demonstrated Eeat promise for pilot-controlled re-entries during orbital and nar missions, and we plan to extend our work in this area.”
nasa established the nasa Launch Operations Center at Cape Canaveral, with Dr. Kurt H. Debus as Director. Reporting to the Director of Manned Space Flight at nasa Hq., the new Center would serve all nasa projects launched from Cape Canaveral, absorbing Marshall Space Flight Center’s Launch Operations Directorate. Similarly at Point Mugu, Calif., the nasa Test Support Office was redesignated the nasa Pacific Launch Operations Office, with Cdr. Simon J. Burttschell as Acting Director.
nasa press conference at nasa Hq. on the tandem Russian orbital flights of vostok iii and iv. Participants: nasa Administrator James E. Webb; Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden; Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director, Office of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes. Mr. Webb paid tribute to the Russian accomplishment as “demonstrations of a very real technological capacity, an ability to plan and engineer and build and fly vehicles that can carry man for extended periods of time. . . . They do have significance.” Dr. Dryden felt that the flights essentially conformed to the stated Russian objective, “to subject two men to identical space exposures, and weightlessness . . . plus . . . longer duration, which is needed to do this.” Dr. Seamans noted that “as far as guidance accuracy is concerned, what they achieved is roughly comparable to what we achieve in our Mercury flights. To me the significant element here is that on the second flight they were able to take off within a limited period of time . . . countdowns can be protracted for one reason or another.” Mr. Holmes said he was not surprised at the Russian flights: “I think we would be selling the Russians pretty short if we didn’t feel that a year after they launched a Vostok on a booster that could lift that kind of a weight, something of the order of 10,000 pounds, that they couldn’t indeed perform in this fashion.” Asked whether the nasa manned space flight program could be accelerated, Mr. Webb answered that the booster program could be accelerated with a crash program spending another $1 to $2 billion a year. “You can get more done. It wlli be done inefficiently. We believe we have a program [now] that marries all of the considerations in an effective way . . .” To the question of who wollid first land on the moon, Mr. Webb replied, “I think we will make the manned lunar landing and return before they do.” As to future Russian capability, Dr. Dryden said: “there is a possibility that the Soviets can do circumlunar flight before we can. I once said there is a fifty-fifty chance, certailliy no better than that, that we collid do that as early as they can. It is for this reason, in fact, that our national goal was set at the lunar flight because this does require another booster on the part of the Russians as well as ourselves. “Ever since the Space Agency has been formed we have been waiting for this other shoe to be dropped. People have told us every month, the Russians are going to produce this big booster in the next few months. Now four years have gone by and they have not yet shown us this big booster. To the best of our knowledge they have developed lighter-weight nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles rather than bigger space boosters. This is not to say that they may not be doing this. All I am saying is that they will require a bigger booster to land men on the moon.”
Last usaf B-52 strategic bomber, produced by the Boeing Company, left final assembly area at Wichita, Kansas. The B-52H model was the 744th in the series since the first B-52 came from Boeing plant on November 29, 1951. With numerous improvements throughout its production, B-52 had eight versions—from B-52A to B-52H (speed of 650 mph and unrefueled range of 12,500 miles). Models G and H were capable of carrying Hound Dog 500-mile-range missile and Skybolt 1,000-mile-range missile.
British scientists protested U.S. plans to explode “rainbow” bombs 500 miles above the Pacific test area (called “rainbow” bombs because high-altitude nuclear explosions light up the sky thousands of miles away). Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Radio Observatory, Martin Ryle, radio-astronomer, and Sir Mark Oliphant, Australian nuclear physicist, all protested the “probable” distortion of the Van Allen radiation belt by the forthcoming U.S. tests.
Aerobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station, the vehicle carrying 211-lb. instrumented payload to 128-mi. altitude in experiment to study behavior of liquid hydrogen exposed to radiant heating and zero gravity. Experiment was conducted for nasa Lewis Research Center, which would use data obtained in development of liquid-hydrogen rocket engines.
Navy Polaris missile destroyed over Cape Canaveral after launch. March 31: Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects Division at nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded the $1,000 Galabert Prize in Paris for his studies on nonchemical booster rockets. During March: nasa completed work on its first major launching facility on the West Coast, a Thor-Agena pad at Vandenberg afb, Calif. A used gantry was shipped from msfc and installed at a $1 million saving over cost of new construction. Pad would be used for nasa polar-orbit launches, such as Echo II, Nimbus, and Pogo (Polar Orbiting Geophysical Observatory).
Third balloon in radiation-experiment series conducted by Ames Research Center was launched from Goose Bay, Labrador. In two hours, the balloon had carried its payload of two monkeys, four hamsters, and instruments to an altitude of 85,000 feet, where it was to catch prevailing winds and drift westward across Canada.	...	.
Chunk of metal, too hot to touch, was discovered in Manitowoc, Wise., street by two policemen. Considered as possibly part of sputnik iv, the 20-lb. object was sent by local members of nationwide Moonwatch tracking network to Moonwatch hq. at Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, Mass., where fragment would be analysed.
Last of 4 solid-fuel Areas rockets fired at White Sands in nasa Langley Research Center photographic study of deployment characteristics of 15-ft.-diameter parachute for use in measuring atmospheric winds at altitudes from 100,000 to 240,000 ft. Other 40-mi.-high Areas shots were on June 30, July 2, and July 5,
Editorial on tactical fighter (tfx) program, contract for which was awarded to General Dynamics and Grumman Aircraft by dod, appeared in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “. . . Underlying the whole tfx concept is one of the solid, basic technical explorations by the researchers of the old National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (naca) that did so much to keep this country the international leader in supersonic aircraft development. Without the fundamental research into the variable sweep wing and the detailed development of this K‘ iple by the Langley research laboratory group headed by Stack, the current tfx concepts of both final competitors would have been impossible. . . . The full story of the Langley contribution to the tfx program should be hammered home as an example of how these research and development investments eventually pay substantial dividends. . . .”
Mercury spacecraft (Capsule 13), friendship 7, was launched into orbit by Atlas booster (109D), Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., (usmc), as astronaut. After three orbits (apogee: 162.5 mi.; perigee: 98.9 mi.), friendship 7 re-entered and parachuted into Atlantic some 166 miles east of Grand Turk Island in the Bahamas. Picked up by the destroyer Noa, Glenn remained inside capsule until on deck. Beyond being the first U.S. manned orbital space flight, MA-6 flight of friendship 7 provided aerospace medical data during 285 minutes of weightlessness, including consumption of solid and liquid food and disorientation exercises. Astronaut Glenn was forced to “fly by wire” (i.e., pilot the spacecraft) during 2nd and 3rd orbits due to troubles with the automatic pilot. Glenn was pronounced “hale and hearty” after his 81,000-mile flight of 4 hrs. 56 min.
mariner ii interplanetary probe reported data showing that interplanetary space was free of cosmic dust and debris found in vicinity of earth, Dr. Wlliiam H. Pickering, director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, told press interviewers. “On this basis, one has to think of the earth as moving in its own cloud of dust,” Dr. Pickering added.
dod announced selection of contractor for 22 test models of tfx aircraft (tactical fighter, experimental), the Convair Division of General Dynamics, with Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corporation as an associate. Based upon much work at Langley Research Center, tfx fighter was designed in usaf and usn versions, h aving variable geometry wings for flight speeds up to 1,650 mph. Contract which would procure up to 1,500 aircraft was said to be bigger than “any fighter aircraft program since World War II in both numbers and dollars.”
John Glenn Day in Washington, D.C. An estimated 250.000	persons lined the rain-drenched parade route from the White House to Capitol Hill. In 20-minute address to the joint session of the Congress, Astronaut Glenn paid tribute to the Project Mercury team and pointed to the unbounded future of space exploration: “. . . I feel that we are on the brink of an area of expansion of knowledge about ourselves and our surroundings that is beyond description or comprehension at this time. “Our efforts today and what we’ve done so far are but small building blocks on a very high pyramid to come . . . “We’re just probing the surface of the greatest advancement in man’s knowledge of his surroundings that has ever been made . . . There are benefits to science across the board. Any major effort such as this results in research by so many different specialties that it’s hard to even envision the benefits that will accrue in many fields. “Knowledge begets knowledge. The more I see, the more impressed I am not with how much we know but with how tremendous the areas are that are yet unexplored . . .”
Combined U.S.-U.S.S.R. proposal for $100 million world-wide weather research program, including the use of earth satellites, was presented to a panel of the World Meteorological Organization (wmo) by Harry Wexler, Research Director of the U.S. Weather Bureau, and Viktor Bogayev, Ass’t. Director of the Soviet Hydrometrical Service, in Geneva, Switzerland. Proposed plan, if approved by the wmo Executive Committee, would then be considered by unesco.
Three scientists at Boeing Company made seven-day simulated space trip to the moon in a cylinder-shaped capsule 8 ft. in diameter and 6 ft., 4 in. high.
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s selection of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. to establish method of assessing hazard potential of operational nuclear vehicle (Saturn C-5/Nerva) was reported. Three-phase study would include: (1) study of influence of impact delay time on hazard magnitude at impact in case of flight failure; (2) study of effect of vehicle trajectory on flight hazards; and (3) study to produce integrated hazards evaluation technique.
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced award of $12 million worth of contracts for tracking-network modification in preparation for lengthy manned space flights. Contracts were awarded to: Canogo Electronics Corp., for tracking antenna acquisition aid systems; Radiation, Inc., for digital command encoders; Collins Radio Corp., for RF command systems; and Electro Mechanical Research Corp., for pcm systems.
Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, addressed the Southern Governors’ Conference, Hollywood-by-the-Sea, Fla., on the role of the South in the Space Age, and remarked: “. . . our space activities are in no sense stunts— spectaculars, if you will—nor will the landing of U.S. astronauts on the moon be our ultimate objective. Rather, the national effort is broadly organized to accomplish rapid advances in science and technology that will make it possible for us to perform any space assignment—military or civilian—that the national interest might require. Furthermore, from lunar exploration, we will go on to wider exploration of the solar system, ventures whose end no man can foresee. ...”
National Bureau of Standards and U.S. Naval Observatory increased the standard frequency transmissions by 2 parts in 1 billion to allow for higher precision in scientific measurements, radio communications and navigation, and satellite tracking.
Catalogue of Astronomical Photographs featuring close-up photographs of moon, was released by Lick Observatory. Each photograph showed area 230 mi. by 280 mi. on scale of 30 mi. to the inch (view of lunar surface from 300 mi.). Lick spokesman said precise optical and guidance systems, high magnification, and skilled use of modern astrophotographic techniques were used to obtain the pictures. The 120-in. reflecting telescope at Lick is world’s second largest.
Establishment of nasa Industrial Applications Advisory Committee announced, with Earl P. Stevenson (former president and chairman of the board of Arthur D. Little, Inc.) as chairman. The committee wollid assist in transferring new scientific knowledge from nasa’s research and development programs to industry.
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Project Div. of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded 1962 Hermann Oberth Award of the Alabama section, American Rocket Society.
nasa supplemental appropriation for FY 1962 was approved by the House and the Senate. It carried $82,500,000 for research and development and $71,000,000 for construction and facilities at Cape Canaveral.
Nova iaunch facilities study contract was awarded to Martin-Marietta Corp., Denver, by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The study assumes Nova will be launched from Cape Canaveral.
nasa announced award of facilities grants to five universities, first such grants awarded by nasa. Worth a total of $6,410,000, the grants were to provide research facilities for activities in space-related sciences and technology to universities making “substantial contributions” to the U.S. space program: University of California, Berkeley; University of Chicago; Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute; State University of Iowa; and Stanford University.
Dr. Arthur E. Raymond was appointed a special consultant to the nasa Administrator. He would be concerned with organization and management of research and development programs, especially those involving advanced research and over-all systems planning. Dr. Raymond retired in 1960 as senior vice president of engineering for Douglas Aircraft Co., having spent 35 years with the company. He served as a member of naca from 19461956.
Representative Chet Holifield, Chairman of Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy, declared in speech that “moon madness” is starving scientific programs other than space exploration. He predicted budgetary troubles for atomic energy programs because of “greater priority” of space programs. November 27-December 9: Four launchings of Centaur rockets took place from the Argentine Rocket Range, Chamical, as part of worldwide program of simultaneous measurements of winds and turbulence in the ionosphere by means of sodium-cloud experiments. The Argentine launchings were joint cooperative effort of French National Committee on Space Studies and the Argentine National Commission on Space Research.
In address at Tulane University, Dr. James R. Killian, President of mit, stated that the Soviet Union had placed “their first rate people” in their space program and thus weakened their high-energy physics program. “We must be very careful in space exploration that we do not tend to draw strength from other technological areas. We need balance,” he said.
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced it would conduct experiments using laser in tracking S-66 ionosphere beacon satellite, to be launched in polar orbit early next year. Laser (light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation) would be tested as “potentially vastly more accurate than current tracking methods and requiring no electrical power from the satellite.” Laser device, emitting beam ){6 of a degree wide, would be mounted on tracking telescope at nasa Wallops Station. Laser signals to satellite would be received on passive reflector and bounced back to earth.
nasa Ames Research Center reported that a number of beetles had survived the 25-mile-high balloon flight in which the monkey and hamster passengers in the bioscience payload perished because of a failure in the life-support system supplying oxygen and heat.
Sudden drop in voltage on mariner ii Venus probe was reported by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists, jpl turned off the probe’s four interplanetary experiments to conserve on-board power for experiments in the vicinity of Venus. Discounting any probabllity of the solar cells being affected by radiation, experts indicated the problem could have come from faulty voltage regulators.
dod established conflict-of-interest ruling on industry’s role in dod research contracts. New policy specified that a company serving as technical adviser in a research program was ineligible to compete for contracts in the hardware production phase. Ruling was first established in Project Advent communications satellite project.
Cosmonaut Nikolayev, by 10:00 PM Moscow time, had orbited the earth 40 times and had passed the million-mile mark in vostok iii. At this time, his companion Cosmonaut Popovich in vostok iv completed 24 orbits of the earth and logged 621,000 miles of space flight. Sohio Research Center calculated the two spacecraft were separated by 1,793 mi. at about 8:00 PM est.
Rep. Charles S. Gubser (Calif.) announced nasa and usn had agreed to convert an old dirigible hangar at Moffett Field, Calif., for production of Rift nuclear vehicle stage. Hangar was located about two mi. from prime Rift contractor, Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., and adjacent to nasa Ames Research Center.
In nasa press conference in New York City, Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of the Lewis Research Center, outlined factors in nasa’s nation-wide recruitment of 2,000 scientists, engineers, and technicians: (1) nasa had already interviewed 4,000 candidates in other cities and hoped to screen another 1,000 in New York; (2) salaries in industry tended to be higher than in Federal employment but nasa offered better postgraduate experience as well as opportunity to acquire national or international reputation; (3) nasa’s manpower drain on the annual pool of 40-45,000 engineering graduates was small; and (4) the new specialists trained in the space program during the next decade would be an effective argument for much of the cost of the entire space effort.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, said that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., probably wollid make his orbital flight (MA-8) the middle or end of September. Speaking at the Lunar Exploration Conference in Blacksburg, Va., Mr. Holmes made it clear that the success of recent Soviet prolonged manned space flights would not change the six-orbit mission of Commander Schirra.
Two tandem 600-ft.-tall research balloons launched from Palestine, Texas, with dummy payload of 6,300 lb., a development test for February 1963 launch of 36-in. telescope with germanium eye to obtain undistorted look at the Martian atmosphere. Scientists from Princeton University, Univ. of California, Vitro Corp., and Schjeldahl Corp. conducted test flight.
In address to Loyola University in Los Angeles, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) said: “For the first time in history, scientific and engineering knowledge gives man a realistic means of world wide attack on the age-old problems of hunger, poverty, and disease . . . Now science has opened the way to space. “There is every reason to be grateful for this new knowledge and power. But some have gone too far. Instead of merely accepting and using the fruits of scientific discovery, they have made a religion of science. This, in essence, is what has happened under Communism—and it has turned out to be the most false, deceptive, and cruel religion the world has ever known. It means that men and women are treated the way a biologist treats plants and animals. It is power without principle . . .” June 17-August 10: Space Science Summer Study, sponsored by National Academy of Sciences Office of Space Sciences (funded by nasa grant), held at State University of Iowa, Dr. James Van Allen as chairman. Scientists represented nasa, dod, aec, nsf, private industry, and research organizations. Review of nasa’s space science program was contained in a detailed nas report released January 1963.
In Voice of America broadcast, Dr. Christian J. Lambertsen of the University of Pennsylvania said that there is an increasing recognition of the role man can play in space exploration because “there are aspects of exploration which no machine yet conceived can carry out.” He pointed out that “the only computer capable of all functions such as remembering, recognizing, learning, thinking, reasoning, judging, integrating, reacting, communicating, and logically altering a previously programmed sequence of events is man himself.” He then reviewed the medicophysio-logical factors to be overcome for manned space flight, and he warned that “even the practicability of truly extended flight outside the earth’s atmosphere is not yet assured.”
nasa announced U.S. and Swedish experimenters were studying samplings of noctilucent clouds obtained in four Nike-Cajun sounding rocket flights during August. Preliminary analysis indicated that samples taken when noctilucent clouds were observed contained significantly more particles than when no noctilucent clouds were visible. Analysis of origin and structure of the particles may take up to a year. Participants in the project include scientists from University of Stockholm Institute of Meterology, Kiruna (Sweden) Geophysical Observatory, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories.
nasa research pilot Glenn W. Stinnett and Stanford physiologist Dr. Terence A. Rogers emerged from 7-day confinement in a simulated lunar spacecraft. Unique study by Ames Research Center involved performance of continuous and realistic professional tasks while under confined space flight conditions.
Special hand tools for use in zero-gravity conditions were tested by personnel of the Manned Spacecraft and the Marshall Space Flight Centers. Experiments were conducted in simulated space environment to try out non-torque hand tools drawn from a number of industrial sources.
Dr. Gerald de Vancouleurs, Professor of Astronomy at the University of Texas, said in nas Voice of America broadcast that the discovery of clues to the prehistory of the solar system and possible contact with extraterrestrial forms of life “stand out as two of the most challenging and promising goals of space exploration.” Dr. de Vancouleurs pointed out that direct sampling and probing of the surface and crusts of the moon and planets may help discover these clues. “Of even greater scientific and philosophic interest,” he said, “is the probabllity that direct exploration of at least one planet—Mars—may place us in contact with extraterrestrial forms of life, whose study may help solve the problems of the origin and evolution of life under different planetary conditions.”
Aerobee 150A launched from Wallops Station with 271-lb. payload boosted to 97-mile altitude; carried camera to study behavior of liquid hydrogen under conditions of symmetrical heating and zero gravity. Lewis Research Center payload was recovered 25 minutes after liftoff.
Second altitude record attempt in two days by X-15 was scrubbed just before drop from B-52, caused by failure of inertial guidance system.
Announced that U.S.S.R. Ministry of Communications had already issued postage stamp honoring double space flight of vostok iii and iv.
Dr. Eberhard Rees, Deputy Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was quoted as stating that Soviet dual-flights vostok iii and iv came “six months to a year” earlier than he had expected.
ias awarded its Flight Test Engineering Fellowship to Raymond P. Boyden, Director of Engineering, U.S. Army Hq., St. Louis. Gene J. Matranga of nasa’s Flight Research Center and Maj. James C. Wayne (usaf) were named runnerups. All will attend Princeton’s Aeronautical Engineering Department.
Soviet delegate Platon D. Morozov demanded that U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space reach agreement on legal aspects of space exploration before considering scientific and technical program, at opening meeting of Committee’s autumn 1962 session. Morozov argued that U.S. high-altitude nuclear test in July had caused atmospheric radiation that imperiled the lives of Soviet cosmonauts; he also commented that international space cooperation would be possible only “in a disarmed world.” When U.S. delegate Francis T. P. Plimpton said he hoped Mr. Morozov was not trying to “block progress” on technical issues, Morozov said U.S.S.R. had accepted “in principle” the recommendations of the scientific and technical committee and later added that his Government would not make agreement on international technical cooperation dependent upon acceptance of Soviet views on legal issues. Committee finally agreed to consider the two subcommittee reports jointly. Subcommittee on international space law had met in Geneva last summer but had failed to reach agreement.
usaf Titan II icbm launched from amr on a planned 5,000-mi. test flight, the missile falling short of its target but achieving most of its test objectives;.
Czech scientist Adeneck Dobrichovsky, writing in a Prague technical journal, said the U.S.S.R. would launch a four-man space observatory for two-month orbit in 1965-66.
oso i (Orbiting Solar Observatory) was successfully launched into orbit from Cape Canaveral, marking the seventh straight success for the Thor-Delta booster. The 458-lb. satellite, with an apogee of 370 mi. and a perigee of 340 mi., immediately began sending back signals on the sun’s radiation in the ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma ray regions from its position above the filtering action of the earth’s atmosphere. By an intricate positioning apparatus, oso’s 13 instruments were focused constantly on the sun with a pointing accuracy of 1 minute of arc. This was the first of a series of Osos to be launched by nasa in the next 11-year sun cycle.
U.S.S.R., U.S., and 13 other countries proposed that U.N. General Assembly call for urgent efforts to break deadlock over legal problems of space exploration. Compromise resolution was submitted for consideration in General Assembly’s Political Committee, which was debating report of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
National Science Foundation reported that Congress had appropriated $10.8 billion for research and development in FY 62, which included $3 billion for research, $6.7 billion for development, $1 billion for facilities, and $100 million for information. nasa spent $1.4 billion, the dod $6.2 billion.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced that the project management of the liquid hydrogen-fueled Centaur launch vehicle and the hydrogen-fueled M-l rocket engine would be transferred from Marshall Space Flight Center to the Lewis Research Center. Studies were being initiated to adapt Centaur as a stage to other boosters. Mr. Webb said: “The transfer wlli allow the Marshall Center to concentrate its efforts on the Saturn vehicles for the manned lunar landing program. ... It wlli permit the Lewis Research Center to use its experience in liquid hydrogen to further the work already done on one of the most promising high-energy rocket fuels and its application to Centaur and the M-l.”
Announced that nasa had awarded contract to Rocketdyne Division of naa for two-year continuation of H-l engine research and development. Preliminary letter contract of $700,000 was signed toward estimated $9,000,000 total cost. H-l engine is used in clusters of eight to power S-I stage of Saturn C-l launch vehicle. During mid-August: Chandler Ross, Aerojet-General Corp. Vice President, told House Committee on Sciences and Astronautics that two Aerojet concepts of recoverable/reusable boosters compared favorably to cost and capability of Saturn C-5. One concept was Sea Dragon two-stage unmanned vehicle with payload capability “well in excess” of a million pounds; and the other was Astroplane single-stage manned vehicle with payload capability of about 550,000 pounds. “In each case the incremental cost savings is of sufficient magnitude to warrant continued feasibility studies of these systems,” Ross said.
explorer xiv had transmitted 589 hours of data to nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, which had released about 240 hours of data to the various experimenters.
Panel of the Federal Council for Science and Technology, headed by Allen V. Astin, submitted report to White House. Report said that Federal laboratories are in imminent danger of losing their best scientists and engineers because present salary scales are not competitive. In a memorandum to Federal department and agency heads, President Kennedy stated that the Administration’s proposal for pay increases met one of the recommendations of the panel’s report: “With the increasing importance of science and technology in developing our mllitary defense, in achieving our foreign policy objectives, and in sustaining the health and welfare of every citizen, the Federal Government must attract and retain its share of talented scientists and engineers at all levels.”
The United Nations should tax commercial ventures in outer space, the ocean depths, and polar regions to obtain financial support, said Dr. Eugene Staley of the Stanford Research Institute in a memorandum to the United Nations. He also proposed that the U.N. should be given exclusive authority to license and regulate space traffic and satellites relaying telephone and television signals.
Winners of the 1962 Harmon International Trophies were announced as follows: Aviator’s Trophy—Lt. Col. William R. Payne (usaf), for his May 1961 non-stop, record-speed flight of B-58 from Carswell afb, Texas, to Paris, via Washington and New York; Aviatrix Trophy—Jacqueline Cochran, for setting 8 world class records with T-38 jet trainer and for flying F-104 jet fighter at twice the speed of sound, between August 24 and October 12, 1961; Aeronaut’s Trophy—Cdr. Malcolm D. Ross (usn) and the late LCdr.Victor A. Prather (usn), for their record-altitude balloon flight of May 4, 1961, over the Gulf of Mexico.
nasa Ames Research Center announced construction of four space research facilities, totaling more than $14 million, had been authorized for FY 1963: biosciences laboratory, guidance facility, radiative heat system for Mass Transfer Facility, and helium tunnel. Bioscience laboratory would be used for studies in genetics, radiobiology, immunology, and environmental physiology, and detection of extraterrestrial life. Guidance facility, consisting of three-man capsule with systems and equipment, combined analog and digital computer, and rotating centrifuge to drive capsule, would be used to obtain data on integrated design of guidance, stabilization, control, and crew support systems in advanced manned spacecraft. Radiative heat system would permit Ames scientists to investigate re-entry heating of spacecraft from lunar or planetary missions. Sections of complete heat shields wlli be tested at the facility. Mach 50 helium tunnel would be used to complement the existing Ames hypersonic free-flight facility, which used gun-launched models to obtain 50 times speed of sound.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa’s Director of Manned Space Flight, speaking before the American Management Association in New York, said: “We believe that the soundness of our present engineering program can be illustrated by the correlation between predicted events and time of occurrence in John Glenn’s recent flight. Indeed, the time from lift-off to impact in this mission was within one second of the pre-flight calculations.”
In testimony before closed session of the House Appropriations Committee, Prof. James A. Van Allen stated that man-in-space programs were not necessary for scientific space exploration. “For the same investment of effort we learn much more without the man. ... A monkey made the first orbital trip and he made out alright.” In testifying on behalf of the National Science Foundation appropriation, Van Allen said that the U.S. should not rush into a cooperative space program with Russia; failures would worsen relations since Russia has more to gain from such a program. The U.S., he said, had surpassed Russia “in nearly all areas of purely scientific investigation of outer space” but some American scientists have “an uneasy, creeping feeling that Russia is about to launch a manned flight around the moon.” Testimony was released on May 14.
The Astronautics Committee of the 51-nation F&lliration Aeronautique Internationale, meeting in Paris, certified Soviet Cosmonaut Gherman Titov as holder of two new world records for space flight: duration of flight, 25 hrs. 11 min.; and length of flight, 436,911 mi. In certifying Titov’s records, the committee relaxed its rule that the pilot must land with his vehicle (Titov parachuted to earth). The heaviest payload in orbital flight stlli belongs to the other Soviet cosmonaut, Yuri Gagarin (10,419 lbs.).
Rift (Reactor-in-Flight-Test) bidders conference held at Marshall Space Flight Center.
aurora 7 with Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) as pilot, launched on MA-7 orbital mission by Atlas booster from Cape Canaveral, the second U.S. manned orbital flight and the fourth U.S. manned space flight. Almost faultless countdown, launch was delayed only briefly by ground fog, and Mercury spacecraft was placed into orbit at 17,532 mph (apogee: 167.4 miles; perigee: 99 miles; period: 88.3 minutes). Astronaut Carpenter performed series of space science and technical development experiments including visual and photographic observations of star fields and “white particles,” consumption of solid foods, release of tethered multi-colored balloon to test sighting, and observation of separated Atlas booster. 81,200-mile flight featured attitude stabllization and control pilotage for completion of three orbits, and monitoring of control-systems fuel for proper retrofire attitude. Re-entry caused landing impact point over 200 miles beyond intended area and beyond radio range of recovery forces. After landing, Carpenter egressed through top of capsule and climbed on inflated raft awaiting rescue, to be joined by two usaf paramedics, Airman John T. Heitsch and S/Sgt. Ray E. McClure, who inflated Stulken collar to prevent capsule from sinking. After three hours on water, Astronaut Carpenter was picked up by a helicopter from U.S.S. Intrepid, and his capsule was retrieved by the destroyer Pierce. Astronaut Carpenter was reported in good physical condition, and flown to Grank Turk Island in the Bahamas for 48-hour debriefings and medical examinations.
nasa announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center had awarded three three-month study contracts for design of an Advanced Oso (orbiting solar observatory) satellite, to be launched into polar orbit during 1965. Advanced Oso wollid aid development of method of predicting solar flares. Contractors were Republic Aviation Corp., Space Technology Laboratories, and Ball Brothers Research Corp.
nasa announced 19 experiments would be included on Pogo satellite (Polar Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) to be orbited by Thor-Agena vehicle launched from Pacific Missile Range. Pogo would be second in Ogo (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) series and first Ogo in polar orbit; it was scheduled for launch in early 1964.
Four American scientists led by Dr. William A. Cassidy, research scientist at Lamont Geological Observatory of Columbia University, left New York on three-month expedition to Argentina, where they hoped to find and unearth a 13)£-ton meteorite. Supported by National Science Foundation grant, the expedition would seek the huge meteorite which was reported in late 1700’s by Indians of north central Argentina.
First anniversary of the dedication of the Goddard Space Flight Center, nasa. During that year, seven Goddard satellites were orbited, the Center successfully operated the new 18-station world tracking network for the Glenn flight, began expansion of the 13-station scientific satellite tracking and data network, saw some 70 of its sounding rocket payloads launched from Wallops Station, established the Institute for Space Studies in New York, and added three buildings and 700 persons to the Goddard staff.
afsc announced it was testing electrocardiogram package in free-fall parachute jumps for possible applications in future manned space flight. Worn inside the astronaut’s pressure suit, the small, 14-oz. package could monitor heartbeat (and other physical reactions): Conditioning unit in package converts heartbeat to FM radio signal which is sent by transmitter in package to amplifier in cockpit, and then to ground receivers, where it is converted to electrocardiogram. Use of package would provide astronaut freedom of movement by eliminating need for connections from pilot to spacecraft. Developed by Hughes Aircraft Co., the package was being considered for use in X-15 program.
U.S. and U.S.S.R. announced in U.N. their bilateral agreement to cooperate in space exploration programs of weather observation, magnetic-field study, and satellite communications. In meteorology, agreement called for experimental phase extending through 1964 “during the development of experimental weather satellites” by both countries; second phase would begin approximately 1964-65 with coordinated launchings by both countries of weather satellite system for operational use. In magnetic survey, agreement called for U.S. and U.S.S.R. each to launch a satellite equipped with magnetometers during International Year of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), 1964-65. Both countries agreed to use the intervening years to continue their own magnetic measurement research and to exchange the data obtained. In satellite communications, agreement called for U.S. and U.S.S.R. to cooperate during coming year in communications experiments via U.S. passive communications satellite Echo A-12. Future negotiations would consider cooperative efforts in experimental system of active-repeater satellites. Agreement provided that “the results of these cooperative experiments would be made freely available to all interested states,” U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Adlai Stevenson said. Agreement was product of Geneva negotiations between U.S. team headed by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, and Soviet team headed by Prof. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, conducted in spring of 1962.
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said in published interview: “People talk too much about crash programs and too little about sustained support. These space programs take time. A decision you make today on some engineering or scientific aspects of our space program may take anywhere from four to five years before it takes the form of hardware. “When you make a wrong decision now, the payoff, good or bad, could come five years later, not sooner than that. We can’t work miracles overnight. . . .”
An estimated 7,000 persons visited the opening of the Space Museum at the nasa Marshall Space Flight Center.
John Dykstra, president of Ford Motor Co., told American Ordnance Association meeting that a great potential defense capability lay untapped in industry—particularly in heavy, mass-producing manufacturing. Asserting that the problem of developing and maintaining broad defense and space capability throughout industry had not been adequately realized or defined, Dykstra suggested reorganizing U.S. productive resources and putting “much more of our heavy manufacturing industry in a state of preparedness to switch readily from peacetime to wartime production. Such preparedness would mean, at a minimum, that heavy industry would be kept current in matters of defense technology in areas of natural interest to it. Such preparedness could also involve a broader distribution of space and defense research and development effort, as well as of production, on a systematic basis. . . . “Whatever form an Industrial National Guard might take, I believe the concept is essential. In view of the enormous demands now being made on all our resources of brainpower, we cannot afford to make less than the best possible economic and efficient use of them. ...”
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, stated in press interview that the recently-created radiation belt had not altered plans for Project Mercury manned flight MA-8. “We don’t have enough data on this. We are looking at this thing, but until we have looked at it a lot more completely, I would not like to see us change our. plans.”
ucla scientists reported that they had developed training devices to allow men to contract individual muscles, which during the stresses of liftoff or re-entry in space flight would permit trained astronauts to operate controls by twitching single muscles.
Senator Henry M. Jackson in a radio interview said there was evidence that “lives were lost” in the Russian manned space flight program. He urged the Kennedy Administration to challenge the U.S.S.R. to “lay bare” its trials and errors in achieving manned space flight.
In meeting at nasa Langley Research Center, Langley and msc personnel presented reports on space station studies to officials from nasa Hq. and other interested agencies.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said in first annual Theodore von K arm an Lecture of the American Rocket Society: “The costs of the presently approved [space] program increase next year to about six billion dollars if current time schedules are maintained. It would not be possible to include the development of a [manned] space station now without still larger resources assigned to the space program. I personally believe that the next large manned space flight project [after Project Apollo manned lunar landing] will be this one rather than extensive exploitation of the moon or manned expeditions to the planets. This might change if the early lunar exploration returned surprises in the form of natural resources of use on earth. “I think it will now be appreciated that the present rather arbitrary subdivisions of our program will coalesce, for the manned space station wlli be useful for both manned and unmanned scientific exploration and could be the site of observation of weather or of communications relay stations . . . .”
Program testing astronaut tolerance to space flight conditions was initiated with order of motion-simulator platform from Textron Electronics, Inc., MB Electronics Div. The platform, to be installed at Wright-Patterson afb, will move in six directions— pitch, roll, yaw, up-and-down, side-to-side, and back-to-forward.
Congressman George Meader (Mich.) introduced H.R. 13130, bill to establish a Commission on Research and Development. The new bill was a “perfected” version of his earlier bill. He called attention to S. 2771, the bill which had passed the Senate, and urged that “speedy action be taken on the legislation.”
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Michael E.	Lipschutz discovered diamonds in meteorite that fell in India 90 years ago, the findings published in Science. Dr. Lipschutz, an astrochemist, is first lieutenant in U.S. Army on active duty with nasa. His research was made with minute portion of the Dvalpur meteorite, which fell to earth May 8, 1872. Dr. Lip-scnutz observed two sizes of diamond crystallites in the meteorite—a few large crystals and many small ciystals. He concluded that diamonds in Dyalpur meteorite were formed by shock when meteorite’s parent body collided with another body in space. December 17: Although relay power supply remained low, Nutlev, N.J., ground station was able to obtain about 10 min. of usable telemetry data from the nasa satellite. Engineers were conducting intensive analysis of telemetry data in effort to diagnose cause of relay’s low battery voltage.
Wash. Evening Star reported that nasa’s Director’ofjMaimed Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, had announed in Cleveland that nasa X-15 pilot Neil A. Armstrong would become the first civilian astronaut as a part of the new selection of astronauts for Projects Gemini and Apollo.
nasa selected American Telephone and Telegraph Co. as contractor for system engineering support for the manned space flight program. It was estimated that some 200 specialists would be available under the contract for quick fact-finding in regard to critical decisions on the complex program.
nasa Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, addressing General Session of U.S. Savings and Loan League in Washington, said: “. . . What we are buying in our national space program is the knowledge, the experience, the skills, the industrial facilities, and the experimental hardware that wlli make the United States first in every field of space exploration—scientific and practical uses, including military applications. And to accomplish this result we must make advances at the frontiers of knowledge in nearly every field of science and technology which wlli project new ideas into our whole industrial system. . . . “The success of the National Space Program hinges on the ability of the American people, through their government, their industry, and their privately endowed institutions, to implement many difficult tasks. Not one or two men wlli make the landing on the moon, but, figuratively, the entire Nation. “And our ultimate success also depends, in some measure, on our abllity to enlist the cooperation of other nations in this enormous undertaking. An important (but certainly not determining) consideration in our international programs is winning and cementing friendly relations with our allies in the Free World and among the uncommitted nations. This we do by demonstration of our peaceful objectives and our willingness to share what we learn from space exploration with the scientific community the world around. . . . “The investment in space progress is big and will grow, but the potential returns on the investment are even larger. And because it concerns us all, scientific progress is everyone’s responsibility. Every citizen should understand what the space program really is about and what it can do. . . .”
Maj. Gen. O. J. Ritland (usaf), formerly Commander of afsc’s Space Systems Division, was named Deputy to the Commander, afsc, for Manned Space Flight. Gen. Ritland would be in charge of liaison with and usaf support of nasa’s manned space flight program.
Issue of ars’ Astronautics contained series of articles by nasa Langley Research Center scientists and others, reviewing LaRC research program on manned space-station technology since early 1960.
In address at Ohio State University, General Curtis E. LeMay (usaf) said: “It is in the fields of science and technology that the greatest explosion of problems is occurring. We are in the midst of an age of technological change that will make the industrial revolution seem dull indeed. The problems associated with technical change are producing opportunities in greater abundance than ever before. Opportunity is not only knocking at the door, it is beating gongs all around the house.... “In science and technology, there is no ceiling. We are going into space. This will be man’s greatest adventure—not only for the men who crew the ships and make the journey, but for the people on the ground who support the effort.... “The free world faces a grave threat. In rapidfire fashion, new discoveries and developments are being made almost daily that prevent us from relaxing our vigilance. Our future is directly dependent on having an educated and informed people who are in tune with the world tempo and alert to the myriad applications and possibilities in all fields of human endeavor ... .”
Soviet Cosmonauts Nikolayev (vostok iii) and Popovich (vostok iv) continued to orbit the earth, their flight paths reported by Sohio Research Center as ranging from 1,382 mi. to 1,793 mi. apart. Radio Moscow reported the cosmonauts were maintaining radio contact with earth and between themselves. By 4:10 PM Moscow time vostok iii completed 52 orbits; vostok iv, 36 orbits. Soviet government remained silent on plans to land the pair. Cosmonaut Popovich, orbiting the earth in vostok iv, passed the mlliion-mile mark shortly after retiring, about 9:00 PM Moscow time.
nasa awarded contract to Kollsman Instrument Division for 38inch-diameter primary mirror in the space telescope to be used in the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao).
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking before the National Association of Broadcasters in Chicago, cited nasa’s space sciences program as “a quest for fundamental knowledge” without which the applied science and technology “would soon run dry. . . . Suppose we had laid out a program five or six years ago, directly tied to manned space flight. We would never have discovered the Great Radiation Belt, which . . . constitutes one of the severest manned-space flight problems we face.”
George M. Kohler of General Electric Co. suggested to the iaf meeting in Bulgaria that a worldwide, intensive program be established to use asteroids as scientific bases for space exploration. Kohler estimated that between 10 million and 10 billion objects 30 ft. to 300 ft. in diameter pass within 20 million mi. of the earth each year, and that a good number of them probably come much closer—perhaps within several thousand miles. He called for (1) careful search for closer asteroids with special electronic telescopes; (2) landing unmanned spacecraft on asteroids; and (3) steering asteroids into earth orbit, to be hollowed out and used as manned satellite bases.
Tave (Thor-Agena Vibration Experiment), flown with Thor-Agena launching alouette satellite on Sept. 29, measured low-frequency vibrations to Agena stage and spacecraft interfaces during Thor boost phase, it was reported. Tave provided “. . . data verifying the techniques used by Goddard and Lockheed in predicting the launch vibration environment of the Thor-Agena B rocket. Demonstration that these techniques were sound is most important in designing future experiments and structures for the Thor Agena vehicles,” Goddard project experimenter James Nagy said. Goddard Space Flight Center had designed, built, tested, and shipped 200-lb. Tave in only 20 days.
Orbital data from satellites have suggested that scientists do not really know the shape of the earth, Dr. George P. Woollard, Director of the Geophysics and Polar Research Center of the University of Wisconsin, said in a Voice of America broadcast. Such studies have indicated that the earth may have not olliy the “flattened ‘tomato shape’ that has been assumed since the time of Isaac Newton but also a superimposed ‘pear shape.’ ” Citing the number of forces that can operate on a satellite, thus requiring extremely careful analysis of its data, Dr. Woollard pointed out that the Committee on Geodesy of the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences had recommended the launching of a specially instrumented geodetic-research satellite to resolve some of the questionable areas of influence on magnetic readings.
nasa scientists concluded that the layer of haze reported by Astronauts Glenn and Carpenter was the little-understood phenomenon called “airglow.” Using a photometer and other instruments, Carpenter was able to measure the layer as being 2-degrees wide. Airglow accounts for much of the light of the night sky.
nasa named Charles H. Zimmerman as Director of Aeronautical Research in the Office of Advanced Research and Technology. Zimmerman, who had joined naca in 1929 and served as associate head of the Aerospace Mechanics Division of Langley Research Center since August 1959, succeeded John Stack who retired last month. Zimmerman would be responsible for the expanding nasa aeronautical program, which supports and conducts research for national goals in military and commercial aircraft, including v/stol aircraft, supersonic transports, long-range flight at hypersonic speeds, technical support of the usaf X-20 (Dyna Soar) and full responsibility for the X—15 research airplane program.
In Voice of America broadcast, Dr. Leo Goldberg of the Harvard College Observatory reported that the accumulation of knowledge in solar physics is proceeding “at a fantastic rate, due to the inherent importance of the subject coupled with a sudden fusing of new instrumental techniques and theoretical ideas.” Dr. Goldberg noted that sun spots in the photosphere have been the object of intense study since Galileo but that “observations have not yet been synthesized to provide even an accurate description of their physical nature, let alone the mechanism of their origin.” Crediting high-altitude rockets for initial detection and occasional study of hidden solar radiation, detailed study requires continous observation of the sun on a 24-hour basis, which “can only be accomplished with the aid of one or more satellite observatories.”
usaf-nasa 30-member ad hoc committee established to plan a “joint hypersonic research program for the next couple of years.” The committee would consider two primary missions for the Aerospace Plane (asp), or hypersonic aircraft: (1) vehicle system to provide earth-to-orbit-and-return capability; and (2) earth aircraft capable of 5,000-mi. unrefueled flight, asp would be follow-on program to X-15 research aircraft program.
Report by Dr. James R. Killian, Jr., released by the National Civil Service League, stated that the U.S. Government is “unusually desperate” for more and better scientists and engineers. Education is not keeping pace “with the growing size of our national commitments in science and technology” and Government is being outbid by industries and even some universities for scarce talent. Greatest need, said the former scientific adviser to President Eisenhower and now President of mit, is for scientists and engineers “with managerial ability.” “Already there is a dangerous weakening of supervising technical leadership.”
Velery Lutsky, Soviet astronomer of the Moscow Planetarium, said in English-language Radio Moscow broadcast to North America, that the flight of aurora 7 made it “more urgent” that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. cooperate in space exploration.
Dr. Andrei S. Severny, Soviet astronomer who heads the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory whose 102-in. telescope is the largest outside of California, reported a partial theory on cause of solar flares—solar flare convulsion is brought about by a release of the accumulation of magnetic energy. Based on observations of changes in the strong magnetic fields, Dr. Severny’s interpretation of flares is based on technique developed by Dr. Horace D. Babcock and his son at Mount Wilson in California. Skeptical of Severny’s thesis, a colleague of the Babcocks, Dr. Robert Howard, was reported in Russia to challenge the Soviet data.
Reported that Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory was establishing a mid western network of 16 observing stations with four automatic cameras to photograph the night sky to locate meteorites quickly after they fall. Located in 7 midwestem states, the stations will scan a total possible recovery area of two and one half billion acres.
Army launched Nike-Zeus missile in what was described as a successful intercept of a simulated icbm nose cone. Apriif!: nasa sponsored a day-long technical symposium in Washington on results of the MA-6 three-orbit space flight. Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and officials of Project Mercury reviewed the findings of the Feb. 20 flight and stressed the conclusion that the presence of the astronaut had been indispensable to successful completion of the three-orbit mission. On the Glenn effect—the firefly-like particles Glenn reported seeing outside Ms capsule during each of the three sunrises—Dr. John A. O’Keefe, Assistant Chief, Theoretical Division, Goddard Space Flight Center, reported that study had shown them to be flakes of paint from the spacecraft.
White House Reorganization Plan No. 2 became effective, establishing the Office of Science and Technology in the Executive Office of the President. Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner was appointed Director, retaining duties of the special assistant to the President for science and technology and receiving certain functions transferred from the National Science Foundation.
Langley afb celebrated its 45th anniversary with the tac Thunderbird team, a band concert, displays of aircraft and missiles, and displays of nasa’s Langley Research Center highlighting the “open house” day.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists disclosed they were conducting radar exploration of Venus. Data obtained by the experiment, continuing from October 1 for about three months, would be compared with those obtained by mariner ii spacecraft when it flies in vicinity of Venus.
Paresev (Paraglider Research Vehicle) flown at nasa Flight Research Center. First manned vehicle designed to be towed aloft and released like a conventional glider, Paresev was towed to 6,000-ft. altitude by Stearman biplane. Released, the craft was flown back to Rogers Dry Lake bed in 3 min. 44 sec. by nasa project pilot, Milton 0. Thompson. Paresev flight program provided data on (1) flare and landing capabilities; (2) stability and controllability; and (3) pilot training. Possible uses of the paraglider concept included recovery of future spacecraft and rocket boosters.
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov visited the White House and toured the Mall in Washington, D.C. At joint press conference at the National Academy of Sciences, Glenn and Titov both spoke about possible international cooperation in manned space flight, Titov suggesting that the diplomats would first have to reach agreement on disarmament. Titov said that the Soviet press conference on August 14, 1961, held at Ludnicki, at which the President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Matislav Keldysh discussed the rocket boosters of vostok ii, contained all useful information available on the Soviet rockets. Titov also said that the released photograph of vostok ii was of a mockup.
National Geographic Society and Lowell Observatory announced preparation of an atlas, “A Photographic Study of the Brighter Planets,” containing “the most detailed and revealing pictures obtained since telescopes were perfected especially for observing the planets rather than the distant stars.”
Report outlining nasa’s manned space flight projects was published by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, with cooperation of nasa. Project Gemini two-man flights, planned for 1964 and aimed at orbital rendezvous, might be as much as a week long. Three-man Apollo flights would follow, circumlunar flights to be followed by lunar landing missions. Advance-design Gemini spacecraft would be first designed specifically by U.S. to come down on dry land, using Rogallo wing to control descent.
nasa and Indiana University jointly announced experimental center for industrial applications of aerospace research would be established at Indiana Univ., with initial nasa funding of $150,000. Project would involve the university’s business professors, biologists, geologists, physicists, and others, working with research and development people of industry and nasa.
nasa announced $240,000 grant to Smithsonian Astro-physical Observatory for setting up 16-station “prairie network” with automatic cameras to photograph bright meteors over seven midwestern states and to enable prompt recovery of meteorites. Project would enable scientists to study chemical and organic structures of meteorites before contamination on the surface of the earth.
Monetary awards for patentable inventions were made to nasa employees under provisions of the Incentive Awards Act of 1954 as follows: George A. Smith of nasa Ames Research Center; Arlen F. Carter, George P. Wood, and Adolf Busemann of nasa Langley Research Center; David G. Evans, Warner L. Stewart, Edward F. Baehr, H. Allen, Jr., C. C. Ciepluch, E. A. Fletcher, Samuel Stein, David M. Straight, and John W. Gregory of nasa Lewis Research Center; William J. D. Escher and Thomas L. Greenwood of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center.
Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke to the American Astronautical Society on the broad benefits derived from the space program. He said: “Space exploration is of such immense importance to man’s total knowledge that it wlli benefit and alter the course of his existence in ways no more foreseeable today than those which resulted from the invention of the wheel. . . . One of the major benefits being gleaned from this vast effort to conquer space is the stimulus which it is providing for scientific research in new and uncharted areas. . . .”
nasa Langley Research Center (LaRc) announced plans to build a cyclotron laboratory on 1,300 acres of usAF-owned land, a former Bomarc missile site, halfway between LaRc and Williamsburg, Va. The laboratory will include two accelerators to generate electrons and protons of the energies spacecraft will encounter on deep space flights.
nas Committee on Atmospheric Sciences submitted three-volume report on “The Atmospheric Sciences, 1961-70” to Dr. Jerome Wiesner, Special Assistant for Science and Technology to the President. Prepared under Dr. Sverre Petterssen of the University of Chicago and Dr. C. Gordon Little of the National Bureau of Standards, the report recommended: (1) a tripled funding of scientific research in the atmospheric sciences over the next 10 years; (2) university output of doctorates in the atmospheric sciences be increased by a factor of at least four or five; (3) universities must broaden and strengthen their programs to become national centers of academic and scientific excellence; and (4) Government research agencies must develop more rigorous research and educational programs.
Army Signal Research and Development Laboratory at Fort Monmouth announced development of a super-powered laser with a peak power of more than 3 million watts. The laser (light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation) is 300 times as powerful as lasers in general laboratory use. It has potential in the fields of communications, range-finding, space vehicle guidance and special-purpose illumination.
British Broadcasting Corp. announced that 30% of Britain’s population—15,000,000 people—listened to its radio coverage of Astronaut Glenn’s three-orbit space flight on Feb. 20, comparable to the size of the audiences that listened to Sir Winston Churchill’s wartime broadcasts.
nasa confirmed Rift nuclear rocket stage would be manufactured in renovated dirigible hangar at Moffett Field nas, Calif. To be used to flight-test nasa-aec Nerva engine, Rift was being developed under technical direction of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. as prime contractor. Rift would be flight-tested in 1967-68 as top stage of Advanced Saturn (C-5) launch vehicle.
nasa announced Maj. L. Gordon Cooper, Jr. (usaf), had been selected for 18-orbit Project Mercury flight MA-9. The day-long space flight would be made no earlier than April 1963. Astronaut Cooper, youngest of original seven astronauts, was back-up pilot and technical adviser for Astronaut Walter M. Schirra in flight MA-8. Back-up pilot for MA-9 would be Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., who made first U.S. manned space flight (suborbital flight, MR-3) on May 5, 1961.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced appointment of Dr. Howard S. Turner to the Industrial Applications Advisory Committee. Dr. Turner was vice president for r&d of Jones & Laugh-lin Steel Corp. and formerly president and a director of Industrial Research Institute.
Lt. Col. John A. Powers, addressing the Texas Associated Press Broadcasters Association, said that the next manned space flight (MA-8) might be as many as seven orbits. “We’ll go for the full seven if all systems work perfectly,” the Project Mercury spokesman stated.
Radio signals from Johannesburg, South Africa, activated four observation instruments on the mariner ii space probe. Transmitted data would be evaluated by Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (jpl).
Congressman George P. Miller, chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, defended the U.S. space program in speech on floor of the House. Arguing that Soviet vostok in and iv manned orbital flights did not justify changes in the U.S. program, he said: “Certainly I will not stand here and say that more and better military space programs should not be undertaken. What I do say is that a considerable effort in this field has long been underway and that the Monday-morning quarterbacks whose teeth start chattering after every Russian ‘spectacular’ might exhibit a bit more faith in those who have the actual responsibility for the defense of the country. . . . “[We should not overlook] . . . the fact that the Soviets have now demonstrated two important capabilities: First, that they have sufficient launch facilities and rocket reliability to launch two manned spacecraft within a short time, and second, that they have the ability to time launches with great precision. These capabilities are an important step toward the development of the rendezvous and docking technique which will be of great value in achieving many advanced objectives in space exploration, some of which may have potential military value. “These, I think, are the formidable implications of their recent feat. But these implications are no reason for us to put our program in a constant state of flux, with projects starting, stopping, and shifting in response to each new Soviet development. Our undertaking is gigantic, immensely complex. It cannot be assembled and disassembled and redesigned and reassembled without losing its direction and momentum, and the space contest itself. . . . “There is a suggestion that the military services should duplicate work now in progress under the civilian agency. There is nothing particularly military about solutions to problems involved in the effects of long-term weightlessness, radiation, and isolation. The capabilities of both civilian and military research agencies should be brought to bear on these problems in a coordinated manner. “On the record, then, it appears that the critics of our space program are not asking that we do twice as much—but that we do everything twice. I do not think the economy will take that, but even if it would—it just does not make sense. “And how about the reciprocal use of the knowledge we are gaining? Science knows no exclusive applications technologically speaking, what is developed by civilians can be used militarily and vice versa. . . . “It seems farily well established that the real cause of all this squabble about the military-in-space stems from an inhouse difference of opinion within the military establishment. The problem is not that our civil space program is retarding the military. On the contrary, it is enhancing it and will continue to do so in the future. The problem is that the military space enthusiasts have not been able to obtain all the green lights they want from their bosses. ... I am confident the controversy will be resolved in time—and expeditiously, I hope.”
Lt. Col. Joseph A. Connor, Jr. (usaf) of nasa Office of Manned Space Flight received Air Force Legion of Merit for establishing and directing nuclear safety board for transit iv-a satellite. Lt. Col. Connor’s work on the project was done more than a year ago when he was assigned to the aec.
nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, addressed National Industrial Conference Board, Chicago, on economic implications of manned space flight program: “ ... In a significant, though incidental way, the space program is already enriching and will continue to enrich our country. It is causing a rapid advancement of industrial technology and the stimulation of our economy. The billions of dollars required for the space effort are not being spent on the moon; they are being spent in our factories and laboratories—for salaries and for new materials and supplies, which in turn represent income for others. “Already the space industry is a major industry. It is creating new job opportunities at all levels of skills and abilities. It is improving standards of living. “New economically beneficial breakthroughs will be made in many fields. A successful space program will require major and rapid advances in the uses of energy and the development of new materials, fabrics, and lubricants—the very forces that are basic to economic growth. “Space research and development is already producing corollary benefits in the form of new products, new methods, and new industrial processes which can be employed in the manufacture of countless articles for human use. The surface has probably barely been scratched. . . . “The development of space science and technology will undoubtedly strengthen our whole industrial base and serve as effective insurance against technological obsolescence. ...”
Tropical storm developed 420 mi. east of Puerto Rico, traveling on path that would cross impact area for Astronaut Schirra’s third orbit, nasa flight officials were closely watching the storm to determine whether it would necessitate postponing Schirra’s MA-8 flight scheduled for Oct. 3. During September: Conclusion that wheel-shaped space station was technically feasible and identification of problems that still exist were revealed in nasa Technical Note D-1504, compilation of 11 papers by nasa Langley Research Center staff. Selection of this 150-ft.-diameter, 171,000-lb. structure was result of studies by Langley for more than 2 years and detailed analyses by North American Aviation, Inc., for past 6 months. The report indicated the space station primarily would provide a means of learning to live in space, where zero-gravity and variable-gravity experiments could be performed, closed life-support systems could be qualified, and rendezvous techniques and systems developed. Chosen model could support up to 38-man crew.
nasa awards of less than $1,000 for inventions were made to the following nasa employees: D. H. Buckley, R. L. Johnson, Earl W. Conrad, R. J. Weber, F. D. Kochendorfer, John C. Nettles, Glen E. McDonald, Gerald Morrell, L. A. Baldwin, V.	A. Sandborn, C. J. Blaze, C. G. Richter, and Marcus F. Heid-mann of Lewis Research Center; and David H. Schaefer of Goddard Space Flight Center.
nasa press conference explained basic decision on Apollo manned lunar exploration program: to base the next phase of its planning, research and development, procurement, and space flight program on the Saturn (C-5) to accomplish the initial manned lunar landing and recovery, using the lunar orbit rendezvous as the prime mission mode. Based on more than a year of intensive study, the basic decision on the lunar orbit rendezvous (lor) mode enables immediate industrial consideration of the lunar excursion vehicle and firm planning on early employment of two-stage Saturn (C-lB) to test-flight the Apollo configuration in earth orbits. It was also announced: (1) an in-depth study of an unmanned lunar logistic vehicle would be undertaken; (2) continued feasibility studies would be made of the earth-orbit rendezvous mode using Saturn (C-5) with a two-man spacecraft, with the possibilities of a direct flight with this spacecraft; (3) continued study would be made of the Nova vehicle (two to three times capability of C-5). nasa Administrator Webb said: “We are putting major emphasis on lunar orbit rendezvous because a year of intensive study indicates that it is most desirable, from the standpoint of time, cost and mission accomplishment. In reaching this decision, however, we have acted to retain the degree of flexibility vital to a research and development program of this magnitude . . .” lor was unanimously recommended by nasa’s Manned Space Flight Management Council because it: (1) provides highest probability of mission success with essentially equal mission safety; (2) provides mission success months earlier than other modes; (3) will cost 10 to 15 per cent less than other mode; and (4) requires least amount of technical development beyond existing commitments.
Univ. of Illinois radiotelescope at Vermilion River Observatory was dedicated. The radiotelescope, world’s largest, included 400' x 600' x 65' parabolic reflector. Prof. George W. Swenson, Jr., Univ. of Illinois project engineer for the observatory, said radiotelescope’s first job wollid be to map Milky Way. The $871,650 telescope was financed mainly with grants from Office of Naval Research (onr), with supplemental grants from National Science Foundation (nsf) and Univ. of Illinois. _	_
nasa approved Saturn C-5 development program and authorized nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to direct its development.
(1) communications satellites; (2) weather satellites; (3) coordination of tracking and data reception on scientific satellites; (4) international search and rescue operations to recover space crews who have returned to earth outside the planned recovery areas; (5) mapping the earth’s magnetic field and exchange of information on space medicine; (6) joint agreement on problems of international law as related to space exploration, beyond those points already agreed to in the U.N., especially the prohibition of space experiments that would inhibit the space experiments of other nations. Premier Khrushchev warned, however, that space cooperation would “depend to some extent on the settlement of the disarmament problem,” since much military hardware and techniques were used in peaceful space exploration vehicles.
explorer ix, launched on February 16, 1961, provided new and refined information on the density of the upper atmosphere, a press conference of nasa and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory scientists reported. They confirmed a figure previously released—that the density of the atmosphere at 420 mi. was 3 x 10-17 grams per cubic centimeter, or 1/40 million millionth of that at sea level, explorer ix density values were about 10 times lower than those computed in 1959 from earlier satellites. Most of this decrease is attributed to the decrease in solar activity since the peak of the solar cycle in 1958 and 1959. Changes were also clearly related to the 27-day rotational period of the sun and to the occasional violent solar storms that affect the earth’s atmosphere. explorer ix, a 12-ft. aluminum-foil sphere painted with white “polka dots,” was expected to have an orbital life of two more years. As it spiraled down into denser atmosphere, it was expected to provide much more information on density at altitudes down to 100 mi.
National Science Foundation released comprehensive report on “Education and Professional Employment in the USSR” by Nicholas DeWitt of the Harvard Russian Research Center.
nasa scientists Theodore P. Stecher and James E. Mulligan reported at cospar meeting that “a complex series of solar events” in November 1960 caused the inner Van Allen radiation belt to “dump” its captive high energy particles along the earth’s magnetic field. This event disrupted a rocket experiment, but it detected an ultraviolet aurora with almost no visible counterpart. Indications were that the inner belt was soon refilled and returned to “normal.”
Mercury astronauts Shepard, Grissom, and Glenn appeared before both the House Science and Astronautics Committee and the Senate Aeronautics and Space Committee, answering a variety of questions on future manned space flight. Dr. Robert Seamans, nasa Associate Administrator, summarized specific nasa program, manpower, and money requirements before the House Committee.
At meeting of the National Academy of Sciences at Austin, Texas, President Frederick Seitz said that other nations should bear a larger share of space exploration efforts. This would help solve “a big problem for us today—whether the attention being given to aero-space in America is draining too much manpower from the other sciences.”
Army Pershing missile successfully fired on longest test flight to date—400 miles—from amr.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., after arriving in Houston after trip from Pacific landing of six-orbit MA-8 flight, held press conference at Rice University auditorium: “My intention was to use so little [attitude control] fuel that no one could argue that we [had not] had enough fuel aboard sigma 7 for eighteen orbits, if we wanted it. I think I proved that point.” He said MA-8 was a “textbook flight” and that ho was sorry to see it end. On the issue of space sickness, Astronaut Schirra stated that despite the prolonged weightlessness of this longest U.S. manned space flight, “there was no problem at all. There was no break-off phenomena, there was no uneasiness, there was no queasiness. I felt great. “The suit temperature problem . . . is a problem which we have solved. I have been much hotter in the tent at Cape Canaveral than I ever, ever thought of being in sigma 7.” He reported sighting the “fireflies” and believing they emanated from the spacecraft.
United Auto Workers and International Association of Machinists unions in Los Angeles announced they had set September 22 as strike date against 4 aerospace companies—North American Aviation, Inc., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., General Dynamics Corp., and Ryan Aircraft Co. President Kennedy warned that such a strike, involving nearly 100,000 workers, “would seriously set us back in space exploration and would imperil the Nation’s defense.”
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, in London press conference, said he did not believe the U.S.S.R. was leading the U.S. in space exploration. “We have been putting all kinds of satellites in the air for meteorological readings and other scientific information, ...” but the U.S. has not been indulging in “the same kind of spectacular” as the U.S.S.R. “I think we should develop achievement upon achievement until it should be almost a matter of course for us to go to the moon, rather than indulge in the spectacular.”
nasa Ames Research Center established Space Sciences Div. to be headed by Dr. Charles P. Sonett. New division will conduct research in the areas of geophysics, interplanetary and planetary physics, planetary sciences, astronomy, and astrophysics.
S-IV stage for Saturn space vehicle arrived at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., after 23-day journey from Douglas Missiles and Space Systems Div., Santa Monica, Calif. First Saturn stage to be shipped by water from West Coast manufacturing site, the S-IV would be mated with other Saturn stages in dynamic test tower at Marshall, for series of bending and vibration tests. Its external configuration, weight, and other characteristics were same as S-IV flight units.
Hartley A. Soul<5 of nasa’s Langley Research Center retired after 34 years’ service at Langley. Soul6 was instrumental in the establishment of what is now the nasa Flight Research Center at Edwards, California, and directed the research on the X-l (which in October 1947 first broke the speed of sound) and the X-15. More recently he was nasa Project Director for the multimillion-dollar PVoject Mercury worldwide tracking and ground instrumentation system.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, addressed National Advanced Technology Management Council in Seattle on the U.S. lunar program. “Although we are still in a very early phase of the greatest engineering project that man has ever undertaken, the Nation has made four crucial management decisions which clear the way for action. First, the goal has been identified. We are to land American explorers on the moon. Second, the timetable has been laid down. We are to carry out the mission and return the U.S. explorers safely to earth within this decade. Third, we have settled on the organization to meet the national goal on schedule. Finally, we have selected the method which we believe can accomplish the lunar expedition on the shortest possible time schedule, with the greatest assurance of success, and at the least expense. You do not need to be a specialist in management to realize that decisions such as these are central to the success of any job—what to do, when to do it, who is to be in charge, and how it is to be done. In the United States space program, these fundamental decisions have been made. And we have proceeded with the work to carry them out at the swiftest pace consonant with other processing needs of the country and with the resources available .... “The achievement which stands out [in the manned lunar landing program] . . ., in my opinion, has been the launching by the people of the United States of a truly national effort to demonstrate our determination and our capacity to sail on the new ocean of space and to master the technology of the space age in all its aspects—for the security of the Free World and the good of all mankind. “The lunar landing is no stunt. The most important accomplishment will be the development by this Nation of the ability to make the landing, and not the landing itself. Achievement of such ability is worth the great investment in brains and industrial capacity and technological advance that we are making. The lunar landing is a yardstick—a measure of this country’s technological leadership, a measure of the ability of this democracy to ‘manage,’ if you will, a great engineering and technological undertaking in the national interest.”
Reported that Hughes Aircraft Co. had developed special devices to determine radiation dosage an astronaut may absorb in space flight. Called “tissue-equivalent ionization chambers” and developed under usaf contract, the instruments would be installed in three usaf “plastinauts,” man-sized dummies of astronauts made of plastic simulating human tissue. The plastinauts were designed “to fly in any space vehicle capable of carrying a man.”
In regular press conference, President Kennedy announced that he had asked his Science Advisory Committee, in cooperation with the Federal Council for Science and Technology, to report “as quickly as possible on the specific measures that can be taken within and without the Government to develop the necessary and well-qualified scientists and engineers and technicians to meet our society’s complex needs—government, educational and industrial.” He prefaced his announcement with a review of the declining number of scientists and engineers educated in the United States since 1951.
Rodney D. Steward was named RL-10 rocket engine program manager at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Steward replaced William D. Brown, who resumed full-time duties as deputy chief, Engine Management Office, msfc.
In address to ars lunar meeting in Cleveland, Dr. James A. Van Allen said that protons of the inner radiation belt could be a serious hazard for extended manned space flight, and that nuclear detonations might be capable of cleaning out these inner belt protons, perhaps for a prolonged period, for making manned orbits about 300-mi.-high above the earth. Van Allen said that the recent shot over Johnston Island was far too small and too low to have such an effect.
Polaris A-2 missile, modified to carry guidance system for advanced A-3 model, was launched on successful 1,500-mi. test flight from Cape Canaveral.
Pioneer naval aviator, Vice Admiral Patrick N. L. Bellinger, died. In 1915, Bellinger became the second American flier to be launched by catapult, established flying boat distance record, established altitude record of 10,000 feet, and participated in aerial spotting for artillery fire. In 1916, he made naval tests of live bombing and practical tests of air-to-ground radio communication. In 1917, he made machine-gun firing tests from seaplane and first night seaplane flights using floodlights. In May 1919, he commanded the NC-1 in transatlantic flight to the Azores, damage to aircraft ended the flight there. During World War II, he was commander of the Atlantic Fleet Air Force.
Draft convention presented to Australia covering joint use of the Woomera Rocket Range by space research program of the western European nations.
Scientists at Jodrell Bank Experimental Station announced they had measured part of Milky Way’s magnetic field, marking first time positive evidence had been obtained of the field’s existence. Milky Way’s magnetic field measured 25 mlliionths of a gauss (earth surface’s magnetic field measures about half a gauss). Led by Dr. Rodney D. Davies, research team had spent 20,000 hours over past four years on the experiment, involving radiotelescopic measurement of light from a star cluster 1,000 light years away.
In address at Wheeling, West Virginia, Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, pointed out that nasa and dod “cooperate closely. For example, we have established a national launch vehicle program to provide the rocket power that both civilian and defense activities require. United States policy demands that every possible effort be made to perserve space as a peaceful resource for all mankind. We must not lose sight, however, of the fact that manned space flight involves facilities, vehicles, and techniques that may well be significant for national defense. . . . “Our landing on the moon will be a 240,000-mile step forward in the great adventure of space conquest. No one can say how far we will ultimately go, but I assure you of this—we are on our way to making the United States pre-eminent in space as well as on earth.”
In speech to ias-nasa Manned Space Flight Conference at St. Louis, General Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of afsc, said that if the Soviets attain a “really significant breakthrough in space technology, they may be able to deny other nations access to space—even for purposes of scientific research. . . . We must have necessary strength to ensure that space is free to be used for peaceful purposes.” Schriever said that “both the military and civilian aspects of our space program are vital, and both must be pursued with urgency. They share a common aim—• the security and well-being of the United States.”
nasa announced that John Stack, Director of Aeronautical Research, would retire June 1 after 34 years of Federal service with naca and nasa. No successor was announced. Mr. John Stack achieved world-wide eminence for his wind-tunnel research and conception of the rocket airplane as a research tool, beginning with the X-l and the D-558, and culminating with the X-15. He was awarded the Collier Trophy in 1951 for solution of the transonic wind tunnel problem. In 1947, he shared the Collier Trophy with Maj. Charles Yeager and Lawrence D. Bell for the X-l which made the first flight through the speed of sound. Stack also received many other awards, including the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award of the ias and the annual medal of the Swedish Society of Engineers. He was a fellow of the ias and the Royal Aeronautical Society (England).
Army Nike-Zeus test flight from Point Mugu, Calif., a partial success in that “missile accepted and correctly executed control commands transmitted from a ground gllidance center,” although third stage did not fire.
In NAS-sponsored lecture on “Geomagnetism” for Voice of America broadcast, Dr. James P. Heppner of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center said: “Each new space experiment adds to the list of unanswered questions about our electromagnetic environment.” He pointed to the changes in the scientific concepts of the boundary of the earth’s atmosphere and of relationships between the earth’s magnetic field and solar radiation that have resulted from data already acquired by satellites and probes. • Soviet officials indicated that newsmen may be allowed to cover the next Soviet space shot, a report later denied.
nasa radiation-research balloon released biological payload near Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, after 130,500-ft.-high, 51-hour flight from Goose Bay, Labrador. Two monkeys survived the flight in good condition, but four hamsters could not survive the day-long recovery operation in the Canadian wilderness; fate of the flour beetles was not yet known. The animals and insects were flown to the University of California at Berkeley for scientific study. This was the second in a series of four balloon experiments conducted by nasa Ames Research Center.
dod announced that it was consolidating all military basic research overseas. The first step would be the opening of a Defense Research Office in Rio de Janiero, Brazil, on July 1, 1962, to coordinate the military basic research program throughout Latin America, nsf and nih would open offices in the same building for their independent programs, with all efforts coordinated by the State Department.	_
Three-man crew “survived” a simulated week-long, round-trip to the moon, in simulation chamber at Martin Co. plant, near Baltimore. Crew in the simulator, which resembled Apollo spacecraft in size and shape, consisted of 3 nasa civilian test pilots: Donald L. Mallick and Harold E. Ream of Langley Research Center, and Glenn W. Stinnett of Ames Research Center. During the simulated flight, made in July, the men took turns as pilot, co-pilot, and navigator, and each made a simulated landing on the moon’s surface in the special one-man capsule designed by Langley scientists.
At annual nasa awards ceremony, nasa Administrator James E. Webb presented Group Achievement Awards: to four groups at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center’s Assistant Directorate for Engineering and Development, Preflight Operations Division, Mercury Project Office, and Flight Operations Office; and to nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Directorate for Tracking and Data Systems, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden presented Exceptional Scientific Achievement Awards to Robert E. Bourdeau and John C. Lindsay, both of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, nasa Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented Outstanding Leadership Awards to Maxime A. Faget, Assistant Director for Engineering and Development, msc; George B. Graves, Jr., Assistant Director for Information and Control Systems, msc; George M. Low, Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, Office of Manned Space Flight; and John W. Townsend, Jr., Assistant Director for Space Science at GSFC.
Tass reported that Soviet astronomers of the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory discovered molecular oxygen in the outer atmosphere of Venus, using 157.6-in. solar telescope and a special spectograph. Also reported were indications of the presence of nitrogen.
Fourth official anniversary of nasa, charged by the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to organize and conduct U.S. space exploration for peaceful purposes. No new agency of the Executive Branch of the Federal Government was created by the transfer of so many units and programs of other departments or agencies as nasa.
Congressional Record reprinted monograph on “U.S. Space Legal Policy—Some Basic Principles,” by Robert D. Crane, director of the Space Research Institute at Duke University. Mr. Crane urged U.S. initiative in the formulation of space law, which “can serve not only to promote scientific research and economic progress and to facilitate the growth of a free and peaceful world order, but to implement on a higher moral level American military and political strategies ...”
President Kennedy named Theodore von K&rm&n as the first recipient of the National Medal of Science for leadership in the science and engineering of aeronautics. A native of Hungary, von K&rm&n became a U.S. citizen in 1936 as director of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratories of Cal Tech. In 1936 he also initiated the rocket research development which led to the creation of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. He is presently chairman of the Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research and Development for nato (known as agaed).
Virginia State Exchange Clubs awarded Distinguished Virginian Award to William J. O’Sullivan, head of the Space Vehicle Group at Langley Research Center. Representative Thomas N. Downing, member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, made the presentation to O’Sullivan in recognition of his concept, design, and development work with the Echo satellite.
In X-15 awards ceremony before distinguished guests and Headquarters personnel, at nasa Headquarters, tribute was paid to the team of governmental and industrial persons responsible for the contributions of the X-15 program to aeronautics and space flight. Associate Administrator Seamans reviewed the objectives and achievements of the X-15 program, nasa Outstanding Leadership Awards were presented to Paul F. Bikle (Director of the nasa Flight Research Center) and Hartley A. Soulli (Langley Research Center X-15 project manager) by Administrator Webb. After a short address on the pride of the nation concerning nasa’s achievements, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson (Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council and a key figure in the Congressional enactment of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958) awarded nasa Distinguished Service Medals to the X-15 pilots Forrest Petersen (Cdr., usn), Robert M. White (Major, usaf), and Joseph A. Walker (nasa).
Electricians began to return to work at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsvllie, Ala., after a ten-day walkout. Estimated 70% of total construction work-force, including workers of other trades who had refused to cross electricians’ picket lines, had returned to work. Hearing on the strike by President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission was scheduled for August 27.
usaf launched an Atlas missile from Vandenberg afb, Calif., in a test flight down the Pacific Missile Range. A sac combat missile crew launched the Atlas from a horizontal, semi-hard “coffin” launcher.
Eugene W. Wasielewski, Associate Director of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, told National Rocket Club that ariel (U.K.-U.S.) satellite was “just beginning to show signs of trouble.” Launched April 26, 1962, the satellite was designed for one year of transmitting life. Wasielewski said some of the experiments aboard the satellite were “not doing as well as some others,” that the radio signals from some of the experiments were fading.
President Kennedy sent to Congress a reorganization plan that would establish an Office of Science and Technology within the White House staff. Its director would advise and assist the President on (1) major science policies and programs in the Federal government; (2) assessment of scientific and technical developments for effect on national policies; (3) review, integration, and coordination of major Federal science activities; (4) ensuring “good and close relations” with Nation’s scientists and engineers. President said this would leave the National Science Foundation free to concentrate on fostering basic research and science education.
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, writing on the U.S. space program in The Saturday Evening Post, stated that he did “not see the need for continuing this effort of such a fantastically expensive crash program. . . . “Why the great hurry to get to the moon and the planets? We have already demonstrated that in everything except the power of our booster rockets we are leading the world in scientific space exploration. “From here on, I think we should proceed in an orderly, scientific way, building one accomplishment on another, rather than engaging in a mad effort to win a stunt race.”
An S-IV stage for the two-stage Saturn began three-week, 3,500-mi. trip via barge from Douglas Aircraft Co. in Santa Monica, Calif., to nasa Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Ala., for dynamic testing.
ranger v lunar probe launched from Cape Canaveral by Atlas-Agena B, the Agena B stage attaining parking orbit and 25 min. later reigniting to send ranger v toward the moon. The spacecraft’s solar cells did not provide power, making it impossible for reception of flight-path correction signal and rendering its television cameras useless, ranger v was to have relayed TV pictures of the lunar surface and rough-landed an instrumented capsule containing a seismometer to send back data on moon quakes and meteoritic impact. Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists tracked the spacecraft for 8 hours, 44 min. before its small reserve battery went dead.
Soviet scientist A. Prokhorov, writing in Soviet labor organization’s publication Trud, stated that study of structure of living organisms would provide great opportunities for their utilization in space exploration. He stated that the “general reliability of modern automation systems is less than the reliability of each of their components taken individually. Living organisms, on the other hand, having developed over millions of years, are much more reliable than their component organs.”
nasa’s Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, briefed the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on the lunar-orbit rendezvous (lor) procedure which nasa announced as the prime mission mode for the initial manned lunar landing.
nasa announced that two technical notes propose new concept on the mechanics of solar heating of the upper atmosphere. Dr. Isadore Harris (TN-D-1443) and Dr. Wolfgang Priester (TN-D-1444) of Goddard Space Flight Center proposed that corpuscular radiation (i.e., solar wind) in association with hydromagnetic waves may be the energy source required to explain the results obtained from orbiting satellites. Harris’ note provided for the first time a diurnal picture of the thermosphere (120 to 2,050 kilometers above the earth’s surface). Priester’s note postulated the physical properties scientists are likely to encounter during a complete 11-year solar cycle when upper atmospheric conditions change according to solar flare activity.
nasa received patent (3,016,693) for electrothermal rocket invented by John R. Jack and Wolfgang E. Moeckel of Lewis Research Center.
In a nasa press conference on the X-l 5 additional research program, Mr. John Stack, nasa’s Director of Aeronautical Research, said: “. . . when I was talking about the total research airplane program, this started really because two men in high positions in a time of great stress also had time to think of the future, and I refer to General Arnold and Dr. George W. Lewis. And when this approach, this sort of thing, was put to them in late ’42—and you can readily appreciate General Arnold and Mr. Lewis were pretty busy men at that time—they did under the stress of all that find time to think also of the future. And this kind of a program that has progressed is a kind of a monument to the foresight of those two men.”
Five Nike-Cajun rockets were fired from Wallops Station, Va., in a series of tests to measure atmospheric conditions at high altitudes. At 5:47 AM nasa scientists fired the first rocket to spread a trail of water vapor up to 89 miles altitude. At 5:54 AM the second rocket was fired. It loosed a cloud of sodium vapor starting at 26 miles and rising with the rocket to 84 miles. The cloud was spectacular in the sunrise and visible for hundreds of miles along the Atlantic coast. At 6:15 AM the third rocket jettisoned and detonated grenades one at a time at altitudes from 24 to 55 miles. Two additional Nike-Cajun rockets were fired in the evening with sodium and grenade experiments.
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced Contract award to Pratt and Whitney, to investigate the feasibility of variable thrust in RL-10 rocket engine. The study was not directed toward any specific mission but would have wide application in future space flights.
President Kennedy toured nasa’s Manned Space Center, after speaking at Rice University, Houston, where he said: “. . . Man, in his quest for knowledge and progress, is determined and cannot be deterred. The exploration of space will go ahead, whether we join in it or not, and it is one of the great adventures of all time, and no nation which expects to be the leader of other nations can expect to stay behind in this race for space. “Those who came before us made certain that this country rode the first waves of the industrial revolutions, the first waves of modem invention, and the first wave of nuclear power, and this generation does not intend to founder in the backwash of the coming age of space. “We mean to be a part of it. We mean to lead it, for the eyes of the world now look into space, to the moon and to the planets beyond, and we have vowed that we shall not see it governed by a hostile flag of conquest, but by a banner of freedom and peace. “We have vowed that we shall not see space filled with weapons of mass destruction, but with instruments of knowledge and understanding. “Yet the vows of this Nation can only be fulfilled if we in this Nation are first, and, therefore, we intend to be first. In short, our leadership in science and in industry, our hopes for peace and security, our obligations to ourselves as well as others, all require us to make this effort, to solve these mysteries, to solve them for the good of all men, and to become the world’s leading spacefaring nation. “We sail on this new sea because there is new knowledge to be gained, and new rights to be won, and they must be won and used for the progress of all people. For space science, like nuclear science and all technology, has no conscience of its own. “Whether it wlli become a force for good or lli depends on man, and only if the United States occupies a position of preeminence can we help decide whether this new ocean wlli be a sea of peace or a new, terrifying theater of war. “I do not say that we should or wlli go unprotected against the hostile misuse of space any more than we go unprotected against the hostile land or sea, but I do say that space can be explored and mastered without feeding the fires of war, without repeating the mistakes that man has made in extending his writ around this globe of ours. “There is no strife, no prejudice, no national conflict in outer space as yet. Its hazards are hostile to us all. Its conquest deserves the best of all mankind, and its opportunity for peaceful cooperation may never come again......... “We choose to go to the moon ... in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard, because that goal wlli serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills, because that challenge is one that we are willing to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone, and one which we intend to win, and the others, too. “It is for these reasons that I regard the decision last year to shift our efforts in space from low to high gear as among the most important decisions that wlli be made during my incumbency in the office of the Presidency. . . . “We have had our failures, but so have others, even if they do not admit them. And they may be less public. “To be sure, we are behind, and will be behind for some time in manned space flight. But we do not intend to stay behind. In this decade we shall make up and move ahead. . . .” September 12: nasa announced it would launch a special satellite before the end of the year to “obtain information on possible effects of radiation on future statellites and to give the world’s scientific community additional data on the artificial environment created by the [radiation] belt.” The 100-lb. satellite would be launched from Cape Canaveral into an elliptical orbit ranging from about 170-mi. perigee to 10,350-mi. apogee.
General Mills launched balloon, trailing 315-ft.-long reflectorized polyethelene tube in test to improve long-range communications, from GM’s research center at New Brighton, Minn. The cylinder, 23 ft. in diameter, was designed as a relay device to receive commercial TV signals from wkbt-tv, La Crosse, Wise., and relay them 260 mi. to usaf base, Wadena, Minn.
oso i began transmitting real-time data on solar observation after five weeks of intermittent transmittal, nasa scientists speculated that the cause of the reduction in the satellite’s rate of spin from 50 rpm to 42 rpm, which caused the transmitter to restart, was either a result of bearing friction within the turning wheel or the slowing down of the satellite’s rotation because of its position with respect to the Earth’s magnetic field.
nasa announced signing of $215,502,744 contract with Chrysler Corp. for production of Saturn S-I stages. Chrysler would deliver the 21 units (instead of 20 as originally planned) between early 1964 and late 1966, beginning with the S-I for Saturn SA-9. nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, with development responsibility for Saturn, would fabricate boosters for first eight vehicles. Chrysler would build the S-I stages at nasa Michoud Operations plant near New Orleans.
At American Rocket Society Honors Night Banquet in Los Angeles, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, was presented the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Award, highest aes honor, for “general eminence in the field of rocket engineering and space flight.” Other 1962 ars awards: Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., nasa astronaut, received the aes Astronautics Award; Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations, Special Projects Office, received the James H. Wyld Memorial Award; Samuel K. Hoffman, president of naa Rocketdyne Div., received aes Propulsion Award; Dr. Howard S. Seifert, of Stanford Univ. and United Technology Corp., received the G. Edward Pendray Award; Theodore Forrester, director of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., Ion Physics Dept., received the aes Research Award; and John R. Winckler, prof, of physics at Univ. of Minnesota, received the first ars Space Science Award.
usaf prepared proposed FY 1964 budget requesting $23.5 billion, including funds for construction of eight RS-70 reconnaissance bombers and for expanded development of space weapons. Also considered in budget preparation was long-range proposal to use nasa’s Gemini two-man spacecraft as a stepping stone toward developing military manned space flight capability.
In the Third International Space Science Symposium sponsored by cospar, Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists W. K. Victor and Robertson Stevens reported that radar soundings of Venus suggest that its surface material and roughness are comparable to that of the earth. Radar probes of Venus have demonstrated that uhf signals can be used for space communications over distances of 50-75 mlliion miles.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa’s Director of Manned Space Flight, testified before a subcommittee of the House Science and Astronautics Committee on the very large and complex manned space flight program. The most important step in space capability in 1961, he said, “was not that of awarding particular contracts or making technical decisions, but rather Mr. Webb’s carefully planned reorganization of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.” Speaking of future launch sites for the Advanced Saturn vehicle as the workhorse of the manned lunar program, he said: “. . . it shows our plans for an entirely new concept of launching our large space vehicles. Instead of literally assembling or building the launch vehicles on the pads as we do at present, this arrangement would permit assembly and test at a location remote from the launch pads and under cover, protected from weather. It wlli be possible to have vertical transfer of the entirely assembled vehicle to the launch pad in a tested condition. This arrangement should offer many advantages in order to permit better and more thorough checkout, and to assure more rapid launching and efficient utilization of each pad. For the extremely tight schedules that wlli be required for launch operations in support of orbital rendezvous, this rapid launch capabllity is highly desirable.”
Japanese Meteorological Observatory reported abnormal atmospheric pressures from a Soviet nuclear blast, apparently one of two recorded also by Uppsala University in Sweden. Japanese agency estimated the strength of the blast at 20 megatons. It said the abnormal pressure lasted from 40 to 100 minutes. Two blasts registered at the seismological institute in Sweden were listed at 19 megatons and 8 megatons. The geodetic institution of the Technological High School at Stockholm, Sweden, registered another gravitational disturbance which may have been a third Russian nuclear test, one which had a force of about 10 megatons. During the past 10 days, the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission had announced that the Russians have conducted at least four nuclear tests.
Speaking before mit School of Industrial Management, nasa Manned Space Flight Director D. Brainerd Holmes said: “The major national problem today is not a lack of technological or economic resources. It is a lack of trained and courageous minded men. For this reason, the integration of our human, economic, and technological resources is basically a manpower problem. We need a special kind of man. “This kind of man not only combines general and scientific training and general management with technical experience, but he has the true courage of his convictions. Above all, he must be tireless and devoted and not give in to compromisers and obstructionists. Technical people may not necessarily be the best managers, but in this age of technology if you do not have the technical answers jmu cannot make good decisions. This is the vital point I want to stress to you today. . . . “We need group research, group engineering, and group science. But we also badly need individual creativity. In short, we need to utilize effectively all of our available capabilities, regardless of the channels they take. We must integrate group and individual efforts.”
Secretary of Labor Arthur Goldberg, in telegram message, told unions involved in strike at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center it was “imperative” that union members “return to work immediately and remain at work.”
Ten-year program for the study of weather, climate, and the atmosphere was submitted to the President’s Special Assistant for Science and Technology, Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner. Report by Dr. Sverre Petterssen was based on six conferences among 189 meteorological specialists and called for tripled manpower and expenditures including much research in space programs.
Aerobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 230-lb. payload to 116-mi. altitude before landing in Atlantic Ocean 59 mi. from launch site. Flight tested performance of three photometers developed for use in Oao (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory) satellite to be launched by nasa in 1964. Other instrumentation obtained data from the comparatively young stars Gamma Cassiopeia and Delta Persei, for use in star-evolution study being conducted by University of Wisconsin. Launch was under management of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center.
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said in Blacksburg, Va., that dual space flight of vostok iii and iv “was impressive from the standpoint of the whole operation, . . . [but] it does not look like the Russians used any new equipment. I don’t think there was a technical breakthrough. . . .” When asked to comment on U.S. prospects of being first to reach the moon, Dr. von Braun said that manned lunar flights would require rockets bigger than any used either by the U.S. or U.S.S.R. so far. “We have such rockets under development, and the Russians also have to develop a new rocket to do this job .... Therefore I don’t think we have any serious handicaps to overcome so far as the lunar program is involved.”
Article in Komsomolskaya Pravda stated that one of mariner ii’s main missions was to learn temperatures of Venutian atmosphere and surface but that Soviet radioastronomers already had answered these questions. Experiments by Pulkovo Observatory determined that Venutian surface was between 300° C and 400° C, and Venutian atmosphere was within limits of 0° C to 100° C and therefore, that Venus should be defined as a “red hot planet.”
nasa Project Mercury officials postponed for three days the 6-orbit space flight of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra (MA-8), now scheduled for September 28. Delay was to permit further time for flight preparation.
President Kennedy toured nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., and Launch Operations Center, Cape Canaveral, Fla. At msfc, he inspected a mock-up of the F-l engine and a Saturn C-l launch vehicle, and later witnessed 30-sec. static-firing of 1.3-million-lb.-thrust S-l stage for Saturn SA-4 launch vehicle. At loc, he inspected launch complexes for Mercury-Atlas vehicle, Titan rocket, and Saturn C-l. He then flew to Houston, Tex., to visit nasa Manned Spacecraft Center on September 12. Addressing workers at Cape Canaveral, the President said: “I don’t think we can exaggerate the great advantage which the Soviet Union secured in the ’50s by being first in space. They were able to give prestige to their system, they were able to give force to their argument that they were an advancing society and that we were on the decline. “But I believe that we are an advancing society, and I believe that we are on the rise, and I believe that their system is as old as time. . . .” He said that, as long as the American system was to be judged in at least one degree by its achievements in space, the United States “might as well be first, and therefore, this country, both political parties, have determined that the United States shall be first.”
General Electric announced that control system for first Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (oao) had successfully completed its first simulated space flight test.
Soviet scientist N. Varvarov was reported to have stated U.S.S.R. program to orbit one-man spacecraft had been completed with flights of vostok iii and vostok iv. During October: In letter report to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden disclosed problems in the Centaur launch vehicle program: Atlas-Centaur capability to carry heavy payloads under severe wind conditions must be studied in greater detail; quality of fabrication must be improved to reach desired level of quality control; guidance system requires further development to achieve necessary accuracy and reliability; tank fabrication requires better welding techniques; Atlas-Centaur inflight separation requires further analysis; nose cone and insulation panels must be further tested to prove their aerodynamic-load resistance. Report said about $100 million would be spent on Centaur in FY 1963 to accelerate development, nasa Lewis Research Center would study use of Centaur in combination with Titan II, Saturn C-l, and Saturn C-lB boosters.
S-I stage of Saturn C-l space vehicle was static-fired for full duration at full thrust (1.5 mlliion lbs.) for first time, at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Previous full-duration firings had attained 1.3 mlliion-lb. thrust.
Plans of a non-profit Washington Planetarium and Space Center Corp. were reported at the National Capital Planning Commission by Father Francis J. Heyden, S.J., of Georgetown University Observatory. They called for the construction of a $1.5 million, 85-foot-diameter dome on Daingerfield Island, south of the Washington National Airport. The planetarium would “provide the public with a much needed space education facility” and would be operated by the National Park Service.
nasa Flight Research Center released photographs of a mysterious floating object taken during Maj. Robert M. White’s July 17 record-breaking flight of the X-15. Pictures, extracted from llim taken by movie camera in tail of X-15, showed gray-white object of undetermined size tumbling above and behind the aircraft, nasa officials reported that it was “impossible to identify or explain the object’s presence at this time.”
In press conference following MA-8, D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, said: “This was a highly successful flight, magnificently performed. It proved there is no substitute for sound engineering and thorough training.” Walter C. Williams, msc Director of Mercury Operations, said that “so far as I am concerned, the mission was perfect.” He added that the next Mercury mission would be a 24-hour flight in early 1963.
Dr. Bernard Lubarsky of nasa’s Lewis Research Center named one of Ten Outstanding Young Men in the Federal Government for 1961 to receive Arthur S. Flemming Awards.
nasa announced contract with the University of Texas to design and build a radio antenna at the Balcones Research Center to be used in making radiation measurements of the moon and planets. It would be 16 feet in diameter and operate effectively at 30,000 to 150,000 megacycles.
25-ft. space environmental simulator used for the first time at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, in beginning of 3-week test of Mariner spacecraft designed for a Venus probe.
Space-age religion must be an “open undogmatic religion which itself reaches out for undiscovered truth,” Rabbi Sheldon H. Blank, professor at the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, said in Williamsburg, Va. If space exploration discovers rational people living on other planets, religious people on earth “wlli have to abandon parochialism and reach for a God who is less comfortably near than we have wanted to believe.”
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $4,673,327-contract to Ets-Hokin and Galvin, Inc., of San Francisco, for construction of main structural portion of Advanced Saturn test stand at msfc, Huntsville, Ala. When completed, the 405-ft.-high test tower would be used for static-firing the 7.5-million-lb.-thrust first stage of Advanced Saturn.
Dr. Lawrence E. Lamb, chief of Clinical Sciences Div. of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, predicted before the Second InterstateTScientific^Assembly:bf D.'C. and Virginia Physicians that manned space exploration would yield a wealth of information for practicing physicians during the next ten years.
First NASA-University Conference on the Science and Technology of Space Exploration held in Chicago, with 1,181 educators and scientists representing nasa Headquarters, nasa field installations, and other Government agencies, as well as more than 300 colleges and universities.
John Hodges, director of Canada’s Regina Observatory, said in an interview that vostok iii and iv were orbiting in space at a time when millions of meteorites were bombarding the earth’s atmosphere in an unusually heavy concentration, and that scientists and astronomers were keenly interested in the outcome of meteorites colliding with the Soviet spacecraft.
Man’s conquest of space accelerated on a broad front. The U.S. achieved manned orbital flight three times, provided man with his first close-up of another planet with mariner ii’s fly-by of Venus, brought global communications a step closer with the orbiting of the first active repeater communications satellite telstar i, and saw the X-15 exceed its design speed and altitude (4,104 mph and 58.7 mi.). U.S.S.R. achieved first dual manned space flight in an effort that racked up an impressive total of 112 orbits, and launched a space probe toward Mars. During the year the U.S. successfully launched a total of 61 satellites, deep-space probes, and probes, the U.S.S.R. 17, accord-according to the U.N. Public Registry. Of the U.S. total, 20 were launched by nasa, 41 by dod.
usaf Office of Aerospace Research announced establishment of a basic research laboratory at the Air Force Academy at Colorado Springs, to provide in-house oar research capability and enable teaching faculty and honor students to conduct research.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa’s Director of Manned Space Flight, speaking before the Explorers Club in New York, listed one of the nasa organizational accomplishments of recent months as “the establishment of a liaison office with the Department of Defense, particularly with the Air Force Systems Command.”
Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin visited Japan, the 30th country Major Gagarin had visited since his space flight.
In answer to question on Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter’s history of motion sickness, John Powers, Mercury information officer, said that Carpenter had no such history. He noted that Cosmonaut Titov had reported that he had only 350 hours of pilot flight time before his space flight, which compares to at least 1,000 hours for each of the seven Mercury astronauts. “Titov never saw his space capsule until 60 days before he flew it,” Powers said, “whereas the astronauts have become familiar with their capsules over a period of three years.”
Back in Washington after two-day tour of U.S. space facilities, President Kennedy held news conference. Asked why decision was made to extend U.S. atmospheric nuclear tests, the President said: “There are two reasons. One is that, as you know, because of the blow-up in the pad at Johnston Island and because of the earlier failures of the communication system in the missile, we were not able to carry out these tests which were . . . among the most important, if not the most important of our series. “So we are going to finish those. In addition, as a result of the earlier tests of this Dominic series, there were certain things learned which we would like to prove out. “So we have agreed to a limited number of tests in concluding the Dominic series, and also we have taken some steps to prevent a repetition of the incident which caused an increase in the number of electrons in the atmosphere, by lowering the altitude and the yield so that lunar flights will not be further endangered.” Asked whether U.S. position of refraining from competition with U.S.S.R. military space vehicles would condemn U.S. to second place in the mllitary field, President Kennedy replied: “No, Mr. Alexander. As I said last week, in the first place we are spending $1.5 billion a year on our military space program. What is the key for the success both of peaceful exploration of space as well as the military mastery of space are large boosters, effective control of the capsule, and the ability to rendezvous, and all of the rest, so that there is an obvious usefulness if the situation should require, military usefulness for our efforts, peaceful efforts, in space. “In addition, as you know, very recently we determined to go ahead with the Titan III, which gives the United States Air Force a very strong weapon if that should become necessary. So that the work that nasa is doing on Saturn and the work the Air Force is doing on Titan and the work being done on the Apollo program and Gemini and the others, all have a national security factor as well as a peaceful factor. . . . “I think the United States is attempting, and this Administration, as you know, is making a very massive effort in space. As I said, we are spending three times what we spent last year in space, and more in this year’s budget than the eight previous years, so that this is a tremendous effort, $5.5 billion as well as the money that we are spending for the military use of space. “As I say, the size of the booster and the capsule and the control all would have, if the situation required it, a military use. We hope it does not; we hope that space will be used for peaceful purposes. That is the policy of the United States Government, but we shall be prepared if it does not; and in addition, as I said from the beginning, both the Soviet Union and the United States have a capacity to send a missile to each other’s country with a nuclear warhead on it, so that we must keep some perspective as to where the danger may lie. But the United States, in the effort it is making both in the peaceful program and the military program, all of this will increase our security if the Soviet Union should attempt to use space for military purposes.” Asked if he were hopeful that U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative ventures in space exploration were likely in the near future, he replied: “No. As you know, Dr. Dryden had some conversations in Geneva with regard to the matter, and some progress was made, but it is limited in its scope and we would hope more could be done and more, perhaps, could be done if the atmosphere between the two countries should be improved.”
Institute of the Aerospace Sciences awarded: the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award, carrying a $5,000 honorarium, to Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa’s Manned Spacecraft Center, for his “outstanding leadership in technical development of spacecraft for manned space flight”; the Lawrence B. Sperry Award to Douglas G. Harvey for design, development, and testing of the first two nuclear auxiliary powerplants placed in orbit; and the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award to Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., chief of Vehicle Environment Division at nasa’s Ames Research Center, for his work on solving problems of space vehicle re-entry and alleviating heat problems at hypersonic, satellite, and escape speeds.
nasa Ames Research Center said that its high-altitude, radiationresearch balloon with cargo of four hamsters and two monkeys had been lost in a storm over Manitoba. The balloon was last seen nearing the end of its 1,900-mi. flight as it entered a storm over God’s Lake, in northeastern Manitoba. This was the third in Ames’ series of balloon flights and the first loss of payload.
nasa announced Col. George M. Knauf (usaf), Deputy Director of Space Medicine in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, has retired from usaf and accepted appointment to same position as a civllian. Dr. Knauf was responsible for much of development and organization of Project Mercury medical recovery support operation.
Ernest Brackett, nasa procurement officer, told American Management Association that about 80% of nasa’s contracts are made for research and development, and outlined nasa procedures of awarding r&d contracts.
President Kennedy announced labor agreements had been reached with two aerospace industry companies, North American Aviation and General Dynamics/Convair, ending threat of strike. Agreement was based on recommendations of the President’s Aerospace Board.
Drew Pearson repeated rumors previously published in Ms column that 5 Soviet cosmonauts may have been killed in manned space flight attempts.
nasa Flight Research Center announced it had received A-5A (A3J) aircraft from usn for use in its supersonic transport research. The “Vigilante” would be used primarily in study of problems in terminal area of air-traffic control operations. Working closely with faa officials, frc engineers would plan and conduct supersonic flights of Vigilante on assigned Federal airways and into high-air-traffic-density areas; the flights would provide basis for formulation of control plans necessary for safe operation of future commercial supersonic aircraft.
Dr. James A. Van Allen, Chairman of the Department of Physics and Astronomy at the State University of Iowa, summarized the satellite and space probe findings about the structure of the geomagnetic field surrounding the earth. Describing the inner zone as relatively stable in intensity of charged particles and caused by a combination of internal and external forces, he said the outer zone showed fluctuations in intensity “by factors of 100 to as much as 1,000,” said these were complexly related to solar flares and geomagnetic storms. The only convincing explanation for the origin of the outer zone yet made is “the capture of ionized solar gas which sweeps by the earth in great clouds from time to time. . . . But the detailed mechanism for producing the observed energy spectrum remains obscure and the nature of this mechanism is perhaps the most interesting unresolved problem in the subject of trapped radiation.”
H. Julian Allen, Assistant Director of nasa Ames Research Center, proposed at NASA-University conference in Chicago that interplanetary spacecraft be cone-shaped and that they enter the atmosphere point-end-first. The originator of concept for returning orbital spacecraft blunt-end-first, Allen stated: “Blunt vehicles are desirable when you are dealing with speeds of the sub-orbital range up to speeds required to escape the effects of the earth’s gravity. But when entry speeds exceed this range, as they probably wlli on return to the earth from trips to other planets, radiation heating drives you away from very blunt bodies, such as the Mercury capsule, to bodies with conical noses. . . . Our concepts of aerodynamic flow, in short, must change as the velocities with which we are dealing increase. . . .”
Testimony of Feb. 27 by Prof. James A. Van Allen before the House Committee on Appropriations on the relative worth of instrumented unmanned satellites versus manned satellites was released. Van Allen was misquoted on the wire news services to the effect that manned space flight was of limited scientific value in the future.
H. Douglas Garner and Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., aerospace technologists at nasa Langley Research Center, awarded $1,000 for invention of Horizon Scanning Active Attitude Orientation of Stabilized Space Vehicles. James S. Albus, engineer at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, awarded $1,000 for his invention of a Digital Solar Aspect Sensor. Invention awards of less than $1,000 were made to following nasa employees: William H. Kinard and Sidney A. Batterson, Langley Research Center; Estin N. Baker, Jess S. W. Davidsen, Ralph L. Mossino, and Gilbert G. Robinson, Ames Research Center; Wilhelm Angele, Marshall Space Flight Center.
usaf announced awarding of Distinguished Service Medals to Lt. General Thomas P. Gerrity (usaf), formerly commander of Air Force Systems Command’s Ballistic Missile Division (afsc/-afbmd) and now Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems and Logistics; and Maj. General Osmond J. Ritland (usaf), formerly head of afbmd and afssd and currently Deputy for Manned Space Flight, afsc.
nasa test pilot John McKay predicted X—15 would soon attain speeds seven times speed of sound at altitudes up to 500,000 ft. during a new series of flights.
U.S. District Judge Clarence W. Allgood ordered striking electricians back to work at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. President of the afl-cio International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Gordon Freeman, also directed the workers to return to their jobs.
nasa announced award of contract to Army Corps of Engineers to define a research program necessary to give the U.S. capability to construct research station on the moon. D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, said nasa does not have a program to establish a “manned lunar laboratory,” but that initial studies “are required now which can lead to the existence of a lunar construction capability.” Objectives of the six-month, $100,000 study: (1) define r&d effort required to provide U.S. lunar research capability; (2) define needed experimental facilities; and (3) prepare schedules and budgetary estimates for a lunar construction research program. Areas of research would include lunar soil characteristics; lunar soil movement and excavation techniques; construction materials; structural design; power generation; storing and handling of lifesupporting atmosphere, water supply, and sanitation; construction tools; and human engineering and training.
Search for two huge meteorites believed to have fallen in western Virginia near Covington and West Virginia near Clarksburg was conducted by Dr. Frank Drake, Director of National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va. Reports by witnesses indicated that the meteorites weighed^about one ton each and that they fell in sparsely populated, national forest areas. During September: Dr. Joshua Lederberg, of Stanford University, and Dr. Carl Sagan, former University of California professor, wrote in September Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences that large amounts of moisture may be frozen into the subsoil of the planet Mars. From openings in the planet’s crust, steam and gas may escape and create hot spots that would be “favorable microenvironments for life.” They said that recurrent clouds detected by telescope “may be symptomatic of this local outgassing of water vapor.”
Reported from Moscow and confirmed by Goddard Space Flight Center that pilots of vostok iii and iv were using radio frequencies of 19,990 megacycles, 20,006 megacycles, and 143,625 megacycles.
House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Panel on Science and Technology recommended that Project Anna, dod’s geodetic satellite, be declared an international scientific satellite.
nasa and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced the selection of Military Electronics Division of Motorola, Inc., as contractor to manufacture and test radio equipment in the first two phases of a program to augment the Deep Space Instrumentation Facility by providing “S” band capability for stations at Goldstone, Calif.; Woomera, Australia; and Johannesburg, South Africa. With these stations located some 120° apart around the earth, dsif would have a high-gain, narrow-beam-width, high-frequency system, with very little interference from cosmic noise and would provide much improved telemetering and tracking of satellites as far out as the moon and nearby planets.
First details of an orbital space station underjfeasibility study, one shaped like a doughnut and inflated once in orbit, revealed at Langley Research Center. Design of space stations had begun in November 1960 at Langley. Paul Hill, chief of the Applied Materials and Physics Division, stated that structures were now under study which could hold from four to thirty people.
afsc announced that Colonel Charles E. “Chuck” Yeager (usaf), first man to fly faster than the speed of sound (X-l, October 14, 1947), was named Commandant of usaf Aerospace Research Pilot School at afftc, Edwards afb, Calif.
usaf Minuteman icbm launched from silo at Cape Canaveral in 3,600-mile test flight.
New York Times reported a 300-ft.-diameter radiotelescope at National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va., had recently detected in one day as many radio signals from Jupiter as smaller instruments have recorded in a month. Source of Jupiter’s long-wave radio signals was still unresolved.
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets, one from Wallops Island, Va., and one from Ft. Churchill, Canada, for purpose of comparing data on wind and temperatures in upper atmosphere. Nike-Cajun from Ft. Churchill reached 69-mi. altitude and ejected 12 high-explosive grenades which detonated on schedule; ground instrumentation measured sound energy from exploding grenades and recorded rocket position during flight. Nike-Cajun from Wallops Island performed unsatisfactorily, reaching altitude of only 31.8 mi. instead of 69 mi. predicted; only two grenade explosions were observed.
nasa fired two experimental rockets into upper atmosphere within a half-hour of each other, to obtain a comparison of electron density profile with wind profile measured at about the same time. First rocket, two-stage Nike-Cajun, attained 82-mi. altitude with a 55-lb. payload to obtain measurements of electron density and electron temperature in ionosphere at night. Second experiment, using two-stage Nike-Apache, involved use of sodium vapor clouds to measure atmospheric winds and diffusion; rocket reached 34-mi. altitude before ejecting its vapor cloud, which extended to peak altitude of 103 mi. Twin launchings, conducted at nasa Wallops Station, marked first time such experiments were conducted together. Experiments were conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center and Geophysics Corporation of America.
nasa announced William B. Taylor, nasa systems engineer and Assistant Director for Flight Systems, Office of Manned Space Flight, had received citation for meritorious service for his work with Army Corps of Engineers Sept. 1960-April 1962. Taylor was praised for his “outstanding leadership, technical competence, and dedicated service . . .” while serving as Deputy Director of Army Engineers’ Geodesy, Intelligence, and Mapping Research and Development Agency (gimrada), before he joined nasa in May 1962.
Dr. Andrie B. Severny, Director of U.S.S.R.’s Crimean Astrophysical Observatory, explained techniques used to photograph mars i on Nov. 3, when the interplanetary probe was 120,000	mi. from earth. Using 102-in. telescope, largest outside the U.S., astronomers fixed its aim at spot mars i was calculated to be; automatic controls shifted telescope’s aim slightly to sweep along the probe’s assumed trajectory. At same time, photographs were made, with each plate exposed twice at 30-sec. intervals. Resulting photographs showed mars i as well as its booster rocket traveling through space. This was believed to be greatest distance from which man-made objects had been photographed.
Dr. Robert M. Petrie, Director of Dominion Astro-physical Observatory in Victoria, B.C., told aaas in Philadelphia that the Milky Way Galaxy appears to be expanding. Dr. Petrie’s 20-year study of 600 “B” stars (hottest and brightest stars in the galaxy) produced evidence that our sun and all other stars are moving away from the galactic center.
usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories reported its 150-ft. radiotelescope at Sagamore Hill Observatory, Hamilton, Mass., would be ready for operation in early 1963. Telescope would be among three largest radio telescopes in U.S., the others being one operated by Stanford Univ. at Palo Alto, Calif., and one by nrl at Chesapeake Beach, Md.
Soviet news agency Tass reported mars i probe was 606,000	mi. from earth (at 4:00 PM est) and was increasing that distance by 215,000 mi. a day. Soviet observatories photographed the Mars probe and its carrier rocket on Nov. 3; director of Crimean Astrophysical Observatory said this was the first time moving artificial interplanetary bodies had been photographed from earth.
The World’s Fair Corp. announced it was developing plans for a unified space exploration exhibit called “Aerospace Island,” as part of the U.S. exhibit in the 1964-65 World’s Fair.
In speech to National Conference on Application of Electrical Insulation, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) pointed to the lessons of history: “. . . Our boldest predictions do not keep very far ahead of technical developments. “A second lesson is that the advance of scientific and engineering knowledge is most effectively achieved through joint effort. The growth of military airpower has owed much to the scientific and industrial community .... I think we can predict the same mutual benefits in space exploration . . .”
An estimated 23,000 visitors toured Marshall Space Flight Center during the “Family Day” observance of msfc’s second birthday.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center conference on Project Mercury flight MA-7, stated that his May 24 orbital space flight demonstrated there was no problem associated with prolonged drifting flight, a procedure necessary in future long-duration space flights. Reporting on re-entry and landing, he said that his preoccupation with floating particles in space consumed time available for stowing loose gear, so that his attention to last-minute stowing and to difficulties in horizon pitch scanner circuit, coupled with shift to manual control of retrofire, resllited in 3-sec. delay of retrofire and 250-mi. overshoot of target landing point.
Army Pershing missile destroyed in test flight from Cape Canaveral when second stage became erratic, the second failure in last three launchings after 13 straight successes.
Preparations for Operation Harp (High Altitude Research Project) announced by Dr. D. L. Mordell, Faculty of Engineering Dean at Canada’s McGill University. In the McGill-initiated project, McGill’s 66-in., 470-lb. Martlet missiles would be fired to approximately 200-mi. altitude from two 16-in., 140-ton guns provided by U.S. Navy. With the first launching in October from Barbados, B.W.I., McGill would become the first university to conduct its own space research program. At least 6 firings would be made before Christmas. Also involved in Harp were U.S. Army, which transported naval guns from Hampton Roads, Va., to Barbados; Florida State University meteorologists; and usn weather-observation aircraft.
In Cleveland, Dr. Joseph F. Shea, nasa’s Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight for Systems, told ars conclave that the manned lunar landing was greatly dependent upon information acquired by the unmanned Ranger and Surveyor payloads. The landing zone for Apollo flights (strip 20° wide along lunar equator) is about the size of Alaska. Maps of two-fifths-of-a-mile to an inch are required, which must be based on photographs which can identify five-or six-ft. objects for navigational fixes and initial exploration. Smallest objects now discernable in the photographs of the moon’s surface by the test telescopes on earth are about the size of a football field.
Two leading U.S. space scientists born in Germany were voted honorary members of the German Rocket Society: Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of nasa Launch Operations Center, and Prof. K. 0. Lange, Director of University of Kentucky’s Aeronautical Research Laboratory.
usaf announced special instruments on unidentified military test satellites had confirmed artificial radiation belt densities calculated from earlier injun and telstah data. Radiation of new belt, created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear test in July, was composed primarily of electrons. Radiation sharply increases above 400-mi. altitude at the geomagnetic equator and reaches peak intensities of 100 to 1,000 times normal levels at altitude above 1,000 mi. Lt. Col. Albert C. Trakowski (usaf) stated in press conference that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., could have been killed if his MA-8 space flight had taken him above 400-mi. altitude. Answering questions about usaf report on the artificial radiation belt, Col. Trakowski said the lifetime of the belt “cannot be forecast at present—it wlli be long.”
Five nasa scientists, led by Ozro M. Coverington of gsfc, arrived in Australia to inspect proposed sites for new tracking stations.
U.S.S.R. was building “largest radio telescope in existence” near Serpukhov, it was reported. 20-acre, cross-shaped radiotelescope featured two movable antenna arms of 1-km. length with supporting towers of 65-ft. height, the instrument modeled after cross designed by Dr. Bernard Y. Mills of Australia. Chief character-tic of cross was its ability to collect considerable amount of radio energy emanating from an extremely small area of the heavens. Another instrument at the radioastronomy station was radiotelescope with parabolic antenna 72-ft. in diameter. Station was under direction of Dr. Viktor V. Vitkevich and operated by Lebede Institute of Physics of Soviet Academy of Sciences. November 26: nasa Flight Research Center announced investigation of X-15 No. 2 accident on Nov. 9 had revealed probable cause was succession of equipment failures coupled with landing gear collapse. Inability of rocket engine to attain full power was attributed to faulty governor actuator which prevented engine’s receiving sufficient amount of propellant. Failure in engine’s receiving mechanism did not allow landing flaps to come down and resulted in high load on aircraft’s landing gear. Unusually high landing-load caused collapse of main landing gear soon after the X-15 touched down at Mud Lake, Nev. Pilot John McKay sustained severe bruises, a back injury, and shock; but he had been released from hospital and had returned to work at nasa Flight Research Center. Accident was under continuing investigation by nasa and usaf engineers, with plans calling for mechanical improvement in flap-lowering mechanism before another X-15 flight.
France announced plans to establish rocket launching facility along the Atlantic coast near Mont-de-Marsan in southwestern France. Station will be ready by 1967, when France has agreed to evacuate the rocket research center at Colomb-Bechar in Algeria.
House voted approval of plan to create a White House Office of Science and Technology to coordinate Federal research and development programs now approaching expenditures of $12 blliion per year.
nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center was presented an Award of Honor by the National Safety Council for having logged nearly 4 million working hours without a disabling injury or fatality. During February: Astronaut John Glenn’s orbital space flight produced a great propaganda dividend for the United States, Mr. Edward R. Murrow, Director of the United States Information Agency, said. “The contrast was immediately drawn around the world between the openness, the complete coverage of the flight, compared to the Russian efforts in this area . . . More newspapers normally hostile to the United States had to admit not only the scientific achievement but the fact that we were prepared to let our own people and the rest of the world see the entire operation from beginning to end.”
In speech to the ars Capital Section, Rear Adm. J. P. Monroe (usn) stated that the Navy had an interest in space exploration and operations as essential as its need for aircraft was in the past. He pointed out that dod’s responsibility for developing a military capability in space was not inconsistent with the nation’s peaceful objectives.
