nasa announced signing of $456.6 million contract for Project Gemini spacecraft with McDonnell Aircraft Corp. Development of the two-man spacecraft began at McDonnell in December 1961 under preliminary letter contract. Contract called for 13 flightrated spacecraft, 12 of which would be used for space flight and one for ground testing. McDonnell would provide other services and equipment under the contract, including two mission simulator trainers, a docking simulator trainer, five boilerplate spacecraft, and three “static articles”—spacecraft for ground test evaluation in vibration and impact tests, (nasa Release 63-66; msc Release 63-71)
Lt. Col. John Powers (usaf) , msc Public Affairs Officer, announced in Washington he had conferred with nasa Administrator James E. Webb and Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden about “the changing nature of the manned space flight program.” In accordance with this change, brought about by the end of Project Mercury, nasa would “realign our organization and our people, including myself.” (West, Houston Post, 7/26/63)
Dr. Henry J. E. Reid, who was Director of naca’s Langley Research Center for 34 years prior to his retirement, was named “Elder Statesman of Aviation” by the National Aeronautic Association. (Langley Release)
Robert Hotz wrote in Aviation Week and Space Technology “It is an inevitable historic trend that as new technology is transformed from the spectacular experimental stage to reliable operational use, peripheral public interest lags almost in proportion to the increase in technical significance. For example, the world press could write about little else for months after Charles Lindbergh made the first solo transatlantic aircraft flight from New York to Paris just 36 years ago this month. Last year more than two million people followed his trail across the transatlantic airway—most of them in jet transports taking about one-fourth the time of Lindbergh’s flight. Yet only a few obscure statistical paragraphs in the daily press recorded this tremendously significant perspective on the trail Lindbergh blazed. “And so it is likely to be wTith manned space flight, as it passes from the experimental flight-test phase into reliable operational {>erformance. . . . [MA-9] is less exciting than the first breath-ess attempt of man simply to survive short-duration space flight. But it is the type of foundation on which future capability can be built solidly. . . . “Mercury must go down in history as one of the most successful technical programs this nation has ever had. . . .” (Av. Wk., 5/20/63,21)
U.S-S.R. and U.S. were reported by the Washington Post to have reached agreement on frequency allocation for communications satellites at the International Telecommunications Union-sponsored conference in Geneva. In previous years the Soviet Union had opposed any space activity by nongovernmental organizations, but in recent months had dropped its opposition to private firms, such as the U.S. ComSatCorp, operating in space. Original positions at the conference had seen the U.S. ask for reservation of 2,725 megacycles in a highly sought-after portion of the microwave spectrum, while the U.S.S.R. had favored only 1,600 me. Details of the compromise position would emerge when both nations went before the full convention. (Wash. Post, 11/5/63) pch-1, patrol craft hydrofoil built by Boeing, flight-tested by U.S. Navy at speeds of more than 45 knots. (AAA, January 1964, p. 5) Partial results announced by Univ. of Stockholm scientists from the U.S.-Swedish series of sounding rocket experiments made in July and Aug. 1963 showed extremely low temperatures to be associated with the presence of noctilucent clouds. Sounding rocket data from the Kronogard firings indicated that up to 35 mi. temperatures closely followed the profile found over the U.S. and other countries. The temperature increased from about — 50°C ( —58°F) at 10 mi. to slightly above 0°C (32°F) at 32 mi., where absorption of the sun’s ultraviolet radiation by ozone molecules causes a warming. Above this level, temperatures decreased again to a normal minimum at 50 mi. of 120°C ( —184°F). When noctilucent clouds were present at this altitude, however, the temperature dropped to what appears to be the lowest temperature ever recorded in nature— —143 °C (— 225° F). This would confirm earlier findings in 1962 that noctilucent clouds om COIRnOSed of cIAn^ tyqrfioloo orvoforl irifli ioa /\mba PaImca 63-248)r	* — v —	“	~ Laser beam bounced off the moon by Soviets was detected by Crimean Astrophysical Observatory. (AAA, January 1964, 5) Editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology by Editor Robert Hotz criticized the national space policy as “badly shredded” by President Kennedy’s recent statements, called for a new statement of policy “based on solid elements of national interest” before the FY 1965 budget debate begins in Congress. (Av. Wk., 11/4/63) Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of afsc, spoke to the aiaa/ asd Vehicle Design and Propulsion Meeting in Dayton, Ohio, on the future of areonautical systems. He predicted a continued need for aircraft in the weapons inventory, cited particular improvement potential in cargo aircraft and V/Stol. Another potential was that “future space operations may require the use of recoverable boosters, for reasons of both efficiency and economy. The first stage of such a booster system would probably be a recoverable air-breathing vehicle.” Two technical areas of particular promise were identified as materials and propulsion. “We have identified new materials that are stronger, lighter, stiffer, and able to withstand higher temperatures. For example, new types of metallic fibers may be feasible in forming extremely strong, lightweight composite structures. If such projected applications prove to be practical, then we may be in for a revolution in aircraft design and fabrication. “There also appear to be high payoffs in the propulsion area. New technology should enable us to achieve better thrust-to-weight ratios and to move away from single point design. “. . . Engineers are almost always overly optimistic about the next two or three years and unduly conservative in their estimates of a 15-year period or more. There were study groups in the 1950’s that denied the practicality and feasibility of icbm’s, the turbofan, and hypersonic flight. Ten years ago, so-called ‘sound engineering judgment’ would not have forecast the present generation of systems. The point is that ‘engineering judgment’ does not always give the best evaluation of long-range predictions. The crucial question to ask is, ‘Does a new concept defy known scientific principles?’ If it does not, then the technical problems will eventually be overcome.” (afsc Release 310-R-9<)
nasa announced its Langley Research Center had issued requests for proposals for instrumented lunar-orbiter probes which would be launched by 1966 to secure topographic data on the moon’s surface. Photographic lunar-orbiters would team with Ranger hard-landing spacecraft and Surveyor soft-landing spacecraft in gathering data preparatory to Apollo manned lunar landing. To be launched by Atlas-Agena launch vehicle, lunar-orbiter would contain camera system capable of obtaining pictures not closer than 22 mi. above moon’s surface, (nasa Release 63-196: l,«bc Release)
Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., a vice president of Grumman Aircraft, replying to question during testimony before Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said first U.S. astronauts returning from the moon would bring back about 100-(earth)-pound sample of lunar terrain. {L.A. Times, 3/20/63)
Sen. Albert Gore (D.-Tenn.) wrote in the New York Times Magazine about space law and the Dryden-Blagonravov agreements: “This agreement, though limited in nature, is significant if for no other reason than that it indicates there are some areas in which our two countries have found it possible to cooperate in outer space development. If successfully implemented it can, perhaps, lead to other and broader agreements. The Dryden-Blagonravov agreement relates to scientific and technical matters. It was achieved despite political differences. Similarly, agreement should be possible on some legal questions if we can isolate those questions from political considerations. “Perhaps if we can build on these small areas of agreement an escalation of the arms race into outer space can be avoided. It is conceivable that science and technology, so often in history energized by the threat or event of war, may, through space research and development, pave the way for removal of the barriers erected by hate, fear, and suspicion.” {NTT Magazine, 11/10/63, 23 ff)
General Accounting Office (gao) released report on nasa’s Centaur booster which was sharply critical of both Government and contractor performance. Done at the request of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and submitted to them on March 29, 1963, but not released until Oct. 3, the report charged that poor management and program slippage had added $100 million to the cost of the program. The most significant charge in the report was that nasa and the contractor—General Dynamics/Astronautics—had in their possession in 1960 data from which could have been predicted the failure of the first test flight in 1962. The only immediate reply came from Julian Scheer, nasa’s Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning: “On Sept. 30, 1962, we moved the Centaur project from Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville to the Lewis Research Center because we knew we had problems. Still, we hope to fly Centaur by the end of this year.” {Wash. Post, 10/4/63; Space Bus. Daily, 10/4/63, 25)
nasa had launched only six of a projected 40 major satellites and probes so far in 1963, according to Aviation Week. Though all six had been successful, it was a big drop from the 18 launches in 1962. nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., attributed some of the drop in the launch rate to “squaring away difficulties which existed before nasa was created or which developed in the early days of the agency.” He included Centaur and Nimbus in this category. “As for some of the other delays and postponements, I think they are due to our involvement in projects where we are doing things for the first time. In building spacecraft such as ego, and the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, we are learning how to design, assemble and test advanced spacecraft—a new generation of spacecraft that are much more complex than the ones we have been flying so successfully.” (Av. Wk., 11/18/63, 30, 31)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, appearing before Senate Committee on Aeronautics and Space Sciences, reviewed status of nasa space sciences programs. “During 1962, the nasa space exploration program entered a new phase of its evolution. We passed beyond the relatively simple satellites and probes which characterized our early years and are heavily engaged in the development of advanced spacecraft and launch vehicles to accomplish the more rewarding, but more difficult missions. In doing so, we met with both dramatic successes as well as some temporary delays. In general, however, the year was one of intense activity and excellent progress. . . .” (Testimony)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $100,000 contract to Boeing Co. for six-month study of logistics spacecraft to be used for ferrying men and equipment to and from orbiting space station. Studies would be of two wingless lifting bodies: M-2, developed by nasa Ames Research Center, and HL-10, originated at nasa Langley Research Center, (msc Space News Roundup, 7/24/63, 8)
dod announced Army Corps of Engineers, New England Div., would provide design and construction assistance to nasa on proposed Electronics Research Center in Boston area. (dod Release 366-63)
D. Brainerd Holmes, former nasa Director of Manned Space Flight and now a senior vice president of Raytheon Co., said in a TV interview on abc that the manned space flight program needed a single manager with great freedom of action. The only way to run a large program, he said, “is to put the project manager in such complete charge . . . that he makes policy with very little approval above.” (NYT, 10/7/63? 23)
In editorial on “Apollo and Its Critics,” Aviation Week and Space Technology Editor Robert Hotz said: “Like all great pioneering ventures, the Apollo manned lunar landing program is the target of a continual barrage of carping. This anti-Apollo chorus usually reaches a crescendo in the spring, when the National Aeronautics and Space Administration budget is facing significant congressionl decisions, and dwindles to a barely audible pianissimo after every successful U.S. and Russian manned space flight. “This year the critics’ chorus is louder than ever and studded vvith many familiar faces ranging from ex-president Eisenhower, who still wishes the space age would dry up and blow away, to an esoteric wing of the scientific community which appears to be disturbed by the fact that non-scientist types, such as engineers and pilots, nave crept into the space program and are running their portion of it with vigor and enthusiasm directed toward specific goals that some scientists regard as unseemly. . . . “The scientific community has traditionally provided the most solid opposition to the manned space flight program, but there has been a steady rate of conversion from critics to supporters during the Mercury years. This has been helped by the fact that it has become obvious that nasa does not intend to neglect scientific exploration because of the Apollo priority. As the nasa program has unfolded with the years, it has become apparent that considerable scientific exploration by instrumented satellites and probes is a necessary preliminary to extending the parameters of manned space flight. It is also evident that manned space flight itself will offer a greater opportunity for scientific exploration of the universe than could ever be possible using only remotely controlled instruments and data transmission .... There are a great many valid, vital reasons why this nation must continue to press its exploration of space at the maximum feasible pace. “We intend to discuss them as the Apollo debate continues. But for the moment, there is no better summation of the purpose in this national effort than that stated by Brainerd Holmes, nasa’s director of manned space flight and the chief engineer of the Apollo program, when he said in a recent speech:
usaf Minuteman icbm traveled more than 4,000 mi. down amr in “flawless” test flight, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/24/63; M<&R 1/28/63, 11)
Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director for Systems, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, said in address before Alabama Society of Professional Engineers in Huntsville: “. . . The lunar program is but one aspe '	' ‘ ’	'	’	1 ical surge which is invading prosper, and maintain the U.S. leadership in the world.” (Huntsville Times, 2/25/63)
Dr. Edward Teller testified before the House Science and Astronautics subcommittee studying the role of the Federal government in science and technology. Dr. Teller suggested that the Congress devote its main effort to the development programs, where most of the Federal money is being spent, but leave the selection of basic research projects largely to the scientists because this kind of research “deals in the unexpected.” Asked to comment on Dr. Wemher von Braun’s statement of the value of the manned lunar landing, Dr. Teller answered: “Von Braun is a competent technician and a superb salesman. Far be it from me to disagree with him.” (Toth, NYT, 10/19/63, 25)
On first anniversary of first U.S. manned orbital space flight, Astronaut John H. Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft friendship 7 was presented to Smithsonian Institution by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator. Astronaut Glenn presented to the Smithsonian the flight suit, boots? and gloves he had worn and the tiny American flag he had earned during his three-orbit space flight. Making the presentation, Dr. Dryden remarked: “It is appropriate that John Glenn’s friendship 7 spacecraft should join the Wright Brothers’ first airplane in this hall, dedicated to man’s pioneering efforts in flight. “These two machines . . . stand as constant reminders that mankind aspires to the stars .... “As in the early days of aeronautics we can only dimly foresee the future of space exploration, what we Shall find, and what benefits will come to us. We know only that we must move forward in knowledge and practical accomplishment as we strive to discover the nature of our universe .... “We are surrounded here by the cherished treasures of the Nation. Today, we add still another to bring to mind the promise of the future that men of imagination and courage will always find new frontiers to conquer . . . .” (WasJi. Post, 2/21/63, Bl; Text)
Task force from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center sent to Rocketdyne, Canoga Park, Calif., where F-l engine had developed “combustion instability,” William Hines reported in Washington Evening Stan Five-engine cluster of 1.5-million-lb. thrust F-l’s would power first stage of Advanced Saturn (C-5). (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/9/63)
explorer xiv energetic particles satellite transmitted 38 sec. of complete data, and officials of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center were hopeful the satellite might eventually resume normal operations, explorer xiv developed transmission difficulty Jan. 10, after 100 days of nearly continuous transmission. Project Manager Paul G. Marcotte of Goddard reported explorer xiv received less than 10 per cent degradation from space radiation since its launch Oct. 2; project officials did not believe radiation damage to be cause of satellite’s transmission malfunction. (nasa explorer xiv Prog. Rpt. No. 4; nasa Release 63-6)
nasa Flight Research Center announced award of $128,675 to Comcor, Inc., for service and maintenance of computer system used to simulate flights of X-15 aircraft. Computer system is capable of providing actual X-15 performance and stability conditions that may be expected in flight, (frc Release 3-63)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) wired conSatulations to w iiiiam Bergen, President of Martin Co., and to aj. Generals Waymond A. Davis and Benjamin Funk of afsc for solving “pogo-stick action” in the Titan II booster for Project Gemini. The sharp surging accelerations during early stages of flight were noted early this year. To solve the problem, Martin Co. engineers redesigned the fuel distribution system to include “surge chambers.” In the two test-flights of Titan II’s incorporating the modification, the booster met nasa-usaf requirements for manned space flight. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/20/63) • The Black Report was submitted to President Johnson by Presidential advisers Eugene R. Black, former World Bank president, and industrialist Stanley de J. Osborne. The report said: “We conclude that one of the basic philosophies of the current grogram, namely that of tying the United States effort to the oncorde and therefore compressing the time of development and construction, is dangerous, technically and economically. “We feel that a superior aircraft which is available in two to three years of the first ‘Concorde’ deliveries will still be able to catch the bulk of the world market.” (Wash. Daily News, 2/13/64; CN, 2/14/64)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert R. Gil-ruth announced revision of management responsibilities, dividing operational from developmental activities within msc projects. Walter C.. Williams, Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and Flight Operations, would develop mission plans and rules, crew training, ground support and mission control complexes, and would manage all msc flight operations; concurrently, Williams would be Director of Flight Operations in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, with complete mission authority during flight tests of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo. James C. Elms, Deputy Director for Development and Programs, would manage all msc manned space flight projects, including total project planning, and would plan, organize, and direct msc administrative and technical support activities, (msc Release 63-88)
Rep. Robert E. Jones (D.-Ala.) inserted in the Congressional Record an article by Eugene Patterson, editor of the Atlanta Constitution, in which Mr. Patterson noted with approval remarks by Dr. Wemher von Braun on the lunar program viewed as a “ ‘capital investment into the next few decades of space exploration, both military and civilian.’ ” Patterson concluded: “It will be an incredible American performance if the United States shrinks back now from the space age into which von Braun dragged us, kicking and protesting, and in which he is now having to struggle to keep us.” {CR, 11/29/63, A7320)
Catalytic Construction Co. of Philadelphia was selected by nasa for negotiations of contract to build, install, and test synchrocyclotron and related equipment and services for Space Radiation Effects Laboratory, to be built in Newport News, Va., under nasa Langley Research Center management. Expected to be completed in mid-1965, laboratory would be used for simulating high-energy corpuscular radiation encountered in proposed nasa space flights, and studies would include effects of radiation on spacecraft materials and components as well as means of shielding against radiation, (nasa Release 63-30)
nasa announced appointment of Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn) as Director of Launch Vehicles in Office of Manned Space Flight, effective about April 1. Capt. Freitag, since 1959 Director of Astronautics in Navy’s Bureau of Weapons and a recipient of Legion of Merit for work in ballistic missile programs, would replace Milton Rosen, who would become senior scientist on staff of nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Defense Affairs, Adm. W. F. Boone (usn, Ret.), (nasa Release 63-38)
U.K.’s newest commercial jet aircraft, the bac 111, crashed in a field in southern England during a test flight, killing all seven crewmen. The British Aircraft Corp.’s twin-jet, 74-passenger 111 was planned as a replacement for the prop-jet Viscount, bringing jet service on short-haul routes. Prior to the crash, the aircraft had had some 80 hours of flight test. (NTT, 10/23/63, 66)
Data from explorer xvii indicated the earth is surrounded by belt of neutral helium atoms, scientists of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center said at American Geophysical Union meeting. Based on preliminary data received one day after launch, Goddard scientists said explorer xvii atmospheric structure satellite had sent back more than eight hours of scientific information on physics and chemistry of tenuous gases making up the earth’s atmosphere, (nasa Release 63-79)
nasa announced Flight Research Center had purchased three F-104 jet aircraft from Lockheed California Co. The F-104’s would oe modified for nasa use in many research programs, including simulated landing of X-15 rocket research aircraft, (frc Release 10-63; nasa Release 63-98)
Astronomers at Mt. Wilson and Palomar Observatories reported they had observed what they believed were five brightest objects in the universe. Joint research by astronomer groups at Mt. Wilson and Palomar, as well as Cal Tech’s Radio Observatory in Owens Valley, Calif.; Jodrell Bank Observatory in England; and astronomers in Australia, was presented in Cal Tech report, which said knowledge gained about the five objects may make possible optical study of objects nearly 10 or 12 billion light years away—the edge of the visible universe, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/17/63)	_
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator said, in accepting Gold Medal of the International Benjamin Franklin Society, New York: “. . . Space science and technology require research and development at the frontiers of almost every branch of science and technology. Any industrial nation which refuses to devote substantial effort to space exploration is incurring the hazard of future technological obsolescence of its industries, the hazard of potential loss of leadership, and the hazard of military surprise by potential enemies . . . .” (Text)
Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center, announced he had formally accepted on nasa’s behalf custody of 110 acres of Government land at Oyster Point, Newport News, Va., for use as site of Space Radiation Effects Laboratory being established by nasa. (Langley Release)
--	t7'"-	-*-'7 to research and development, with the attendant flow of new processes, new inventions, new products, and new ideas which stimulate many sectors of the economy. So far, during the past six years we have spent less than $10 billion on all aspects of space development and exploration. This has averaged less than 20 cents per capita per week. Contrary to the careless thinking of some critics, this money has been spent for materials, jobs, facilities, etc., right here on earth rather than on the moon or some distant planet. In other words, its stimulating effect has resulted in a greater demand for consumers’ goods and greater savings and investments. “It is unrealistic to conclude that, if this money were not going into space work, it would necessarily flow into other essentials such as slum clearance, education, and cancer research. The facts are that we have been spending more for those essentials since there has been a space program; the space program contributes to such progress; and it is not likely that the Congress would vote more money for such other projects if there were no demand for space funds. This is not an either/or proposition . . . .” 741-623 0—64---17 He attributed to the space program major credit for such benefits as: “comprehensive knowledge and understanding” of earth-sun relationships, interplanetary space environment, origins of solar system and life itself; improved communications, weather forecasting, and navigation; improvements in metals, alloys, and ceramics, and “substantial progress in the whole field of electronics . . . .” In “peaceful application of space competence to national security” he listed: “1. Support of our terrestrial armed forces ... in communications, meteorology, navigation, and mapping; “2. Increase in our alertness against pending dangers and our knowledge of potentially hostile territories through early warning and observation capabilities; and “3. Competence to examine and neutralize, if necessary, hostile and threatening spacecraft. “. . . Of even greater importance is the potential impact the space program can have on world peace through substituting competition in space exploration for competition in building nuclear striking power. If sanity prevails, the path to the stars can be the path to peace.” (Text)
S-l stage for Saturn SA-5 launch vehicle arrived at Cape Canaveral, having left nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., by barge Aug. 10. (Av. Wk., 8/26/63, 33)
164-lb. payload sent to 127-mi. altitude with Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station in experiment to obtain nighttime electromagnetic noise and propagation data. Included in payload were three sweeping receivers and a broadband receiver of the type to be included in Eogo satellite (Eccentric Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) next year. Preliminary telemetry evaluation indicated all experiment objectives were met. (Wallops Release 63-65)
Senator Estes Kefauver (D.-Tenn.), Chairman of the Senate Antitrust Subcommittee, told the Senate that nasa proposed regulations would “waive tne Government’s rights to patents on taxpayer-financed research and development in most cases” and urged the proposal be killed. (AP, Chattanooga Times, 2/7/63)
Eight U.S. scientists issued statement supporting U.S. program to land men on moon and countering recent criticism that instruments would be more valuable than men in lunar exploration. “This criticism raises important issues which underlie the United States space effort.” Statement cited “overwhelming” Congressional approval of President Kennedy’s proposal for a manned lunar landing within this decade, presented on May 25, 1961. “Was this support tendered for scientific reasons primarily, or was it motivated by a broader concern with national interests and national goals?” Project Apollo cannot be assessed on scientific merits alone, but even if it could be, “situations are bound to arise in which the human performance is indispensible.” Furthermore, “the momentum and significance of the lunar program are derived from its place in long-range United States plans for exploration of the solar system,” at heart of which is role to be played by man. The eight scientists were: Dr. W. Maurice Ewing, Director of Lamont Geological Observatory; Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of nasa Goddard Institute for Space Studies; Dr. Joshua Lederberg, Chairman of Genetics Dept., Stanford Univ. School of Medicine; Dr. Willard F. Libby, Director of ucla Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics; Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald of ucia Institute; Dr. Lyman Spitzer, Jr., Director of Prinpeton Univ. Observatory; Dr. Harold C. Urey, Prof, of Chemistry, Univ. of Calif.; and Dr. James A. Van Allen, Chairman of State Univ. of Iowa Physics Dept. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/27/63,1,13)
Senate passed nasa authorization bill (H.R. 7500) providing $5,511,520,400 in FY 1964, a restoration of $307,801,000 cut by House action Aug. 1. Senate bill would authorize $4,225,275,000 for research and development; $539,185,000 for administrative operations; and $747,060,400 for construction of facilities. Senate adopted amendment to bar, under certain circumstances, any authorized funds for r&d for exclusive benefit of any person providing satellite communication services (other than Government agency) and amendment requiring that, in addition to study of location for Electronic Research Center, there would be written notice to Administrator that study committee had no objection to selected location. Bill wTas ordered to House-Senate conference committee. (CR, 8/9/63, 13877-889, 13893-912)
Willis B. Foster became Director of new Manned Space Science Div. of nasa’s Office of Space Science and Applications. Formerly Deputy Assistant Director for Research in dod’s Directorate of Defense Research and Engineering, Mr. Foster would direct liaison and scientific support of the manned space flight program, including the criteria and selection of scientist-astronauts and scientific r&d in support of manned space flight, (nasa Release 63-242)
nrl astrophysicists reported on “galactic X-ray astronomy” at American Astronomical Society meeting held at Georgetown University. By launching rocketborne “telescopes,” nrl scientists have detected, two x-ray sources previously unregorted. One, a mysterious x-ray source near the constellation corpius, is so strong that its x-ray output is one billion times as bright as the earth’s sun. This may be the hitherto elusive neutron star theorized by S. Bowyer, E. T. Byram, T. A. Chubb, and H. Friedman. The other x-ray source, located near Scorpius in the Crab Nebula, is the remnant of a super stellar explosion that occurred in 1054 A.D., according to nrl reports. Detectors in a rocket launched on April 29, 1963, spotted the mysterious x-ray emitter near Scorpius. “One possible hypothesis,” Friedman said, “is that the x-rays come from an invisible cloud of extremely hot gas, of the order of a million degrees . . . .” Friedman concluded that the development of more sensitive detectors for use on rockets and orbiting satellite observatories would help make less mysterious the strange phenomena now being observed in space. (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/28/63, B2)
Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academy of Science, was the opening witness in hearings on the Government’s role as a patron of science and technology, conducted by the subcommittee on Science, Research and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Dr. Seitz said that the period of almost unlimited growth of Federal investment in science and technology was coming to an end, would have to level off and force some “hard decisions” on choices, and expressed the fear that basic science would suffer in competition with more glamorous hardware projects. For the most part he thought U.S. science wras well ahead of Russia, but noted remarkable progress on the part of West Germany and Japan. (Finney, NYT, 10/16/63)
Discussing the National Space Program before Iowa City Daily Press Association in Des Moines, nasa Associate Director of Plans and Program Evaluation Addison M. Rothrock said: “The prime objective of . . . [the manned space flight] program is to land men on the moon before the end of the decade. The scope covered by the program is much broader than this. It is in fact the research, development and operation of a series of research manned spacecraft that will determine for us man’s ability to operate in space. By focusing on the moon-landing we have set a goal that insures we develop all basic phases of the operation of manned spacecraft. I cannot emphasize this too strongly. “By the time our three astronauts leave for the moon-landing we as a nation will have accumulated 2000 flight hours in earth orbit of manned craft. To indicate to you the significance of this number—we have as of now less than five flight hours of manned aircraft at speeds in excess of Mach 2.5. ... In these 2000 hours we will have orbited the earth some 1300 times. Men will have gone to and from craft in orbit. We will have rendezvoused and inspected craft and transferred men and material between craft. We will have maneuvered the craft both in regards to the attitude of the craft as has been done with Mercury and the Orbiting Solar Observatory and in regards to changes in the flight path as has been done with Mariner II and Syncoms. These are the things that must be done and will be done in the development, operation, and functioning of manned craft in space. . . .” (Text)
Three-year tektite research program described in Journal of Geophysical Research by G. S. Hawkins of Boston Univ., Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, and Harvard College Observatory. On the basis of extensive data obtained in their research, combined with previously known data on tektites, the researchers concluded that tektites originated from terrestrial impacts bv meteorites. (Joum. of Geophys Research, 2/1/63, in msfc ST ID, 3/11/63, 5-6)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center confirmed that Astronaut Lerov Gordon Coopers MA-9 space flight would be delayed because of “electrical wiring problems in the launch vehicle control system which are peculiar to Atlas 130-D,” the vehicle for • ( Arcr T? oIoooa C Q OA\
nasa announced selection of Genisco, Inc., to negotiate development, fabrication, and assembly contract lor man-carrying motion generator for research into guidance and psycho-physiological problems of space flight. Motion generator would be major component of nasa Ames Research Center’s Space Guidance Research Facility, expected to be operational in about two years, (nasa Release 63-146; Ames Release 63-26) iJu!/y2: jpl spokesman said tests showed deterioration of washer could have caused short circuit and overheating in ranger v lunar probe, which failed to generate power after launch Oct. 18, 1962, and passed within 450 mi. of moon Oct. 21. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/63)
nasa Langley Research Center announced selection of E. W. Muller, Contractor, Inc., of Newport News for preparing the site for nasa Space Radiation Effects Laboratory, Newport News, Va. (Langley Release)
Delta Day at Cape Canaveral, the nasa Group Achievement Award presented to Delta Project Group of Goddard Space Flight Center, manager of Delta space vehicle for nasa. At Delta Day ceremony, nasa Director of Space Sciences Dr. Homer E. Newell remarked that the “Delta Team has had 16 times at bat, and a hitting streak of 15 in a row, for a batting average of .937. That is good hitting .... We would wish that all launch vehicles could boast of records equal to that of Delta. The scientific community would, I am sure, wish me to express its appreciation with a hearty ‘Well done!’ ” Directing additional remarks to Delta Launch Team at Cape Canaveral, Dr. Newell said: “You have turned out the most cost-effective launch vehicle in the nasa stable. It has given us the highest return on the investment of any vehicle we have, and that is of fundamental interest to us. “About 26% of all nasa attempts to place a satellite of any kind in orbit have been made with Delta, and 45% of our successful earth satellites placed in orbit have been put there by Delta. At this point in time, as new as we are in our space effort, that is an impressive record . . . .” (nasa Release 63-39; Text)
Reported that one example of space flight experience vitally benefiting other Government projects was adoption of Mercury spacecraft and landing maneuveis to the escape and survival projection system for F-lll (tfx) tactical fighter aircraft. In emergency escape from F-lll, entire two-man crew compartment and section of aircraft’s wings are separated from aircraft; drogue parachute then deploys and pulls out large Mercury-type parachute which lowers compartment to a landing. Like Mercury spacecraft, ejected compartment contains environmental life-support system and necessary survival equipment. (Cook, Wash. Daily News, 9/2/(53)	_	...
“A Report Covering Evaluation of Areas Considered for Proposed nasa Electronics Research Center,” by Robert C. Sellers & Associates, inserted in Congressional Record by Rep. John W. Wydler (R.-N.Y.). Report concluded: “1. nasa’s statistics on graduate educational capability in the Boston area do not stand up as against that of New York [metropolitan area]. “2. nasa’s inference that the industrial complex in the Boston area offers potential benefits does not stand up m light of the current backlogs in that area without expansion of existing organizations, as against New York’s Long Island area. “3. In reviewing nasa’s statements, the Senate and House committees should also ask: After seeing overexpansion’s disruptive effects in other areas of the Nation, is it good planning to create a new situation when other areas can support their needs with minimal expansion?” (Seller Report, CR, 8/14/63, 14203-04)
Invention of retrometer, device relaying light beam over which voice messages are transmitted, by nasa Langley Research Center scientist N. E. Thomas was reported in Newport News Times-Herald. (Newport News Times-Herald, 6/14/63)
Explosions at Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory, Rocket Center, W. Va., with three men presumed dead and 10 others injured. Explosion occurred in building used for processing chemicals, destroying building and several large trailers, abl is Navy-owned facility, primarily a research center for solid-rocket propellants, operated by Hercules Powder Co. Cause of explosion was not immediately known. (Wash. Sum. Star, 4/28/63)
Canadian government authorized four additional satellites for ionospheric research in joint U.S.-Canadian space program. {M&R, 3/11/63, 9) During March: Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the soldier and statesman for whom nasa Marshall Space Flight Center was named, donated to the center the Executive Order naming nasa's Huntsville, Ala., facility and the fountain pen used by President Dwight D. Eisenhower for signing it. (Chattanooga Times, 3/10/63)
General B. A. Schriever (usaf) told Central Florida Medical Meeting, Orlando: “The successful development of space technology required major contributions from aerospace medicine. These contributions are twofold: first, an increased knowledge of the biological problems that wTill be encountered in space flight; and second, the development of equipment and techniques that will enable man not only to survive, but also to operate effectively in space. We ha ve already made great progress through the Air Force high altitude research, through simulation of the space environment, and through the Mercury program. But additional knowledge and experience will be required to conduct extensive manned operations in space. . . . “One of the major problems to be encountered in manned space flight is radiation, which may actually become a limiting factor on the duration of flights in a given orbit. This may come from several sources—from solar flares, from space-ambient radiation such as found in the Van Allen belts, or from nuclear devices that may be exploded in the earth’s atmosphere. There are two approaches which are being taken to the solution of this problem, and they may be used in conjunction. The first is shielding, which is the current means of protection against radiation. But in space systems, where weight is of critical importance, conventional shielding methods are likely to be out of the question. “The second method seeks to make use of a drug with antiradiation properties. Some 1,800 potential antiradiation drugs are currently being evaluated, and a number of them appear to hold great promise. Several interesting facts have already emerged from these studies. For example, cells with less than the normal supply of oxygen are protected from radiation damage. Stimulating the production of white blood cells and slowing the metabolism also protect the cells to some degree against radiation damage. Ideally, we would like to discover an antiradiation drug that can be administered orally without toxic side effects . . . .” (Text)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said in interview that plans for 360-ton, four-man spacecraft to fly from earth to Mars were in “quite an advanced stage.” Emphasizing that execution of such plans was not yet approved and funded by nasa, he described nuclear-electric powered spacecraft and said it was “projected for beyond the 1970V’
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, in address before the Los AnSiles Council on World Affairs, pointed out the unique role of alifomia in the national space program: “During Fiscal Year 1962 and the first six months of FY 1963, 47 per cent of nasa’s prime contracts over $25,000 were awarded to firms in California. If the second ranking state is excluded in each of these years, California industries received more nasa prime contract dollars than all of the other 48 states combined. manned space glider to the “Unless the nation decides to forego the opportunity it now has to insure a pre-eminent position in space, I foresee no possibility, certainly not in the near future, that the volume of space activity conducted in California will decline ... It does seem likely that as our national investment in space research and development increases, California will find it more difficult to maintain its present percentage of the total . . . .” nasa’s procurement, Mr. Webb said: “In short, we are making a deliberate effort to use the self-policing forces of the market place, to avoid building government competition with industry, and also to maintain sufficient managerial and technical capability in our own organization to make certain that our contractors are giving us the reliability we must have and the taxpayers a dollar’s-worth of work for every dollar we spend.’’ In reviewing the international aspects of the nasa program, the nasa Administrator cited the provisions of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, and said: “Some citizens, who regard military necessities as the prime justification for our space effort, find it difficult to accept the open, unclassified character of our civilian space program. Some regard basic scientific results as a national treasure, which should be kept under lock and key, and ask ‘Why do we give away our secrets to the Russians?’ “The answer is that our program involves both science and technology. There are no real secrets of nature, and it would be self-defeating to try to classify the science and principles of nature. On the other hand, technological advances and inventions are the product of men and effort, and can properly be classified and kept from potential enemies where the national interest so requires. “Accordingly, our national space program moves forward with the basic scientific research conducted by the civilian agency, available to the whole scientific community, but technological development conducted by both nasa and the Department of Defense which is shared by both agencies, and classified when defense and military interests are involved. In this manner we have protected our national security while making the maximum contribution to the advancement of science . . . .” (Text) March 27: In a letter to Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner discussed the problems of scientific manpower. “The manyfold demands for technical manpower draw on the same pool of talent—for defense and space, for innovation of civilian products able to compete in a world market, for meeting such domestic problems as mass transportation and environmental pollution associated with a rapidly urbanized society, for medical advancement, and for the effective management of our resources in such a way that we can help upgrade the way of life of citizens throughout the world without downgrading our own. Superposed on these requirements is the need for science, mathematics and engineering teachers to meet the rapidly growing college enrollment. A sharp competition for manpower has resulted, particularly for the superior individual having advanced training. In that competition, not all sectors of demand have succeeded in meeting their needs, and the future outlook is not encouraging. “For the first time, we are confronted with a plurality of goals that may well outstrip our technical manpower resources. “Faced with the same manpower problem as the Soviet Union, how, in a democratic society where each citizen must have a free choice of his or her occupation, do we meet this challenge? “The urgent need for more individuals having advanced training is clear .... To keep pace with our national needs, it is the judgment of the Presidents Science Advisory Committee that we should and could increase the number of Ph.D.'s each year in engineering, mathematics, and physical sciences (emp) to reach 7,500 in 1970, the number of master’s or equivalent to 30,000. This annual production of 37,500 advanced degrees by 1970 should be compared with 15,000 in 1960, 11,000 in 1950. “A substantial fraction of these new graduates, incidentally, must be plowed back into the universities for teaching, and soon .... With regard to students, the major barrier to continuation of full-time graduate study is financial .... Another barrier is inadequate graduate facilities .... In addition, there is very convincing evidence that some geographical areas produce a much greater proportion of doctorates than others .... Relatively few students are prepared to study more than several hundred miles from their homes. It would thus appear that we have a special problem in terms of meeting an unequal geographical distribution of centers of educational excellence. “The present barriers to graduate education—limitations in student support, number of faculty, and educational facilities— must be overcome. It is to that end that the President has proposed that the Federal Government take the initiative and provide the leadership needed to meet these national needs. “To meet goals for graduate education in the three fields of potential shortage—engineering, mathematics, and physical sciences—it is of critical importance that we increase the number of graduate students enrolling in the fall of 1964 from the 22,000 which may be expected on the basis of projected trends to some 30,000 .... Support would be provided within existing legislation, through nsf, aec, and nasa fellowships, and through new nsf science development and training grant programs .... In virtually all of these cases, assistance to students would be accompanied by a grant directly to the college or university to help meet the true cost of education, and thus would assist the university to maintain an internal balance between fields .... The President also proposes Federal support for new physical facilities .... “The proposed program is designed to achieve a substantial and unprecedented acceleration in the rate of production in advanced degrees in these three fields.” (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/86, 6/10/63)
At aas meeting in Washington, Dr. G. E. Moreton described photographs of H-Alpha rays showing that solar flares produce shock waves which depress the sun’s surface. The photographs were taken last Sept. 20 at Lockheed Solar Observatory, Burbank, Calif. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/28/63)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said in address at Annual Dinner Meeting of Pittsburgh Post, Society of American Military Engineers: “Space science and technology require research and development at the frontiers of almost every branch of science and technology. Any industrial nation which refuses to devote substantial effort to space exploration is incurring the hazard of future technological obsolescence of its industries, the hazard of potential loss of leadership, and the hazard of military surprise by potential enemies .... “While the new technological developments offer the earliest contributions to economic development, m the long run the scientific knowledge obtained in the great unknown environment of the celestial bodies and interplanetary space may bring much greater returns. For, judging from past experience, advances in scientific knowledge are the foundation of advances in technology, which are a key factor in economic development .... “We live, in the language of the old cliche, at a great moment in history. Man has begun to lift himself above the restrictions of his planet into a new and strange environment and to expand his intellectual horizons. This is no visionary activity but one essential to the strength and security of our nation and to the future of man in the universe.” (Text)
Soviet news agency Tass reported radioastronomers at Pulkovo Observatory had discovered radiation belt around planet Jupiter. (upi, Wash. Dally News, 5/15/63) Addressing tbe Forum, nasa Administrator James E. Webb reviewed early history of U.S. development in aeronautics, noting U.S. was far behind m aircraft development in 1915, when naca was formed: “The wisdom of its [naca’s] establishment was amply demonstrated over the ensuing years, and led ultimately to United States supremacy in civil and military aviation . . . .” He noted U.S. was behind in 1957 when U.S.S.R. orbited sputnik i, then cited formation of nasa in 1958 and President Kennedy’s recommendation in 1961 of accelerated program “to give the nation a clearly leading role in the conquest of space. “I review this history because it is necessary occasionally to remind ourselves of the past if we are to have a clear view of the Sresent. With a warning clearly sounded in space, the nation etermined, for the first time, that it would seize the opportunities offered by man’s new ability to explore space, and that it would not be content merely with catching up with somebody else. Instead we set our sights on the most challenging goal within our reach, which could be achieved within a time scale competitive with the ability of others to do the same, and determined that we would explore the moon with men within this decade. “Nothing in recent history suggests that we have reason now to change our course .... “Those who view the lunar program simply as a propaganda effort fail to grasp that not only our prestige, but our capacity for constructive international leadership, our economic and military capacity for technological improvement, depend upon our ability to achieve acknowledged superiority in science and technology, and to use this capability in our own behalf and that of our allies . . . .” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Director of nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, described nasa research in supersonic transport and in v/stol aircraft and said: “Aeronautical and space research serves as a sharp cutting edge to advance man’s knowledge in practically every technology which is fundamental to transportation devices. Although it is impossible to predict quantitatively the impact on transportation of current aeronautical and space research, past experience has shown that we may predict with confidence that it will be considerable . . . .” (Text) Najeeb E. Halaby, faa Administrator, said on May 16 that “there are areas—such as in pure research—where it is impossible for private industry to bear the full economic burden. For example, clearly it is up to the Government to play a role in the development of a supersonic transport, if this Nation is to provide such an aircraft .... “I believe the government should act only in areas where the people ‘cannot so well do for themselves’ even in this increasingly complex and technical world, and that we who are charged with making decisions affecting the public must be convinced beyond any reasonable doubt that there is a need for the Federal Government to conduct the activity at all . . . .” (Text)
John L. Sloop, Director of Propulsion and Power Generation in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified on nasa high-energy propellant program before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight: “Our interest in high energy propellants dates back to the middle-forties. A large amount of research on high energy propellants was conducted by naca. This research contributed to the development of the RL-10 engine. It also led to the choice of oxygen-hydrogen for the upper stages of Saturn I and Saturn V . . . . “Let me assure you, however, that we are not thinking or dealing in the past. I firmly believe there are many opportunities ahead to use high energy propellants in space exploration .... One phase of high energy propellant research in the 1953-1959 period is just beginning to reach fruition and offers significant potential gams in payload for existing vehicles and future vehicles. More work remains to be done . . . .” (Testimony)
L. Gordon Cooper’s 22-orbit space flight as “a great step forward in the United States’ space program.” (AP, NYT, 5/18/63, 9)
Testifying before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Edmond C. Buckley, Director of nasa Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, described basic support job that tracking and data acquisition provide to nasa’s flight projects, indicated major additional resources required, and concluded that “the success of the [space flight] mission depends on our ability to communicate, to receive telemetered data, to track, and to command.” (Testimony)
Both Houses cleared for the President the Independent Offices Appropriations bill (H.R. 8747), including $5.1 billion nasa appropriation for FY 1964 ($612,000,000 less than requested). Of this amount, $3,926,000,000 was for research and development; $680,000,000 for construction of facilities; and $494,000,000 for administrative operations. House agreed to Senate amendments (unresolved in conference committee report): Amendment 82 provided that a joint venture to land a man on the moon may not be undertaken with any other nation without the consent of the Congress; Amendment 84 provided that no part of nasa’s appropriation could be transferred to any other Government agency for research without approval of the Bureau of the Budget, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. II/2Q2; (JR, 12/10/63, 22788-95)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, said he doubted that Russia has developed any new booster capability despite rumors that the Soviets are about ready to launch another “space spectacular.” (Dallas Morning News, 4/24/63)
Discovery of radiation belt around planet Saturn, first reported in Physical Review Letters, was described by two physicists of the nrl research team, Joseph M. Bologna and Russell M. Sloanak-er. From 170 radioastronomy measurements of Saturn’s radiation made between July and October 1962, the researchers discovered that radiation from the planet was too intense to be heat emission, and “the only theoretical explanation is radiation from electrons spiraling in a magnetic field.” Their research indicated Saturn’s radiation belt circles the planet from north to south, theoretically not so likely as equatorial belts such as those of Earth and Jupiter, but Sloanaker said further studies were planned with 300-ft. radiotelescope at Green Bank, W. Va., to clarify uncertainties. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/8/63)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Director of White House Office of Science and Technology, testified before the House Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development on the nasa-dod agreement on joint study and recommendations on National Orbital Space Station (noss) : “We have finally made a good start. Now, we are going in the right direction.” He also said that mucb of nasa’s r&d was work that dod would have to do for itself if not done by nasa, that dod’s r&d budget was leveling off and would continue to do so because the U.S. was no longer behind U.S.S.R. in weapon systems such as the icbm. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/25/63, 145)
nasa Ames Research Center selected three companies for negotiation of contracts to study solar probe project—General Electric Co. Missile and Space Div., Martin-Marietta Co., and Philco Corp. Each contract would call for four-month study providing “information in depth for the procurement of any future Solar Probe spacecraft, should the program become fully authorized.” (Ames Release 63-19)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, addressing Cleveland-Akron sections of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) and American Society of Mechanical Engineers (asme), stated “a few of the social and moral responsibilities of scientists working in this field [of space science and technology]: “(1) To search for knowledge of the facts and to conduct our work with devotion to intellectual honesty and objectivity. “(2) To carry out our part of the national program of space exploration in such a manner as to obtain maximum benefit to the welfare of tlie nation and all mankind. “(3) As citizens to lend our influence to the establishment of societies of free men in a peaceful world providing not only material benefits but also incentives for mental and spiritual growth and accomplishment. “(4) To realize in our job and daily contacts the highest moral aspirations and ideals of which we are capable.” (Text)
National Academy of Sciences named a panel of scientists to advise the Federal Government on astronomy’s role in space exploration during the coming decade. Headed by Dr. Albert E. Whitford, Director of Lick Observatory, nas panel was soliciting comment from all of U.S. astronomers on astronomy’s manpower and equipment needs. It hoped to compile full report this year and offer guidelines for the future of astronomy. (San Francisco Chronicle,2/W/OA)
President Kennedy sent FY 1964 Budget Request to Congress, recommending nasa appropriation of $5,712 billion. Of this sum, $3.19 billion was for manned space flight, with Project Apollo receiving largest single increase in nasa budget—from $435 million in FY 1963 to $1.2 billion in FY 1964. nasa Administrator James E. Webb characterized the budget request as “austere”—it would neither speed up nor slow down the National effort to land an American on the moon in this decade. Total FY 1964 space budget, was estimated at $7,614 billion— nasa, $5,664 billion; dod $1,668 billion; aec, $254.3 million; Weather Bureau, $26.2 million; and National Science Foundation, $2.3 million, (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964; Wash. Post, 1/18/63, A12; M&R, 1/21/63,13)
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, said in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “. . . The past year has been an exceedingly active one for our manned space flight program. It was not only the year for accomplishments both in Project Mercury and in the initial Saturn test flights, but it was also a year for decisions in the rest of our program. “The lunar orbit rendezvous technique was selected for Project Apollo, and our preliminary program plans were translated into firm and decisive schedules. Every major hardware element has been placed under contract and construction of the required facilities is well under way. “In the current year we plan to carry forward all of the activities I have just described. By the end of this year much of the preliminary testing required in our program should have been completed and we should be well under way in the program designed to achieve not only a manned lunar landing in this decade,but also pre-eminence in manned space flight for this Nation.” (Testimony)
Reported that Soviet cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov had been promoted from major to lieutenant colonel, (upi, NYT, 4/9/63, 15) April 10: faa announced award of contract to Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Inc., an affiliate of Cornell Univ., to conduct systems analysis in supersonic transport research program. Under contract, Cornell would perform intensive effort in direct support of .Joint Systems Analysis Group, composed of representatives of nasa, dod, faa, and the commercial airlines, (faa Release 63-41)
In the Senate debate on the Independent Offices Appropriations bill, Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D.-Ark.) made a motion that the nasa appropriation be cut an additional $519 million—a flat 10% cut in each of the three nasa budget categories: research and development, construction of facilities, and administrative operations. “Simply stated,” the Senator said, “the purpose of the amendment is to allow time to reevaluate the goal of trying to reach the moon in this decsde and to Proceed on s, more Helibe rate find thoughtful basis.” (CR, 11/19/63, 21270-299)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, said problem of communications blackout during manned spacecraft re-entry may be solved by spraying water from the spacecraft as it re-enters the earth’s atmosphere. Kelley told NASA-Industry Program Plans Conference that experiments conducted at nasa Langley Research Center had found that water suppressed ionized plasma, which creates shield around re-entering spacecraft and blocks radio communications. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/13/63, A6)
At aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting, Dallas, presentation by Warren J. North of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center and William B. Cassidy of Ling-Temco-Vought described Gemini launch escape system, and said: “A manual abort system will provide added operational flexibility by enabling the flight crew to choose an abort time which may reduce the possibility of aborts at high dynamic pressure; to choose optimum abort times compatible with contingency recovery areas; and to reduce the probability and the risk involved with an inadvertent abort . . . .” (Text)
Senate passed bill (S. 816) to establish a Commission on Science and Technology to conduct a two-year study of methods of eliminating duplication of research effort, to make results of research more readily available, and to determine whether a Cabinet office should be created to coordinate the Federal scientific effort. Commission would be composed of 12 members appointed by the President, Vice President, and Speaker of the House. Bill went to the House. {CR, 3/8/63, 1962-64; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/9/63, A5)
In address to the annual meeting of the nea’s elementary school principals at Oklahoma City, nasa Administrator James E. Webb stated that every segment of society needs to reexamine its activities in the light of changes brought about by science and technology. “In the field of education it is evident that a first and obvious demand of this age is an increasing supply of scientific and technical manpower, including scientists, mathematicians, and engineers with advanced degrees .... “A second obvious demand on education is the development of a citizenry with a higher level of scientific literacy, not merely to motivate more young people1 toward careers in science, but to assure our nation of a body politic better qualified to understand and cope with the problems of government and society during a period of great and rapid change. “And, finally, achievement of our goals in space will demand the highest scholastic efforts and intellectual accomplishments in virtually every field of study. “Space is, indeed, a new and challenging frontier, but it is a frontier of the intellect—one which challenges brain, not brawn, with creative intelligence our greatest weapon . . . .” (Text)
Selection of two new X-15 pilots, Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf) and Milton O. Thompson (nasa) was announced by Paul F. Bikle, Director of nasa Flight Research Center, and Brig. Gen. Irving L. Branch (usaf) , Commander of AF Flight Test Center. Pilots would fill vacancies left by nasa research pilot Neil Armstrong, now a nasa astronaut, and Maj. Robert White (usaf), recently assigned other usaf duties, (nasa Release 63-127; frc Release 12-63)
Ma]. Robert M. White (usaf) received 1962 General Thomas D. White usaf Space Trophy from Secretary of Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert for his outstanding contributions to U.S. aerospace research through piloting X-15 rocket research aircraft, usaf Space Trophy is presented annually by National Geographic Society. ( dod Release 789-63) Jime 3-11: Sixth annual meeting of 18-nation cospar (Committee or. Space Research, International Council of Scientific Unions) held in Warsaw. U.S. scientists, headed by Dr. Richard W. Porter and participating through nas Space Science Board, delivered 70 papers at Fourth International Space Science Symposium held in con j unction with cospar meeting, (nas Release) Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of U.S. delegation, summarized U.S. space activities from approximately Jan. 1 to Dec. 31,1962: more than 100 high-altitude research balloons; approximately' 846 synoptic rockets (by Meteorological Rocket Network from six North American sites); and more than 100 scientific sounding rockets. U.S. had announced launching of 19 scientific and scientific-applications satellites and space probes. (Porter, Report to oospar) Head of Soviet delegation A. A. Blagonravov summarized Soviet space activities of 1962: launching of interplanetary probe mars i; 71 geophysical and meteorological sounding rockets; 12 unmanned (Cosmos) satellites; and two manned spacecraft. Elaborating on mars i, he said that at 106,000,000 kilometers from the earth “a defect in the probe’s orientation system resulted in a violation of the directionality of the probe’s antenna to earth, making it impossible to maintain further radio contact with the probe.” (NTT, 6/4/63,10) Soviet scientist S. V. Vemov reported on June 4 that cosmic-ray bombardment of earth from outside the solar system had doubled in last five years. Findings were based on more than 4,000 Soviet scientific balloon flights since 1957. (Underwood, NYT, 6/5/63) On June 5, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center offered world scientists the design of small rocket payload and ground telemetry station suitable for ionospheric research, gsfc scientists Siegfried J. Bauer and John E. Jackson said payload’s “versatility, simplicity and relatively low cost should make it an ideal tool for the investigation of the many problems of the ionosphere by the international scientific community, especially during the iqsy [International Year of the Quiet Sim].” (gsfc Release) Prof. Anatoli Blagonravov, head of Soviet delegation, announced U.S.S.R. would conduct unspecified number of manned space flights in 1963, would launch two unmanned probes toward Venus and Mars, and would continue orbiting satellites in Cosmos series, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/6/63) Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Chief of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center Theoretical Div., said that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion July 9, 1962, as well as Soviet high-altitude nuclear explosions Oct. 22, Oct. 28, and Nov. 1, added temporarily to radiation particles in Van Allen belts. Lifetime of electrons and protons trapped by earth’s magnetic field had been “one of the most important and perplexing problems in radiation belt work for several years . . . [and] for the first time, this past year we have obtained definite information on trapped electron lifetimes . . . .” (gsfc Release; AP, Wash. Eve Star, 6/6/63) U.S. and U.S.S.R. delegations on June 6 announced readiness of their countries to cooperate in iqsy space experiments. Also at cospar, Japanese scientists reported plans to use U.S. Relay communications satellites for television broadcasts of Olympic Games in Tokyo in 1964. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/7/63) Dr. W. R. Adey of ucla Brain Research Institute on June 7 challenged Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s report that he sighted smoke rising from individual houses in Tibet during his MA—9 orbital space flight. Dr. Adey asserted weightlessness produces feeling of euphoria: “Under such conditions one is inclined to make judgments that are not critical, because normal controls on judgment are not operative .... Unrecognized disorders of visual perception and of judgments arising therefrom may be of considerable importance in space research.” Dr. George T. Hauty of faa Civil Aeronautics Research Institute reported on experiments showing that marked reduction of sensory stimuli could induce slowing of subject’s thought processes and even hallucinations. (NYT, 6/8/63, 26; Electronic News, 6/10/63) B. E. Welch of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reported that results of six experiments showed oxygen toxicity would not be problem with pure-oxygen atmosphere in 17-day manned space flights, (nas Release) Dr. William F. Neumann of Univ. of Rochester Medical Center said astronauts under weightlessness up to two weeks could be expected to lose some calcium from their bones, probably equivalent to calcium loss of bedridden patient over 6-7 weeks: “For flights longer than two weeks, particularly space-capsule flights of indefinite length, grave questions of the continued normalcy of bone structure and bone development arise.” (NYT, 6/8/63, 26) Soviet scientist V. V. Sharnov reported that moon was covered with slag-like material, confirmed by Soviet radioastronomical observations. Speculating on surfaces of Mercury and Mars, he said former should resemble that of moon and latter was “mostly covered with dust. The fact that this material remains uncemented is a result of humidity.” Radar contact with planet Mercury was made at distance of 54 million mi. Radar contact with planet Venus permitted refinement of value of astronomical unit obtained in 1961 and estimate of Venus rotational period. (Underwood, NYT, 7/9/63,81; Av. Wk., 6/10/63, 31) Dr. D. E. Graveline of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reEorted provision of artificial gravity in manned spacecraft was eing considered for prolonged manned space flights. Artificial gravity may be required because re-entry after a month or more of weightlessness could be dangerous to human beings—in prolonged weightlessness, natural processes which attune the circulatory system to gravity forces would decay, and body could not make necessary readjustment to g forces encountered in re-entry (NYT, 6/8/63,26; AP, Balt. Sun, 6/9/63) R. S. Young of nasa Ames Research Center reported June 8 on experiments providing evidence that certain earth organisms survive and grow under simulated Martian environment. Experiment simulated equatorial summer day-night cycle on Mars with presence.of water; further experiments were being conducted to determine minimum water and nutritional requirements for these organisms and to find their shortest growing period. If experiments show terrestrial organisms can survive “under the most rigorous laboratory simulation” of Martian environment, there would be “decisive evidence” of need for spacecraft sterilization. (nas Release) Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. Observatory said June 9 that astronomer on Mars, using most advanced equipment known today, would probably be unable to prove existence of life on earth. Of 80,000 photographs of earth taken from “an American Tiros satellite, only one could be interpreted as showing biological life on earth.” (AP, NYT, 6/10/63)
Air Force Association presented Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper the David C. Schilling trophy for the year’s most significant aerospace achievement m field of flight—his 22-orbit Project Mercury space flight MA-9.	(msc Space News Roundup, 9/18/63,8)
Lewis Research Center tested a newly developed seal for liquid fluorine pumps. This seal eliminates the explosion inherent in previous seals for liquid fluorine transfer systems. (Lewis Chronology, 10)
Editorial in Indianapolis News stated: “The national interest, as well as the furtherance of Indiana’s economic well-being, would be served by the location ih this State of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s projected electronics research center. “. . . Indiana can offer transportation advantages, availability of trained young scientists, a favorable labor climate, coordination with established private industry, good living conditions and ample space for expansion. “Purdue and Notre Dame provide outstanding examples of what should be a top-priority site for installation of the $50 million facility proposed by nasa . . . .” (Ind. News, in (JR, 12/10/63, A7511)
nasa announced it had selected a fact-finding committee to study various geographic locations for the proposed nasa Electronics Research Center. Once the committee completed its study, the nasa Administrator would make the final decision and report his findings to Congress in conformance with P.L. 88-113. (nasa Release 63-233)
Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper flew simulated launch countdown and aspects of MA-9 Project Mercury space flight at Cape Canaveral. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/8/63)
First child bom to space traveler—Tanya Titov, daughter of Maj. Gherman Titov (vostok ii orbital space flight) and wife Tamara. (AP, NYT. 9/25/63, 8)	_
Gordon Bain, faa Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development, issued statement rejecting Oct. 1 proposal by Continental Airlines President Robert F. Six that U.S. join with U.K. and France in supersonic transport development. Regarding U.S. participation in U.K.-French Concorde development, Bam said that “at the present stage in the development grogram of the Concorde, there is little, if anythingj that United tates manufacturers could contribute, except possibly money,” and monetary contribution would aggravate U.S. balance-of-payments problem. Regarding U.K.-French-U.S. joint development of mach 3 airliner, Bain said: “At no time have the British-French indicated any interest in such a project. (Wash. Post. 10/4/63) During October: Centaur AC-2 vehicle completed its last two major tests prior to launch. At Lewis Research Center the new stage separation system underwent successful test. At General Dynamics/Astronautics Sycamore Canyon test site in Calif., -two RL-10 engines underwent full duration, full power test (380 sec. at 30,000 lbs. thrust). (Av. Wk., 10/14/63, 32)
Quoting President Kennedy’s Inaugural Address, in which he said, “Let both sides seek to invoke the wonders of science instead of its terrors. Together let us explore the stars . . .,” New York Times editorial stated: “When the President spoke these words, there was far more reason to think his idea an impractical one than there is today. Of course there are difficult problems still in the way of serious Soviet-American cooperation on a manned space flight. But the financial, political and scientific advantages to both sides of a joining of forces in this area would be so great that every opportunity should be seized to explore this possibility with the Soviet Government. Moscow’s feelers in this direction should be followed up, not rebuffed out of hand . . . .” {NYT, 9/19/63, 26)
nasa submitted the following written answer to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences in response to question raised by Senator Margaret Chase Smith on the contamination problem in space exploration: “Present plans for lunar spacecraft are to use assembly techniques in clean rooms and under environmental conditions similar to surgical operating facilities. These procedures will not make the spacecraft sterile but are expected to reduce the total population of viable organisms by orders of magnitude below otherwise expected quantities. As stated earlier, the natural environment of the Moon is believed suitably hostile to the propagation of Earth-like organisms to such an extent that any contamination will be contained in very local areas.” (Committee Hearings, NASA Authorization for Fiscal Year 1964—Part I, 598)
In a letter to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Rep. Clarence D. Long (D.-Md.) criticized nasa for failure to fulfill Public Law 88-113 whereby “ ‘a detailed study of the geographic location of, the need for, and the nature of, the proposed center’ ” should be made. Long was referring to the selection of a site for and the building of a $50-million electronics research center. He implied that the nasa “factfinding committee” set up to conduct this study had not given sufficient consideration to all suitable locations—the Baltimore area in particular—and, thereby, had failed to serve the national interest. (OR, 1/22/64, 934)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, nasa Director of Electronics and Control, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology: “As a result of our review and study on the implementation of electronics responsibilities for future space missions, in our FY 64 Budget we are requesting Congressional approval for initial funding of $5M to establish a new Electronics Research Center to be located in the Greater Boston Area. Our long range plans call for an installation buildup over a period of six to seven years yielding a staff of approximately 2,000 personnel, of whom 600-700 would be professionals, and a plant value of approximately $50M. “The rate of Center growth will be gradual and represents an investment in the future of space flight, analogous to the investment made in the older research centers many years ago which is paying off so handsomely today. This rate of growth together with up-grading of Center personnel by continued graduate education after they are on-board is expected to allow us to meet our staffing requirements with little or no impact on scientific and engineering manpower as projected during this growth period. “The nasa considered many potential sites throughout the country for location of the Electronics Research Center. On balance, the overall university-industrial strength and capability in electronics and guidance research in the Greater Boston Area resulted in its selection as the location for the Center. This area, noted for its past and current heavy concentration on electronic research, both in industry and universities, provides a compatible, 741-623 O—64--0 stimulating environment for growth of nasa capabilities in this important area of technology. “The Center will have the principal function of conducting and directing research and component technique investigations in the related fields of communications, data processing, guidance, instrumentation, and control. It will be staffed and equipped to perform original -work and to work closely with industries and universities with common interests. For example, component test facilities will be provided for evaluation of industrially developed experimental components. The Center will serve to focus the increasing nasa out-of-house efforts in the burgeoning area of electronic technology. Most important, it will provide a regenerative path for the early exploitation of advanced techniques of developments for space flight, whatever their source.” (Testimony)
Astronomers at Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory announced it was virtually impossible for explorer xix balloon satellite to be sighted by the naked eye, because even in the most favorable conditions the satellite appears only of the fourth magnitude (on borderline of visibility). So far, all sightings reported to the Observatory were from the Southern Hemisphere and jvere assisted by powerful binoculars or telescopes. (AP, NYT, 12/31/63, 4)
Addressing the Kokomo (Ind.) Chamber of Commerce, nasa Adminstrator James E. Webb remarked: “We are in a continuing competition for world leadership, and leadership in space has become an important element in this struggle .... “It is logical that aggressive elements in the Soviet Union may hope to enter a new period of forward thrust by some startling breakthrough in space technology. The only way we can make sure that this does not happen—the only way to safeguard our technological frontiers—is to pursue an active program of research and development over the entire range of space technology. This includes manned space flight, the development of nuclear-powered rockets, electric propulsion for spacecraft, advanced communications, satellite observ ations of the global weather picture, lunar and planetary exploration, and acquisition of new understanding of the basic forces operating in our solar system and the universe. The space frontier has many salients, many different points of activity. We must not lag behind in any area of space technology or our ability to deter aggression, in space and on earth, may be jeopardized .... “Most of those who question the value of the lunar program fail to appreciate that it involves much more than a single expedition to the moon before 1970. Although the moon is the ultimate objective of the Apollo program, its main purpose is to develop our space competence—our space muscle and space skills —at the most rapid pace consistent with good management, crew safety, and the efficient use of funds .... “Do we conclude that a vigorous effort to develop knowledge and capability in space science and technology, particularly given the long lead times involved in this development, is fruitless and extravagant until military requirements are clearly defined ? Do we fly in the face of history and assert that the enormous economic potential of space research and exploration does not exist simply because we cannot pinpoint all of the precise benefits which such research will produce and which all the lessons of history tell us are there? Or do we, in the tradition which has made nils uuuiiliy great, grasp the opportunity to cross a challenging new’ frontier and insure that the nation will not sacrifice the opportunity or risk the hazards which lie beyond?” (Text) .
Cumberland Plateau Seismological Observatory, near McMinnville, Tenn., was dedicated. Observatory was last of four U.S. observatories designed to measure earth movements as small as one-millionth of an inch and built to specifications set by 1958 nuclear testban conference in Geneva. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/14/63)
Completion of M-2 lifting body’s successful wind-tunnel testing and analysis was announced by nasa Ames Research Center. A wingless, maneuverable spacecraft capable of orbiting the earth and landing like an airplane, the M-2 lifting body was now ready for full-9cale flight research. (Ames Release 63-7)
Dr. Otto Struve, prominent U.S. astronomer and former Director of National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., died at 66 in Berkeley, Calif. (Chicago Trib., 4/10/63)
Addressing International Northwest Aviation Council in Edmonton, Alberta, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Educational Programs and Services James V. Bernardo said: “The destinies of all nations are inextricably entwined with aeronautics and space exploration. Aviation—or perhaps more appropriately, aerospace activities—will continue, on an ever-increasing scale, to have profound effects upon the lives of all people. “The frontiers of science and technology are limitless. The years ahead will bring about not only tremendous changes, but also an increased and unquenchable thirst for knowledge of the unknown beyond our earthly atmosphere. These years ahead will also witness, I’m sure, another great revolution in education, one which will give us a continuity and sequence in science and mathematics, from the kindergarten through the college graduate school. As the revolution takes place, great care must be exercised by the architects of the curriculum that we achieve a necessary balance. We must teach our young people—since the future lies with them—the physical sciences so that they can achieve our national goals in science and engineering. But we must also teach them the humanities so that they can use these achievements for man’s betterment. The two great branches of learning must be blended into the best possible educational program.” (Text)
$9,847,000 contract for electrical and mechanical equipment for three launcher umbilical towers for Saturn V launch vehicle was awarded by John F. Kennedy Space Center, nasa, to two-company team of Paul Smith Construction Co. and E. C. Ernst Co., Inc. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/20/63, 432)
Recently approved program by nasa-usaf Project Gemini Program Planning Board called for about 12 usaf experiments to be included in later Gemini flights, John Finney reported in New York Times. Board was reported to have concluded it could make no recommendations on usaf pilots participating in Gemini until dod clarified its position on military requirements for a manned space flight program. (Finney, NYT, 9/3/63,1,15)
nasa Administrator Webb wrote letters to the respective chairmen of the House and Senate space committees indicating that a mid-city location in Boston on land now owned by the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority might provide an alternate location for the proposed nasa Electronics Research Center. He pointed out that if authorization for the Center and its location m the Boston area were approved? nasa was going to not only carefully consider the original possibility of obtaining 1,000 acres of land as near as possible to Harvard and mit, but also the alternate location, utilizing air-rights with multi-story structures on a smaller area. (Texts, nasa Release 62-63)
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, said that spectacular “ ‘firsts’ in space are not truly accurate measurements of technical and scientific progress. The question of who is first in space will be decided by the total accomplishment and the total ability of each nation to sail this uncharted sea. Dramatic events, such as the first flight of a man in orbit, or the first landing on the moon, make up only a part of this assessment . . . .” Holmes was addressing Sidwell Friends School Forum, Washington, D.C. (Text)
First flight test of inflatable meteoroid probe (paraglider), using Aerobee 150 launch vehicle, was conducted from White Sands Missile Range. Objective of experiment was to develop technique for determining penetration rates in thin structural materials. Preliminary results indicated Aerobee 150 followed nominal flight trajectory, but paraglider did not accomplish flight because canister in which it was contained failed to eject. Experiment was joint project of nasa Langley Research Center (paraglider) and Goddard Space Flight Center (vehicle) under direction of nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Release 63-102; nasa OAirr/Levine)
Address on Research and Development and the Federal Budget, by bob Executive Assistant Director William D. Carey, inserted in Congressional Record by Rep. John W. McCormack. Carey said:
Titan II icbm launched from Vandenberg afb concrete silo site in successful usaf test flight. (AP, Wash. Post, 6/21/63)
Speaking in Tampa, Fla., at a ceremony celebrating the 50th anniversary of the first scheduled air service in the U.S., President Kennedy contrasted the first air service between Tampa and neighboring St. Petersburg with today’s jet travel. Looking ahead, he said that “within our sight, if not yet within our grasp, is the day when men will routinely fly through space at 25 times the speed of sound.” As soon as 1975, the President predicted, “metroplanes” would take off from the center of one city and land in the center of another, while supersonic jet transports would be crossing the oceans at 1,400 mph. And beyond that would be “hypersonic transports” flying at mach 6 to 8. (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/18/63)	_
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Montana State University, Missoula, Mont., listed six reasons for making Project Apollo the major manned space flight effort of the 1960’s: “1) The goal of lunar exploration is feasible from an engineering standpoint .... “2) By planning ahead, and adopting a realistic schedule, we rwrn. J 11> a ww .... n A. T v. n A j J	J	An J on f!«n*IA1«At tvviriu mo w aoiciauicao in iiiueuioiirii anu	mianuii^. “3) We have set ourselves a clear goal which the entire world can understand, and one in which we nave a good chance of being first .... “4) We have set a goal which will focus our efforts, and at the same time enable us to build up a broad base of space power .... “5) In Project Apollo we protect ourselves against the great psychological advantage the Soviet Union would have if it alone could occupy and use the moon . . . . “6) Project Apollo gives us our first good chance of overcoming the lead in manned space exploration which the Soviets now hold.” (Text)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center, said in Kansas City that there was no conflict between science and religion. “Science stands to better understand creation. Religion stands to better understand the creator. Science seeks to harness the forces of nature around us; religion and ethics seek to harness the forces of nature within us.” (Kansas City Times, 11/15/63)
nasa Ames Research Center announced award of contract to Westinghouse Electric Corp. Astronuclear Laboratory to study potential physiological radiation damage in space. One-year study would “attempt to understand the basic phenomena of biological response to cosmic radiation, and to develop the means of preserving man’s well-being and insure his survival during long periods of exploration in deep space. . . .” (Ames Release OS-22 ; nasa Release 63-107)
National Airlines President L. B. Maytag, Jr., told National Aerospace Education Council in Miami Beach that mach 2 commercial airliner would be far more economical and utilitarian than mach 3, usable only in transoceanic flight because of altitude requirements. Mach 2 aircraft could make transcontinental U.S. flights faster than mach 3 aircraft, which would have to cruise at 12-mi. altitude in order to prevent sonic boom damage. Mach 2 could be built of aluminum, but mach 3 airliner would have to be built of titanium and steel, Maytag said, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/11/63) July 10: Camera equipped with special synchronization system making it capable of taking 8 million pictures per sec. was reported in Washington Star. Synchronization system was devised by Pvt. 1/C R. Carey of Army Engineer Research and Development Laboratory, Ft. Belvoir, Va. (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/10/63)
Final parcel of giant 6,000-acre Plum Brook site near Sandusky, Ohio, was transferred from Army to nana jurisdiction, nasa Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, operates the Plum Brook Station. (Lewis Chronology, 2)
Two sounding rockets launched at 'White Sands Missile Range in U.S.-Sweden coordinated study of ion and electron concentrations in D-region of the ionosphere. Areas sounding rocket carrying Sweden’s scientific experiment was fired to 60-mi. altitude, its 12-lbs. of instruments to obtain measurements of ion densities from peak altitude down to 25 mi. At apogee, parachute was deployed and instrumentation exposed. Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched 62 min. later, carried U.S. experiments in 100-lb. payload of instrumentation designed to measure ion and electron densities, ultraviolet radiation in the upper atmosphere, and a camera supplied by Univ. of Leicester, England, to photograph x-ray emission; payload did not achieve desired altitude (about 110 mi.) because of malfunction in the launch vehicle. Cause of malfunction was not yet known. U.S.-Sweden experiments were part of program sponsored by Swedish Committee for Space Research and nasa, whose Goddard Space Flight Center has responsibility for U.S. coordination. Both firings were conducted by Physical Science Laboratory of New Mexico State Univ. under U.S. Army contract, (nasa Release 63-277)
License granted by the Atomic Energy Commission for operation of low pressure, low power (100 kw) Mock Up Reactor to Plum Brook Station of nasa Lewis Research Center. The mtur would be used to determine the effects of experiments on the radiation flux in the core of its high-power twin, the Plum Brook 60-megawatt reactor. Also, experiments requiring low-level nuclear bombardment would be run in the mur. (Lewis Chronology, 3)
President Kennedy released report by special panel of President’s Science Advisory Committee, report concluding that exchange of scientific information “is an inseparable part of research and development .... [Scientists should] snare many of the burdens that have traditionally been'carried on by the professional documentalist .... Science can ultimately cope with the information expansion only if enough of its most gifted practitioners will compact, review and interpret the lit741-623 0—64-6 erature both for their own use and for the benefit of more specialized scientists . . . .” In releasing the report, President Kennedy said: “Strong science and teclmology is a national necessity, and adequate communication is a prerequisite for strong science and technology.” (nyt Co., Atlanta Journal <£■ Constitution, 2/17/63)
At Wright Brothers Memorial Banquet in Hollywood, Calif., the Timers Aero Club of naa awarded “Elder Statesmen of Aviation” awards to John K. Northrop, Floyd B. Odium, and (posthumously) James Kindelberger. Also fai medals were presented to Paul F. Bikle, glider pilot and Director of nasa’s Flight Research Center, and Joseph A. Walker, nasa X-15 pilot. General Curtis E. LeMay, usaf Chief of Staff, said in address to Wright Memorial Dinner: “. . . When Orville and Wilbur Wright made their historic flights, 60 years ago, little did they know that their effort would have such an impact on the nation’s strategy and on its military forces. “We should learn a lesson from this. “We cannot in today’s world stop our search for new sources of national strength. Further, if this Nation ever finds itself falling behind in the technological race—and lacking men possessing the vision and courage of the Wright Brothers, and the great Aerospace flyers who followed them, then in my opinion our days at a great Nation will be numbered and so will the days of freedom.” (Air Force and Space Digest, 1/64, 84; Text, dod Release 1572-63)
Brig. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Vice Commander of Air Force Ballistic Systems Div., was appointed Deputy Director of Project Apollo in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, effective Jan. 15. General Phillips would assume major responsibility for management and administration of Apollo, while Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight and Director of the Office of Manned Space Flight, would continue having major responsibility for technical direction of Project Apollo, (nasa Release 63-287; dod Release 160563)
nasa launched Saturn SA-4 in successful flight test from Cape Canaveral, the 1.3-million-lb.-thrust rocket reaching 77-mi. altitude in last of four successful tests of first stage alone. After 100 sec. of flight, one of the booster’s clustered eight engines was cut off by pre-set timer, and that engine’s propellants were rerouted to the other seven, which continued to burn. Experiment confirmed engine-out capability designed into the Saturn I vehicle system by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center engineers, (nasa Release 63-61)
A. Adzhubey, Chief Editor of Izvestia, wrote an open letter to William R. Hearst, Jr., publisher and owner of the New York Jour-nal-American, denying the New York newspaper’s report that several cosmonauts had died in space flight. One of the cosmonauts reported dead, Petr Ivanovich Dolgov, “actually did die but not in 1960 as the newspaper claims, but in 1962, . . . when together with Major Yvgemy Andreyev, he made an unprecedented parachute jump from the stratosphere.” Col. Dolgov and Maj. Andreyev received the title “Hero of the Soviet Union” for their test jump from the stratosphere balloon “Volga.” The other “Soviet cosmonauts” reported missing by the Jowr-nal-Americam were: A. Belokonev, I. Kachur, A. Grachev, and G. Mikhaylov. These men were not cosmonauts, said Adzhubey, but instead technical workers “who test various kinds of equipment, instruments, and clothing used both in space flight and in high-altitude aviation.” None of them made space flights and they are all alive and well. (Izvestia, 5/28/63, 2, atss-t Trans.)
In commencement address at Univ. of Pittsburgh, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “In the world you enter today, man is no longer rooted to terra firma, to his native land, or even to his city block, either in the literal sense or in his understanding of the powerful forces of the universe, of which he is such a minuscule part. Increasingly man comprehends that the new understanding and knowledge that are being unleashed by science and technology will alter his existence in more ways and more rapidly than he can possibly foresee .... “Forty years elapsed between the Wright brothers and the first supersonic flight. Only 10 years were required to reach 4,000 miles per hour in the X-15. Applying this knowledge, we now see a shrunken and bipolarized world, within which we can travel anywhere in a few hours, but cannot solve without force and violence man’s relation to man. And all of this was achieved using the atmosphere up to twice the height of mountains. “By the end of this decade, man will have stood on the moon and looked outward to the vast universe and beyond, and learned in the process vastly more about the earth itself . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/12/63, A3792)
ComSatCorp incorporator George J. Feldman said at Conference on Space Science and Space Law, Univ. of Oklahoma: “The reality of a viable [satellite] communication system remains to be accomplished with the accompaniment of hard work, hard and yet imaginative intelligence, and cooperation, nationally and internationally .... “The choice of system ... in turn is of importance to the international users. How do they participate? Do they own stations? Do they furnish personnel? What about their own research and development? And in addition to the economics there is the political national interest and national pride in participation . . . “The communication satellite has arrived of experimental age. It will be brought into being as a working system. The United States has no monopoly on its creation. There are others who are capable of doing it. There is strong worldwide interest. The corporation is beginning to tackle the formidable problems in earnest enthusiasm, and I may say in the spirit of the kind of dedication that accompanies a pioneering effort of responsibility. The expert group being assembled can make a substantial contribution of national benefit, as it researches and develops its program. It is time to give this effort the understanding required, for much is at stake for all . . . .” (Text, CR, 7/2/63, A4188-89) Jv/rue 19: tiros vn (A-52) meteorological satellite placed in orbit with Thor-Delta launch vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral. Initial orbital data: 405-mi. apogee, 388-mi. perigee, 97-min. period, 58.2° inclination to equator. On satellite’s first orbit, Command and Data Acquisition Station at Wallops Island, Va., obtained direct pictures from Camera 2 showing cloud vortex over Newfoundland and set Camera 1 to read out pictures on next orbit. First pictures were transmitted within an hour to Cape Canaveral, Fla.; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.; and National Weather Satellite Center, Suitland, Md. In addition to two wide-angle TV cameras, tiros vn carried infrared sensors and electron temperature probe. Orbiting marked 18th straight successful satellite-orbiting by Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (nasa Release; Wallops Release 63-59; upi, NTT, 6/20/63, 3)
Reorganization of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Michoud Operations was announced by Michoud General Manager Dr. George N. Constan. (Marshall Star, 6/26/63,7) Jwm 27: X-15 No. 3 piloted by Maj. Robert A. Rush worth (usaf) to 285,000-ft. altitude and 3,425-mph speed (mach 4.89) in 13-min. flight. X-15 was launched from B-52 mother ship over Delamar Lake, Nev., its engine burning 80 sec. Maj. Rushworth qualified for military astronaut wings by piloting the rocket research aircraft to altitude higher than 50 mi. Purpose of flight was to familiarize 38-year-old Major Rushworth with comparatively high-altitude flight, (frc Release 14—63; nasa Release 63142)
Scientists at the nasa Lewis Research Center succeeded in driving an experimental solid-propellant rocket motor into unstable combustion. This new experimental technique makes possible a {ilanned research investigation of combustion instability prob-ems. (Lewis Chronology, 5)
Four airmen ended simulated 30-day space flight mission inside a space cabin at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, San Antonio, Tex. The airmen breathed pure oxygen at simulated altitude of 27,500 ft. in preparation for future manned space flights. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/17/63)
Results of industrial survey made bv Univ. of Denver Research Institute under nasa contract were released, survey based on questionnaires of 988 companies. Results indicated: (1) transfers of technology from Government-sponsored research and development to private industries was the most important contribution of space-related programs to civilian sector of nation’s economy; (2) space related r&d stimulates both basic and applied r&d of improved materials, processes, and techniques, as well as new test and laboratory equipment ; (3) space-related r*d output contributed to cost reduction in both commercial manufacturing and fabrication methods; (4) institutional and economic barriers exist and must be surmounted in the transfer process; (5) time lag exists between development of new or improved technology whether through industrial or Government-sponsored research and its ultimate utilization, nasa Office of Technology Utilization would use this information to determine ways of accelerating transfer of nasa’s technological advances to civilian/industrial community, (nasa Release 63-197: Text)
In addendum to speech delivered last Dec. 30, Dr. James A. Van Allen retracted his criticism of President’s Scientific Advisory Committee concerning radiation effects of U.S. high-altitude nuclear test in July. Dr. Van Allen said his criticism should have been directed toward joint nasa-aec-dod committee headed by Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, President’s special assistant for science and technology and also chairman of President’s Science Advisory Committee. Addendum appeared in published version of speech in bulletin of St. Louis Citizen’s Committee for Nuclear Information. ( nytns, Chattanooga Times, 2/14/63) During February: Four men spent 14 days in slow-rotation room simulating slowly-rotating space station, in NASA-sponsored experiment at Navy’s School of Aviation Medicine, Pensacola, Fla. “No serious disturbance of a psychological or physiological nature was encountered,” and no change was found in conceptual reasoning, physical performance, perception, and sensory ability. No important changes in blood pressure, respiration, or pulse rate were observed during the experiment. (Av. Wk., 3/4/63, 59)
Identification of innovations “. . . I want to make it very explicit that nasa’s Technology Utilization Program is separate and distinct from our manned space flight and space science efforts. The space exploration program stands on its own merits; our nation must occupy a position of pre-eminence. The benefits from industrial applications are not now—and never will be—the justification for the high costs of this major effort . . . .” (Text) Harold B. Finger, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of nasa Nuclear Systems, described on May 9 nasa research in and plans for nuclear propulsion: “. . . the door that was opened here in Chicago in December 1942 has in less than 20 years led us to concepts and hardware for the utilization of that new energy source in space missions that could not be generally anticipated at that time. As a result of that dramatic scientific effort, we have established major goals aimed at the early and practical utilization of nuclear energy in space. We are convinced that a substantial effort is justified by the potential performance advantages and the many applications of these systems for difficult space missions. This work will lead us not only to the development of particular hardware items, but will open new fields of rocket propulsion and power to permit us to travel freely in space.” (Text)
Gov. Nelson Rockefeller was preparing his proposal for establishment of New York science and technology institution, it was reported. Proposed state institution would offer both undergraduate and graduate study in science and technology. Rockefeller and state university trustees were expected to appoint committee of educators and scientists to develop detailed plans. (Orlando Sentinel, 1/5/63)
T„	f_•_______£___________t>___:j__i. T':__l_____ ' Alt ' '<f! ’ll u l/y	t. r /If /<*/ a { .11 lull' 1U1U1C1 j- rroiucill riinniiimwni “Let us turn to the space exploration program, which I publicly have called downright spongy. Now clearly the strong competitive spirit of the American people has been aroused by the so-called space race. But let us step back for a moment from emotion and be objective. This is what my scientific advisers and I tried to do when we started space work back in 1955 and thereafter enlarged it into a comprehensive program. We didn’t and don’t want to be a second-best nation, not in any important field, and certainly not in total accomplishment. But can we best maintain our overall leadership by launching wildly into crash programs on many fronts? This is where we seem to have got out of focus. “Let me make it perfectly clear that we should have an aggressive program of research and exploration, so broadly based that in the long run there will be no question of our space leadership; but we should pursue it in an orderly, step-by-step way to enlarge systematically our knowledge of the scientific, military, and industrial potentials in space. This sort of a program would be a strong, steady push from the known into the unknowns of space 741-023 O—64--------14 science, accumulating along the way the techniques and skills to put our astronauts on the moon, among other developments. The annual cost would not include money for stunts and unnecessary contests. “Most of the scientists who advised me on space matters—all men of great knowledge and integrity—believed in this step-bystep program as most effective for the long pull, pointing out that the things we need to learn in space are almost as endless as space itself. Proud as we may be of our astronauts and, our Venus probe and other accomplishments in space, this racing to the Moon, unavoidably wasting vast sums and deepening our debt, is the wrong way to go about it, as I see it. Because it has been stated that the country’s prestige is at stake in this race, the average citizen may be loath to question the huge sums now being requested. But he should . . . .” (Sat. Eve. Post, 5/18/63, 1519; CR, 5/15/63, 8111)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced series of sounding rocket tests had confirmed association of Sporadic-E disturbances with presence of wind shears in altitude regions measured Nov. 7, Nov. 30, and Dec. 5,1962. Linder nasa contract, Geophysics Corp. of America scientists measured velocity of wind movements (using Nik6-A_p&clie rockets witli sodium vapor trails) and iguo-spheric phenomena (using Nike-Cajun with Langmuir probe electrical equipment) at nearly the same time. Experiments confirmed theory of Australian scientist J. D. Whitehead that action of upper atmosphere wind pulls electrons from above and below into thin cloud-like layers, causing Sporadic-E layers that often interfere with radio signals’ being reflected off higher F layer of ionosphere, (gsfc Release)
In address at Virginia Polytechnic Institute at Blacksburg, Secretary of Commerce Luther Hodges said: “Of the nearly $17 billion we in the United States are spending on research and development, only about $4 billion is spent by American industry for non-military, non-space work. And of that $4 billion, only about $1.5 billion is aimed at increasing the productivity of our economy. “The countries of Western Europe are spending twice as large a proportion of their gross national product for civilian research and development. . . . Japan, which many people still think of as an imitator and copier of western scientific and technical developments, actually has as high a ratio of scientists and engineers working on its civilian technology as we have. . . . “American industry must be much more alive to the need for more research and development work in the civilian sector of our economy. There must be a wider diffusion of this work throughout industry, and there must be greater industry support for the training of people capable of doing this work. “Some 80 per cent of all our industry sponsored research is done by 300 companies, and 73 per cent in only 5 industries. “Two of these industries, aerospace and electronics, account for 25 per cent of the industry sponsored research, but their products account for only 3i/2 per cent of the total production of goods and services in this country. . . .” (Text, (JR, 4/25/63, 2444-2445)	_
Conference on artificial satellites held at Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Blacksburg, Va., sponsored by vpi in cooperation with National Science Foundation and nasa Langley Research Center. 13 nasa scientists and engineers were among the featured speakers. ( XT A C * T?ol QOCp AO 1 7	\ ^ j.. ilu.l AtV/iGiVOU WW X I Cl J Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, said in introductory lecture: “Those who argue that we should dispense with the frills of science and space exploration, and concentrate on the necessities of military development, forget that we can’t really say what the military necessities in space will be. Our crystal ball is not that good, and it would be foolhardy to pretend that it is. We do not wish to develop a Maginot line in space, only to have it flanked by forces of greater flexibility. We need to develop in a broad way our space capability so that we shall have the ability to move in any direction required by future events to meet any threats along whatever lines may develop. “. . . Out of this broad activity in space will come the ability of the United States to use space and to operate in space either as it may chose to do voluntarily or may find itself compelled to do in its own defense. The development of our ability to operate in space, including manned space flight, gives to our country another dimension in which to meet the challenges—both opportunities and threats—of the future. We can do engineering in space, advance our science in a way that cannot be accomplished at the surface of the earth, and extend the range of practical applications for the benefit of man. And, if necessary, we can thwart the attempts of any enemy to use space against us. “In this day and age we cannot afford to ignore this last point. In our own self interest, and for the safety of our country, we cannot permit others to develop space capabilities that we cannot match, and that may, therefore, be used disastrously against us. “This is a capability we must have to ensure our survival in the space age as the independent, self-determining nation that our forefathers set us up to be, and that we have always insisted on is is the capability that we shall have from the development of the ability to investigate scientifically with satellites and space probes, and from space applications, from the ability to perform manned space flight and manned space operations, from the vast complex of manufacturing and assembly plants, launchings complexes, tracking and telemetering facilities, and from the invaluable experience that this initial stage in the space program will give us. “This is the most significant point about the present era in space. This is the most important aspect of the present activity in space. “We are now laying the groundwork for whatever role we may have to play in space in the future. We are ensuring that no one will ever be in a position to use space against us while we, helpless and frustrated through lack of the necessary space capability, have to take what comes . . . .” (Text) Dr. Wilmot N. Hess of Goddard Space Flight Center told Conference August 14 that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion in 1962 provided new information for determining path and rate of decay of high-energy electrons, thus providing better understanding of the Van Allen radiation belts. “While the nuclear explosion shortened the lives of some satellites and increased the intensity of radiation around the globe, it had a valuable side effect. “To students of the Van Allen belt, it was almost like having a controlled experiment in space . . . .” (AP, NYT, 8/15/63, anna i geodetic satellite’s flashing beacons had resumed after more than two months of blackout, Richard B. Kershner of Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory disclosed in Aug. 15 press conference. In Blacksburg for Artificial Satellites Conference, Kershner said: “We have no explanation for the lights coming back on two weeks ago. We don’t like to believe in space gremlins, but we’ve reached the point where that’s as good an explanation as any.” (AP, Chic. Trib., 8/16/63) Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center, addressed banquet. Dr. Thompson called on educators attending the conference to join with nasa and other research organizations to develop new and more effective means for accelerating effective distribution and assimilation of newly acquired research information. He cited prospective establishment of Virfinia Associated Research Center (varc) adjacent to the lshc pace Radiation Effects Laboratory at Newport News, Va., as a new and imaginative device to promote flow of knowledge between a major laboratory and three outstanding Virginia institutions of higher learning. (LaRc Release) Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Chief of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center’s Flight Operations Div., said Aug. 16: “The first U.S. manned spaceflight program [Project Mercury] was designed to (1) put a man into earth orbit, (2) observe his reactions to the space environment, and (3) bring him back to Earth safely at a point where he could be readily recovered. All of these objectives have been accomplished, and some have produced more information than we expected to receive . . . .” Discussing the stringent reliability requirements of manned space flight: “The smallest mistake in a man-rated system can bring totally unexpected results. The unexpected is the rule in the unknown, and if man is going to live in the region beyond our atmosphere, he is going to live under new rules or not at all. We have been aware of these rules . . . but they have not been brought to our attention so vividly as they have in the manned flight program .... “The manned space flight program has added greatly to our knowledge of the universe around us and demonstrated that man has a proper role in exploring it. There are many unknowns that lie ahead in space, but we are reassured because we are confident in overcoming them by using man’s capabilities to the fullest ... . We now depend on man in the loop to back up automatic systems rather than using automatic systems alone to insure that the mission is accomplished .... We have arrived at what we think is the proper mixture of that formula. Man is the deciding element; but we cannot ignore the usefulness of the automatic systems.” Kraft told news conference that two engine problems were encountered in the Titan II booster for Project Gemini. Titan II’s first stage generated chugging oscillation which could cause “the pilots to have their eyeballs shook out.” Second stage engine was producing only about 90% of desired thrust. Both problems apparently were associated with turbine drive mechanisms (msc Release 63-126; AP, Chic. Trib., 8/17/63) Gerald M. Truszynski, nasa Deputy Director of Tracking and Data Acquisition, discussed satellite data recovery and tracking system for manned satellite program. He described the manned space flight network used in Project Mercury and the augmentations planned for support of Project Gemini, concluding: “. . . while certain equipment augmentations will be effected, many of the techniques learned during the Mercury program, particularly in terms of procedures required to assure positive Network support, will be utilized in Gemini and in this way, an ever-increasing background of know-how will be available for the extremely complex missions which will be encountered in the manned lunar landing program shortly to be upon us.” August 13: Spokesman for Westinghouse Defense Center, which was preparing program definition study of nonmilitary navigational satellite under nasa contract, predicted navigation by satellite could become reality “in three or four years .... Using electronic sensors, the system would determine automatically the position of each ship or aircraft with respect to known references and relay this information to a ground station. This station would then compute the navigation ‘fix’ and relay this information to the user via the satellite . . . .”	(Space Bus. Daily, 8/13/63, 230)
nasa Langley Research Center announced selection of the Boeing Co.’s Transport Div. and the Lockheed-Califomia Co. to negotiate two nine-month study contracts. Studies would evaluate four concepts of supersonic commercial transport investigated by nasa Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center and would provide information on feasibility of these four concepts through engineering investigations. Their evaluations would provide basis for and serve as guide to nasa’s future supersonic transport research programs. ( nasa Release 63-7; Langley Release)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter addressing the usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks Air Force Base, Texas, said: “The main goal of Project Mercury is to prove the design and engineering concept and the usefulness of Man in space, but the capabilities of the Mercury system can be streched only so far. I had hoped that the flight of “Aurora Seven” would be a humble beginning in the gathering of scientific data from space about . the universe in which we live. In the three short months that preceded the flight, we developed many special instruments for this purpose. . . . There is untold wealth of information to be gained as a result of space flight if we turn our talents and curiosities in that direction. “I have worked closely with scientists from many fields, but perhaps most closely with those in medicine. “There have been some wonderful intangibles I attach to working with these men. They are more than vein probers, brain pickers and pulse takers. I am continually challenged by their curiosity and insight, and fascinated by their research. I respect their intelligence and I treasure their friendships. “It is this intelligence, this special education and innate curiosity scientists of all types have in common that demands they be included in future space flights. “Perhaps one day the astronaut will be the least important person aboard as he ferries a cargo of astronomers, geologists, biologists, and flight surgeons to Mars.” (Text)
Warren Rayle, Lewis Research Center engineer, described work he is doing m watching for “ball” lightning, a phenomenon occurring during thunderstorms and appearing as a round, glowing object which may move slowly or hang in the air. Lewis scientists engaged in research with plasma propulsion devices think ball lightning may be much like the plasmas they work with in the laboratory, (lrc Release 63-31, Lewis Chronology, 4)
nasa announced agreement with Australian Government for establishment of deep space tracking facility about 11 mi. southwest of Canberra; a manned space flight and scientific satellite tracking station at Carnarvon; and a smaller station at Darwin, (nasa Release 63-47)
Andrew G. Swanson, scientist at nasa Langley Research Center, was one of 45 outstanding young executives awarded an Alfred P. Sloan fellowship in executive development at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Award was announced by Dean Howard W. Johnson of mit’s School of Industrial Management. (Langley Release)
Department of Commerce asked the National Inventors Council, previously concerned with routing the ideas of independent inventors to dod, to broaden its activities and advise the Commerce Department on all steps the Federal government can take to spur invention and application of inventions. Dr. J. Herbert Holloman, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology, said application of new ideas was the biggest problem: “There is immense resistance to new methods. Innovation often comes from an invader—from a foreigner to a company, an industry or a country. For example, polymers came from the chemical industry to the textile industry. Fluorescent lighting came from Europe. The transistor was not developed by a radio-tube manufacturer.” (Jones, NTT, 10/11/63, 53)
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, discussed the manned space flight program before Yale Chapter of Sigma Xi, New Haven, Conn., and said: “In two centuries, the United States has grown from a small collection of settlements here along the Atlantic seaboard to a great nation of almost 200 million people spread across a continent. We have dug canals, dammed rivers, built railroads, launched ships, constructed highways, and flown aircraft. We bave constructed buildings, bridges, and a nationwide grid of electrical power. We have developed a system of industry, agriculture and distribution by which our people are provided with food, clothing, automotive transportation, and other necessities and conveniences in such volume that the United States has assumed an unprecedented position of wealth and power in the world. “Some historians explain this growth in terms of challenge and response. Under this interpretation, which appeals to me, the frontier and external danger have provided stimuli for growth. Now, however, with the frontier gone and the external danger, we hope, decreasing, we are entering a new period of change. What will now spur us to further growth ? “Exploring space can provide such a challenge. Here is an endeavor, clearly in the American tradition, which will unleash again the urges to build and explore—and which will employ for a great national purpose the tremendous productive capacity of our economy.” (Text)
Wind-tunnel studies to evaluate aerodynamic drag and jet engine mass air-flow characteristics with 3/10-scale model of free-flight lunar landing test vehicle were begun at nasa Langley Research Center. Model was built at nasa Flight Research Center. Data from Langley tests would be supplied to Bell Aerosystems Co., building two full-scale lunar landing research vehicles under contract from Flight Research Center. (Av. Wk., 4/22/63, 77)
Eclipse of the sun visible across Canada and Northeastern U.S. nasa joined other scientists and astronomers in scientific studies during the eclipse, with emphasis on ionosphere and on sun’s corona. At Churchill Research Range, usaf oar facility located at Ft. Churchill, Can., six Nike-Apache sounding rockets equipped with instruments to measure electron density, electron temperature, and solar radiation in ultraviolet and x-ray regions were launched for nasa Goddard Space Flight Center; Aerobee 150 sounding rocket equipped with spectrophotometric instruments to measure absolute intensity of spectral features in ultraviolet region was launched for Johns Hopkins Univ.; and Canadian Black Brant sounding rocket with instruments to measure variations in D and E layers of ionosphere was launched for usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories, gsfc and afcrl scientists said preliminary results indicated collected data confirmed previous predictions of composition of the ionosphere. At White Sands Missile Range, gsfc project for eclipse was Aerobee 150 sounding rocket equipped with coronagraph to photograph sun’s corona, ultraviolet spectrometer aimed at sun’s center, and camera to photograph Lyman-Alpha rays. At Wallops Station, gsfc project was measurement of electron and neutral particle temperatures in the ionosphere using instrumented payload launched by Aerobee 300A sounding rocket to 207-mi. altitude. At Pleasant Pond, Me., gsfc team photographed eclipse with specially made instrument for photographing stars and comets near the sun. DC-8 flying observatory flew north from Edmonton, Can., to meet eclipse at Great Slave Lake, following path of moon and flying above much of atmospheric-haze layer. Sponsored by Douglas Aircraft Co. and National Geographic Society with 11 other participating organizations, expedition included nasa Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and nasa astronomer Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill studying various scientific details of the phenomenon. Also onboard were Sheldon Smith and Ray Torrey of nasa Ames Research Center, photographing rays of sun’s corona, (nasa Release 63-148; msc Release 63-113; Goddard News, 7/15/63, 1, 8; oar Research Review, Vol. II, No. 11; dod Release 978-63; Wallops Release 63-70; M&R, 7/29/63,24)
. . . it is my view that the difficulty here is . . . one of organizing research about research, of developing more adequate insights into cost-benefit relationships, of illuminating our value analysis so that we can with greater confidence strike a balance between being first in high energy accelerators and being first in education and in decent living and job opportunity. I do not think that Government alone can reach these answers, but perhaps Government can—and indeed I believe it must—be as proportionately lavish in stimulating this kind of intellectual inquiiy as it has been in endowing science and technology .. . .” (Text, CR, 9/30/63, A6108-09)
Commenting on Soviet Cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova’s space flight in vostok vi, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Clinton Anderson said: “I’m not surprised. There isn’t any reason why women can’t go up into space. . . .” Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics George P. Miller said: “It doesn’t surprise me that the Russians want to pull another spectacular by putting a woman in space. It shouldn’t interfere with our scientific program. I don’t want to downgrade their achievement, but it doesn’t mean we have to follow suit . . . .” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/63) Jwne 17: nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, observed Soviet manned spacecraft vostok v and vi were traveling in two different orbital planes: “It appears unlikely that sufficient fuel could be taken aloft by either of these Vostok spacecraft to effect a rendezvous.” (Transcript)
nasa Ames Research Center announced laboratory synthesis of Adenosine Triphosphate (atp) molecule, universal medium of energy exchange in earth’s life-forms, atp was most complex molecule yet produced in a laboratory, according to Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma of Ames Exobiology Div., who performed the experiment by shining ultraviolet light on nine combinations of chemical mixtures. Dr. Ponnamperuma said the nine different mixtures may have resembled composition of earth’s oceans at the dawn of life four billion years ago. “Such experiments are lending significant support to the theory that biological molecules, which are the prerequisites of life, could have appeared by the interaction of forces and materials which existed on the earth before life did.” Collaborating in the atp synthesis were Dr. Carl Sagan of Smithsonian Astrophysical Laboratory, on the theoretical level, and Ruth Mariner of Ames. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/18/63)	_
Demonstration of transatlantic typesetting was conducted between Chicago and Groonhilly Downs, England, via ground computer and relax i communications satellite. Originating from Chicago conference of American Newspaper Publishers Association Research Institute, dispatch was received in final typeset form. In second phase of demonstration, articles were similarly sent from London and Rio de Janeiro and were received in Chicago. (Wehrwein, NTT, 6/11/63) nasa announced selection of Space Technology Laboratories, Inc., for negotiation of contract for design and fabrication of four Pioneer interplanetary space probes. First launching in series was scheduled for early 1965 with Delta launch vehicle, (nasa Release 63-131; Ames Research 63-24)
nasa Flight Research Center announced award of contract to Bell Aerosystems Co. for design and construction of two manned lunar-landmg research vehicles to be used in conjunction with Project Apollo. Free-flight test vehicles would be capable of taking off and landing under their own power, of attaining about 4,000-ft. altitude, of hovering, and of horizontal flight. Vehicles would be used in investigation of problems that may be encountered in landing manned vehicle on the moon; results of these studies would assist in preparation of flight-crew training devices, (frc Release)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, in cooperation with nbc and rca, accomplished 'first known transmission of television in color via relay i communications satellite. 15-min. sequence of movie Kidnapped was relayed by relay from 4,000-mi. high orbit, and was scheduled to be shown on Walt Disney's program on March 24. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/22/63, A5)
nasa announced first television experiments via stncom ii communications satellite had been conducted. Test pattern signals sent Sept. 23 were followed by TV pictures Sept. 24 and 25; because of bandwidth limitations, no audio was sent. Officials of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center said transmissions were of good quality. Transmissions originated at Fort Dix, N.J., ground station, were sent to syncom n 22,300 mi. above the earth, and retransmitted to at&t ground station at Andover, Me. (nasa Release 63-216)
Interplanetary space simulation was achieved in a 6-ft.-wide, lO-ft.-high-space tank at the nasa Lewis Research Center. This included solar simulation and vacuum of 10~13 torr. (Lewis Chronology, 3)
Senator Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) introduced jointly sponsored resolution in the Senate to authorize presentation of an Air Force medal of recognition to Maj. Gen. Benjamin D. Foulois (ret.). General Foulois learned to fly from Wilbur Wright in 1909 and was Chief of the Army Air Corps when he retired in December 1935. In 1907, he wrote a thesis on “Tactical and Strategic Value of Aerodynamic Flying Machines,” using Jules Verne, the Bible, and Army Field Service Regulations as sources, one of the pioneering concepts of the military application of aeronautics. General Foulois served on the naca (1929-30, 1932-35), and is currently President of the Air Force Historical Foundation. (CR, 2/28/63, 2975) During February: nasa Goddard Space Flight Center plans for second-generation Oso satellite—known as Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory, or Helios—were outlined at Philadelphia technical meeting by Goddard’s A090 Project Manager A. J. Cervenka. (Av. Wk., 3/4/63,48)
dod announced study of emergency re-entry from manned space flight was being conducted by Armour Research Foundation under direction of afsc Flight Dynamics Laboratory. Armour study would be based on theoretical re-entry vehicle with crew of three or less, performing in low earth orbits, re-entries, and short duration missions. Armour would provide afsc Flight Dynamics Laboratory with design criteria and drawings for controllable emergency escape systems enabling the vehicle to land in relatively small area, (dod Release 441-63)
X-15 No. 1 flew at speed of 2,864 mph (mach 4.25) and altitude of 74,000 ft. in its first test as an aerial mapping plane, a camera having been installed into the underside of the craft’s nose. Piloted by Maj. Robert Rushworth (usaf) , X-15’s rocket engine burned a record 2min. Primary purpose of flight was to measure photograph distortion caused by shock waves, air flow, and other aerodynamic turbulence. Flight marked first test in advanced research program in which X-15 would photograph stars, measure meteoroids, and investigate infrared rays in space, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/12/63; AP, NYT, 4/12/63)
usaf Titan II successfully launched from silo at Vandenberg afb in test flight down pmr. (M&R, 5/20/63,16)
First anniversary of first tandem manned space flight, which began Aug. 12, 1962, when vostok rv piloted by Lt. Col. Pavel R. Popovich was launched into nearly same orbit as that of vostok iii piloted by Maj. Andrian C. Nikolayev, launched into orbit less than 24 hrs. earlier. At one point the two spacecraft were within 6.5 km. (4 mi.) of each other, according to Soviet newspaper Pravda. Upon landing Aug. 15, Maj. Nikolayev in vostok in had completed 64 earth orbits, 1,645,000 mi.; and 95 hrs., 25 min. flying time. Colonel Popovich in vostok rv had completed 48 earth orbits; 1,242,000 mi.; and 70 hrs., 29 min. flying time.
nasa reported relay i communications satellite’s low battery voltage had been result of faulty voltage regulator in one of its twin transponders. Continued tests by rca and nasa engineers pinpointed the difficulty and also discovered that the regulator fails to function properly when it becomes too hot or too cold. Despite the difficulty engineers would attempt live television transmission via relay i by sending special command signals to the satellite and concentrating on the remaining good transponder. (Wash. Post, 1/9/63, C8)
The House Republican task force on space and aeronautics issued a 15-page report on the Administration’s space program. Main criticism was that the military space program was being neglected. “Too little progress has been made toward the development of a strategic space capability. In fact, the tendency of the present Administration is in the opposite direction—away from any military capability in space whatsoever other than conventional unmanned missiles.” Meanwhile, the report charged, the civilian space program “has grown so big so fast that waste and inefficiency have been all too inevitable.” Although nasa was taking some steps to tighten controls, it “could and should do more.” In international space agreements, the report charged that the U.S. had given more than it received in the agreements reached with the Soviet Union. Furthermore it contended that the Administration was usurping the powers of Congress by entering into a series of space agreements without submitting them to the Senate for its advice and consent. Finally, the report expressed concern over rising costs of Federal r&d and its competition with industry. “Competition between Government and industry in research and development appears to be increasing rather than decreasing, with industry operating at a natural and unnecessary disadvantage. This apparent imbalance should be corrected.” (NTT, 11/22/63, 21) The old question of whether sun spots affect human behavior received new empirical evidence. Drs. Howard Friedman, Robert 0. Becker, and Charles H. Bachman of the State Univ. of New York and Syracuse Univ., reported on a study they had made in which the daily admission rate in seven New York psychiatric hospitals was compared with the daily variation in the earth’s magnetic field over a period of four years. The comparison revealed that “the greater the intensity of the earth’s magnetic field due to ‘sun spots’ and other natural interference coming out of the cosmos, the higher the rate of psychiatric hospital admissions.” The effect was explained by the fact that all creatures with central nervous systems operate on self-generated, direct-current electricity. The same is true of radio transmitters and receivers. In both cases the electric impulses must travel through the earth’s magnetic field. This magnetic field is normally smooth flowing. Only when it is disturbed does radio transmission suffer. The doctors reasoned that the same thing might occur in the human nervous system. The doctors concluded: “Speculatively, the results are in keeping with the conception of the behavior of an organism being significantly influenced, through the direct-current control system, by external force fields Attention is thus invited to a hitherto neglected dimension in the complexity of psychopathology specifically, and perhaps generally in all human behavior.” (upi, Wash. Post, 11/22/63)
U.S.-Australian experiment to obtain data on the ionosphere conducted at nasa Wallops Station, with Aerobee 150A sounding rocket carrying 144-lb. payload of radio instruments 1,253 mi. high during eight-minute flight. Experiment was designed to measure intensity and spectrum of vlf radio waves above “E” region of the ionosphere. This was third U.S.-Australian attempt of the space experiment and first success, the previous two having failed to reach desired altitude because of vehicle structural failure. Scientific payload was provided by Australia’s Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization. Technical facilities, telemetry recording, and the two-stage rocket were provided by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-39)
nasa-dod agreement on Manned Orbital Research and Development System (mords) was signed, which required aacb to coordinate ail study contracts. (Joint nasa-dod Release)
Dr. Theodore von Karman, distinguished U.S. physicist, died in Aachen, Germany, four days before his 82nd birthday. As early as 1906, Dr. von Karman established basic principles that led to design of light and efficient aircraft structures. Among his important scientific contributions were studies of air turbulence, which influenced early aircraft design, and theory of boundary layers, which led to pioneer construction of wind tunnels. He was responsible for many scientific theories leading to development of supersonic jet aircraft and rocket engines. Dr. von Karman in 1930 became Director of Cal Tech’s Guggenheim Laboratory, which in 1944 became Jet Propulsion Laboratory. As jpl Director he pioneered in U.S. rocket propulsion, led development of Jato. Chairman of nato’s Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research and Development (agard) since 1951, he was recipient of more than 20 honorary doctorate degrees and was in 1963 first recipient of National Medal of Science, which cited him “for leadership in the science and engineering basic to aeronautics, for distinguished counsel to the armed services and for promoting international cooperation in science and engineering.” Dr. von Karman was bom in Budapest, became U.S. citizen in 1936. (NTT, 5/8/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/8/63, B5)
Representative George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) submitted article by A. A. Mikhailov, Director of the U.S.S.R.’s Pulkovo Observatory on the American astronomer, William Wallace Campbell (18621938) in the Congressional Record. Appearing in Soviet journal called Nature, article reviewed work of Dr. Campbell at the Lick Observatory in San Francisco, where he pioneered in stellar photography and the determination of stellar motions (18901923). (CR, 3/1/63,1086-87)
At aaas meeting in Cleveland, biophysicist Dr. Harold C. Urey expressed disappointment with cutback in scientific exploration of the moon preparatory to manned lunar landings. Criticizing advocates of exploring the moon by instruments instead of men, he repeated his view that only personal observations by trained men will provide answers to scientific questions about the nature of the moon. In this connection, he deplored criteria for selecting astronauts, arguing that the emphasis should be on trained geologists rather than jet pilots. Later at press conference, Dr. Urey stated that there is no scientific reason to believe the moon is devoid of water and that “most probably” there are pools of water below the rocky surface. Dr. Urey discussed eruptions on moon near the crater Aristarchus, observed by Lowell Observatory and others. He said sightings may have been carbon in a form not found on earth. Action of water on calcium carbide beneath moon’s surface may have released acetylene gas, which was then broken down by the sunlight into a molecular form of carbon in which the atoms are paired. Such substance could exist in moon’s near-vacuum atmosphere, but on earth the atoms would join and form graphite. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/31/63, 5; Wash. Post, 12/31/63; AF/’-cts, Chic. Trib., 12/31/63) _	_	_	_
nasa Flight Research Center announced refinement of tracking data showed Joseph A. Walker reached record altitude of 354,200 ft. in his X-15 flight of Aug. 22, 3,200 ft. higher than preliminary figure previously announced, (nasa Release 63-219)
Editorial in New York Times (Western Edition), inserted in Congressional Record by Senator William Proxmire (R.-Wis.), said: “. . . Energetic research and development efforts in space are vital, as a report just issued by the President makes clear, but intensive work (and expenditures) in the vast expanse of space studies is far different from—and far more important than—a mere race with the Russians. Whether the $20 billion (or $40 billion) race to the moon is justified on scientific, political, or military grounds, we do not think the matter has been sufficiently explained or sufficiently debated. We hope it will be in the present Congress.” (CR, 2/11/63,1989)
Second anniversary of Titov’s orbital space flight in vostok ii; Pravda using occasion to announce the cosmonaut and his wife were expecting the birth of a baby, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 8/7/63)
At Third International Conference on Atmospheric and Space Electricity, held at Montreux, Switzerland, Elden C. Whipple, Jr., of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Planetary Ionosphere Branch proposed that rocket be fired through thunderstorm to determine effect, if any, of such storms on earth’s ionosphere. (Goddard Release)
Hearings on nasa budget authorization for FY 1964 began before House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Administrator James E. Webb repeated President Kennedy’s declaration of the national goal of making the U.S. “the world’s leading spacefaring nation” and achieving for the U.S. “a position of pre-eminence” in space. Mr. Webb testified: “The mastery of space, and its utilization for the benefit of mankind, will not be determined by any single achievement. Superiority in the space environment with its great advantages and benefits will be won and very likely can be held by that nation which first fashions into a usable system all of the scientific knowledge, all of the technology, all of the experience, all of the space launch and terminal facilities, and all of the aids to space navigation required for safety and regular services. “These are the capabilities and resources which the United States must have, and this budget is designed to make rapid progress toward acquiring them. “moving from our present position to achieve mastery of space requires that we add substant ially to our scientific knowledge and to our utilization of technology. The nasa program is progressing on both of these fronts. In a complex effort such as this, conducted in a new medium about which much is yet unknown, the scientists and the engineer inevitably must work closely together and grow increasingly dependent upon one another. . . . “The nasa program, therefore, is designed to expand both science and technology. We are moving forward on a broad front. We have avoided becoming trapped in a narrow program—one limited, for example, to developing only the technology needed to reach the moon with state-of-the-art hardware. To do so might well be to find, some years hence, that we had won the battle and lost the war as far as ultimate and enduring superiority in space is concerned. . . .” (Testimony)
nasa Director of Meteorological Systems Morris Tepper told House Committee on Scieiice and Astronautics that tiros v and tiros vi (launched in June and Sept. 1962 respectively) were still providing good data. Tiros data “continue to be used by the Weather Bureau for weather analysis and forecasting, storm tracking, hurricane reconnaissance, etc. The Weather Bureau disseminates its analyses and warnings widely .... “The Meteorological Soundings project has continued throughout the year as planned. The project at Goddard Space Flight Center which utilizes the larger meteorological sounding rockets continues as it has in past years with excellent results. In addition, we have initiated at the Langley Research Center a project which will develop and utilize the smaller meteorological sounding rockets. We expect to have this well underway by the end of this Fiscal Year . . . .” (Testimony)
Sen. Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.) said in St. Louis that dod’s cancellation of Dyna Soar (X-20) manned space flight project probably would accelerate production of Gemini capsule by McDonnell Aircraft Corp. of St. Louis, thus benefiting employment and economy of St. Louis. (St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 12/11/63)
Selection of Republic Aviation Corp. for negotiation of Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory (Aoso) contract announced by nasa. Under $5.5 million contract, Republic would complete Phase I of Aoso development, including detail design, systems engineering, reliability assessment, limited hardware development of critical systems and components, and trade-off analysis, (nasa Release 63-147)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, compared U.S. and U.S.S.R. space achievements in General'Electric Forum: “1. U.S. has put about 4 times as many payloads into earth orbit (approximately 130). “2. U.S.S.R. has put substantially more weight into earth orbit with its smaller number of payloads. “3. U.S. space applications in weather, communications, and navigation have been impressive. U.S.S.R. has potential in these fields but not accomplishments. “4. Both nations have obtained remarkable amounts of scientific data, with no measurable advantage to either country. “5. U.S.S.R. has operational more powerful rockets than U.S., while the U.S. is developing more powerful ones than any known to be in U.S.S.R. “6. U.S.S.R. is ahead in manned space flight. “7. Since the race began, ratio of successes to failures has been comparable. In 1962, U.S. had one payload launching failure for each five successes.” {GE Forum, 7-9/63,23) During September: nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Diyden said in General Electric Forum interview: “. . . There is no question that setting definite technical tasks before people does motivate them. For instance, war efforts generally provide goals and accelerate progress—jet propulsion, electronics, miniaturization, and other technological advances. Along the same line, one of the major byproducts of space research has been a revitalization of education, getting people interested in scientific knowledge again—and particularly important, getting young people interested in science and technology.” {GE Forum, 7-9/63,20)
nasa announced delay from a previously planned April launching date of Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper’s MA-9 orbital space flight, because of decision to rewire Mercury-Atlas flight control system. Rescheduled date of flight was not given, but nasa Manned Spacecraft Center’s Chief of Manned Flight Operations, Walter C. Williams, estimated delay would be at least three weeks—putting launch date no earlier than mid-May. (msc Release 63-26; Wash. Eve. Star, 2/13/63)	*
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, speaking in Cleveland, Ohio, before the eighth annual Inter-Church World Peace Seminar, said that possible U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation on space exploration would bog down in the Soviet’s extreme security measures. Their security measures toward their space program were as stringent as that of the U.S. in regard to nuclear weapons, Dr. Dryden said. (Text in CR, 10/8/63, A6325)
Feasibility of operating large numbers of ion engines together was established when Lewis Research Center successfuly operated an array of nine ion engines under simulated space conditions, (use Chronology)
Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.) addressed the Columbian Women of George Washington Univ., Washington, D.C.: “From . . . space research and exploration will come knowledge—knowledge about the universe and its physical laws; knowledge about the earth on which we live; and knowledge about life itself. “The space program will stretch the abilities and minds of our people for years to come. It will provide a continuing, long-term stimulant to our economy. The magnitude of the task will test the resources and cooperative will of all major elements of our society. Still, space exploration, and manned space flight in particular, offers the United States the opportunity for unparalleled progress in the future. “Ultimately, within this century, the sum of all our efforts will give us the equipment, the knowledge and the skill to utilize space as we now utilize the seas and the air. “This then is our motive—our objective. To develop superior competence in space which will be available for any national purpose which may be required, whether it be for the peaceful use of space for the benefit of all mankind or to keep the peace. . . .” {CR, 1/24/63, A230-32)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that Goldstone Tracking Station nau uiaue nrst rauar contact o an. zL wnn pianet itiars in a Az-hour per day experiment which would end early in March. 25-billion watt signal made 125-million mi. round trip Jan. 21 (the return signal being only one-billionth of one-trillionth of a watt) and indicated Mars has both rough and smooth surfaces, (jpi. Release; Wash. Are. Star, 2/22/63, A2; Wash. Post, 2/22/63, A10) February 21: Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert testified to the House Armed Services Committee: “In recognition of the increased impact of space programs on our national resources and their direct effect on our future national security, Air Force space activities are closely coordinated with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. One example is the recent agreement between the Department of Defense and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on the Gemini program. The intent is to insure that the scientific and operational experiments undertaken as a part of the Gemini program will be directed towards satisfying both military and nasa requirements and objectives .... “Our forward space development program integrates the rad work of many years into a cohesive space program. Funding for all facets of the program is not included m the FY 1964 budget, but the program will provide for Air Force space activities for the near future. “The Air Force has developed a solid foundation of space on which military capabilities can be built. These efforts have brought us to a point where significant military space possibilities are (dearly apparent. Utilizing the technological base so far established, the Air Force must translate these technical capabilities into actual defense systems. The time required to move from a development state to operational systems is measured in years. Yet, it is the ready military capability, not the technological base, that accomplishes deterrence. Accordingly, the Air Force proposes to begin some of these conversions at once. “The forward program aims at two basic objectives: “first, to enhance the general military posture of the United States by building a defense capability in space. Space is not only a new area of vulnerability to attack, but also affords important means of supporting the terrestrial forces of the U.S. in relation to a military threat posed by a hostile power. “second, to provide a capability within the space region for the purpose of denying to a hostile power the uninhibited military exploitation of space, and to provide a system of protection for U.S. scientific activities in space . . . .” (Text; A-N-AF J oumal and Regi ster, 3/2/63,17,37)
nasa requested industry proposals for design and construction of a “prototype six-month life support system for four men”—a 2,600-cu.-ft. cabin in which four-man crews would make simulated space flights lasting six months. Proposals were due at nasa Langley Research Center by Feb. 26. (upi, Wash Post, 2/7/63, A13)
cosmos xix transmissions have beenpicked up by the Sohio Research Center near Cleveland, Ohio. The Center said that Russian satellites normally have an on-off switch which the Russians can activate for transmission as the satellite passes over Russian territory. They theorized that the switch might have stuck, causing the satellite to transmit continuously. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, 10/6/63)
In Aviation Week and Space Technology editorial, Robert Hotz said: “The current debate has done much to explain to the public and Congress the real aims of the space program, which are the development of a broad capability in space technology that eventually can be applied to whatever national purpose or need that may arise in the future. Gradually, the point that the manned lunar landing Apollo program is simply the best possible focal point for this effort in its present phase is emerging from the verbal pyrotechnics of the current debate. It is becoming more readily apparent that Apollo is not just an ‘over-Niagara-Falls-in-a-barrel’ type of dare-devil stunt, but a well-conceived program of broad exploration across the whole spectrum of space technology as we know it today. “The solid technical success of the Mercury program, particularly in the six- and 22-orbit flights of Cdr. Schirra and Maj. Cooper, has done much to make this point clear. It should be obvious now that Mercury, Gemini and Apollo spacecraft are really the Nina, Pinta and Santa Marias of space exploration, and are simply paving the way for whatever useful purposes this nation eventually decides to utilize space. . . .” {Av. Wk., 6/3/63, , ^ • •
On anniversary of first U.S. manned orbital space flight, Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Mercury Project Manager at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said: “Three U.S. Astronauts have accumulated 1,144.51 minutes in orbital space flights. The flights of Glenn, Carpenter and Schirra have confirmed that man can perform in a space environment and that he can enhance the mission success and flight safety by virtue of his flexibility and his capability to exercise judgment to solve operational problems. “The flights have also confirmed that the approach and philosophy followed in the design of the Mercury spacecraft was technically sound. Each of these flights has elevated our confidence level in the spacecraft systems and has demonstrated that, although not a simple task, the resources of the United States— that is, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Defense, private industry and other elements—can be unified toward a common end with unparalleled cooperation to accomplish a national objective on a minimum time schedule. “All these benefits derived from the Mercury Project, are directly applicable to future manned space flight programs and ____: j____j *. j-x: ________1_;_i_ x_ i______xu _ t-: _ j a n~ pl UVIUO a &U11U. AUUIlU.U'blUll Ull WIUCU UA	1116 AJR5II11111 clilU ApVllO programs.” (msc Release 63-30)
Hook-up of three global satellite tracking networks into a single central console at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center was announced. Console allows combinations of operators at 51 communications points around the world in the satellite tracking and data acquisition network, the manned space flight tracking network, and the deep space instrumentation facilities. (AP, NTT, 12/11/63)
nasa officials testified before the Subcommittee on nasa Legislative Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on the summary report on Project Mercury that had accused industry of poor workmanship. Dr. George Mueller, Director of Manned Space Flight, and his Deputy, George Low, and Walter C. Williams, Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and Flight Operations, msc, agreed that the bulk of the 444-page report was “a recital of success,” with only one 10-page section listing deficiencies. The committee agreed with the witnesses and considered the matter closed. {Space Bus. Daily, 10/10/63, 60)
Radio Moscow wished Astronaut Cooper good luck on his space flight and said: “The Soviet people, who were pioneers in space, are hoping that this scientific experiment works out successfully. We sincerely hope that its results will serve the development of peaceful cooperation and above all cooperation between the Soviet Union and the United States in the study of the laws of the universe.” (upi, Wash. Post, 5/16/63)
Article by nasa scientists Dr. Homer E. Newell and Dr. Robert Jastrow in Atlantic Monthly inserted in Congressional Record by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Replying to scientists critical of pace set for landing men on the moon, the authors said: “This question requires a further exploration of the motives underlying the U.S. space effort. Is it primarily a scientific program, or is it motivated by a broader concern with the national interest ? Looking back to the overwhelming support given the new space program by the Congress in 1961, it seems clear that this support was not tendered for scientific reasons primarily, but came from a deep-seated conviction that the expanded program will make an important contribution to our future strength and security. We believe that this is the reason why the people have supported the enlarged space program. That brings us to the point on which we take issue with some of our scientific colleagues, who complain, ‘The scientific exploration of the moon has been accorded a secondary priority in the lunar program.’ This remark is based on the premise that science should have top priority in the space program. However, while science plays an important role in lunar exploration, it was never intended to be the primary Objective of that project. The impetus of the lunar project is derived from its place in the long-range U.S. program for the exploration of the solar system. The heart of that program is man in space, the extension of man’s control over his physical environment. The science and technology of space flight are ancillary developments which support the main thrust of manned exploration, while at the same time they bring valuable returns to our economy and our culture. The science which we do in space provides the equivalent of the gold and spices recovered from earlier voyages of exploration. It is the return to the taxpayer for his investment in his nation’s future. But the driving force of the program is not in scientific research alone, valuable though that may be in the long run. Thus, the pace of the program must be set, not by the measured patterns of scientific research, but by the need for a vigorous response to the national challenge . . . .” (Text, CR, 7/31/63, A4874-76)
nasa officials testifying before a subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee offered sharply revised estimates on the cost of a manned lunar landing. Under questioning from senators, nasa Administrator James E. Webb agreed that nasa would spend much of the $20 billion normally stated as the cost of manned lunar exploration even if there were no program to land a man on the moon. When asked how much the manned lunar landing would cost over and above other space exploration, Mr. Webb estimated less than $3 billion, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., estimated $2 billion; nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George Mueller estimated $1 billion. Mr. Webb and Dr. Seamans had included the cost of unmanned investigation of the lunar surface, while Dr. Mueller was counting only the cost of the Lunar Excursion Module (lem). (NYT, 10/1*9/63, 1)
The lunar landing research facility was nearing completion at Langley Research Center. A gantry structure 400 ft. long and 250 ft. high with a 50 ft. clearance would suspend a model of the Lunar Landing Module (lem), sustaining % of the model’s weight to simulate the % lunar gravity and enable astronauts to practice lunar landings. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63,83)
nasa Argo D-8 (Journeyman) rocket launched from Pt. Arguello, Calif., the four-stage sounding rocket carrying 104-lb. instrumented payload to probe hazards of the radiation belts. Designed by Univ. of Minnesota scientists, payload reached 990-mi. altitude and relayed valuable information during its 27-min. flight, then impacted in Pacific Ocean 1,250-mi. south of Pt. Arguello. Launch was conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center with support by nasa Wallops Station personnel. (Wallops Release 63-12; AP, Newport News Times-Herald, 2/12/63)
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric discussed management of military r&d at Chemical Engineering Achievement Awards Dinner, New York City: “Ten years ago, expenditures for defense research and development were at a level of about $2 billion or about 5% of the U.S. military budget. Today the comparable figure is over $7 billion, or nearly 14% of the current Defense budget. Half of this total is for system development, a good deal of which represents prototype hardware. The other half represents the dollars that buy brain-power at the drawing board and in the labs—and nowadays I should add computer time .... “There are indications that we are seeing the beginning of a K'od of increasing Congressional concern and interest that may to even tighter controls over r&d expenditures. This change in Congressional attitude is more than an expression of growing concern over deficit spending. It reflects an increased awareness of the national importance of r&d .... “Today, fortunately, there can be no question about the sufficiency of American military power, either now or for the foreseeable future. The 100% increase of strategic alert force megatonnage in the past three years and the large and unquestioned U.S. lead in both bombers and missiles provide us with the kind of strength that permits us to go forward with our r&d effort in a more orderly way . . . .” (Text, dod Release 1527-63)
If we do not make these efforts we will not be first on the moon, we will not be first in space and one day soon we will not be the first on earth.’ ” {Av. Wk., 4/29/63,17) April£9: aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, speaking at Centennial Charter Day Convocation, Univ. of Massachusetts, said: “If we look back a number of centuries to the Middle Ages, we find that man and society in the Western World were dominated by rather static concepts. The individual was born into a world that was essentially unchanging by our standards. He was not very important. Poverty, disease, toil, and natural calamities were simply an inevitable part of life. He accepted the proffered explanations of the world and the universe, and his curiosity was not encouraged. Man was a fearful and superstitious plaything of his environment. The concept that man might improve his lot was not widely considered. Nor were the tools at hand for such a task. “The beginning of the changes in this outlook are generally identified with the Renaissance and the Reformation. The questioning and inquisitive human spirit could not be stifled forever. Men began to question old forms and beliefs—in religion, politics, and the law; in art and literature; and in science and philosophy.	* “The process of breaking out of a closed world and liberating the mind was a slow one, and it is by no means complete. There were many landmarks, established by many brave men in all walks of life, on the route to liberation. An example was the overthrow, by the evidence produced by Copernicus and Galileo, of the dogmatic concept that the earth is the center of the universe. It is difficult for us today to estimate the impact, on a closed system of thought, of the knowledge that the earth and the other planets revolve around the sun. If such an important belief could fall, were not others vulnerable ? While science was opening man’s eyes to the truth of his surroundings, a change was m the making concerning the concept of nian himself. The themes of individual rights ana freedom were being developed in the period of the enlightenment and the first crystallization of these revolutionary ideas was in the American Revolution—the first revolution of which I am to speak to you today. Beginning with the Declaration of Independence and culminating with the adoption of the Constitution, the place of the State was confined to protecting the rights of the individual and becoming the instrument for man’s self-government .... “The freedom to embrace new ideas, the concept that men need not accept miserable conditions of life, and the hope inherent in science, unleashed as never before the economic energies of man. Our second revolution, the industrial revolution, and the rise of science and technology, saw a beginning of the realization of . . . a huge increase in industrial and agricultural production at a cost of less total labor, the conquest of many diseases, the lengthening of life, the improvement of health .... “As we now enter the early stages of the scientific revolution— our third revolution—the full flower of creative evolution is bursting upon us. Yet ‘powerful as the forces of science and technology have already demonstrated themselves to be, relatively speaking we are only beginning to feel their influence. Our Nation and the world are committed to an accelerating cycle of knowledge-gathering and knowledge-exploitation. We cannot visualize in detail the consequences for the future. We can, however, clearly see that we can, if we have the wisdom, create an environment essentially of our own choosing. The scientific revolution can provide for the essential needs of men around the globe. Our small world will grow smaller. At the same time our perspective will be broadened unimaginably by the exploration of space. We can only guess at the distant impact of this dynamism on man, his institutions, the content of thought and the quality of life. We can be sure, however, that successful adaptation to the changing environment can be achieved, in an atmosphere of freedom, only through advancement of men generally to higher 1 eve's of education . . . .” (Text, in CR, 4/29/63, 6847—49) April 29: Addressing the Senate space committee, Deputy Defense Secretary Roswell Gilpatric summed up dod’s philosophy on space: “The United States has a single national space program. . . . Space, like other mediums, affords useful and often unique ways for achieving defense objectives. Some of these are by no means uniquely military . . . similar remarks would apply to machines and devices used in the air, on land and on sea, and space is no exception. ... As a corollary to these observations, the totality of our military space efforts, assessed from a national rather than a departmental standpoint, greatly exceeds the efforts of the Department of Defense alone. Space systems and devices are not simply military or non-military merely because they are developed by one agency or another.” (M&R, 5/6/63) April H9: General Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of the Air Force Systems Command, testifying before the House Science and Astronautics Committee, said that the Air Force was reviewing its space program, at the request of Defense Secretary McNamara, to determine how the Air Force might better achieve its military mission capabilities. Stressing the importance of both the Military Orbital Development Station (mods) and Aerospace Plane (asp), he said that mods was “of fundamental importance to achieving various military capabilities in space, both manned and unmanned.” (M&R, 5/6/63)
Langley Research Center issued invitations to bid to 39 contractors for construction of the laboratory building of the nasa Space Radiation Effects Laboratory at Newport News, Va. With cost of the laboratory building estimated at $3 million, this is the last major contract to be awarded for the $12.3 million facility. (uaRc Release)
Details of plan for $250,000,000 research center near Pittsburgh disclosed by Dr. Edward Litchfield, Univ. of Pittsburgh chancellor and Oakland Corp. board chairman. Oakland Corp. was specially formed to undertake development of center, which would include nuclear reactor and instrumentation complex, computer center, and data bank, in addition to theaters, school, restaurant, and Carnegie Museum. {NYT, 6/23/63, 39)
Newly created nasa Management Advisory Committee on Manned Space Flight visited nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Chairman of committee was Dr. Marvin J. Kelley, retired President and Board Chairman of Bell Telephone Laboratories; other members were Dr. Hendrick W. Bode, James McCormack, Dr. Hector R. Skifter, and Dr. Arthur E. Raymond. (Huntsville Times, 4/4/63)
In an article in Pravda, V. Golobachev reported that U.S.S.R. was filing with the Federation Aeronautique International claiming new records for the tandem space flight of Cosmonauts Valery Bykovsky and Valentina Tereshkova June 14r-19,1963. U.S.S.R. was claiming eight new records for the tandem flight: for vostok v (Bykovsky), duration of orbital flight, 119 hours; distance, 3,326,000 km. (2,063,377 mi.) ; these represented four new records, since they were records not only for orbital flight but for any type of flight. For vostok vi (Tereshkova), four records claimed for women in orbital flight: duration, 71 hrs.; height, 231 km. (144 mi.); distance, 1,971,000 km. (1,224,720 mi.); maximum weight orbited, 4,713 kg. (10,390 lbs.). Total maximum thrust for each flight was listed as 600,000 kg. (1,322,760 lbs.).	(Pravda, 10/4/63, afss-t Trans.)
New York City honored Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper with tickertape parade. At city luncheon honoring Major Cooper, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and the entire Project Mercury team, Mayor Robert Wagner presented Major Cooper and Mr. Webb with city’s Medal of Honor and scroll acclaiming MA-9 space flight. Mayor Wagner said: “. . . It is remarkable how such a feat not only unites our own country in prideful pleasure, but also gives satisfaction to the rest of the world—to friend and foe alike. This is not man against man, but man against the elements, man against the forces of nature, man armed with the power of knowledge . . . .” {NYT, 5/23/63; CR, 5/29/63, A3487)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced Cook Technological Center Div. of Cook Electric Co. had completed first of new biomedical tape recorders for use in first two-man Project Gemini space flight. Each recorder would receive and record continuously, for 30 hours, six kinds of simultaneous biomedical signals from sensors within astronaut’s spacesuit. Post-flight play-back of the tapes would provide continuous analysis of astronauts’ physical and mental endurance in long periods of space flight, a major goal of Project Gemini, (msc Release 63-78)
nasa plans for new Electronics Research Center in the Greater Boston Area were outlined by Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, in his address before Engineering Societies of New England, Boston: “. . . The principal function of this research center will consist of research and component technological development in the related fields of communications, data processing, guidance, instrumentation, control, and energy conversion. It will be staffed and equipped to perform original work and applied research as well as evaluation of industry and university efforts. It will sponsor nasa research and development efforts in these areas with industries and universities and act as a focal point for nasa research in these related fields . . . .” (Text)
Brig. Gen. Charles H. Roadman (usaf) , nasa Director of Aerospace Medicine, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics' Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. Replying to press criticism of nasa plans to use pure oxygen in Project Gemini spacecraft, General Roadman said: “. . . in our investigations to date we have no physiological information that would permit us to say that 100% oxygen from a physiological standpoint is contraindicated in a two-week mission. This is not to say that there are not many physiologists who would like more information concerning 100% oxygen over a time period, which we thoroughly support . . . .” (Transcript) nasa Administrator James E. Webb, in keynote address May 6, cited recommendation by Iowa Summer Study that one or more scientists be included in Project Apollo lunar flights: “To those who have the responsibility for success in reaching the moon, it has appeared that the nature of the Apollo effort requires the training of astronauts who have substantial experience as test pilots in high speed jet aircraft, and to the extent possible engineering training as well. “Meanwhile, it is apparent that the view of the scientists that trained scientific personnel should participate is valid, and that at the earliest appropriate stage in the program scientists will be included on Apollo missions. So far as we can now tell we are obligated to utilize astronauts with the maximum of test-flight experience and highly conditioned reflexes on the first flight of the most difficult of all undertakings. Should training and experience in intermediate flights indicate otherwise we will, of course, take this into consideration in determining the stage of development in manned space flight at which a scientist-astronaut will directly participate. “In its effort to insure maximum scientific benefit from the manned space flight program nasa is doing several things: “First, manned space flights are being used to take scientific measurements in order that they will provide results beyond crew training and technological experience. “Second, efforts have already begun to provide scientific training for the present group of astronauts including geological field trips to enhance their capacity for scientific observation. “Third, a manned space science working group has been established [within nasa] .... This group is already at work in the planning of a program for training scientists for space flight . . . .’’ (Text) Dr. David H. Stoddard, Assistant Director of Medical Operations in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, discussed human factors in manned space flight and said “we are confident that the biomedical needs of our currently approved manned space flight program can be met from within the scope of our existing technology.” (Text) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director for Systems in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, reviewed U.S. manned space flight program. Describing Project Gemini, he said:	. . the Gemini is more than an experimental spacecraft. At the end of its scheduled developmental flight program, it will be available for missions ranging from scientific and engineering experiments to the ferrying of astronauts to and from a permanent space laboratory. The end goal of Gemini is, therefore, an operational spacecraft which can be launched by relatively small boosters. We expect Gemini to be a useful space vehicle for several years .... The Gemini spacecraft will reach operational status by 1966 . . . .” (Text)	. Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn), Director of Launch Vehicles and Propulsion in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, said: “The nation’s program to achieve pre-eminence in space and to insure that, the United States occupies first place among the nations of this world in science, in technology and in conquest of space is critically dependent on the power of the rocket. “You may have heard much about the ‘booster gap’ and the effect this situation has had on our position vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union started well ahead of us in the development of large rockets, so necessary for manned flight. The Soviets have been ahead of us, and are still ahead of us in their ability to launch reliably large masses to Earth orbit. “However, with the acceleration of our own progress and by the establishment of our program on a sound engineering basis we can, we believe, surpass the Soviets in time and clearly establish and demonstrate United States pre-eminence in manned space flight. . . .” (Text) Reviewing nasa space program, Director of nasa Office of Programs D. D. Wyatt said: “In its broadest context the nasa program can be classified into three complementary parts. First, we have those phases of the program which are aimed at the exploration of the very nature of space .... “The second major element of our program is aimed at the earliest practical utilization of space for the benefit of mankind .... “Complementing our programs to understand and define space is a third major program element aimed at developing and improving the highly complex technologies which will enhance our future capabilities in space . . . .” (Text) John E. Naugle, Director of nasa Geophysics and Astronomy Programs, said: “. . . the scientific program which we have in nasa is a logical extension of the research work which has been underway in laboratories on the earth since the time of Galileo. Just as astronomers once carried their telescopes to the top of a mountain to see better, now we carry telescopes beyond the earth on rockets and satellites. By doing this we see entirely new phenomena and enable scientists to broaden their studies in certain scientific disicplines . . . .” He then discussed scientific results from each of the six scientific satellites launched by nasa since beginning of 1962 (oso i, explorer xiv, explorer xv, alouette i, ariel, and explorer xvii).	(Text) nasa Director of International Programs Arnold W. Frutkin said in May 7 address delivered by J. H. Barnes, nasa Chief of Cooperative Programs, Office of International Programs: “What other nations are doing in space and in particular, what they are doing together, is in fact small when compared with the resources going directly into national programs in the US and the ussr. Yet, what has been accomplished provides substantial evidence of the feasibility, the benefits, and the promise of joint action by the nations in this new field . . . .” (Text) Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Space Sciences, described scientific spacecraft now under development, and said: “We must continually assess our progress .... The flight performance of our spacecraft has been increasing dramatically .... The useful life of unmanned spacecraft launched in 1962 has exceed six months and is still rising because most of those intended for long life are still operating successfully. “Our progress with launch vehicles has been equally gratifying. In 1962, 82% of all major nasa launchings were successful. This performance has been paced by the remarkable Thor-Delta which has successfully launched 16 out of 17 spacecraft. In addition, the huge Saturn has scored 4 out of 4 perfect flights. During this time period, both the Thor-Delta and the Scout payloads were increased over 60% at no increase in their $2.5 million and $1 million price tags. These dramatic increases in performance, life, and reliability of spacecraft and launch vehicles represent by far the most effective way to achieve economy in the space program . . . .” (Text) nasa Director of Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said: “There are four principal areas where a continuing and driving program of advanced research is required if this nation is to achieve pre-eminence in aeronautical and space activities in the decades to come. These are energy conversion and propulsion; materials and structures; control, guidance and communications; and space sciences and the environment of space.” (Text) Louis B. C. Fong, Director of nasa Office of Technology Utilization, said on May 8 that the “basic objectives of the [nasa] Technology Utilization Program are:
Nike-Apache sounding rockef launched at Wallops Station carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to 94-mi. altitude in experiment to obtain measurements of electron density profile, electron temperatures, and solar radiation in ionosphere. Test was part of continuing nasa program conducted by Goddard Space Flight Center to study ionosphere. (Wallops Release 63-20)
Near-operational Army Pershing missile launched from tracked-launcher at Cape Canaveral and hit target 130 miles down amr, its first complete test flight success. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/26/63, A3)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, the President’s Scientific Adviser, testified before House Science and Astronautics subcommittee on the Federal role in science and technology. He indicated that the tremendous surge in development of military weapon systems that had been the principal cause of the 15-to-20 per cent increase in the Federal science and technology budget each year for the last several years would level off. Now the effort would shift from military systems to bringing technology “to bear on serving the collective needs of our people.” He was concerned lest without the defense motive the Nation slip back into indifference toward support of science, particularly the basic research that provided the new ideas for further advances. He also said that he not only supported the U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative lunar landing proposal but that he had often commended the idea to the President. (NYT, 10/17/63; Space Bios. Daily, 10/17/63, 98)
Henry F. Auter, Chief of Electrical Systems Engineering Branch of Test Div., nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, appointed Deputy Manager of msfc Mississippi Test Operations. (Huntsville Times, 6/15/63) Jwne 16-19: Flight of vostok vi with Lt. Valentina V. Tereshkova, first woman in space, conducted by U.S.S.R. Launched from Baikonur, vostok vi completed 48 earth orbits in 70 hrs. 50 min.; initial orbital path was 141-mi. apogee, 112-mi. perigee, 88.3-min. period. Shortly after entering orbit, Tass reported, Lt. Tereshkova established radio communications with Lt. Col. Bykovsky in vostok v; the two cosmonauts then radioed joint message to Premier Khrushchev. Tass stated flight of vostok vi was being made “to continue the study of the effect of various space-flight factors on the human organism, including a comparative analysis of the impact of these factors on the organisms of a man and a woman; to carry out new medical-biological research and to further improve and perfect the systems of piloted spaceships in conditions of simultaneous flight.” During initial orbit vostok v and vi came within about five km. (three mi.) of each other, apparently closest distance achieved. Cosmonaut Tereshkova, whom Tass described as having never piloted an aircraft, landed bv parachute in Kazakhstan. After she and Cosmonaut Bykovsky landed, Tass issued statement on flight results: “New valuable data have been obtained about the influence of different factors of a space flight of long duration on the organisms of man and woman. Rich factual material necessary for further perfection of the systems of piloted space ships has been obtained.” (Tass, Izvestia, 6/18/63, 1, afss-t Trans.; NYT, 6/17/63-6/20/63, Iff) Jwne 16: Results of six-year experimental study of 25 generations of mice exposed to large radiation doses were reported in New York Times. Conducted by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, study disclosed large doses of radiation over long period of time have an “amazingly small” effect on mice: no evidence of malformations was found, and there appeared “to be no threat to genetic extinction of the species.” (Plumb, NYT, 6/16/63)
nasa announced launch responsibility for Agena and Centaur space vehicle programs had been transferred from nasa Launch Operations Center to nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Field Project Branch at Cape Canaveral. Launches would be conducted under technical direction of Ageiia and Centaur project managers, nasa Lewis Research Center. Transfer would permit log to concentrate on manned space flight and associated launch vehicles, including Saturn series developed under management of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Overall project responsibility for Agena and Centaur programs had been assigned to nasa Lewis Research Center in December and October, respectively. (nasa Release 63-19)
Experiment to study behavior of liquid hydrogen when exposed to radiant heating and zero gravity conditions was launched to approximately 120-mi. altitude by Aerobee sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station. Preliminary analysis of telemetry data indicated only partial success of the experiment, provided by nasa Lewis Research Center. (Wallops Release 63-60)
Tass announced postage stamp commemorating vostok v space flight had been issued by Soviet Ministry or Communications. (Reuters, NTT, 6/18/63,10) Walter C. Williams, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Associate Director and Project Mercury Operations Director, summarized Project Mercury, emphasizing that primary lesson taught by the manned space flights was value of attention to detail. Discussing biomedical results, he said orthostatic hypotension first noted in Astronaut Walter M. Schirra (MA—8, six orbits) was more pronounced in Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (MA-9, 22 orbits). Lowered blood pressure was believed to be cause of Cooper’s temporary dizziness when he emerged from Mercury spacecraft: “The effects seem to be post-flight, and continued from 18 to 24 hours.” {Av. Wk., 7/1/63, 71) Astronauts Walter M. Shirra, Jr., and L. Gordon Cooper received the aiaa Astronautics Award. (Av. Wk., 7/1/63, 31) Rombus (Reusable Orbital Module—Booster and Utility Shuttle) concept described June 18 by Philip Bono, Chief Advance Project Engineer of Future Space Systems, Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div. Single-stage manned space cargo carrier, capable of orbiting many hundreds of tons and reusable at least 20 times, could be developed by late 1970’s. Eight strapped-on liquid-propellant tanks would be jettisoned and parachuted to earth after providing initial boost; Rombus would be recovered from orbital mission with use of parachutes, main engine retro-thrust, and extended landing legs. Bono’s paper was based on study performed for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and was one of many large vehicle concepts under study by industry and government. ( dac Release 63-122) Speaking on June 19, Dr. Stanley Deutsch, Chief of Systems Research and Analysis in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, declared Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper could not have sighted houses, boat, and train during his MA-9 orbital space flight “because of the visual angle.” Dr. Deutsch speculated the visual impressions might have involved hallucinations or transfer of stored impressions. “We need a great deal of study in the area of perception [in the weightless condition].” Interviewed at meeting, Astronaut Cooper said: “I’m not changing my mind one bit, I know what I saw.” (Av. Wk. 7/1/63, 31)
Harvard College Observatory reported that astronomers at Boyden Observatory at Bloemfontein, South Africa, had photographed syncom i satellite missing since February 14. The Observatory’s photographs indicated syncom i probably was in orbit about 22,000-mi. high, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, A8)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and nasa cosponsored second Manned Space Flight Meeting, in Dallas, Tex. (Advance Program) Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter described flight experiences in Project Mercury at the aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting, Dallas, and concluded: “I think this philosophy sums up our attitude toward manned space flight. It is the increasing importance of man in the system that is going to characterize our space flights of the future. We will need skilled pilots to fly these missions, and we are in the process of developing those skills now. “The era of manned space flight is just beginning, however, and Project Mercury is only the first step. We are convinced that it has been a very profitable step and that succeeding programs in manned space flight will continue to expand our knowledge of the universe, hopefully for the benefit of all mankind.” (Text)
nasa announced Paul Haney, Public Affairs Officer for nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, would replace Lt. Col. John A. Powers, msc Public Affairs Officer, effective Sept. 1. Colonel Powers would become special assistant to Dr. Gilruth. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/31/63; nasa Release 63-167)
Dr. George E. Mueller, Vice President for r&d of Space Technology Laboratories, named to new position of nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, succeeding D. Brainerd Holmes who would resign Sept. 1 as Director of Office of Manned Space Flight and Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Centers. ( nasa Release 63-162)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Can., with nuclear emulsion payload to study very-low-energy cosmic ray heavy nuclei. Payload reached 150-mi. altitude, was recovered from an inland lake approximately 90 mi. from launch site. Instrumentation and nuclear emulsions were in excellent condition, but analysis of nuclear emulsions would require considerable time. Experiment was project of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
Special Subcommittee of House Committee on Armed Services, established to investigate research and development in the Armed Services, met in executive session, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/136)
usaf launched a Minuteman icbm from an underground silo at Vandenberg afb, Calif. (Wash. Post, 11/30/63) November SO: gsfc announced negotiations with the Marine Engineering Dept, of Northrop-Nortronics on a contract for design and construction of a huge 230-ton test chamber to simulate the launch phase of space flight for test of unmanned spacecraft and their components. The chamber would duplicate as nearly as possible the environmental conditions and the separate or combined conditions of acceleration, noise, vibration, and vacuum. The Launch Phase Simulator was expected to cost approximately $1.9 million. (gsfc Release G-27-63)
nasa Langley Research Center announced contract awarded to Basic Construction Co. for building to house synchrocyclotron of nasa’s Space Radiation Effects Laboratory at Oyster Point, Newport News, Va. (LaRc Release)
Plum Brook Station, nasa Lewis Research Center, awarded a $450,000 contract for completion of nuclear rocket and dynamic control test stand. The 200-ft.-high stand was to be used for testing second-generation nuclear rocket components. (Lewis Chronology, 3)
Atomic Energy Commission awarded full-power license to operate the 60 megawatt Plum Brook research reactor to the Plum Brook Station of nasa Lewis Research Center, (lrc Release 63-3, Lewis Chronology, 1)
nasa announced it would negotiate extension to existing contract with Control Data Corp. for procurement of computers and associated equipment for Apollo spacecraft Pre-Flight Acceptance Checkout Equipment (pace) stations. Cost of the equipment for the nine stations was expected to exceed $25 million. General Electric Co. would receive the equipment as government-furnished equipment, would deliver first two pace systems to North American Aviation, Inc., for checkout of Apollo command and service modules. Four systems would be delivered to John F. Kennedy Space Center, two to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., and one to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, (nasa Release 63-286) ....	.
At news conference on the phenomena of pneumatic tire hydroplaning, at nasa Hq., Walter B. Home and Robert C. Dreher of nasa Langley Research Center described results of experiments conducted with automobiles traveling on wet roads. On highway curve where maximum safe speed is posted as 45 mph, automobile with tire pressure of 25 psi did not reach hydroplaning speed until about 52 mph; automobile with tire pressure of 16 psi attained hydroplaning speed at 40 mph and swung out of control. Mr. Home said: “In this country, most, automobiles use tire inflation pressures between 16 and 30 pounds per square inch. This is a hydroplaning speed between 42 miles an hour and 55 miles an hour. “This hydroplaning speed range is well within the higher legal speed limits on roads in this country. Therefore, automobiles are real susceptible to hydroplaning.” He exploded the popular notion that reducing tire pressure makes driving on wet roads safer. “About the only place where it does any good to reduce the tire pressure is when you are driving on sand and you want to get higher flotation.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/17/63; nasa Fact Sheet; nasa News Conf. Transcript; nasa TN D-2056)
In Washington ceremony, Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., tjsmc) presented U.S. flag he carried during orbital space flight in friendship 7 to Marine Corps Assistant Commandant Lt. Gen. Charles H. Hayes. Flag would be placed in Marine Corps Museum. (A-N-AF Journal & Reg., 9/28/63, 8)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. were reported to have a draft of a resolution on legal aspects of space exploration and to be circulating it for comment to other members of the 28-nation U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space prior to formal submission. It was announced on Nov. 8 that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had reached general agreement. (Brewer, NYT, 11/17/63, 34)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said in address before State Convention of New Jersey Society of Professional Engineers: “. . . activities in space itself, and in the complex of supporting work that goes forward here on earth, draw upon almost every branch of science and technology. In the process, the needs and interests of engineers and scientists are drawing closer together, and the lines of cleavage between the various disciplines are becoming less and less distinct .... “More than ever before, engineering has become the full and active partner of science in the exploration of this newest frontier . . . .” (Text)
Results of Research Institute of America’s survey of more than 1,400 businessmen on U.S. goals and national policy, published in General Electric Forum, revealed 21% considered present expenditure on space fully warranted, 41% considered it probably fully warranted, 27%—probably not, and 11%—not warranted. Other replies: To “In years immediately ahead, what should be level of space expenditure, in relation to gnp?” 6% said “sharply higher than present expenditures, 16%—a little higher, 38%—remain at about the present ratio, 24%—a little lower, and 16%—sharply lower. To “Assuming that national policy in the immediate future corresponds to your answer above, do you believe that the U.S. will exceed the Russians in space achievements by 1970?” 38% said probably will exceed the Russians, 44%—will approximately equal them, and 18%—probably will not equal them. Asked to identify a statement closest reflecting their opinion on what space policy should be, 66% checked the statement, “Our prime objective should be to sustain a prudent and orderly program of scientific progress in space achievements with little regard for who leads in this or that particular aspect of space technology.” Asked about the military role in the U.S. space program, 16% replied it should be greater, 67%—about the same, and 17%— smaller. (GE Forum, July-Sept. 63,31-39)
Subcommittee of House Committee on Appropriations voted to approve $5.1 billion appropriations bill for nasa in FY 1964, $250,820,400 less than nasa authorizations bill. Rep. Olin E. Teague (D.-Tex.), Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said President Kennedy’s proposal for U\S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar flight was “bound to hurt” chances of full appropriations being passed bv House and criticized idea of joint project as impractical. (Finney, NYT. 9/25/63,1,15)
U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations began in Rome on technical details of a three-year agreement signed at Geneva in June 1962, for exchange of data to be gained from separate satellite launchings. Dr. Hugh L. Diyden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, headed U.S. scientific delegation, and Prof. Anatoli A. Blagonravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences headed the Russian delegation. Joint space research program would include coordination on meteorology and communications studies, and charting of the earth’s magnetic field. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/11/63, A3)
Edward Z. Gray was appointed Director of Advanced Studies, Office of Manned Space Flight, nasa Kq., suceeedmgDr. WTilliam A. Lee, who was joining the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, msc. Mr. Gray had been with Boeing Aircraft Co. for 24 years, most recently as Development Program Manager of Advanced Space Systems, Aero-Space Div. (nasa Release 63-228)
Missile tests for Project Dazzle, a defense research program to develop antimissile missiles, involving cooperation between the United States, Britain, and Australia, would be conducted at Australia’s big Woomera rocket range, using the British-developed Black Knight rocket. Project Dazzle would involve identifying and tracking missiles re-entering the earth’s atmosphere from space. The program would include basic research into the physical phenomena associated with the re-entry of objects from space. Australian and British natural scientists would be responsible for analyzing the results recorded by an instrumentation system provided by arpa. (U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, November, 1963; The Christian Science Monitor, 8/14/63)
nasa announced selection of Lear Siegler to negotiate contract for design study of “psychophysical information acquisition processing and control system” (Piapacs). Proposed system, mounted in pilot’s garment and headgear, would replace present system of sensors attached to pilot and would permit continuous acquisition of psychological and physical data, nasa pilots would test system in flights of aircraft including F-104, Jet Star, and X-15, at nasa Flight Research Center, (nasa Release 63-139; frc Release 13-63)
In address at a space exploration symposium at New York University, Dr. Eugene M. Emme, nasa Historian, reviewed the birth of the space age and its first half decade. Referring to the impact of space exploration upon society, he said: “Space exploration—with all of its novelty and drama and future potential for society—continues to jar the intellect, stir the emotions, and stimulate actions among peoples everywhere .... Our children, of course, have no doubt whatever that man will soon set foot on the surface of the moon, and then the nearby planets; it is only a question of exactly how soon. The rest of us old folks, conditioned as we are to the scientific and technological realities of the recent past, have a little difficulty comprehending either the reality or the significance concerning the mobility or mankind in space today and tomorrow .... “To the historian, the closing of the present kindergarten era of astronautics, with its tender philosophy, offers the germ for a new renaissance in the mind and spirit of mankind. It could well be a renaissance for mankind as was sparked with the new geography of Columbus and Magellan and the new astronomy of Copernicus and Galileo which helped loosen Europe from the Dark Ages; or when the new biology of Darwin for the physical organism, the challenges of Marx and the new psychology of Bergson and Freud for the conscious man assisted the great intellectual stimulus of the late nineteenth century as well as the humanitarianism and the technological boom of the twentieth century . . . .” (Text; Airpower Historian, 1/64,6-10) November 1: Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory was dedicated by akpa and usaf in Arecibo, Puerto Rico. Largest radar-radio telescope of its kind in the world, aio is a l,000-ft.-diameter bowl constructed in a natural bowl formed by several mountain peaks. As a radiotelescope, it should detect radiation from galactic sources considerably more distant than any yet detected. As a radar, it would be the most sensitive instrument yet built for ionospheric research. Dr. Thomas Gold, head of the astronomy department of Cornell Univ., which built and would operate the new facility, predicted that it would help make clear “the grand architecture of the Universe.” (dod Release 1358-63; Schmeck, NYT, 11/2/63, 9)
Tracking and data acquisition operations ceased for oso i (Orbiting Solar Observatory), launched March 7, 1962. (gsfc Historian, 8/14/63)	_	.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, in address at Topeka, Kansas, traced the historic role of the Federal Government in animating science and pointed to the quickening pace of science and technology today. Major considerations? which “make it clear that an understanding of the space environment, and the development of the technology which will enable us to operate in space, are imperative,” Webb said. “First, the modem rocket engine, which can operate in the vacuum of space . . . has given us and other nations for the first time the means to explore and utilize the space medium. Given this ability, and the spectacular achievements already made, Americans and citizens of other nations assuredly will not remain confined to this small planet. We and they will explore space, nrt+fln	r> Alkinnr 5 v*o van	mi ■■■»■ ■■» iuio w mg uno less than a position at the forefront of that pioneering effort. “Second, it is generally recognized, I believe, that our national security itself is heavily involved in the space competition. Not only our prestige but our capacity for constructive international leadership depend upon a superiority in science and technology— for economic development of national defense—that is understood and accepted. The nations of the world, seeking a basis for their own future progress and security, continuously pass judgment upon our ability as a nation to make decisions, to concentrate effort, to manage vast and complex technological programs in our own interest. It is not too much to say that in many ways the viability of representative government and of the free enterprise system, in a period of revolutionary changes based on science and technology, is being tested in space. “Third, our national defense—perhaps even our national survival—demand that we act to insure that no hostile force will be permitted to use space as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us. “The fourth and most important of the major reasons for undertaking a broad national program of space research and development—the one which promises the greatest rewards for mankind—the technological applications which will flow from it, will offer vast returns op our space investment here on earth over many years ahead.” (Text)
Donald L. Nored, Lewis engineer, described nasa contract with Stanford Research Institute to study one of the most complex problems in high-energy rocketry—simple ignition. Preliminary results offer promise that a tiny quantity of ozone difluoride mixed with liquid oxygen will cause the lox to ignite immediately on contacting liquid hydrogen, (lrc Release 63-15; Lewis Chronology, 3)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced eight nasa astronauts were working with manned space flight simulator at LingTemcoVought, Dallas, evaluating manual control and instrument display should the Apollo lunar excursion module’s primary guidance system fail during descent to the moon, (msc Release 63-81)
F-l rocket engine static-nred in 10-sec. test, first in series conducted by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. (Marshall Star, 12/11/63, 2)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuing requests for proposals for vacuum chamber to generate space environmental conditions for use in thermochemical tests. Chamber would permit msc engineers to study function of propellant equipment, heat rejection, and energy collecting devices during long periods of space flight, (msc Release 63-144)
Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, speaking before the Washington chapter of aiaa, said that funds for the space program thus far in this decade had (1) created a team of trained people; (2) developed basic technology; (3) constructed facilities; and (4) been used up in consumption of consumable items. Consumables, he said, represented the cost of launches and costs of the recovery forces. This category amounted to less than eight per cent of the total. “The remaining 92 per cent of the funds are used for creating permanent capital . . . .” (Text)
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on The Peaceful Uses of Outer Space convened in Geneva. {NYT, 5/3/63) Mercury spacecraft faith 7, with Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) as pilot, lifted off Pad 14, Cape Canaveral, at 8:04 a.m. est. Atlas launch vehicle placed spacecraft in initial orbit of 166-mi, apogee, 100-mi. perigee, 88.7-min. period, 32.5° inclination to equator, 17,544-mph speed. Be-sides participation in flight procedures, astronaut ate, slept, and conducted scientific experiments. Because automatic control system (acs) failed during 19th orbit, spacecraft was oriented manually during 22nd orbit, retrorockets were fired manually, and re-entry phase was conducted without acs. faith 7 landed two miles from U.S.S. Kearsarge near Midway Island in Pacific. Value of trained pilot’s presence in spacecraft was underscored by successful mission achievement despite acs failure. MA-9 provided biomedical data confirming man can survive and function during prolonged space flight with no ill effects. Experiments during flight included: ejecting from spacecraft in third orbit a 10-lb. flashing-beacon sphere (testing visibility of objects in space in preparation for future rendezvous maneuvers), which Cooper sighted during fifth and sixth orbits; photographs of zodiacal light nighttime airglow layer; horizon definition experiment, using colored filters in 70-mm. camera; radiation measurement experiment, using Geiger counters mounted on spacecraft exterior and detectors inside spacecraft and inside astronaut’s space suit; tethered balloon experiment (to measure atmospheric drag) which Cooper attempted in sixth orbit but balloon did not deploy; infrared photography for meteorological purposes; television photography, which achieved historic “first” in U.S. manned space flight with direct transmission of TV pictures to tracking stations; cabin environmental temperature study, another historic “first” with cabin coolant valve and fan turned off from orbit #5 until about two hours before re-entry, astronaut relying on space suit for cooling while cabin temperature stabilized at around 96° F; HF antenna tests, another “first”, involving transmissions with antenna horizontally polarized and vertically polarized; ground light experiment, with astronaut observing three-million-candlepower xenon light at Bloemfontein, Republic of South Africa; window attenuation experiment, with astronaut viewing calibrated standard light source and stars to evaluate transmission of light through spacecraft window; and white paint patch measurements, investigating changes in paint pigments during re-entry heating. Cooper’s historic flight covered estimated 593,885 mi. in 34 hrs. 20 min. Nearly 36 years before, Charles Lindbergh’s historic flight from New York to Paris covered 3,610 mi. in 33 hrs. 30 min. (nasa MA-9 Press Kit; NYT, 5/15/63; NYT, 5/16/63; NYT, 5/17/63; Press Conf. Transcript, NYT, 5/20/63; Aerospace Yearbook, I960)
Cleveland Clinic kept a calf alive for 20 hours after its heart had been replaced by a mechanical heart system. The controls to drive the pump of this mechanical heart were designed for the Clinic by nasa Lewis Research Center pump specialists. (Lewis Chronology, 11) November 9; usaf’s Rome Air Development Center (radc), Griffiss afb, N.Y., would take part in the tracking and experimentation with nasa’s Echo II passive communications satellite scheduled for launching shortly. A 60-ft.-diameter steerable parabolic antenna had been erected at the Center’s Passive Satellite Research Terminal near Rome N.Y. The terminal would be able to transmit on S and X bands for 5,000-mi. tracking and communications range, usaf would investigate passive communications satellites for their possibilities as a relatively nonjammable military communications system. {A-N-AF Joum. & Reg., 11 /!)/63, 28)
An article in Aviation Week, by George Alexander, summarized the important advances in the Atlas test program: (1) 0.032-in. airframe, basically a stainless steel balloon relying on gas pressure for rigidity; (2) contaminant control in liquid oxygen systems; (3) early exploration of problems in staging: timing, hardware clearances, shifting center of gravity, flight control response and adaptability; and (4) handling of liquid oxygen to reduce geysering by using last-moment slug-filling to load the tanks. Of 87 research and development Atlas vehicles, 10 were classified as failures and 18 as partial successes. (SID, 5/20/63, 9; Av. Wk., 2/25/63)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center employee Dave M. McGlathery became third Negro registered at Univ. of Alabama, first at Huntsville Extension Center. (Smith, NYT, 6/14/63, 16)
The ratio of nasa scientists and engineers to NASA-contractor scientists and engineers should be 1 to 4 by early 1964. It was 1in Jan. 1960,1:3 in Jan. 1963. (Space Bus. Daily, 11/18/63, 265)
General B. A. Schriever (afsc) said in address to seminar participants at National Science Fair, Albuquerque: “The most challenging scientific enterprise we have today is the exploration of space. There are several reasons why this new region is of great importance to us. First of all, it is an unknown and unexplored medium, which is certain to contain many surprises. Second, it is a tempting region for a nation that is bent on aggression. Soviet leaders have shown a keen awareness of both the psychological and military aspects of space exploration. They have boasted repeatedly that they could use their space technology for aggressive purposes. We cannot afford to leave our space frontier unguarded. “Space exploration is also important for another reason. It greatly stimulates the advance of science by serving as a natural focus for intensive research in virtually every area of science and technology .... “Today’s methods of taking scientific measurements are far more accurate than those of the past, and they are improving all the time. For example, a year and a half ago we were able to measure speeds on our Holloman sled track to an accuracy of about one part in 40,000. Today that accuracy has been increased to about one part in 150,000 . . . .” (Text)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in address before aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting in Dallas: “The age of space is, for all regions of America, a second industrial revolution, a revolution that is bringing a new future, a new degree of participation, a new scope of contribution for every region of our country, and for every segment of our society.” Regarding Project Apollo, he said that “to reach for the moon is a risk, but it is a risk we must take.” Failure to do so would be “even riskier.” (upi, NYT, 4/24/63)
With launching of Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Kronogard Range, Sweden and U.S. completed series of sounding rocket experiments to study noctilucent clouds near Arctic Circle. Sponsored by nasa and Swedish Committee for Space Research, program included launchings of Areas rockets with payloads to measure winds and Nike-Cajun rockets with payloads to make direct cloud samplings during 1961 and 1962. Four Nike-Cajun rockets with rocket grenade payloads were successfully launched during summer 1963, these experiments measuring upper atmosphere temperatures, winds, pressure, and density and measuring changes in size of artificial cloud particles created by smoke puffs from the payloads. Experimenters were scientists from Institute of Meteorology, Univ. of Stockholm; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had responsibility for U.S. coordination in the project. (nasa Release 63-179)
Boilerplate model of Apollo spacecraft arrived at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center for dynamic and compatibility tests with the Saturn I. Boilerplate model included command and service modules and mockup of launch escape system. (Huntsville Times. 4/9/63; naa S&ID Skywriter, 4/19/63,1)
fcc Chairman E. William Henry predicted in address to American Bar Association’s Committee on Communications, meeting in Chicago, that a single communications satellite eventually may equal carrying capacity of all telephone cable circuits between U.S. and rest of the world. Last year 5 million telephone calls were made from U.S. to 176 countries. Existing facilities probably will be used to capacity by 1965, he said, and $500-million international communications system will be in operation by 1970. New transistorized cable, with capacity of almost six times present capacity, will be available. (Wolters, Chic. Trib., 8/15/63) August 15: stncom ii communications satellite was successfully maneuvered into synchronous position 55° west longitude, over Brazil and South Atlantic Ocean. The satellite was slowed from westward drift speed of 1.2° per day to nearly zero drift by firing of onboard nitrogen jets. Previous firings of hydrogen peroxide jets occurred Aug. 11, when syncom ii was slowed from 7° drift per day to 2.7° drift per day, and Aug. 12. when satellite was reduced to 1.2° drift. Firings were directed by engineers at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and actual command was executed from ground station at Lakehurst, N.J. stncom n was now stationed about 22,300-mi. altitude and traveling at speed of about 6,800 mph, matching earth’s rotation speed of 1,040 mph at equator to keep it on station. It was hovering in figure-8 pattern 33° north and south of equator, nasa Administrator James E. Webb called completion of the positioning maneuvers the culmination of “one of the outstanding feats in the history of space flight.” (nasa “stncom n Fact Sheet”; nasa Release 63-185)
Gov. Frank Clement of Tennessee signed bill authorizing construction of $2 million Tennessee Space Research Institute on site donated by usaf near Arnold Engineering Development Center, Tullahoma. Institute would be operated by Univ. of Tennessee. Mission of institute would be “to offer graduate level courses in aerospace science and engineering while carrying on research in these fields for both Government and industry.” {Nashville Tennessean, 3/16/63; Nashville Banner, in CR, 3/18/63, A1479)
nasa and dod negotiation of agreement giving nasa authority to purchase its own Atlas-Agena launch vehicles was reported by Missites and Rockets, nasa had signed agreement, and dod approval was “expected shortly.” (M&R, 6/24/63,9) Jv/ne %4: John Stack, pioneer of aircraft development over 34 years with naca and nasa, now director of engineering for Republic Aviation Corp., interviewed on supersonic transport development in U.S. News and World Report. Asked how much had been done on U.S. supersonic transport to date, he said: “. . . You could almost take it off the shelf today. The technology is there. It’s just a matter of pulling it together and putting it into the airplane you want. We were doing research on the problems of supersonic transport down at Langley Research Center all through the late 1950’s. We knew then that it was feasible. There was no fundamental scientific obstacle. “In December of 1959, at the request of E. R. Quesada who was head of the Federal Aviation Agency and President Eisenhower’s aviation adviser, we made a presentation on development of a supersonic transport. Mr. Quesada recommended that work get underway. He didn’t get the money he asked for, but supersonic-transport development was established as a national policy. “The Kennedy administration came in, in 1961, and Najeeb Halaby replaced Mr. Quesada at the faa. He pushed ahead with the development program. Congress appropriated a total of $31 million for the project in 1961 and 1962. This year, 1963, was to be the prototype year. “. . . as you know, the day after Pan American Airways announced that it was placing an order for six of the British-French Concorde supersonic transports President Kennedy said there will be a supersonic transport program. “. . . If we wait another year [for Congressional appropriations], we will be in a serious position in this competition. . . .” _ (U.S. News, 6/24/63j/7?, 7/9/63,11621-22)
nasa announced it would sponsor study to determine interest in system of “practical” satellites to collect data from remote areas of the earth. If warranted, study would be followed by a feasibility and design study. A possible use of data collection satellite was in oceanography, using instrumented floating buoys distributed over ocean surface to measure characteristics of the sea. Satellite would interrogate each buoy, store information, then transmit it upon command. Similar application was tracking of icebergs, using transponders planted on ice formations. Study would be under cognizance of nasa Future Applications Satellites unit, which was also investigating nonmilitary uses of navigational satellites, (nasa Release 63-55) • Senator Clifford P. Case (R.-N.J.) questioned whether a planned space electronics research center should be located in Boston or in fact, whether one was needed at all. He said New Jersey has outstanding qualifications for such a center and it and other states should be considered a possible location—if the center is actually needed, nasa has already selected the Boston area as the site of the center. (Boston Herald, 3/18/63)
Fifth anniversary of nasa. Ceremonies throughout the week included open house at Wallops Station, Va., Sept. 29 and 30; Fifth Anniversary Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington; Project Mercury Summary Report Conference at Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, Tex., Oct. 3 and 4; and nasa Fifth Anniversary Banquet in Washington Oct. 5. In its fifth year of space operations (October 1, 1962-October 1, 1963), nasa launched 12 orbital, deep space, and manned space flights, of which 10 were successful, 1 partially successful, and one unsuccessful. The X-15 rocket research aircraft set a new altitude record of 350,000 ft. and began its follow-on flights involving space research. The Mercury program added a 6-orbit flight and was concluded with a 22-orbit flight. Among other successful flights were four scientific satellites, two communications satellites, the first and second synchronous-orbit communications satellites, and another weather satellite. The fifth scientific lunar probe (ranger v) was unsuccessful and led to a reworking of the remaining Ranger probes. Project Apollo flight testing was begun. In its five years of space operations, nasa had launched a total of 68 orbital, deep space, and manned space flights, of which 39 were successful, 9 partially successful, ajid 20 unsuccessful, for an overall average of 2y2 successes for every failure. The rate of improvement ranged from 1 success per failure in 1958-59 and 1959-60, to 2 to 1 in 1960-61, to 5 to 1 in 1961-62, . to 12 to 1 in 1962-63.	(hhr-14)
usaf announced launching Titan II icbm from underground silo in test flight from Vandenberg afb. (AP, NYT, 9/25/63,14)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, accompanied by nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, and msc Deputy Director for Flight Operations Walter C. Williams, held press conference at Cape Canaveral carried on nation-wide TV. Major Cooper presented orbit-by-orbit account of his MA-9 space flight. Asked about possibility of MA-10 flight, Dr. Seamans said: “It is quite unlikely that we will have another Mercury flight,” but final decision on MA-10 would be made “within a week or so.” (NYT, 5/20/63, 24; New York Herald Trib., 5/20/63)
nasa report released on Project Mercury flight MA-8 (Oct. 3,1962), in which Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., said: “I was also impressed with the fact that . . . [under the different lighting conditions that prevailed, the separated sustainer stage] was almost black in appearance, rather than the shiny silvery vehicle that Astronauts Glenn and Carpenter had seen at this time and that I had observed on the launching pad .... “At about 10 minutes 30 seconds, I went back to flying-by-wire, low, and tracked the sustainer as it traversed down through the window, and it was a thrill to realize the delicate touch that it is possible to have with fly-by-wire, low. . . . The control system was so effective that it just amounted to a light touch and maybe a few pulses in either axis to get the response I wanted. I could point the spacecraft at anything I wanted to. I could see the sustainer and track it, but I do not believe the relative motion problem would be so easy to solve that I would be able to steam along and join up with it. Although the relative velocity was on tne order of 20 to 30 feet per second, it was enough to cause a problem, particularly at a time when one is becoming acclimated to a new environment. These problems would be difficult to solve by one’s own trajectory analysis, since there were no systems aboard to aid the pilot in solving the problem. I think that when we build up to the rendezvous technique, one will need more time than that just at the point of insertion to effect this rendezvous, even with proper training. The use of time while orbiting in space is only earth relative, therefore if a rendezvous is not hurried, the task should be relatively simple .... “A smog-appearing layer was evident during the fourth pass while I was in drifting flight on the night side, almost at 32° South latitude. I would say that this layer represented about a quarter of the field of view out of the window, and this surprised me .... Seeing the stars below the glowing layer was probably the biggest surprise I had during the flight . . . .” (nasa SP-12, Results of 3rd U.S. Manned Orbital Space Flight, 49-55)
nasa awarded a $236,520 grant to the Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz., to provide a building for processing, storage, and research of lunar and planetary photography. This would assist Lowell Observatory in fulfilling the request of the International Astronomical Union in August 1961 that Lowell establish a Western Hemisphere repository of lunar and planetary research materials corresponding to the Eastern Hemisphere center at Meudon, France, (nasa Release 63-235)
West German scientists outlined plans for German space program at Third European Space Flight Symposium, Stuttgart. Program includes: communications satellite to be placed in polar orbit; high-energy rocket propulsion stage; space transport system ; space probe rocket with paraglider landing system to allow recovery and reuse. (Wilcke, NYT, 5/26/63,13)
Astronomers at McMath Hulbert Observatory of the Univ. of Michigan and at the U.S. Naval Observatory reported the first signs of a new 11-yr. solar cycle. Indications of a new cycle were the appearance of sun spots well above the sun’s equator and the reversed magnetic polarity of the disturbance. (Science Service, NTT, 11/18/63, 15)
Dr. George L. Simpson, Jr., nasa Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition: “nasa is committed to a hard, driving effort to transfer the useful fruits of our research and development effort to the private sector of the economy in as quick and as useful a way as possible. “We are committed, first, because the Space Act requires it. nasa is directed to ‘Provide for the widest practicable and appropriate dissemination of information concerning its activities and the results thereof.’ “We are also committed because we are mindful that a large part of the Nation’s r&d effort is occupied by the Federal agencies; and that it is essential that the maximum value be wrung out of this part of the total effort. “The requirements for space exploration begin in the field of anatomy and run through virtually the whole gamut of scientific and technological interest, through new power sources to zero gravity. Further, those things which are made for space travel receive no compromises from that harsh environment. Which is to say that a very large part of the total space work is at the very leading edge of the state-of-the-art; and that in another large part of the state-of-the-art must be extended. “It is reasonable to think that an effort of such size, range and sophistication, extending over a number of years, cannot fail to have major scientific and economic consequences: consequences that begin as scientific and technological advances and then are converted into new techniques of manufacture, new systems of organization, and new products and services. The space effort will be, we think, altogether comparable in its effect on the American economy to that of World War II. Our objective is to maximize, to facilitate, to speed up this effect. . . . “We are aware that past experience indicates severe problems in the transfer of government research and development efforts to private use. However, we feel that the Nation’s well being requires a major effect to determine whether these problems can be solved.” (Testimony)
Chemist S. Stephen Papell, of nasa’s Lewis Research Center, had applied for a patent on magnetic rocket fuel. Mr. Papell had found a means of magnetizing JP-4 and other liquid hydrocarbons by mixing small quantities of magnetic iron oxide with the liquids. Under weightlessness, an electromagnet located near the propellant pumps could pull the fuel into the pumps. Papell said much work remained to be done on the process before it could be considered operationally feasible. (Av. Wk., 11/11/63, 30; Lewis Chronology, 11)
Arthur S. Flemming Awards for outstanding contributions to Federal Government were presented to five administrators and five scientists at D.C. Junior Chamber of Commerce luncheon. Among the scientists were nasa’s George M. Low, Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, Office of Manned Space Flight, and Edgar M. Cortright, Jr., Deputy Director of Office of Space Sciences. Other three scientists were Joseph F. Saunders, head of nrl Medicine and Dentistry Branch; Norman J. Doctor, physicist at Army Diamond Ordnance Laboratories; and Charles M. Herzfeld, director of dod Ballistic Missile Defense. (Wa,sh. Post, 2/11/63, A8)
Winners of nasa Certificates of Outstanding Achievement at 12th annual Tidewater Science Congress, Norfolk, Va., were announced by Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center. Awards were made to high school students for their exhibits in six fields of science and were in addition to regular Tidewater Science Congress prizes. Mr. Thompson said this marked beginning of annual nasa awards program in conjunction with Tidewater Science Congress and at regiohal fairs in four states. (Langley Release)
Dr. Walter C. Williams, Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and Flight Operations, msc, was named NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Operations. He would supervise manned space flight operations at msc, msfc, and loc. During manned space flight missions he would have full authority and responsibility for conduct of the flights. His appointment would become effective Nov. 1, 1963. (nasa Release 63-237)
Sen. E. L. Bartlett (D.-Alaska) introduced in Senate a bill (S. 2038) to establish a Congressional Office of Science and Technology (cost) to advise and assist members and committees of the Congress on matters relating to science and technology. Bill was referred to Senate Committee on Rules and Administration. (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/125)
First meeting of nasa-usaf board to coordinate joint participation in Project Gemini. Board included nasa Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans and usaf Assistant Secretary Brockway McMillan as co-chairmen; Maj. Gen. O. J. Ritland; dod special assistant for space, L. L. Kavanau; nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes; and nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Defense, Adm. W. F. Boone. {M&R, 2/18/63, 9) February 8: Hawker Aircraft, Ltd., P-1127 jet fighter completed vertical take-off and landing test aboard aircraft carrier Ark Royal. Spokesman for the British company said P-1127 was first aircraft other than helicopter to achieve this feat. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/9/63; Rational Observer, 2/11/63)
Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academy of Sciences, testified at the initial hearing held by the House Select Committee on Government Research. Dr. Seitz warned Congress against starving basic research and individual or small-team research “in order to divert funds for research which appears to be more spectacular from a popular standpoint .... There appear to be signs of such diversion in the present session of the Congress.” As evidence of this trend, Dr. seitz pointed out the relative size of the cuts in the nasa budget compared with the cuts of the National Science Foundation. Also, he pointed out, even the nasa cuts were heavier in space sciences than in manned space flight or applications, nasa, he thought, should play a role like that of the Office of Naval Research ten years ago, offering broad support to basic research in chemistry, physics, astronomy, and other sciences. (Loorv, N.Y. Herald Tribune, 11/19/63)
In a speech at the 1963 Corporate Leadership Dinner, Detroit, Michigan, Robert W. Samoff, Chairman of the Board of nbc, said: “Within the past quarter century alone, scientific research has more than doubled the inventory of human knowledge. “The simple fact that we have shortened the distance between research and product development has itself altered and enriched American life immeasurably, and has created a potential for raising the living standards of people eveiy where .... “Historically, man’s adaptation to new circumstances has proceeded by fits and starts, aided by a generous allotment of time in which to accomplish massive transformation. But now science and technology are pumping a new form of quick-change fuel into the lifestream of civilization, and the time is past when we might count upon years of grace in which to alter concepts and methods to suit a differing environment. Today the unprecedented rate of change we experience—and can anticipate— is a fact unique in human experience, calling for more rapid and drastic accommodations than have ever before been required.” (Text)
The Chemistry and Energy Conversion Division at the Lewis Research Center began a major study of the feasibility of using thin-film solar cells for space power applications. (Lewis Chronology, 11)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D.-Ind.) spoke on the space race: “Mr. Speaker, the announcement that the Soviet Union is withdrawing from the race to the moon has produced some disturbing reactions here in the United States. Here we have a breakdown in the Communist system. Here we have an opportunity to exert real leadership and show what a free econ _ . d vA/in 4" t r> /v 4" L n I UU 1 OVtitlllg UlOrO we abandon our efforts to explore the universe. I am perturbed. Why must we do something just because the Soviet Union does it? Why should we refuse to do something just because the Soviet Union refuses to do it?” (OR, 10/29/63, 19384) Addressing the Joint Meeting of Service Clubs, Bozeman, Montana, nasa Administrator James E. "Webb said: “To take a clear lead in rocket power, or even to match the larger rockets the Russians may be building now, we must cariy on with the development of the Saturn V. This giant rocket is needed to do extensive maneuvering in space near the earth and has the power to send the Apollo spacecraft on its journey to the moon and on prolonged flights in earth orbit. “The United States will inevitably need space power of this order even if we had no plans for going to the moon. We do not know now what future military requirements for rocket power may arise.” (Text) Project Gemini was running into serious problems in its onboard power systems, according to John Finney of the New Tork Times. The new fuel cell source for electric power was to have provided power for up to two weeks at only 1/6 to 1/10 the weight of batteries required to produce equal wattage. But fuel cell development has run into problems of leakage, inadequate lifetime, and poor thermal control. While such problems could probably be engineered out by the time fuel cells were needed for Apollo, the Gemini timetable might require batteries to be substituted for the fuel cells. This in turn might cut Gemini missions down to two days, nasa’s new Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller was said to favor beginning development of backup systems in some of the areas of new technology such as fuel cells but to be hampered in this approach by lack of money. (Finney, NYT, 10/30/63, 26)
Morton J. Stoller, Director of nasa Office of Applications, was awarded nasa Medal for Outstanding Leadership, nasa Admin-38 istrator James E. Webb, in making the award, commended Stoller for his “outstanding and dynamic leadership in planning, developing and directing a complex scientific organization whose notable achievements have significantly contributed to the preeminent position of this country in the space sciences, the development of space technology, and the practical application of such research and development.” (nasa Release 63-20)
President Kennedy appointed Willis M. Hawkins, Jr., vice president and general manager of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., to position of Assistant Secretary of the Army for Research and Development, replacing Finn J. Larsen who resigned July 31. (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/27/63)
nasa ordered its major manned space flight program contractors to freeze all new hirings and not replace any persons lost through normal attrition. Expected to save millions of dollars, the temporary action was taken while nasa was reassessing its budget programing for the current fiscal year, based on an expected appropriation of only $5.1 billion. (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/6/63)	....	.
Army Transportation Corps loaned 20 sea-going barges to nasa for use in space vehicle development program. Barges would be used initially for transporting supplies from Marshall Space Flight Center to Mississippi Test Operations; later, they would be fitted with liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen tanks to store the propellants for fueling Saturn S-IC static-test boosters. (Marshall Star, 3/6/63,1)
gfso announced negotiations with Republic Aviation Corp. for Phase I contract for Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory (Aoso). Aoso would be launched into a 300-mi. near-polar orbit for observations of x-rays, gamma rays, and ultraviolet emissions of the sun. Phase I calls for one-year development of systems engineering ana detailed aesign of Ine satellite, ^gsfc Release G 22-63)
nasa Ames Research Center announced seven nasa astronauts were conducting simulated manned spacecraft missions at Ames centrifuge facility. Tests involved subjecting astronauts to space flight stresses they might encounter during future manned space flights. (Ames Release 63-29)
James J. Haggerty, Jr., writing in Army-Navy-Air Force Journal and Register, said: “The excitement and enthusiasm which characterized the early years of space research is dimming. The barrage of criticism leveled at the Administration for its lunar landing program has taken a severe toll and brought forth a budget which will move the manned moon shot back at least two years and there seems to be a general lack of concern over this abrogation of a stated national goal .... “Space exploration may soon run into its first real barrier, which might be termed the ‘megabuck barrier.’ In the fantastic missions being considered for the next decade, there are myriad technical problems, the solutions of which will require a supreme effort on the part of the scientific and technological community. Yet none of tnese problems appears impossible of solution. The real stumbling block may be money .... “Perhaps tnere will be some great breakthrough—or a series of them—which will bring a dramatic reduction in the costs of space flight. But at the moment, with no such breakthrough on the horizon, the megabuck barrier appears more formidable than the speed of light. (A-N-AF Journ. <& Reg., 12/7/63, 14)
nasa and faa announced they were completing plans for joint study of supersonic transport operation, the study providing data for both (1) design and operation of a supersonic transport compatible with an evolving air traffic control system; and (2) definition of requirements for air traffic control system to handle supersonic commercial air transports. Study would be based on four different sst concepts evolved by nasa Ames and Langley Re: search Centers and on simulation of air traffic environments of today and of the 1970’s. The research would use flight simulation facilities of Langley Research Center and air traffic simulation facilities of faa National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center; it was scheduled to run through 1964. (nasa Release 63-53: faa Release #28)
Arnold W. Frutkin, nasa Director of International Programs, outlined progress in nasa international programs before Third European Space Flight Symposium, Stuttgart, and said: “I believe that the essential meaning of this brief review of our own programs is that international pooling of efforts in the space field can be highly successful if it is rigidly directed to solid scientific and technical objectives of mutual interest, requiring significant rather than token contributions by both sides and thoughtful planning. Perhaps even more important is the clear evidence that these successes engender growing interest and greatly expand the basis for succeeding cooperative enterprises. “We are quite aware of our great indebtedness to European science and technology. We believe that the freest possible association of our respective programs, where they complement and support each other, is the soundest way to proceed if we are to continue to benefit in this way and if we are to reciprocate generously. I believe that in the long run cooperation between nasa for the United States and esro and eldo for Europe affords the best means to expand the hard core of cooperation in space research, and that such collaboration will have the greatest potential for further extension to forward-looking nations everywhere in the world . . . .” (Text)
Lewis Research Center engineers reported on studies involving simulated micrometeoroid penetration of future spacecraft. Using specially-built .22 caliber rifles that fire at velocities up to 10 times the speed of normal bullets, engineers were puncturing different types of fuel tanks to duplicate what might happen in space to a spacecraft struck by a micrometeoroid. (lrc Release 63-42, Lewis Chronology, 5)
Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, announced formation of nine-man Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development. Chaired by Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.), Subcommittee would have following objectives: overall evaluation of scientific research and development throughout the bountry; strengthening of Congressional sources of information and advice on science and technology ; achievement of most effective utilization of scientific and engineering resources of U.S. to accomplish national goals; and Congressional overseeing of the National Science Foundation. (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/133)
Soviet Cosmonauts Yuri Gagarin and Valentina Tereshkova visited the Berlin Wall at the Brandenburg Gate. Later in interview on East Berlin Radio-TV, Cosmonette Tereshkova stated: “There are married women among our female cosmonauts. A friend of mine is married and has children and she has been prepared for a space flight in the same way as I was.” Visit of cosmonauts to Berlin coincided with East German Parliamentary elections. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 10/21/63, A3)
Dr. Frank J. Malina, U.S. astronautics pioneer, elected by International Academy of Astronautics to succeed the late Dr. Theodore von Karman as Director of theAcademy until its annual meeting next autumn. Dr. Malina had served as Academy’s Deputy Director since 1961. (iaa Release No. 14) During May: Paul D. Lowman, Jr., geologist in nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Theoretical Div., asked whether lunar base, permanent manned space station, or manned Mars exploration would “give the greatest scientific return in the shortest possible time,” replied: “A lunar base, very definitely. The moon will be more useful scientifically than Mars because it has no atmosphere, and because, being much closer, we can send back information and samples at a much higher rate. Compared with the space station, the moon has the advantage of providing a large, stable platform with usable raw materials; in addition, the moon has a stratigraphic record of its history and of meteoritic material which has accumulated on it. These advantages are in a sense a one-way street. We can make many of the observations proposed for the space station from the moon as well, because the moon has essentially a space environment. But we cannot examine the lunar rocks from a space station; we must get down on the surface for that. . . .” (Goddard Release) During May: nasa awarded $115-million contract to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., for continued development of F-l engine. New contract was follow-on to letter contract which had initiated F-l development. {M&R, 5/6/63,13)
In an article in Missile and Rockets, nasa Administrator James E. Webb emphasized the importance of the engineer in the space program: “During this period of intensive research and development, it becomes doubly important for industry, the press, and nasa to tell the workshop and test site story as well as the launch site story. The role of the space engineer must be brought out as clearly as the achievements of space scientists and the astronauts . . . . ”	(M&R, 11/25/63)
In letter to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, ^ New York Congressional delegation urged nasa to select site in New York state for its proposed electronics research center, nasa had received more than 30 bids from areas in at least 19 states for location of the center. (AP, NTT, 12/30/63; M&R, 12/23/63, 9)
Ham, first chimpanzee to be successfully launched on (suborbital) space flight, became a permanent resident of Washington’s National Zoological Park. Ham flew in Mercury-Redstone flight MIU2 down the amr on Jan./ll, 1961.	(Wash. Post, 4/5/63) Apnl 5: Tass reported lunik iv spacecraft was 365,000 km. (226,680 mi.) from earth at 6:00 p.m. Moscow time and was continuing on its flight toward the moon. Radio communications with the probe were good, and telemetry data indicated onboard instruments and systems were functioning normally. “Experiments and measurements, provided for by the program, are being conducted.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station (radiotelescope facility), reported receiving signals from lunik iv for 45 min., ceasing abruptly at 8:50 p.m. (10:50 p.m. Moscow time). Lovell said there appeared to have been some “complicated maneuvers” with the probe. Italian astronomers reported receiving 45 min. of TV pictures showing closeup of moon’s surface. In Moscow, two scheduled lectures on lunik tv flight were canceled by Moscow radio; a television discussion of history of lunar research made only passing reference to lunik iv. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/6/63, eos Trans.; NYT, 4/6/63, 2; upi, NYT, 4/6/63, 2; cbs-TV “Newsnight,” 4/5/63; Av. Wk., 4/15/63, 38)
Saturn project engineers James B. Bramlet and Robert E. Lindstrom, of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center Saturn Systems Office, said at aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting in Dallas that nasa heavy launch vehicle programs are on tight schedules but are “within the bounds of our capabilities .... [and can meet requirement for a] manned lunar landing in this decade.” (Huntsville Times, 4/23/63)
usaf awarded to United Technology Center a $15,390,000 increment to existing contract for design, development, fabrication, delivery, and flight testing large segmented solid-propellant motors, usaf also obligated to Thiokol Chemical Corp. a $1,380,000 increment to existing contract for rad on solid-propellant motors, (dod Release 1609-63) During December: In its “Statement of Purpose,” the Subcommitee on Science, Research and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics outlined scope of Federal Government’s support of rad and reviewed responsibilities of the Congress in answering questions of basic policy and evaluating the Federal rad effort. Report pointed out that Government provides “more than two-thirds of the total research and development money being spent in the United States. Of this total, 75 percent is spent in industry, 8 percent in colleges and universities, and 15 percent within the Government itself, according to studies of the National Science Foundation.” (“Government and Science No. 1: A Statement of Purpose,” Rpt. of the House Subcomm. on Science, rad, 1963) During December: Marshall Space Flight Center engineer Paul J. deFries spent two weeks at U.S. scientific stations in Antarctica gathering data on their experiences. Some factors might relate to the problem of supplying astronauts during long stays on the moon. (Marshall Star, 1/1/64, 1)
Goddard Space Flight Center engineers directed radio signal sent from Lakehurst, N.J., to stncom ii communications satellite 22,000 mi. in space, signaling hydrogen peroxide jets onboard to fire and slow satellite’s drift westward from rate of about 7° to about 2° per day. With aid of additional maneuvers signaled from ground, syncom ii was expected to attain synchronous orbit within three days, appearing to hover over 55° west position and prescribing figure-8 pattern 33° north and south of equator. (AP, AFT7, 8/12/63)
nasa and dod announced joint agreement to coordinate studies and actions concerning a manned orbital research and development station. The Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board (aacb) would be the means by which the joint appraisals would be carried out. If the eventual findings were that such a program was required, the nasa Administrator and the Secretaiy of Defense would submit a joint recommendation to the President, including a statement as to which agency should have project responsibility. If the President agreed to proceed with the program, a joint nasa-dod board would be set up to establish objectives and approve specific experiments, (nasa Release 63-231; dod Release 1380-63)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched at twilight from Wallops Station, Va., with 100-lb. payload to test theories of free radical formation in comets. At 95-mi. altitude a flame was produced that left a faintly luminous cloud of combustion products visible from earth for 10 to 20 seconds. The cloud reflected sunlight in the way a comet does. Conducted by Lewis Research Center, the studies would test theories that natural comets are composed of the materials existing at the time of formation of the solar system. A second test was scheduled for the following night. (Wallops Release 63-90; Space Bus. Daily, 10/11/63, 68)
Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center, was awarded honorary Doctor of Science degree by College of WTilliam and Mary. On previous day, he was awarded honorary Doctor of Science degree by Univ. of Michigan. (lorc Release, 6/10/63)
dod announced two single-engine Cessna 180 airplanes of usn Arctic Research Laboratory made deepest known light-plane penetration of Arctic Ocean Basin when they landed May 24 at North Pole. From May 21 to June 2, nine sites were occupied on pack ice so that scientists could collect scientific data on gravity and on ice conditions. ( dod Release 814—63)
In hearings on H.R. 7381, bill to modernize dual-compensation and dual-employment laws, conducted by House Committee on Post Office and Civil Service, nasa Administrator James E. Webb testified:	.... “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration is strongly of the opinion that the proposed legislation should be enacted (1) to permit the Government to capitalize on certain skills, competence, and experience in the areas of aerospace science and technology possessed by a sizable group of military personnel who have completed their service careers, and (2) to correct certain inequities in the present statutes pertaining to the Government employment of these personnel. “Many of the abilities and skills and much of the knowledge valuable to nasa are possessed by certain military personnel who have been closely associated with missile and military space programs and aeronautics. Collectively, this body of men, educated and skilled in aerospace science and technology, represents a reservoir of knowledge and experience which constitutes a national asset of inestimable value. Unless this limited group of specialists can be attracted to remain in the Government, this asset will not be available directly to the Government’s space program. As of August 5, 1963, 227 active duty military officers are detailed to nasa by the Department of Defense . . . .” (Testimony)
Titan II launch from amr on Nov. 1, 1963, testing the effectiveness of new damping devices installed to reduce surges of propellant and oxidizer that created vibration levels unacceptable to Project Gemini manned space flight, was termed successful by Space Business Daily. Vibration level had dropped to a level acceptable to nasa, although usaf wanted further tests to confirm reliability. (Space Bus. Daily, 11/14/63, 251)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper greeted by crowds of thousands in Houston as he returned home for first time since his 22-orbit MA-9 space flight, (upi, AFT’, 5/24/63)
Japan’s Science and Technology Agency announced a five-year space program that included development of Japanese boosters and launching of three satellites. It would be funded at $59,138,888 and employ some 300 Japanese engineers. Programs included a 60-km. weather observation rocket; a 150-km. two-stage weather observation rocket; 400-km. three-stage rockets; 1,200-km. two-stage rockets; navigation satellites, to be ready for launching by NASA in 1967. (M&R, 11/18/63,13)
Definitive contract for research and development of a paraglider system for landing of Project Gemini spacecraft was awarded by MSC to Space and Information Systems Div. of North American Aviation, Inc. The contract set paraglider r&d at $20,015,100, of which $10.8 million had already been spent under a letter contract issued about one year ago. The other landing system being developed for Gemini is by parachute, similar to the one used in Project Mercury. Paraglider would be designed for land landings, parachute, for water landings, although both systems have eventual capability for land and water landings, (msc Release 63—159)
In an address to the Press and Union League Club of San Francisco, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said that the two basic policy questions repeatedly raised concerning the U.S. space program were: (1)	“Is exploration of the moon an objective of sufficient value to our drive for space leadership to warrant a total investment of as much as $20 billion in this decade, and in the next fiscal year at a rate that requires two-thirds of our [nasa] space budget?” (2)	“Is the pace at which we are proceeding and the rate of expenditure which is required to explore the moon by 1970, necessary to insure eventual pre-eminence in space, and reasonable in the light of our other pressing national needs?” In speaking to these questions, Mr. Webb traced the evolution of the U.S. space program and the determination of the national objectives in space after the strategic surprise of sputnik i. He ' discussed the central considerations of world leadership in science and technology, and the role of space exploration and exploitation in national affairs. He reviewed progress to date and the urgent requirement for full public understanding of the meaning and purpose of space exploration. (Text)
nasa $600,000 grant for “research in aerospace physical sciences” at Univ. of Alabama Research Institute, Huntsville, was announced by Univ. president, Dr. Frank A. Rose. (Huntsville Times, 3/5/63)
Addressing Washington, D.C., meeting of American Red Cross, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “Project Apollo offers us our greatest opportunity to overcome the lead in manned space exploration now held by the Soviet Union. It gives us assurance that if an American is not first on the Moon, he certainly will not be far behind. And most important of all, it demonstrates to all the world that we in the United States have the capability and the determination to carry on those things which we have declared seriously that we intend to do.” (Text)
Army Corps of Engineers awarded $1,701,368 contract to C&B Construction Co., Memphis, for' construction of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s components test facility at Huntsville, Ala. (dod Release 1569-63)
A $3.5-million spaceship simulator to train crews for space flight, space intercepts, and orbital rendezvous at afftc, Edwards afb, has been ordered by afsc, the command revealed at the Air Force Association meeting, Washington, D.C. (AFSC Operational Highlights, 13)
In meeting of legal subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Soviet delegate Roland M. Timerbaev declared that it would be “delusion” to report to the Committee that any progress had been made during 28-nation subcommittee’s three-week session. Business before subcommittee had been drafting of legal code covering space exploration activities and considering of proposals concerning liability for space vehicle accidents and return of astronauts and spacecraft after emergency landings in foreign territory. {NYT, 5/3/63,3)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb was showing interest in acquiring usaf Titan III boosters to launch future heavy payloads such as observatory satellites, according to Aviation Week. Webb was said to have discussed with dod’s Dr. Harold Brown the possibility of adding Titan III to the list of standard launch vehicles in the national space program. (Av. Wk., 11/18/63, 25)
syncom n 24-hour communications satellite used to relay oceanographic data from research vessel Geronimo in Gulf of Guinea off Africa to National Oceanographic Data Center in Washington, which compared the data with its records and sent back to the Geronimo the deviations to correct errors. Demonstration via syncom n was performed to determine practica-hilitv of nrovidinc research shins auicklv with information to correct errors. Line of transmission: from Geronimo to Kingsport in Lagos harbor, to syncom n some 22,300 mi. above Atlantic Ocean, to ground station at Lakehurst, N.J., along ground lines to nodc, and return. ( nasa Release 63-212) impetus of war; that, while insuring national security, its central purpose is to secure the peaceful uses of space for all mankind; that nasa is a civilian agency; and that it necessarily will require many years of sustained and costly effort. We have in fact set ourselves a hard challenge of national purpose and will: to sustain such a program through all of the troubles and difficulties that are inevitable in a research and development effort, an effort whose failures as well as. its successes are set before the world to see. This is a difficult undertaking; but if we succeed in these ways, then we will have accomplished much and learned more as a free society . . . .” In interview following his address, Webb commented on that day’s proposal by Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko for summit meeting of leaders of the 18 nations participating in Geneva disarmament conference. Webb said Gromyko’s U.N. speech was the most recent example of growing awareness of U.S. advances in space technology. “. . . The image of America as a can-do nation in space has been increasing rapidly, and the Russians cannot fail to be influenced by that image.” (Text; St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 9/20/63)
In its first few days of operation, explorer xvii satellite had obtained data that more than tripled all previous direct measurements of the neutral gases in earth’s upper atmosphere, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced. Satellite was traveling. in elliptical orbit (578-mi. apogee, 153-mi. perigee, 96.4-min. period) and was transmitting data of excellent quality and quantity. It had been commanded more than 75 times, and each time it responded with approximately four min. of data on density, pressure, composition, and temperature of upper atmosphere gases. New communications system, utilizing special data readout station at gsfc, was providing scientific and technical data from the satellite within minutes of its transmission, (gsfc Release)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, announced appointment of Robert B. Young as msfc Director of Projects and Industry Operations. Presently Vice President and General Manager of Aerojet General Corp.’s Sacramento Plant, Young would assume his msfc position Nov. 1. (nasa Release 63-184)
Spectroscopic studies of Mars indicate Martian atmosphere is too thin (10 millibars pressure) for wing- or parachute-landings by spacecraft, according to Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, Director of Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona. Until recently, pressure on Mars was generally considered to be 85 millibars, based largely on observations by Dr. Audouin Dollfus of the Paris Observatory. Earlier this year, Dr. Kuiper had estimated surface pressure to be 17 millibars, but more precise analysis led him to 10-millibar conclusion, nasa scientists planned further observations for March 1965, when Mars is closest to earth, to gain decisive evidence. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/26/63,1)
Opening of Technical University of Berlin’s Institute for Elements of Space Travel was attended by Prof. Eugen Saenger, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Prof. Hermann Oberth, and other dignitaries of West Berlin and Univ. of Berlin. Prof. Saenger, former head of Research Institute for Physics of Jet Propulsion at Stuttgart, has been nominated as director of the new institute. (Bild [Hamburg], 1/8/63, in msfc SIN, 3/63, 5)
Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Maine) read letter from Senator Wallace F. Bennett (R.-Utah) in session, of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, the letter quoting three scientists who estimated that, at present pace, 60 per cent of all physical scientists would be working as nasa employees. Senator Bennett called on Republican members of Committee to see what steps were necessary to “prevent this concentration of scientific brains /"1„„--------A „A Al___________ ha uuvciiiniciit at uic ca^choc - -TA + A /lAV»r»A1*of.1ATtO L V Cl. tc Wli/OlUClVllO i n rl (NYT, 4/25/63) In aiaa speech at Dallas on “Space Policy and Space Management,” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc. reviewed the national objectives in space: “First of all, there is an over-all policy objective, which the President has expressed as the determination of this country ‘to become the world’s leading space-faring nation.’ It is worth mentioning that this is a broad umbrella. . . . Suffice to say that the space program is not a one-project design nor a short-run episode. It is a growing, expanding, multi-project program, which I predict will become an increasingly significant part of our way of life. As important as it is, the moon project is not the whole space program; it is just one portion and one phase of an over-all program which has breadth through variety and depth far into the future. “A few features of this broad space policy are: “1. Its objectives are peaceful . . . the distinction as to what is peaceful and what is not peaceful is a matter of intent and is not determined by what agency of the government engages in them .... “2. Our policy asserts that space travel and space exploration are subject to international law and that such activity should be consistent with the provisions of the United Nations charter. . . . “3. It is our policy to seek increased international cooperation in, and mutually advantageous agreements for, the orderly and open conduct of space and space related activities .... “4. It is also our policy that the concept and performance of our space responsibilities shall be maintained and strengthened as a national program rather than a series of separate and unrelated projects. . . . “5. There are inherent risks in space exploration, particularly in manned flight, and they must be recognized .... “6. While we must continue to improve on state-of-the-art competences, it is essential that we strive just as hard to make so-called quantum jumps in technology and performance .... “7. It is a significant element of policy that progress be the joint product of government and private enterprise. . . . “In conclusion, the national space program is an essential and dynamic feature of our economy. It benefits the many rather than the few. It strengthens the nation, both at home and abroad. It looks forward rather than backward. It highlights the contributions of the most able technologists and the most able managers and gives them an unprecedented peacetime opportunity to repay more fully the special bonus they have received by living in this great country. “We can afford the space program. We must afford it. We can be satisfied with nothing less than first place—to the moon, to the planets, and throughout the solar system.” (Text)
nasa Space Vehicle Review Board met at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, board being composed of 28 members representing Marshall, Manned Spacecraft Center, and Launch Operations Center. (Marshall Star. 1/23/63,3)
Dr. Michael J. Lipschutz, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center astrochemist, reported at American Geophysical Union meeting in Washington that 2,900-1'b. iron meteorite Navititas found in Mexico in 1872 had been on earth for 800,000 years. In addition, meteorite may have traveled through space for 300 million years in asteroid belt before impacting on earth. Age was measured by examination of radioactive age of certain of meteorite’s chemical elements. (Goddard Release)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified before Communications Subcommittee of Senate Commerce Committee that experiences of both telstar i and relax i communications satellites were being “used continuously to review projects such as Syncom .... in an attempt to achieve the 24-hour, synchronous orbit, as well as all of our other satellite projects. “I should like to add, finally, that the experience of Telstar and Relay to date have merely reinforced the opinion which I gave before this committee last year; that considerable research and development have yet to be performed before economic operational systems can be established . . . .” (Testimony)
Brig. Gen. Gerald F. Keeling (usaf) said in address before Fifth Annual usaf—Industry Conservation Conference: “Department of Defense procurement from the aerospace industries for air weapon systems, and research and development, is now running about $20 billion a year .... “The Air Force share . . . totals $10.6 billion a year, which is more than half the dod total .... “With expenditures of this magnitude, both the dod and Air Force have reason to be concerned that conservation, cost reduction, and value engineering be practiced	(Text, afsc Release 36-R—47) Jwne 19-Jitiy 7: First nationwide display of space research innovations with possibilities for industrial applications was held at 1963 Chicago International Trade Fair. Exhibit was sponsored by nasa Office of Technology Utilization and presented by Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (iitri). (nasa Release 63-122) JwrveW: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in speech before Conference on Space Science and Space Law at the University of Oklahoma: “The impact of the space budget ... is greater than its size wnnlH inHipnfo For ovorrmlo q moinr norfinn of if (topg for
President Kennedy announced that he had appointed Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Chairman of the Chemistry Department at Princeton Univ., to succeed Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner as the President’s science adviser and director of the White House Office of Science and Technology. Dr. Hornig has previously been a member of the President’s Science Advisory Committee. The President also announced that Robert H. Charles, a special assistant to the nasa Administrator, would succeed Joseph S. Imirie as Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Materiel. (Wash. Post, 11/8/63)
347-acre Government site in Newport News, Va., presented to Commonwealth of Virginia for Virginia Associated Research Center (varc), established by Univ. of Va., vpi, and College of William and Mary, varc would operate the adjacent Space Radiation Effects Laboratory under nasa contract. Speaking at luncheon following site presentation ceremonies, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden discussed role of physicist today: “It seems clear to me that man’s newly won ability to leave the confines of earth and explore the frontiers of space offers a challenging new opportunity for scientists of all disciplines, and for physicists in particular .... “The need ... is for our creative physicists to think of simple devices, or at least small ones, to make the critical physical measurements that will heighten our knowledge of the characteristics of the universe around us. The task is not easy, but the challenge is great, and the opportunities for new findings are, it seems to me, almost unlimited .... “Today space exploration is the great motivating development that can serve to promote the over-all growth of science and enhance its role in the national life .... (Text)
D-558-II Skyrocket dedicated in ceremony at Antelope Valley College, Lancaster, Calif., where it would be on permanent display. Designed and built by Douglas Aircraft Co. with cooperation of usn and naca, research aircraft was first to fly twice speed of sound (mach 2.01, on Nov. 20, 1953). Antelope’s Skyrocket was third model; first two were on display at Smithsonian Institution and Claremont, Calif., Air Museum, respectively. (Dedication Program)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) spoke on the House floor of the series of meetings with leading scientists that had been conducted by the Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development of the House Subcommittee on Science and Astronautics. “I cannot overemphasize the work of the Daddario Subcommittee in the effect it will have on the future progress of the United States, progress not only in science but also in the proper relationship of science and technology to our entire society. The members of the subcommittee are assuming a very weighty responsibility because, I believe, results of the subcommittee work will set the framework for science and technology in relation to the overall resources that we have to guide ourselves in the difficult years that lie ahead of us.” (CR, 11/7/63,20332)
Based on net value of awards, nasa Marshall Space Flight Center awarded almost one third of nasa’s FY 1963 contracts to industry ($949.8 million). Second highest was Manned Spacecraft Center ($737.2 million), followed by Western Operations Office ($412.3 million) and Goddard Space Flight Center ($303.5 million). (M&R, 1/20/64, 9)
nasa announced Langley Research Center had requested industry proposals for studying manned obital research laboratory systems capable of sustaining a four-man crew in space for one year, (nasa Release 63-81; Langley Release)
Biweekly Satellite Situation Report, by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, initiated practice of reporting only those objects launched by nasa, with no coverage in future of launchings by dod agencies or U.S.S.R. (Sat. Sit. Rpt., 1/16/63)
Aerobee sounding rocket launched 248-lb. instrumented payload to 123-mi. altitude in experiment to map night sky sources which emit photons (radiant energy) in specific wavelength interval. Impact occurred 62-mi. downrange from launch site at Wallops Station. Flight was joint project of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center and Lockheed Missile and Space Co. (Wallops Release 63-28)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Scientific Advisory to the President, testified before Monopoly Subcommittee of Senate Small Business Committee on the need for flexibility in Government patent policy. “The Department of Defense feels strongly among other things that the performance of its mission requires the ability to assure the contractor at the time of contracting that he will retain commercial rights to his ideas, in order to assure the unrestrained participation by the most competent elements of American industry in the defense programs .... The central question ... is whether the terms of the contract will encourage tbe contractor to apply his full teclmical background and experience to the Government. These considerations also apply to contracts of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The national interest requires greater uniformity between dod and nasa patent practices since they are drawing on the services of the same sector of industrial research and development competence. “. . .1 feel that a reasonable basis for framing a government-wide patent policy can be found. It seems important for the Government to move in the direction of a more consistent policy that will eliminate the unhealthy confusion and instabilities that attend the present situation. Such a policy should provide for the Government to retain title in the range of circumstances that I listed earlier; but it is necessary to recognize that, because of the problems of the type that concern the Department of Defense and nasa, any policy, to be realistic, should enable industry to retain exclusive rights in certain circumstances .... The nature of the work involved, the commercial background of the contractor, and the extent to which the contractor would be expected to work the invention in the public interest would be significant factors in permitting contractors to retain exclusive commercial rights . . . .” (CR, 3/21/63, 4378)
Appointment of Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II as consultant to Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. President of the Lovelace Foundation for Medical Education and Research, Dr. Lovelace would be consultant on medical aspects of current manned space programs. (nasa Release 63-274)
Richard N. Thomas, professor of astrophysics and chairman of Faculty Committee for Astrophysics of Dept, of Physics and Astrophysics, Univ. of Colorado, was awarded Dept, of Commerce Gold Medal for Exceptional Service. (Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering, 5/63,9) During March, April, and May: Total of 227 nasa appearances at 70 hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, involving 246 hours. This involved 546 man-hours of primary witnesses, not including backup witnesses, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/88) Jv/ne 1: Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., returned to U.S. after vacationing in Japan with his family since shortly after MA-9 manned space flight, during which he had been stationed aboard Pacific tracking ship Coastal Sentry. Glenn’s candidness and openness during visit was said to have “boosted U.S. image” in Japan. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/2/63)
According to results of survey by National Industrial Conference Board, about two per cent of U.S. working population and nearly one third of its scientists and engineers are engaged in research and development. Survey also showed total rad spending, including both private industry and Government, is more than $17 billion per year. In 1960, more than one half of overall financing came from Federal government. Defense, atomic energy, and space projects accounted for 57% of all resources devoted to rad in 1960. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/19/63)
Three ruby-colored spots appeared on the surface of the moon on the night of Oct. 29, 1963, and might have been volcanic eruptions, Dr. John Hall, Director of Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz., announced. Hall said that James Greenacre found the spots while studying the moon through a 24-in. refracting telescope. The spots stood out against the yellow-white surface of the moon. Greenacre said that in three years of studying the moon’s surface he had never seen spots similar to these, although a Russian astronomer had reported sighting a similar phenomenon in Nov. 1958 or 1959. (upi, Ban Diego Union, 11/1/63; Christian Science Monitor, 11/2/63)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, speaking before the Atomic Industrial Forum Conference in New York, said that nuclear energy was essential to the space program and offered larger potential in space applications than in terrestrial ones. “One of the major defects in space thinking today is that it is too ‘short-run’. There is a tendency to think only from budget to budget rather than from decade to decade. It has taken great effort—not altogether successful—to get people to think as long-run as a manned flight to the Tnr»on In terms nf what, sna.ee travel and snare exnloration #	~	'	T *	^	# ' '	''"	‘	1.	1. mean to this country, the lunar objective is really a short-run target. Yet, some people think of it as the final space goal which is so far in the future that it can be further delayed without serious effects. If we are to think clearly about space, it is important that we recognize the lunar program for what it is, i.e., only one of the initial steps in a very young program. I believe that those who understand and support nuclear energy in space have a responsibility to educate others in the long-run, broad-based view of space. ... I am suggesting that, if we can get people to realize now that space travel and space exploration are permanent features of the economy, the idea of nuclear energy will automatically be considered a major element in the program.” (Text)
nasa launched two-stage Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with 185-lb. payload of U.S.-Japanese instrumentation to measure electron density and temperature in the ionosphere. Payload was lofted to 139-mi. altitude and no recovery operation was involved. Purpose of experiment was to compare simultaneous measurements made by two different methods: instruments supplied by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center and radio-frequency resonance probe developed by Japan’s Radio Research Laboratory. (Wallops Release 63-85; nasa Release 63-211)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, testified on the nasa-dod Gemini Program Planning Board before Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics. “The nasa-dod Agreement on Gemini was put into effect by Secretary McNamara and Administrator Webb on January 21, 1963. This agreement represents another important example of the manner in which both the Department of Defense and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration are striving to maximize the technological productivity of national space flight programs such as the Gemini. I think it is significant that in announcing the agreement, Mr. McNamara and Mr. Webb emphasized the national character and importance of the Gemini project and reiterated their intentions to insure that Gemini is utilized in the national interest and to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort in this area as in all others .... “I think it is important to point out here that increased dod participation in the Gemini does not alter the peaceful and experimental character of the program. We are driving forward to advance the technology of manned space flight, including rendezvous and designated docking and to study and understand man’s effectiveness under prolonged conditions of weightlessness. In carrying out this program, nasa continues to be solely responsible for the management of the Gemini project. . . .” (Testimony)
Industry proposals to define advanced nuclear space propulsion systems for 1970’s were submitted to nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The mission-oriented studies would analyze post-Nerva developmental engine systems for maximum operational use and flexibility in U.S. space program. {Av. Wk., 3/18/63, 53)
Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D.-Ark.), Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, stated on the Senate floor that he favored space exploration but considered the present large space budgets “an unwarranted diversion of resources from the Nation’s most pressing needs.” He favored President Kennedy’s proposal for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar exploration for two reasons: “First, it would greatly reduce the costs of space exploration, releasing funds for important domestic programs, such as education, employment, urban renewal, and conservation of resources; second, it would further reduce world tensions by opening up a significant new area of Soviet-American cooperation.” (CR. 10/2/63, 17598)
nasa announced three personnel appointments to Headquarters: Earl D. Hilbum, Vice President and General Manager of Curtiss-Wright Corp. Electronics Div., as Deputy Associate Administrator (for non-manned space flight centers); Robert F. Garbarini, Chief Engineer of Sperry Gyroscope Co. Air Armament Div., as Director of nasa Office of Applications; and Robert W. Long, President of Long Construction Co., as consultant on construction matters to Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator. ( nasa Release 63-141)
Fifth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, explorer i. Also fifth anniversary of activation of U.S. tracking network to track explorer i: at the time, network included Vanguard’s Minitrack stations located primarily in Western Hemisphere. Since that time, other networks were added to form truly worldwide tracking network and data acquisition system for satellites and space probes launched by U.S.: Minitrack network; Deep Space Instrumentation Facilities; Manned Space Flight Network; Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Baker-Nunn Telescope-Camera Network. Ceremonies at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center featured talks by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Radio transmissions from vanguard i, second U.S. satellite and oldest U.S. satellite still transmitting, were heard during tour of Goddard facilities following formal ceremonies. Highlighting occasion was presentation of scrolls of appreciation to ambassadors of 16 nations that have cooperated with U.S. in establishing the international tracking networks. Field reports indicated that in at least 12 countries related special events and ceremonies were held on the same day as Goddard observances. Countries reporting special activities included Argentina, Australia, Bermuda, Brazil, Ecuador, Great Britain, India, Iran, The Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, and Spain, (nasa Release 63-10; upi, Wash. Post, 1/27/63, A6; State Dept., usia Field Reports—per AI/Robinson) January 31: At ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary of Tracking at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in remarks delivered by nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh: “. . . I would like to quote briefly from the report drafted by the Senate Committee [on Aeronautics and Space Sciences] before the passage of the [National Aeronautics and Space] Act: “. . .‘Space neither invites nor necessitates any re-definition of American goals and aims. Throughout our history, it has been the goal of peace and liberty that has led Americans to explore the dimensions of challenging frontiers. Our goal now remains unchanged.’ “I have chosen this paragraph to quote because it is basic to our national philosophy. In space activitieSj the lines of demarcation that so often separate nations in their purposes would seem to be petty. Interchange and cooperation in the exploration of a realm as vast as the solar system—indeed, the universe—should lead to better understanding among nations . . . .” (Text)
nasa Director of Aeronautical Research Programs Charles H. Zimmerman resigned to accept position with Army Material Command’s research and development directorate. Since June 1962, Zimmerman directed nasa’s aeronautical research programs including X-15, V/Stol research, and supersonic transport study. (Av. Wk.. 9/2/63,24)
Aerobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 195-lb. instrumented payload to 125-mi. altitude in 7V2-min. flight. Conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, experiment was designed to measure electron densities in ionosphere by several methods and to yield information necessary to further development of direct measurement techniques. (Wallops Release 63-42)
X-15 No. 3 flown by Joseph A. Walker (nasa) to maximum speed of 3,858 mph (mach 5.52) and maximum altitude of 92,000 ft. in flight test near nasa Flight Research Center to investigate heat rates at relatively high speeds and low angles of attack. As secondary mission, pilot performed several maneuvers to check control methods while X-15’s automatic damping system was turned off. (nasa Release 63-119)
President Johnson signed the Executive Order establishing the John F. Kennedy Space Center: “whereas President John F. Kennedy lighted the imagination of our people when he set the moon as our target and man as the means to reach it; and “whereas the installations now to be renamed are a center and a symbol of our country’s peaceful assault on space; and “whereas it is in the nature of this assault that it should test the limits of our youth and grace, our strength and wit, our vigor and perseverance—qualities fitting to the memory of John F. Kennedy: “now, therefore, by virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, I hereby designate the facilities of the Launch Operations Center of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the facilities of Station No. 1 of the Atlantic Missile Range, in the State of Florida, as the John F. Kennedy Space Center; and such facilities shall be hereafter known and referred to by that name.” (Marshall Star, 12/11/63, „ 2)
nasa announced that Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director (Systems) , Office of Manned Space Flight in nasa Hq., had been named Program Manager, Apollo Spacecraft, at msc. He would be responsible for the development of the Apollo command and service modules and for the lunar excursion module (lem). George Low, Deputy Director (Programs) in the Office of Manned Space Flight, would assume the added responsibility for the Systems organization, (nasa Release 63-226; msc Release 63-163)
Five men entered Boeing Co. space chamber, simulating quarters in manned space station or manned lunar base, for 30-day engineering test of integrated life-support system. Designed and built for nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, system included all elements of life support necessary for 150 man-day space mission. Associated with life-support equipment were specific crew tests simulating problems of space flight. Members of test crew: R. H. Lowry, Boeing Chief of Bioastronautics; Maj. Edward Westlake (usaf) of Air Force Systems Cmd.; Roger Barnicki, nasa Flight Research Center X-15 personnel equipment specialist; Charles Proctor, Boeing biochemist and food specialist; and Richard Farrell, Boeing psychologist. ( nasa Release 63-155)
John C. Sanders, chief of Dynamics and Controls Branch, nasa Lewis Research Center, obtained patent for and made preliminary design of interplanetary rocket using solar rays as energy source. Rocket uses 200-ft.-wide aluminized mylar mirror to gather solar rays. (Marshall Star, 1/9/63,3)
Scientists and engineers from major nasa centers convened at Lewis Research Center to discuss future manned planetary missions, (lrc Release 63-30, Lewis Chronology, 4)
At banquet of “Lectures in Aerospace Medicine,” School of Aerospace Medicine, San Antonio, Southwest Research Institute president Martin Goland said: “Our age is one of quickening technology, of economic opportunity accompanied by sharpened domestic and international competition, of changing social patterns and political structures. In the kaleidoscope of this environment, a major source of strength will be on the side of the nation which is creative and productive; the nation whose people are capable of exploiting for sound purposes the seemingly inexhaustible potential of science and technology. “Within this framework, it seems clear that we must view our space program as more than an assembly of scientific goals and technical objectives. So considerable is our intellectual and material investment in space that we cannot judiciously ignore its by-products, the opportunity to transfer knowledge and capabilities from space technology to other portions of our national effort. Each one of us must act as a catalyst in this diffusion of ideas . . . .” (Text)
Dr. Simon Ramo, Vice Chairman of Board of Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc., said in Air Force and Space Digest article: “The landing of men on the moon needs to be understood by the American people merely as a specific framework on which is built a broad research program to explore many areas of science. Space is new and special; it is only now that we have the ability to enter a region of the universe previously denied to us, except for viewing from a distance through the insulation of our atmosphere. Nevertheless, without a definite task, a broad space pro-741-623 O—64------22 gram of this size would be very inefficient, would wander and become redundant, unwieldy, and confused. We need to agree that what counts most is advancing science on a broad front .... “. . . the addition of a human passenger and observer to a total space effort is a necessary ingredient. An ideally laid-out program . . . requires emphasizing broad research aims in all of the sciences .... How can we justify a large national space-research program whose true objective is scientific discovery across all the spectrum of science if we are going to leave out the life sciences .... “It is essential then that the public should understand that the program they are buying is not just a man-on-the-moon program. Like an iceberg, the greater part of the program will be unseen. Space exploration will be lengthy and continuing, requiring patient backing as a long-term venture . . . .” {AF & Space Digest, 8/63, 49f) During August: Peak power output of 50w from pulsed gas laser demonstrated by Orlando Div. of Martin-Marietta Corp. At higher power levels the company predicted application of the laser in optical radar system. {Av. Wk., 8/19/63, 34)
nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight D. Brainerd Holmes, addressing Tenth Annual Conference for Engineers and Architects, Ohio State Univ., said: “The nation has a pool of about 1,400,000 scientists and engineers, which is expected to grow to 1,900,000 by 1970. At present, between 250,000 and 300,000 of these are employed in the aerospace industry, nasa employs more than 9,200 of these on its own staff and, through contract, accounts for the employment of about 32,800 others. Thus the space program occupies something over 3% of the national pool of scientists and engineers. We expect that this proportion will rise gradually, to a little more than 6% in 1968. “There is no evidence that this growth of the manpower requirements for space is interfering with consumer research and development. Nevertheless, as a consumer of scientific and technical manpower, we feel a responsibility to do our part to maintain and increase the supply. “Because of this responsibility, nasa is . . . providing about 35 million dollars to universities for research projects, and 10 million dollars have been granted for university facilities. Under the graduate training grant program, 88 universities have funds for 796 fellowships. It is expected that this number will increase . . . .” (Text)
Radio and optical astronomers of the Mount Wilson and Palomar observatories announced the discovery of what probably are the brightest objects in the universe observed so far. Their brilliance, they believe, may make it possible to penetrate two to three times deeper into space than was considered possible with present-day telescopes. Five of these super-bright celestial bodies have so far been recognized. Radio astronomers detected them by their radiations of energy in the longer wavelengths, at radio frequencies. They were identified in the third Cambridge (England) Catalogue of Radio Sources as 3C—48,3C-196,3C—286, 3C-147, and 3C-273. The objects are so bright that they had been thought to be nearby stars in our own Milky Way Galaxy, but there is now growing evidence that they are very distant galaxies involved in titanic explosions. The study of such distant objects is vital to cosmologists in determining the kind of universe we live in—whether it will continue expanding, stop expanding, or will eventually contract. {NYT, Western Edition, 3/26/63, Wm. L. Laurence) During March: nasa scientists discovered a new “hot spot in the sky” over Wallops Island, Va., where in winter the temperatures 34 to 60 mi. above the earth reach more than 75° F and winds blow at speeds approaching 400 mph. Currently there is no existing scientific theorv to account for the super-high-altitude, jet-streamlike wind and hot air that seems to blow over Washington, Baltimore, and Annapolis during the winter. Details of the discovery were distributed this month in a nasa technical note entitled “Preliminary Measurements of Temperatures and Winds Above 50 KM (31 mi.) over Wallops Island.” Authors of the pamphlet are Dr. William Nordberg and Wendell Smith, of the Goddard Space Flight Center. (Balt. Sun, 3/31/63)
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite June 28 from nasa Wallops Station, using Scout booster. Goddard Space Flight Center Satellite Situation Report listed the satellite as “research satellite for geophysics.” (AP, Wash. Post, 7/7/63; gsfc Sat. Sit. Rpt., 6/30/63)
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, said in address to American Ordnance Association, Washington: “The Department of Defense has not fully defined the role man should play in its space activities. However, under an agreement between Secretary McNamara and Mr. Webb, reached in January 1963, nasa will manage the Gemini program to assure the fulfillment of both dod and nasa requirements, and the dod will contribute funding, in an amount to be determined later .... “Although manned flight is more expensive than unmanned flight in the development phase, the increased reliability of a manned vehicle will ultimately enable us to carry out complex tasks in space more effectively and, very possibly, at less expense than with automatic equipment. “Thirteen years ago, the late William Faulkner made a comment that may apply to the present discussion:
nasa announced its first contract to study overall systems requirements for Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (sms) had been awarded to Republic Aviation Corp. Administered by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, contract called for four-month study to determine “technical systems needed for 24-hour surveillance of the earth’s cloud cover and to identify the major scientific and engineering advances required for the ground stations.” (nasa Release 63-18)
Project Mercury officially ended. Initiated in autumn of 1958, Mercury had achieved its goal of placing manned spacecraft, in orbital flight around earth, investigating man’s survival ability and performance capabilities in space, and recovering man and spacecraft. Mercury-Redstone suborbital flights paved the way toward ultimate goal, with Astronaut Alan B. Shepard becoming first U.S. man in space in freedom 7 (May 5, 1961), followed by Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom in liberty bell 7 (July 21,1961). First U.S. manned orbital space flight was achieved with Mercury-Atlas MA-6 flight, Astronaut John H. Glenn in friendship 7 (Feb. 20, 1962). This three-orbit space flight was followed by: MA-7, three-orbit flight of Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter in aurora 7 (May 24, 1962); MA-8, six-orbit flight of Astronaut Walter Schirra in sigma 7 (Oct. 3, 1962); and MA-9, 22-orbit space flight of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper in faith 7 (May 15-16, 1963). Project Mercuiy logged 34 orbits of manned space flight with 52 hrs. 23 min. of flight tune. Jwne 12: nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of six-month study contract to Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for establishment of environmental control and life support requirements for manned earth-orbiting space station. Duration of 24-man station would be from one to five years, (msc Release 63-100)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center awarded preliminary, 90-day contract for development of variable-thrust RL-10 rocket engine to Pratt and Whitney Aircraft. The hydrogen-powered engine would be capable of operating at as little as 12.5 per cent of its rated thrust and be capable of restarting in space. Throttleable RL-10 engines had been test-fired in feasibility studies at Pratt and Whitney plant and nasa Lewis Research Center. (Huntsville Times, 1/8/63) communications agency Telespazio in
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, inserted in Congressional Record an art'cle from Missiles and Rockets, which said: “The United States has gained more knowledge of outer space than the Russians because we’ve done a better overall job with our unmanned satellite program. We are using unmanned vehicles to help predict weather around the world, to improve navigation, to make possible international television and other communications, and to keep track of what the enemy is doing to establish missiles and other weapon systems aimed at us. “Not only have we learned more about the planet Mars through unmanned space research, but we’ve gained much knowledge of the vast reaches of space in between and beyond .... We’ve pursued unmanned space research down far more streets and alleys than have the Soviets. “For the most part, our unmanned satellites are yielding knowledge that will assure success with manned flights into space in the future. For that reason, if no other, it is easy for the unmanned satellite program to be overlooked, its significance lost in the international competition of manned flights. This is a pity, for what we do in unmanned space exploration today is the very foundation on which we will build future manned space exploration. “In saying this we are not being partisan to the claim so often heard these days that we ought to forget about the manned program and explore space only with unmanned vehicles. We regard the controversy as a mere tempest in a teapot that will prove meaningless in time . . . .” (CR, 8/20/63)
The ships Rose Knot and Coastal Sentry, two mainstays of the world-wide Mercury tracking network operated by Goddard Space Flight Center, have undergone modifications for the MA-9 mission and are ready for sea duty again. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64, 2)
nasa launched 85-lb. scientific payload to 208-mi. altitude at exact moment explorer xvii atmospheric structure satellite passed over the Wallops Island, Va., launch site, an unusual “first” in nasa sounding rocket program. Launched by Aerobee 300A sounding rocket, experiment obtained temperature data on electron and neutral particles and measured ion and neutral particle densities. Data from this experiment would be compared with similar data obtained from explorer xvn as it passed over Wallops Island at 198-mi. altitude during its 236th orbit of earth. Miss distance was 35,000 yards. Preliminary evaluation by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center scientists indicated data were of excellent quality. (Wallops Release 63-40; Av. Wk., 5/6/63, 21)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station in continuing series of upper atmosphere studies, the vehicle carrying payload that ejected and detonated 12 explosive charges at intervals from 22- to 51-mi. altitude. A similar experiment was launched from Ft. Chilrchill, Canada, at about the same time to obtain high altitude wind and temperature data. Both shots were considered successful. Experiments were being conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-22; nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 3/5/63 and 3/11/63)
Walter C. Williams and J. C. Elms assumed duties as deputy directors of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, under M6C Director, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth. Williams, formerly msc Associate Director, became Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and Flight Operations; concurrently he was named Director of Flight Operations in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight. Elms was appointed msc Deputy Director for Development and Programs, with primary management responsibility for spacecraft development. (MSC Roundup, 11/28/62, 1)
Donald L. Mallick and Harold E. Ream, nasa Langley research {illots, reported to ias meeting on research results of simulated unar spacecraft landing, lunar orbit rendezvous, and atmospheric re-entry made in simulated three-man spacecraft. Realistic tests demonstrated ability of research pilots to complete precise maneuvers of flight, despite necessarily cramped quarters and seven-day duration. Lane aerospace scientists Jack E. Pennington and Roy F. Bris-senden reported on experiments to investigate astronauts’ ability to rendezvous in space by visual means. Pennington and Bris-senden concluded that pilot could sight target vehicle from perhaps as much as 200 mi. away if it is lighted by sun or bright beacon; he could then successfully brake his own spacecraft along an intersecting path. Dr. Leonard Roberts, LaRc physicist, reported to ias on implications of lunar landing if moon has, as many scientists believe, dust layer on surface. Dr. Roberts concluded that spacecraft descending to moon would erode a crater by action of its rocket exhaust. If dust exists on lunar surface, it would be blown outward and away from descending vehicle; air would not be present to recirculate dust in envelnnimr cloud so astronaut’s visibilitv '	...... ... ... .. IT-----Q -----7	—	----------- should not be reduced by lunar dust. Other Lane scientists presented research reports covering instruments for satellites, supersonic aircraft flutter problems, and wind tunnel experiments on helicopter rotors. (Langley Release)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, spoke at American Nobel Memorial Foundation dinner, New York: “Because of the nasa policy of no exchange of funds, and of insisting on a mutuality of interest in entering into . . . cooperative programs, various national programs grow up with a viability that they might otherwise not have. They are not little nasa programs implanted on foreign soil. They are genuinely national programs, with strong national support, and vigorous national participation. They serve to strengthen the science and technology of the cooperating country in a way that only such direct involvement can. Moreover, in the case of scientific programs, since a universal element of these efforts is an agreement that scientific results will be made generally available to the scientific literature, the entire world community of nations benefits.” (Space Quotes, 9/15/63)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight: “The F-l engine development program has an impressive list of accomplishments. A year after the contract was signed full-scale components were undergoing tests, and in 27 months complete engine systems testing had begun. Full thrust and full duration tests have become routine. The engine has been gimbaled during hot firing. We expect successful completion of the Preliminary Flight Rating Tests this year .... “When design of the F-l was begun in 1959, combustion instability was known to be a potential problem. Accordingly, early in the program tests of various injectors for the thrust chamber were conducted, and a design was selected which had not experienced unstable combustion. For about a year, from mid-1961 to mid-1962, engine tests were conducted without this phenomenon occurring. Then, on June 28 last year we were testing development engine #008 on the test stands in California. A test run which was scheduled for the full 2y2 minutes running time was interrupted after 106 seconds of satisfactory performance by a rupture of a valve casting. The rupture was traced to combustion instability. Since this occurrence, several cases of combustion instability have taken place. “This phenomenon is not unique to the F-l, but has occurred in the development of most liquid rocket engines .... “We are presently concentrating on combustion instability and are making progress. With the contractor at Rocketdyne, we have made an exhaustive survey of all test data having a bearing on the problem .... “To summarize, the F-l engine development over the last four years has made satisfactory progress . . . .” (Testimony) March 18: Frederick R. Kappel, at&t board chairman, said in speech before New York Chamber of Commerce that telstar ii communications satellite would be equipped with instruments “far more resistant to radiation” than telstar i. Like its predecessor, telstar n would be launched by nasa at at&t expense. (NYT [West. Ed.], 3/19/63)
Japan launched Lambda-2 sounding rocket with instrumented payload to 376-mi. altitude in experiment designed to gather data on the upper atmosphere for iqsy. Rocket was built by Tokyo Univ. Industrial Engineering Research Center and fired from Kagoshima Space Center in southern Japan. {M&R, 12/23/63, 10; Space Bus. Daily, 12/19/63,428)
Request for proposals to provide services and materials necessary for operating and maintaining X-15 “High Range” issued by nasa Flight Research Center. Range consisted of terminal station at Edwards afb and two up-range stations at Beatty and Ely, Nev. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/22/63,280)
Eric Sevareid, in Washington Evening Star column titled “If Columbus Had Never Sailed,” discussed the debate on landing men on the moon: “It was two years ago this week end that President Kennedy sent his special message to the Congress in which he said that he himself believed we ‘should go to the moon.’ It has taken two years to develop the beginnings of a national debate on the question, among Congressmen, scientists and editorialists. “I say the beginnings of a debate because, on its public plane at least, the argument has not yet come into its true focus. The true question is not whether we should try to land men on the moon—the nature of this political world as well as the nature of men’s curiosity and the unquenchable spirit of science make it inevitable that we try—but how we go about it ... . “This is only the beginning. Anyone has only to let out his imagination a short notch to see the ultimate possibilities—to see humanity’s push into space transforming this society, dominating its intellectual pursuits, absorbing its resources, altering the training of its youth and its moral and religious concepts, upsetting the priorities for the its social and humanitarian efforts on terra firm a. “Those who scold the worriers say that to cancel the moon voyage would be as if Ferdinand and Isabella had cancelled Columbus’ voyage which opened the New World. They are more often right than they know. What is at stake are not only the new marvels to be found, but also the profound transfiguration of the source of the search. 741-623 o—64--15 “After the voyage of Columbus the Old World was never the same, in political, economic, military, social, religious or intellectual terms. After the first men walk upon the moon, Old Earth will never be the same and the change will begin in the two societies, Russia and America, now competmg for the cataclysmic honor of commencing the alteration.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/28/63, A13) May US: Stanford Research Institute report, prepared under Aerospace Industries Association grant, criticized “industry-Government aerospace relationship” as inefficient, full of overregulation and ineffective administration by Government and “over-management” by industry. Report said its findings were of national significance because aerospace industry’s output represents three per cent of gross national product and even greater share of manufacturing volume and employment. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/29/63, A4)
Adm. Sergei Gorshkov, Commander-in-Chief of Soviet Navy, wrote in Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) that US.S.R. had successfully fired missiles from underwater submarines during training exercises last year. He said “radical re-equipment” had provided Soviet navy with submarines and surface vessels armed with missiles capable of striking anywhere in the world. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/6/63, A15)	_ February 5:	System to determine composition of moon’s crust by explosions on lunar surface was described by Francis E. Lehner, senior project engineer on lunar seismology, Cal Tech. Under development for nasa by Lehner and Dr. Robert L. Kovach, geophysicist at jpl, system was designed to be sent to moon in “unmanned instrument package weighing about 50 pounds .... “We propose to obtain subsurface information about the moon by touching off a series of small explosive charges and then with one or more geophones placed at some distance from the explosives detect the resulting waves that have penetrated into the crust and have been refracted again to the surface. “A geophone converts a mechanical wave into an electrical one that may be amplified and recorded. Different kinds of rock formation, and cracks and layers of material will affect the wave patterns, which can be amplified and radioed back to earth.” (ctps, Chicago Trib., 2/6/63) February 5-6:	First intra-agency technical conference on optical communications and tracking held at gsfc with representatives of nasa’s field centers and installations attending. Purpose of the conference was to provide for an exchange of technical information on laser optical and tracking programs at each of the centers. (Goddard News, 2/25/63,2) February 6:	nasa announced it would use TV to monitor Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper during his Project Mercury space flight MA-9. Slow-soan television monitoring equipment had been installed at Cape Canaveral and aboard tracking ship to be stationed in South Pacific; third monitor might be established in Canary Islands. Television pictures received at Cape Canaveral could later be fed into U.S. networks, it was reported, (upi, Wash. Post, 2/7/63, A4)	_	_
In wake of rumors that nasa was planning three-day manned space flight for August, nasa affirmed its announced plan to end Project Mercury with MA-9 flight in April unless unforeseen problems arise in that flight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/30/63)
nasa Director of Electronics and Control Dr. Albert J. Kelley made public two- studies conducted by nasa on need for electronics research center and letters from nasa Administrator James E. Webb to Rep. George P. Miller and Sen. Clinton P. Anderson. Letters and studies pointed out that electronics difficulties comprised greatest single cause of failures in spacecraft and rockets during past five years, nasa had no highly developed skill in design of electronic components, and new center was expected to fill that need. (Loory, N.Y. Herald Trib., 7/14/63)
Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, said in address before faculty and student body of Vanderbilt Univ., Nashville, that for the U.S. space program, “1962 was an active and successful year .... iiiv mull 1 mV ana Varied acco*npiiSmiicn.iS Oi A »oiuu like to stress three that have very far-reaching significance. “First, we demonstrated beyond any shadow of doubt that the United States has the capability for manned travel and manned exploration of the solar system .... “Second, ... we completed the difficult round of decisions on how to get to the moon .... “Third, in the past year we more clearly defined the long-range goals of our space program .... Our long-range goals [are] to make America the leading spacefaring nation and to achieve pre-eminence in all major aspects of space science and space exploration . . . .” (Text)
Saturn I ground test booster arrived at Cape Canaveral after 10-day trip from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. It would be used with S-IV stage in series of tests to check out the launch complex. (Huntsville Times, 4/16/63)
Dr. Nicholas E. Golovin of the President’s Office of Science and Technology told National Space Club in Washington that low reliability of Scout booster (50%) was because of difficulties in four-stage booster teclmology. A basic difficulty to be overcome in future space systems, he said, was development of long-lifetime components and subsystems. Today’s missile system technology requires operational lifetime of less than a half hour; but Apollo would require 400 times that long and Mars fly-by mission, up to 20,000 times that long. The other basic problem for future space systems, he said, was achieving greater reliability with less flight testing. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/18/63, 417)
Aerobee 150A launched from nasa Wallops Station carried instrumented payload to approximately 102-mi. altitude in experiment to study behavior of liquid hydrogen in conditions of radiant heating and zero gravity. Radiant heat measurements were as predicted, and there were 4 min. of zero-g time. Experiment was conducted for nasa Lewis Research Center, responsible for nasa development of liquid-hydrogen-propelled rocket enE'nes. (Wallops Release 63-83; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. lunching)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of nasa Lewis Research Center, told Chicago press conference that trouble in Centaur launch vehicle had been corrected. Centaur was proceeding at Lewis under highest national priority (DX) and would be developed on schedule to launch Surveyor lunar spacecraft and Mariner interplanetary spacecraft in 1965. Dr. Silverstein pointed out new testing philosophy for Centaur called for more extensive and qualitative ground test before flights. (Chicago Sun-Times, 1/10/63; Chicago Daily News, 1/10/63)
Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman, Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, speaking on the Senate floor stated: “The decision to try to land a man on the moon by 1970 does not constitute a crash program .... Failure to decide on a schedule for attempting to reach the moon is equivalent to setting no deadline at all. Work is done best—even by the technical community—which is not exempt from the laws of human nature—when a specific goal is set. An objective of landing on the moon in the 1960’s . . . permits us to work at a challenging pace; yet, does not absorb a greater percentage of the nation’s resources than our country can afford. This is only one percent of the gross national product at current rate .... “Project Apollo does not fit the description of a crash program.- The wartime Manhattan project was a crash program. We used all the resources we could to develop the atomic bomb in the shortest period of time, regardless of cost. We maintained duplicating operations over a 3-year period in the hope that one would work—and one did, in time to help win a war. Apollo is no such project. If it were, we would not have had the controversy over whether earth-orbiting rendezvous, lunar-orbiting rendezvous, or a direct landing was the best way to get a man to the moon. A crash project would have gone into operational stages of all three alternatives to a moon landing .... “The shortage of scientific manpower has not been aggravated in a measurable way by Apollo. Those critics who fear that it has, have not established their case. For example, in 1970, it is predicted that U.S. scientists and engineers will total 1,995,000, of which only 114,700 or less than 6 percent, will work for nasa and its contractors. It should be noted that a substantial portion of those are merely moving over from research and development work on aeronautics and missiles . . . nasa is enlarging its efforts to increase the national supply of scientific and engineering personnel. Last fiscal year, the agency provided graduate science and engineering fellowships to 100 students at 10 universities. In its budget proposal for fiscal 1964, nasa requests authorization for 1,250 fellowships covering 110 universities. “Additionally, the agency has provided funds for 150,000 square feet of research space at five universities; it is asking for funds to provide 400,000 square feet of laboratory space at 11 universi ties.” {OR, 5/23/63,8961-66)
Missiles and Rockets article on nasa’s advanced research program said: “The greatest single obstacle to development of new and improved rocket engines—large or small—lies in certain peculiar sounds emitted by powerplants in operation. “Commonly called screech, screaming, squealing or buzzing, the sounds are all manifestations of combustion instability—one of least understood characteristics of a rocket engine. “The key to the lack of knowledge and understanding of the phenomenon is in the very complexity of the combustion process within the engine.” (M&R, 11/25/63, 63)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded 1963 American Citizenship Award at 11th annual German-American Day festival, North Bergen, N.J. {MarshallStar, 5/29/63,7)
Addison M. Rothrock, Director of nasa Policy Planning Div., addressing Mid-Winter Conference on Science Teaching at Jekyll Island, Ga., discussed “the need for close relation between our studies in science and technology and our studies in the humanities”: “In space we are presented with the foremost challenge in science and technology that man has known. As a nation we face other challenges, challenges presented to us in the humanities— challenges calling for a mass assemblage of knowledge and intellect equal to that supplied by the 40,000 engineers and scientists that will by next year be working on our project to land men on the moon. And we have here a problem to which we have not found the answer: how to mount a mass attack by men with the kind of training acquired in the physical sciences to work on these problems in the humanities in which detailed, repeatable, and controlled experiments cannot be made. This, I think, is a great need, if not the greatest need of our time. If the space program shows us how to assemble—and use well—efforts of this magnitude and shows us the betterment for man that can result from doing it well, we will truly have made a great and lasting contribution to our nation and to our civilization. “. . . we as a nation must understand more of science and its implications .... “And though all children will not and should not attempt science as a calling, I think there should be an attempt as far as feasible to teach all children what science means and to teach them the importance of experimentation as a means of increasing our knowledge and understanding And for those who do not major in science this need to experiment—to learn from experience—should be heavily emphasized .... “So please educate our youth well, teach them of the power that comes with knowledge of our universe and the people who inhabit it. Teach them sciences so that they can achieve triumphs in technology. Teach them the humanities so that they will use these triumphs for man’s ^betterment. And above all help our children to grow in tolerance, help them to develop their wisdom, help them achieve self discipline. And ‘Holding fast to basic concepts while discarding outmoded practices,-----let us work together, make every effort and meet every challenge to build this nation’s most fundamental resource: the human mind.’ ” (Text)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator testifying on nasa’s international programs before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said that the “first substantial fruits of these programs were realized in 1962 and further significant programs were laid down for future years. During 1962, “—the first two international satellites, Ariel and Alouette, were successfully placed in orbit, “—launchings of sounding rockets bearing scientific payloads were carried out in cooperation with eight countries, “—37 countries engaged in special projects in support of our weather and communications satellite programs, “—foreign participation continued to grow in the operation of our global tracking and data acquisition network overseas, “—and, a new nasa international fellowship program was successfully established in our own universities.” Discussing studies of follow-on projects to manned lunar landing, Dr. Dryden listed as “obvious candidates . . . establishment of a station on the moon permitting prolonged occupancy, a manned laboratory orbiting the earth as a satellite, and manned reconnaissance of the planets .... “It seems to us that an orbiting laboratory is a necessary preliminary to manned planetary expeditions .... “Obviously the capsules presently in the program do not have sufficient space available for experimentation and have only a limited lifetime in orbit. Something larger, of longer duration in orbit, and with resupply capability is required. Many exploratory design studies nave been made of the technological feasibility of assembling a large space laboratory in space from multiple launches with one or another of the available launch vehicles. We believe however that technical feasibility alone does not justify a project of this magnitude and cost. We are attempting to grasp the problem from the other end, that is to ask what one can and would do in a space laboratory in specific fields of science and technology with a view to establishing a realistic and useful concept. We hope that such studies will provide the information necessary to justify and support a decision to be made in time for the fiscal year 1965 budget. The program must be designed to fulfill national needs . . . .” (Testimony)	'
Dr. L. R. Shepherd, President of British Interplanetary Society, urged European Space Research Organization (esro) and European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) combine to form a European space agency to “develop the technology and logistics of an economically viable space transportation system.” Suggesting it would be wasting time and money for Europe to attempt to duplicate U.S. communications satellite systems, he said European agency should concentrate on advancement of transportation techniques—including construction of orbital stations and establishment of lunar base capable of constructing and supplying space vehicles. (Wilcke, NYT, 5/22/63, 37; M&R, 5/27/63,14-15) Dr. Lawrence L. Kavanau, Special Assistant for Space, dod ddr&e, said: “None of us harbors any illusions about the expense of developing and operating military space systems. Any and all military efforts in tins field will be costly. Of the two, development costs may well prove to be the relatively minor one. Building and supporting an operational military space force may involve costs far out-distancing the investment in its research and development. Military mission capabilities in space will not ipso facto evolve merely 'because we are able to attain an experimental capability in the medium. The fundamental point here is that military needs, by definition, require the capacity to conduct reliable repetitive space operations .... “One of the important aspects of the [nasa-dod] Gemini agreement is the stipulation that neither agency will initiate any major new programs or projects in the field of near-earth orbit manned space flight without the consent of the other. That paragraph was inserted for a specific purpose. The concept of a Manned Orbital Space Station, Manned Orbital Development System, or similar names by which such a facility has been called has been proposed and considered in the Department of Defense for at least five years ... a limited space station project need not represent a national commitment as far-reaching and as large in scope as the manned lunar landing program. It Should, nevertheless, require a national, rather than a single agency decision, to get it under way. There is no question that, if a decision is made to proceed, the Department of Defense should be a full partner in this enterprise all the way, and may even qualify for management of the national project to satisfy both nasa and dod needs. This, of course, requires a Presidential decision if and when the project is approved.” (Text, dod Release 718-63) Col. James W. Little, Director of Pilot Training, usaf Air Training Command, said: “We envision that the basic preparation for space flight taught now by the Edwards afb Aerospace Research Test Pilot Course will be taught eventually to all pilot trainees in the Air Training Command. Student training will be conducted into the suborbital area above 200,000 feet instead of below 50,000 feet as it is at present . . . .” {A-N-AF Joum. & Reg., 6/1/63,2)	.... William Littlewood, American Airlines vice president, said: “The United States is woefully deficient in funds and efforts to solve the essential research problems, to gain the basic knowledge, to develop the potentials of atmospheric flight, as to safety, comfort. and efficiency, or to compete successfully and for long with +|io foreign s.d.v&.ntsges in tins field .... “Whereas all efforts and expenditures of naca were devoted to aeronautic research, including large assignments in safety and reliability, we now find aeronautic research relegated to a fifth echelon level in nasa and reduced to a negligible portion of the total budget and to a fraction of the former naca effort.” (AP, NYT, 5/22/63,65)
President’s Award for Distinguished Civilian Service presented to: Dr. Alain C. Enthoven, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis; David D. Thomas, Director of faa Air Traffic Service; and Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory. (Av. Wk., 6/10/ 63,36) Jv/ne 12: Friends and associates of the late Dr. Edward R. Sharp, former director of Lewis, dedicated the Edward R. Sharp Medical Library at Southwest Community Hospital, Berea, Ohio. (lrc Release 63-39, Lewis Chronology, 5) Jwne 13: Responding to former President Eisenhower’s criticism of U.S. manned lunar program, Senator Edmondson (D.-Okla.) said on floor of the Senate: “We stand in the position of leader for the free world as we battle for superiority in this challenging field. We cannot afford to do less than we are now doing. “The national goals set by the President of the United States and ably administered by the distinguished James E. Webb deserve the united support of Americans, for it is this program which assures this country preeminence in space.” Rep. Charles H. Wilson (D.-Calif.) said on floor of the House: “Surely the critics of this program do not wish our country to be left behind in the space race ? . . . “In our own day and age, brave men are still exploring uncharted oceans. I have no doubt that these journeys, too, will be well justified and that once again in time the expense will be repaid many times over. “I suggest we study history a little more fully to prepare ourselves for the future. I regret that General Eisenhower will be pictured to our great grandchildren in future textbooks as being shortsighted and narrowminded . . . .” (OR, 6/13/63, 10168, 10248)
Department of Labor’s second annual William F. Patterson Memorial Award presented to nasa Langley Research Center “in recognition of apprenticeship program excellence.” (Newport News Daily Press, 9/12/63)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, nasa Associate Administrator, told Washington Representatives Chapter of National Security Industrial Association: “The goals of this [accelerated national space] program and of our nation in space are to achieve a position of pre-eminence in every aspect of space science and technology for the benefit of all mankind .... Four main reasons underlie the tremendous effort we must make to achieve the goals stated by the President. Our position as leader of the Free World requires it. Our national security requires it. The fact that we are a practical people, dedicated to the improvement of life on earth for ourselves and our world neighbors, requires it. And man’s age-old urge to explore and our national traditions of pioneering require it . . . .” Dr. Seamans also discussed the Pioneer space probe program: “. . . We are initiating a competition for a new probe, pioneer, to develop a better understanding of solar flares. These probes will be used, commencing in 1964 (the International Year of the Quiet Sun), to measure the characteristics of the interplanetary medium such as magnetic field, solar plasma, solar and galactic cosmic radiation, and micrometeorites. The probe will provide information of intrinsic scientific value in addition to measurements in direct support of the manned lunar landing....” (Text)
At 39th annual joint meeting of Virginia Engineering and Technical Societies Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of Langley Research Center, announced that whenever the U.S. decided to go ahead with a manned orbiting laboratory, Lane would be ready. “Although there is no nasa approved flight project for a manned space station at the present time, Langley will be in a position through its studies to provide many of the answers to design and operational problems when such a program is given the go signal.” (Newport News Daily Press, 6/22/63)
nasa announced Ames Research Center had requested industry proposals for six-week study contracts to determine feasibility of using earth satellites as orbital, recoverable biological laboratories. Such a biosatellite project would provide means of studying animal and plant responses to periods of prolonged weightlessness. Studies would consider spacecraft systems that could be used in series of six biosatellites with flight durations of from three to 30 days. Decision on flight programs would be made after evaluation of study contracts; nasa already had received, and was evaluating, suggestions of biological experiments that could be performed. ( nasa Release 63-46; Ames Release 63-9)
Senate debate of H.R. 7500, nasa authorization bill for FY 1964, continued. Sen. Stephen Young (D.-Ohio) said: “The argument has been made that it is unwise to spend billions of dollars to explore outer space when we have so many unsolved problems remaining here on earth. In my judgment, however, and I am sure most of my colleagues agree, elimination of expenditures for space exploration would not necessarily result in the transfer of those funds to other forms of research. Moreover, an investigation of the funding of all forms of Federal research reveals that no real conflict exists between space exploration and research in other fields. “In fact, this investigation provides persuasive evidence that, rather than interfering with other forms of research, our space effort has stimulated a more favorable climate for research in general, so that progress is being made simultaneously in a great many areas totally unrelated to space . . . .” (CR, 8/8/63, 13751)
Dr- Vannevar Bush, honorary chairman of the corporation of mit. long-time scientific adviser to the Government, and Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development from 1941-46, wrote a letter to the New York Times on the manned lunar program. Noting that Premier Khrushchev said recently that a manned lunar landing would not be worth the cost in money or in lives, Dr. Bush stated: “This is an aspect of the space program which the American public has by no means faced.” That lives would be lost in the program was inevitable, he asserted, and would occur with the whole world watching. “What will happen when the tragedy occurs? The public is now in doubt on the program. They will be impatient as it proceeds very slowly, with little of popular appeal to report. When a grim tragedy occurs they may throw the whole experiment out the window. “I have just as much enthusiasm as the next man for the parts of the program which make sense: the communications and weather satellites, for example. But the whole program has been blown up to absurd dimensions. Instruments on the moon would gather scientific information, nearly as much as a man would, and the information would not be worth the cost. “To put a man on the moon is folly, engendered by childish enthusiasm. It will backfire on those who drive it ahead.” {NTT, 11/17/63, 8E)
John W. Stone, Advanced Studies Manager of Launch Vehicles and Propulsion Directorate, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, said at aiaa Manned Space Flight Meeting that projected Nova launch vehicle would be so costly that it would require national policy ruling—such as President Kennedy’s decision to award high priority to manned lunar landing program. There would be no need for such a decision on Nova until 1968 at the earliest, he said. (M<&R, 4/29/63,16)
Insignia for cosmonauts was announced by Soviet Defense Ministry in Krasnaya Zvezda. Insignia represented golden wings, in center of which was world globe girdled by golden satellite orbit extending across background of unfurled Soviet flag. Below globe was removable shield with number 1, 2, or 3, according to class of cosmonaut—third class, for one space flight; second or first class, for two or three space flights respectively. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/5/63, 1 apss-t Trans.)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Iowa Bankers Association 77th Annual Convention in Des Moines, said: “Let me list the principal reasons why our investment in manned space flight is sound: “1. The current level of effort is vital if we are hot to settle for second position in space .... “2. Almost all our advances in space technology will add directly or indirectly to our ability to deter aggression .... “3. The scientific capital we shall acquire in the lunar program will long serve the nation .... “4. The facilities we are building and the technology we are acquiring are tangible assets that will extend benefits to our children and grandchildren .... “5. The dollars that are putting us into space are being spent right here on earth .... “6. We are clearly demonstrating to the world the ability and determination of our democratic society to organize whatever large-scale scientific and industrial effort is required to meet critical national and international needs in time of peace as well as war .... “7. To meet the stringent demands of the space environment . . . engineers are developing new materials . . . certain to pay off dividends, many of which we cannot foresee, some of which may be of revolutionary nature .... “8. We are rapidly building up a large pool of highly trained and creative scientists, engineers, and technicians .... “9. We are currently devoting about one per cent of the country’s income to the civilian space effort. If the inducement to hard work and inspiration of participating directly or indirectly in space exploration spurs our people to increase production of goods and services by only one per cent, the space program will pay for itself. “10. Our swift progress has now brought us to the point where our space power can be employed in peace-making as well as peace-keeping.” (Text)
Next Soviet space flight would be “spectacular” and “more complicated,” four Soviet cosmonauts indicated in Evening Moscow interview. The cosmonauts—Yuri Gagarin, Gherman Titov, Andrian Nikolayev, and Pavel Popovich—said U.S.S.R. was busily preparing for a forthcoming space launching, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/12/63)
At nasa Hq., D. Brainerd Holmes, former Director of nasa Manned Space Flight, was presented nasa Medal for Outstanding Leadership by nasa Administrator James E. Webb. (nasa Release 63-199)
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, nasa Director of Biotechnology, said in speech before National Rocket Club that Lt. Tereshkova’s orbital space flight established feasibility of sending scientists not trained as pilots to moon and nearby planets: “I think it is significant that she is not a pilot. This points to the importance the Soviets attach to gathering biomedical information on the effects of space flight and may be a preparation for flying scientists who are not trained pilots . . . .” (upi, NYT, 6/19/63, 3; Av. Wk., 6/24/63,33)
Senate and House passed H.R. 7500, bill to authorize nasa appropriations for FY 1964. Senate and House both adopted the conference committee’s bill authorizing $5,350,820,400 total; of which $4,119,575,000 was for research and development, $713,060,400 for construction of facilities, and $518,185,000 for administrative operations. (CR, 8/28/63,15298-303,15268-270)
Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said in article in New York Times Magazine: “The challenge of space exploration and particularly of landing men on the moon represents the greatest challenge which has ever faced the human race. Even if there were no clear scientific or other arguments for proceeding with this task, the whole history of our civilization would still impel men toward the goal. In fact, the assembly of the scientific and military with these human arguments creates such an overwhelming case that it can be ignored only by those who are blind to the teachings of history, or who wish to suspend the development of civilization at its moment of greatest opportunity and drama.” (NYT Magazine, 4/21/63,12f)
First stage of Saturn SA-5 vehicle was static-fired in 142.-sec. test at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Eight-engine cluster was fired at full thrust of 1.5 million lbs. (Huntsville Times, 3/14/63)
nasa would support pilot program to develop adult education course on the space program in Pawtucket, R.I., E. E. Collin of nasa Education Services said in New York Herald Tribune. nasa $2,500 contract with Rhode Island State Dept, of Public Instruction would finance 10 two-hr. presentations covering overall space exploration program, each given by expert in the subject area. (Loory, N.Y. Herald Tnb., 7/30/63; Collin, nasa afee)
usaf announced awarding $3,000,000 original definitive contract to Lockheed Propulsion Co. for research and development of solid propellant motors for the large solid booster program, (dod Release 1304—63) September 27-October 10: nasa displayed models of manned and unmanned spacecraft in lobby of nasa Hq. building, part of fifth anniversary observance, (nasa Release 63-214)
Speaking before a dinner of the American Association for Contamination Control in Boston, Mass., Franklyn W. Phillips, director of nasa neo, spoke of the proposed electronics research center: “We have seen nothing to date that would alter our original proposal to place the [electronics] center in the greater Boston area. The reasons we made the choice in the first place are as valid now as they were then. “Greater Boston represents the greatest concentration of electronics know-how in the country and is the logical place for this center.” (Boston Herald, 5/3/63)
nasa was about to enter the prolonged-flight phase of its bioscience program, according to Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences. He cited negotiations now underway with GE to provide six 1,000-lb. recoverable biosatellites. These would be used for such flights as three-to-five day flights to study effects of weightlessness and radiation on plants and animals; 21-day orbital flights to study effects of weightlessness and absence of earth’s rotation on biological rhythms in plants and animals; and 14-to-30 day flights by small monkeys to study effects of prolonged weightlessness on the cardiovascular system, central nervous system, and general physiology and behavior. All studies would have importance for prolonged manned space flight. (Macomber, San Diego Union, 10/12/63)
usn launched Polaris A-3 test missile from surface test ship U.S.S. Observation Island using completely new eject launch system. (dod Release 1301-63) September 26-0ct6ber 1: xivth International Astronautical Congress held in Paris, with more than 1,000 delegates from 34 countries attending. 80 papers covering wide range of scientific and technical subjects were presented. (Program) Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research, and Chairman of iaf Bioastronautics Committee, presented his “Bioastronautics Review.” Dr. Konecci discussed U.S. bioastronautics programs, results, and plans, and compared U.S. program with that of U.S.S.R. Summing up Project Mercury MA-9 flight, he said: “Hie performance of Gordon Cooper proved in detail man’s integration with the operation of the spacecraft systems. This accomplishment of the Mercury program is of major significance as it does indicate that much more dependence can be placed on man as a reliable operating portion of the man-spacecraft combination .... Once agam, the recent flight of MA-9 has proved that man can adapt very rapidly to a 35-hour period in a new environment. His senses and capabilities are little changed in space. At least for the duration of Cooper’s mission (a total of 34+ hours) weightlessness affecting the normality of his judgment, orientation and other human functions in space was no problem . . . .” (Text) Dr. Konecci also reviewed Russian progress in biotechnology. He said the Soviets had demonstrated the reliability of their spacecraft and their “high regard for life of the cosmonauts, since, to our knowledge, ‘not a single life has been lost in the U.S.S.R. space effort.’ The Soviets concede that, in the long run, human intellect and sensations are the only forces capable of learning the secrets of the universe.” (Text) Four papers by Soviet scientists presented at iaf Congress indicated biological effects of cosmic radiation were one of the most complex and most urgent problems of bioastronautics. Papers reported on radiation effects on seeds, fruit flies, animal tissue, and bacteria as well as on cosmonauts Gagarin, Titov, Nikolayev, and Popovich, who experienced no harmful effects. (Abstracts) At iaf Congress in Paris, Dr. Charles Draper of hit told Missiles and Rochets that joint lunar landing was possible within five years if progress continued at present rate and if U.S. guidance were used with a Soviet rocket. {M&R, 9/30/63,26) Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin said in address Sept. 28 that Soviet scientists were working on problems of rendezvous and coupling of at least two spacecraft in orbit. Cosmonaut Gagarin acknowledged that rendezvous technique was “extremely complex” and that a number of problems remain in areas of “communications, optics and maneuvers.” He said Soviets would dock several individual vehicles in earth orbit to construct space platform from which man would be sent on flight trajectory toward the moon. Le Journal du Dimanche reported Cosmonaut Gagarin’s prediction that U.S.S.R. would land a man on the moon before the U.S. {Av. Wk., 10/7/63, 30; Le Journal dv Dima/nrhs,. 9/29/63. 22) . Soviet General Nicolai Petrovich Kamanin, Deputy Chief of Staff of Soviet Air Force and head of cosmonaut group, said at iaf luncheon that joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar program would achieve a manned lunar landing more quickly and cheaply than separate efforts by the two countries. After the luncheon he told newsmen that a “more favorable political evolution” was necessary before a joint lunar expedition could be planned. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/30/63) Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Space Sciences, said in iaf address: “One of the most exciting technological aspects of space exploration has been the development of automated spacecraft. Most of the scientific exploration of space and the useful applications of space flight thus far have been made possible by automated spacecraft. Development of these spacecraft and their many complex subsystems is setting the pace today for many branches of science and technology. Guidance, computer, attitude control, power, telecommunication, instrumentation, and structural subsystems are being subjected to new standards of light weight, high efficiency, extreme accuracy, and unsurpassed reliability and quality . . . .” He then reviewed automated spacecraft already flown or currently under development by nasa. (Text)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, presented before House Committee on Science and Astronautics an account of nasa’s use of FY 1963 funds. Explaining $170 million decrease in launch vehicle costs because of lunar-orbit-rendezvous decision, he said nasa had deferred developmental phase of Nova very large launch vehicle and was conducting “further studies on the requirements and design concepts of a large launch vehicle consistent with optimum post-lunar-landing usage .... We are continuing [M-lj engine developments [for Nova], since it is a long lead time component, but have reduced the level of contractor effort to reflect the removal of a firm operafinrml firmnrr	^ V1V11U1 l.lllllllg •	•	•	• Speaking on space sciences, Dr. Seamans said: “Extensive study of the biological science area has demonstrated that specific recoverable satellite flights should be undertaken for the purpose of acquiring data on the effects of space environment on living matter. We are, therefore, undertaking such a bio-satellite program and have increased our estimated funding requirements in this area by $13.9 million in this fiscal year.” On communications satellites, Dr. Seamans said: “We re-examined our Communication Satellite program quite carefully in the light of the creation of the Communication Satellite Corporation and the reoriented activities of the dod following the cancellation of the Advent project. From this programmatic re-examination we have concluded that principal nasa effort should be focused on the research and development problems associated with the synchronous altitude class of communication satellite. We have, therefore, dropped the low altitude mutliple passive satellite project, Rebound, and advanced intermediate active satellite projects from hardware development consideration at this time. As a result of these decisions, we reduced our communication satellite program by $35.2 million . . . .” (Testimony)
Ground-breaking ceremony for new astrophysics and space research laboratory in Chicago, part of Enrico Fermi Institute for Nuclear Studies, Univ. of Chicago announced. {Chic. Trib., 4/28/63)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, interviewed in Washington Post magazine, Parade. Asked “with all our needs on earth, can we afford to spend $20 billion to go to the moon?” he replied: “We can’t afford not to spend it. Only the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. have the resources for extensive space exploration. If we are to lead the free world and insure our own security, we must be first in space. This does not mean that we must neglect other urgent needs. We have ample resources to explore space and do the other things, as well.” Asked “What is our ultimate destiny in space?” he replied: “I don’t know, nor does anyone else. Columbus didn’t find what he was looking for, but I think we’re all pretty glad that he took that voyage. Einstein, when he produced the formula E=MC2, didn’t know that it would change the course of history. “I am sure of one thing—the benefits which will flow from our venture into space will be beyond anything any of us could imagine. “Until now, in space, no shot has been fired in anger. Thank God. My hope is that, in the years ahead, the conquest of space will encourage peaceful co-operation among nations and become a substitute for war. “In the hostile environment of space there are challenges all mankind must share. We—all nations, that is—should go out there together, hand in hand.” (Parade, Wash. Post, 9/29/63)
The astronauts making the United States’ first two-man Gemini endurance space flight next year would be wired for sound as never before—to a pair of small magnetic tape recorders registering their physical and mental reactions second by second throughout the flight. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64, 2)
jpl awarded contract to Motorola, Inc., for fabrication and system integration of receiving subsystems operating at S-band frequencies in the Deep Space and Manned Space Flight tracking networks. Contract was follow-on to present contract awarded March 1962 under which Motorola designed and fabricated modules for S-band receiving subsystems for Deep Space Network. The additional equipment was for the nasa Unified S-Band System, in which receiving equipment for both networks are identical except for slight difference in operating frequency. Unified S-Band System allows all communications functions between ground stations and spacecraft to be accomplished at single frequency; provides more efficient power transfer between ground station’s directive antennas; and reduces by hundreds of times the galactic noise received on uhf frequencies, (nasa Release 63-284)
Nike-Cajun sounding rpcket launched at Wallops Island, Va., to 46.5-mi. altitude, ejecting ozone about 10 sec. after trajectory peak. Objects of the nasa Lewis Research Center experiment were to: test excited oxygen theory of sodium airglow; detect concentration of atomic hydrogen in the atmosphere; measure altitude of sodium and hydroxyl airglow layers; and test a new technique for studying atmospheric chemical releases with rocket-borne photometers. (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching)
U.S. Army’s Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully performed inflight maneuvers in test flight at White Sands Missile Range. Missile was launched from underground cell, (dod Release 55763)
Researchers at the nasa Lewis Research Center ran a giant cryomagnet producing a field of 50,000 gauss over a one-foot-diameter test section. Although this was probably the largest magnetic field ever produced over such a volume, the cryomagnet would be enlarged from two to twelve coils with an ultimate design goal of 200,000 gauss. (Lewis Chronology, 2)
Rep. Edward J. Gurney (R.-Fla.), forwarded to President Johnson an appeal to preserve the name of Cape Canaveral, asking the President to clarify his executive order and make it clear that it applied only to the launch operations center and missile range station. Residents of nearby Florida communities writing to their Congressional delegation largely favored naming the John F. Kennedy Space Center as a tribute to the late President but preferred retaining 400-year-old name of Cape Canaveral. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/9/63; Av. Wk., 12/9/63, 25)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in address before Milwaukee Press Club Gridiron Dinner: “From the results of the past five years of effort, it is apparent that, if we are to achieve mastery of space, we must add substantially to our scientific knowledge and to our utilization of technology. The nasa program is moving forward on both of these fronts. Essentially, our efforts in the Gemini and Apollo programs, leading to exploration of the moon, will provide us with an understanding of the limiting factors in space utilization, and the skills which will be needed to meet such future requirements in the space environment as our nation decides to undertake .... “All of these skills are needed not only in the pursuit of peaceful rewards for mankind from space exploration, but for the development of any space missions wbich may become necessary to our national defense, to insure that space will not be used as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us. As these skills increase, a growing close relationship between the nation’s best experts in the underlying technologies is utilized to make the best decisions on new operat ional systems, whether civilian or military. “It is also recognized that our space program must be broad enoughj including considerable basic research, to give us a flexible base suitable for a continuity of effort in a direction or directions perhaps still unknown. Our broad and varied space effort permits us to lead from our great national strengths—the remarkable flexibility of our economic, social and political systems, the great variety of our talents, and the vast resources of our university-industry-government complex. “Accordingly, we have not allowed ourselves to be trapped in a narrow competition, but have developed a national space program which embraces a wide range of activities . . . .” (Text) April 17: Soviet declaration of 11 basicprinciples of space activity presented to Legal Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. U.S. sources said proposals were virtually unchanged from those offered last year. {NTT, 4/18/63, 22) Discovery of planet (“Barnard’s Star B”) in constellation Ophiu-chus was reported to astronomers at Tucson, Ariz., by Dr. Peter van de Kamp, Director of Swarthmore College’s Sproul Observatory, Swarthmore, Pa. Six light years from earth, planet is one-and-a-half times mass of planet Jupiter or nearly 500 times mass of earth. Dr. van de Kamp’s measurements of amount of wobble it produced in motion of its sun, Barnard, determined object to be a planet. Barnard’s Star B was third planet discovered outside our solar system but the most nearly planet-sized one of all. (Wash. Daily News, 4/18/63; NTT, 4/19/63, 4) usaf announced selection of three contractors to begin development work on large solid-fuel rocket motors: Aerojet General Corp., Thiokol Chemical Corp., and Lockheed Propulsion Co. Thiokol and Aerojet would conduct parallel programs leading to demonstration static firing of half-length 260-m. motor of about 3 million-lb. thrust; depending upon results of this work, usaf would select one of the companies to proceed with development aimed at demonstration of 6-million-lb. thrust motor. In addition, Thiokol would work toward demonstration static firing of 156-in.-diam-eter motor of 3-million-lb. thrust, using two segments in solid-fuel motor; Thiokol would work toward demonstration static fipirwv 1	r\ Tia-TOilUstTt.lk flimcf in oinrrlo llilllg VA Il/U'AAA.“VAAlilllOtCl lAAV/VVl VA VliV AiAAAllVAA IV, Ulll	AAA UAAAj^AV/ segment, steerable through use of movable nozzles; Lockheed would work toward demonstration static firing of 156-in.-diame-ter motor of one-million-lb. thrust, in single segment, steerable through use of deflectors, usaf was managing the solid-propellant rocket motor development under nasa-dod agreement, (dod Release 493-63) Draft report on two bills (S. 132 and S. 152) “to create the National Weather Council and to provide coordination and central direction for an accelerated program of weather research, basic and applied,” sent to Bureau <3 the Budget for consideration and advice prior to submission to the Congress. Proposed council “would coordinate and centrally direct meteorological and weather research and experimental programs” of represented agencies and would consist of: Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau (Council Chairman), Director of nsf, Administrator of nasa, Secretaries of Agriculture, Interior, Army, Navy, and Air Force or their respective designees. S. 132 would also include Administrator of faa. ( nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/55 and 56; Itr, nasa administrator to Hon. Warren G. Magnuson, 4/17/63)
X-15 No. 3, piloted by Joseph A. Walker (nasa), reached 27l,000-ft. altitude and 3,677-mph speed (mach 5.47) in flight near nasa Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif. Flight was second highest altitude achieved with rocket-powered X-15 and fourth to reach or exceed altitude for which aircraft was designed; it was X-15’s highest altitude without ventral tail fin. (nasa Release 63-8)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va., carried 63-lb. instrumented payload to 104-mi. altitude in test to measure ion concentration and composition in upper atmosphere. Flight was joint project of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63—47)
nasa Lewis Research Center awarded a $48,131,315 contract to Aerojet-General Corp. for redefinition of Snap-8 (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) development program. Snap-8 is designed to provide 35 kilowatts of on-board electric power to future spacecraft. (Lewis Chronology, 8)
House passed bill to authorize $5,203,719,400 for nasa in FY 1964 (334-57). House bill would authorize $4,013,175,000 for research and development; $508,185,000 for administrative operations; and $682,359,400 for construction of facilities. House cut $34.4 million from the bill as reported from Committee on Science and Astronautics: Amendment introduced by Rep. Richard L. Roudebush (R.-Ind.) cut $24.4 million from Committee’s recommendation for facility, training, and research grants, the amendment intended “to stabilize” nasa’s university program at FY 1963 level. Another amendment cut $10 million from advanced design development. Amendment offered by Rep. John W. Wydler (R.-N.Y.) to cut $3.9 million authorization for electronics research center was defeated (111-04). (CR, 8/1/63, 1307013129) . ... August 1—November 1: Project Stormfury, experiment to investigate ways of reducing destructive force of hurricanes, conducted jointly by Weather Bureau and Naval Weather Service. Experiment involved seeding hurricane clouds and cumulonimbus clouds (not associated with hurricane winds) with silver iodide to learn if energy patterns can be changed. Results would be compared with similar experiment conducted during 1961 Hurricane Esther, (dod Release 1077-63)
dod Distinguished Public Service Medal presented by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara to John H. Rubel, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, (dod Release 824r-63) During First Week of June: Technical progress reports on supersonic transport study contracts were made by Boeing Co’s Transport Div. and Lockheed-Califomia Co. to nasa Langley Research Center. Final reports on the nine-month contracts would be made in November, (nasa Release 63-129; Langley Release) First Week in June; Dr. Barry Commoner, biology processor of Washington Univ., St. Louis, referred to conclusion of Space Science Summer Group that search for extraterrestrial life “should be acclaimed as the top-priority scientific goal of our space program,” and charged that chances of finding extraterrestrial life were so small that they did not justify multibillion dollar cost. Dr. Commoner’s criticism came in commencement address before Hahnemann Medical College in Philadelphia. (Finney, NYT, 6/9/63)
A second disturbance on the moon has been observed by usaf lunar mappers at Lowell Observatory, usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center announced. Sighting was made by Observatory Director Dr. John A. Hall aim four other observers Nov. 27 and lasted an hour and a half (first sighting Oct. 29 lasted 20 min.). Both sightings were near crater Aristarchus, both were ruby red, and both were seen when moon was in the same phase (sunlight returning to this surface area). Previous sighting was of three red spots, but this sighting was of single red area 12 mi. long and 1V2 mi- wide, inside crater’s rim where one of first spots had been seen. Observation was confirmed by astronomy graduate student Peter A. Boyce, at Ohio State Univ.'o Perkins Observatory. Dr. Hall believed spots may be gases released from lunar interior by intense heat of the returning sunlight. (AP, San Diego Union, 12/4/63; Time, 12/27/63, 54-55)	_
Testifyingbefore the House Select Committee on Government Research, Dr. Vannevar Bush said: “The spectacular success of applied research during the war led to a fallacy entertained by many. It is that any problem can be solved by gathering enough scientists and giving them enough money .... It is folly to thus proceed. The great scientific steps forward originate in the minds of gifted scientists, not in the minds of promoters. The best way to proceed is to be sure that really inspired scientists have what they need to work with, and leave them alone. “If the country pours enough money into research, it will inevitably support the trivial and the mediocre. The supply of scientific manpower is not unlimited. “In any broad program of research the keyword in regard to any one aspect of the program is ‘relevance.’ It is a good word to have in mind in examining any research program. Competent directors of research know what it means. Probably ‘conducive to progress toward the main object of a program’ is as good a definition as any. Just finding out something new is not by itself sufficient justification for research. It needs to mean something when we find it. “When scientific programs are judged by popular acclaim we inevitably have over-emphasis on the spectacular. That is just what we have today. The deeply important scientific advances moving today are not easy to understand. If they were they would have been accomplished long ago. Outstanding scientific progress, which will most affect the lives and health of our children, is not grasped by many.” Objecting to the practice of the government and the armed forces of utilizing universities in the management of secret programs, Bush said: “It should never be forgotten that the main task of the universities is to educate men. The country will need skilled professional men in the future as much as it will need new knowledge. As we now go we are not meeting this challenge sufficiently. Every research program placed in a university should be so ordered that its product is not only new knowledge but skilled educated men.” (Text)
nasa Langley Research Center announced award of contract to Univ. of Virginia for developing “research apparatus and techniques for laboratory studies of drag on satellites.” Under one-year contract, U. of Va. would develop suitable laboratory equipment and make laboratory measurements of molecular impact forces exerted on samples of spacecraft materials. (Langley Release)
Dr. Bruce Murray of Cal Tech reported Venus observations from Mt. Palomar Observatory during December had detected a Venus “storm” 1,000 mi. wide. The “hot spot” on Venus was observed with ultrasensitive heat detector mounted on 200-in. telescope. Dr. Murray was addressing session of American Geological Union, meeting in Washington. (Wash. Daily News, 4/17/63; Wash. Post, 4/18/63)
Dr. Donald E. Gault of nasa Ames Research Center told American Geophysical Union that moon dust, from one to 10 tons a day, was falling on earth. Dr. Gault estimated that 54 per cent of dust sprayed off moon (by impact of meteoroids) enters solar orbit; 40 per cent enters earth orbit; 3 per cent impacts earth directly soon after leaving moon; and 3 per cent hits earth after a month or more. He suggested methods of finding moon dust for analysis: launching rocket to collect sample particles from upper atmosphere; and obtaining samples of sea sediment in polar regions where, he said, layers of moon dust must have been deposited and trapped. (NYT, 4/18/63; Wash. Post, 4/18/63)
With launching and recovery of 120-ft. balloon, Balloon Research Center at Palestine, Tex., completed its cosmic-ray study project. Today’s balloon floated to more than 10,000-ft. altitude to collect cosmic-ray data, (upi, NYT, 9/3/63,4)
At ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary of Tracking at nasa Goddard Spa'ce Flight Center, Secretary of State Dean Rusk said: “We 17 nations have embarked on a cooperative effort to expand the knowledge of man to an unprecedented extent. We think we are creating a heritage for those who follow us in the coming generations in a great exploration for peaceful purposes .... “The world watches us in our success and our failures, the whole world will benefit from our discoveries. “Wc seek to publish all the knowledge we uncover.
First Block II flight configuration of Saturn I space vehicle, SA-5, was static-fired for 33 sec. at Marshall Space Flight Center, developing full 1.5 million lbs. of thrust. All objectives of the firing were met. (Marshall Star, 3/6/63,1)
Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, stated his conviction that a belt of comets never seen from earth lies near the path of the planet Pluto. It was this comet belt, he though, that accounted for the disturbances in the orbit of the planet Neptune. Pluto had sometimes been credited with this effect, but Dr. Whipple said that Pluto could scarcely weigh as much as the earth, while the objects producing such an effect would have to weigh ten times as much as the earth. (Science Service, NYT, 11 /14/63,3)
National Aeronautic Association president Martin M. Decker announced National Frank G. Brewer Trophy for 1962 would be awarded to Dr. Merlyn McLaughlin, president of College of Osteopathic Medicine and Surgery of Des Moines, Iowa, (naa Release) Eugene M. Zuckert, Secretary of the Air Force, speaking at Symposium on the Exploration of Mars of the American Astronautical Society, discussed the two-fold task of the Air Force: “. . . . first, to protect the Nation’s exploration and research in space as effectively as the Air Force contributes to protection of our national activities on the Earth’s surface, and second, to act as the Department of Defense agency which helps insure the National Space Program’s success through provision of Air Force facilities and services to the overall effort. “The question of whether there is a need of an operational capability for United States military forces beyond the atmosphere may already have been answered for us in a number of public statements by Soviet military and political leaders .... Their major new book on Military Strategy . . . says, “Soviet military strategy acknowledges the need to study the use of space and space vehicles to reinforce the defense of the socialist countries. ... It would be a mistake to allow the imperialist camp to gain any superiority in this area.’ ” (Text) Speaking at a symposium on the Exploration of Mars in Denver, Colo., Wolfgang E. Moeckel, chief of lrc’s Electromagnetic Propulsion Division, said: “The potential of electric propulsion for Mars exploration is as great or greater than that of other systems now under development and it becomes even more attractive for the exploration of the farther reaches of the solar system.” (lrc Release 63-35, Lewis Chronology, 4-5) Highlights of parellel studies on three classes of Nova launch vehicles, conducted by General Dynamics/Astronautics and Martin-Marietta Corp. for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, were presented by Andrew Kalitinsky, gd/a Program Director. {Av. Wk., 6/10/63,34) Dr. H. O. Ruppe of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Future Projects Office estimated manned Mars mission would require about $9 billion for interplanetary spacecraft, $5 billion for operating costs (including procurement of Nova launch vehicles), and $2 billion for remaining production and procurement costs. Dr. Ruppe presented paper on “Vehicle Design for Earth Orbit to Mars Orbit and Return,” discussing results of Project Empire (Early Manned Planetary-Interplanetary Roundtrip Expedition) contract studies by Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Ford Co. Aero-nutronics Div., and General Dynamics/Astronautics Corp. Results of studies indicated: only marginal capabilities exist for allchemically propelled space vehicles; even with nuclear-powered upper stages, manned roundtrip flight would be difficult task; because of eccentricity of earth’s orbit, flights during 1975-80 period may be technically or economically unfeasible; manned Mars program would require unusually high degree of coordination within entire National space program. {NTT, 6/7/63, 11; Marshall Star, 6/12/63,1? 4) Harold B. Finger, Manager of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of nasa Nuclear Systems, said: “[Manned Mars mission] will be a very major undertaking exceeding the Apollo program In total cost and difficulty. For that reason, we must realistically recognize that one of the factors determining the timing of such a mission will be the availability of funds and manpower. We must recognize that we cannot undertake such a mission until the Apollo mission begins to phase out. “If, as will probably be the case, rendezvous in earth orbit and some orbital assembly or propellant transfer will be required to perform the Mars landing missions, an earth orbiting space laboratory will probably precede the accomplishment of the actual planetary missions. The cost of such a system would also be high but it would probably be a necessary stepping stone to the planetary missions .... “The unknowns in such a mission will require the accumulation of a great deal of basic information and . . . substantial development efforts for all of the systems and facilities that would be required in such a mission. I think it is to be expected that the time required for development of these systems puts the accomplishment of a manned Mars landing mission off until late in the seventies and more probably into the early eighties .... “I expect that large chemical rocket booster stages, in combination with nuclear rocket upper stages, will be used to accomplish the Mars landing mission. I expect also that such vehicles and propulsion systems will be used to perform the preliminary missions of manned fly-by trips around Mars and trips into orbit around Mars. It is conceivable that such missions could start in the latter part of the 70’s . . . .” (Text) A. James Shiner of nasa Man-System Integration delivered paper prepared by him and Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research: “A manned orbital research laboratory . . . becomes a distinct requirement to obtain human design requirements for a Mars vehicle system, whether that system be nuclear or chemical. The manned orbital research laboratory will help answer many of our questions about the space environment^ and man’s ability to not only survive, but to perform useful functions in prolonged space missions. The manned orbital research laboratory under study by the Langley Research Center will have to operate for prolonged periods of time to obtain the required human research and biotechnology data needed for design of advanced space systems. A manned orbital research laboratory will eventually be used to simulate Martian voyages as well .	. .” (Text) Secretary of the Air Force Eugene Zuckert predicted need for military patrol in space “to determine at all times what is hap741-623 0—64--16 pening in near-space and to deal with any threat there . . . . [Space patrol] would provide on-call protection for U.S. space activities, both scientific and military, in the event of hostile enemy actions.” (Rocky Mountain News [Denver], 6/7/63) Dr. W. M. Sinton, Lowell Observatory astronomer, said in June 7 address that possible vegetation on Mars would probaby resemble cactus, especially barrel or saguaro cactus. (AP, Balt. Sim, 6/8/63) Dr. Gerard de Vaucouleurs of Univ. of Texas described recent Mars observations from Pic du Midi in French Pyrenees. Studying spotted patterns of dark areas, Pic du Midi found seasonal darkening or Martian surface was actually a filling in of spaces between dark spots on the planet. Dr. de Vaucouleurs found it difficult to reconcile large-scale changes of dark areas with recent findings that Mars was extremely dry. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/8/63) Jwne 7: France’s President Charles de Gaulle opened 25th International Air Show at LeBourget Airport, visiting U.S. space exhibit as well as other exhibits. (NYT, 6/8/63,35)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb testified before Senate Select Committee on Small Business, Subcommittee on Retailing, Distribution, and Marketing Practices' hearings on the role of effects of technology on the nation’s economy. Webb said that nasa’s “pull on the nation’s pool of scientific and technical manpower has been substantially less than many alarmists have stated.” Reiterating that nasa is a “management agency,” he pointed out that 93% of nasa’s space research money goes to private industry, “thus encouraging the growth of research and development under private industry.” (Space Bus. Daily, 12/19/63, 425)
Princeton-Pennsylvania Accelerator, a 3-bev proton synchrotron, dedicated at the James Forrestal Research Center of Princeton Univ. In his remarks at the dedication, aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg pointed out that the accelerator “is unique among large proton accelerators in the unusually rapid pulsing of the magnet—19 cycles per second.” (aec Release S-37-63)
nasa Ames Research Center announced award of contract to Thiokol Chemical Corp. for “hypervelocity test device,” to be part of Hypervelocity Free-Flight Facility now under construction at Ames. Thiokol would design, build, test, and deliver the wind tunnel structure, to be used with light gas gun to test designs for manned orbiting spacecraft, vehicles returning from moon and planets, and possibly vehicles entering atmospheres of other planets. (Ames Release 63-20; nasa Release 63-89)
rca Board Chairman David Samoff, addressing American Friends of the Hebrew University in New York, predicted vast scientific and technological developments in the years ahead that “are so fundamental that they will alter the very structure of society and compel each of us to readjust some of our traditional concepts .... “Modem man—especially the would-be leader in society—has to be a culturally integrated individual, familiar with the sciences as well as the humanities. There cannot be two isolated cultures for the simple reason that there is only one society in which to live .... “I would propose that scientific and cultural education begin with the earliest school years and extend without interruption through college and into the professional schools. Specifically, courses in the social sciences and humanities should be related to the physical sciences. It seems to me highly desirable that science itself should be studied as a social phenomenon because of the great impact it has upon society .... “. . . scientific realities of tomorrow will surpass our vision of today. The great challenge before all of us is to make sure that the new knowledge and new instrumentalities shall be used constructively and not destructively. The powers of science and technology are neither good nor evil in themselves. Their capacity for good or evil lies in the use we make of them . . . .” (Text, OR, 12/4/63, 22087-89) December £: Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, announced that revised testimony refuted the earlier contention that 25 per cent of U.S. scientific manpower would be working on space programs by 1970: “I challenged the accuracy of that forecast. The next day the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee began hearings on nasa’s relations with universities .... “The best estimates are that 6 or 7 per cent—at most 10 per cent—might be involved. That is a long way from being an excessive drain on scientific brainpower.” (upi, NTT, 12/3/63, 47)	.	.
Speaking at the Fourth International Space Science Symposium in Warsaw, Poland, Dr. R. S. Young of nasa’s Ames Research Center, said that certain earth bacteria not only survive but grow satisfactorily in a laboratory-created Martian environment. Knowledge of growth of earth organisms on Mars is important for two reasons, Dr. Young said. First, the extremely complex problem of decontaminating earth spacecraft depends upon proof that earth organisms do not present a hazard to other planets. Second, as much information as possible about survival on Mars or on other celestial objects is needed for designing instruments on spacecraft to detect and analyze such life if it exists. (The Cleveland Press, 8/1/63)
Moscow Pravda announced Yevgeny Alexandrov, head of research laboratory in Moscow Mining Institute, had discovered a new law of physics which corrects the laws of Sir Isaac Newton. Newspaper did not indicate which laws of Newton were corrected nor how they were corrected, but it said: “Up to now, mechanisms and machines of an impact nature [presumably mining equipment such as pneumatic drills] quickly went out of commission. Now their life will not only be extended immeasurably but also their power will increase many times over. “Innumerable examples can be given,” the newspaper said, but did not offer any. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/14/63, A3)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D with unidentified satellite from pmr. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963) During July: nasa Marshall Space Flight Center selected General Dynamics/Ft. Worth and Douglas Aircraft Co. to conduct parallel studies of manned Mars exploration flight “in the unfavorable time period” (1975-85). Under seven-month contracts, the companies would outline the mission and development program for the Mars flight, identifying spacecraft and booster systems and selecting mdst promising mission profile. (Space Bus. Daily, 7/5/63; LA. Times, 7/9/63; Marshall Star, 7/10/63,8)
Mercury astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, accompanied by nasa astronomer Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill, would observe solar eclipse over central Canada, on July 20 from a specially equipped DC—8 jet, flying above most of atmospheric haze at 42,000 ft. During the flight Dr. Gill would point out to Astronaut Carpenter various scientific phenomena likely to be encountered in future manned space flights, and Carpenter would attempt to photograph airglow caused by zodiacal light. Scientists from nasa Ames Research Center also would be onboard to photograph rays of the sun’s corona, seeking particular detail in sun’s polar regions to trace solar magnetic fields. Flight would be sponsored by Douglas Aircraft Co., National Geographic Society, and 11 other organizations. (NTT, 6/28/63, 1; nasa Release 63-148)
Columbia Univ. School of Journalism announced $131,000 award from nasa to evaluate nasa’s dissemination of space news and to study problems and competence of news media in reporting and interpreting space news, to determine whether better ways can be found to improve public understanding of space sciences and space exploration. Study would take 3 years, with comparable funds expected for the second and third years. Commenting on the grant, Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said: “It seems a strange expenditure, especially when we are desperately trying to maintain their budget . . . .” Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “It sounds like the agency is carrying out the Space Act by trying to find ways of better interpreting to the public the great technological developments in space.” Unnamed nasa spokesman said the grant was “a legitimate study fulfilling our Congressional mandate to keep the public informed.” (Toth, NY T, 7/13/63,21)
Invitation to European scientists to participate in ground experiments using lasers to track the nasa Polar Ionosphere Beacon Satellites (S-66) was made at Third International Symposium on Quantum Electronics, Paris, by representatives of nasa Hq. and Goddard Space Flight Center. Under proposed program, nasa would provide orbital prediction data to European participants, who would attempt to track the satellite by bouncing a laser beam from ground off comer reflectors on satellite, nasa would be conducting similar experiments in the U.S. Lasers were expected to provide useful supplement to existing radio and radar tracking systems by providing extremely precise range and bearing data. (Al, Robinson)
nasa announced selection of Boeing Co. and Douglas Aircraft Co. for final negotiations leading to manned orbital research laboratory study contracts, nasa Langley Research Center would negotiate definitive three-month study contracts with the two companies. (nasa Release 63-120; Langley Release)
Soviet Cosmonauts Lt. Col. Yuri A. Gagarin and Junior Lt. Valentina Tereshkova visited the U.N. in New York. After a standing ovation by the General Assembly, Col. Gagarin listed five areas in which U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation was possible: exchange of scientific knowledge, tracking, rescue of downed spacemen, global weather study, and an international radio communications system. Manned space flight cooperation required “certain clarification,” he said. (NYT, 10/17/63)
Army Corps of Engineers announced start of construction of world’s largest structure, the Vertical Assembly Building for Saturn V launch vehicle, vab is being built on Merritt Island, adjacent to Cape Canaveral, Fla. As design and construction agent for nasa’s manned space flight facilities, Corps was managing construction contracts in Merritt Island for nasa Launch Operations Center, (dod Release 1141-63)
nasa announced problems with two connectors to electrical amplifier in faith 7 Mercury spacecraft had caused loss of automatic control system during MA-9 space flight, forcing Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper to re-enter from orbit with manual control. Premature lighting of .05 g panel light during 19th orbit had indicated that automatic control system would be inoperative until spacecraft descended to point of feeling .05 g. Then, in final orbit, trouble in inverter caused loss of automatic control system altogether. Postflight examination of faith 7 circuitry traced .05 g signal and inverter failure to independent electrical connectors that failed to function due to moisture; in both cases, electrical insulation of the connectors broke down. Correction of problems for future spacecraft would include tighter control of moisture and increase of insulation of electrical components, (nasa Release 63—118)
John L. Sloop, Director of nasa Propulsion and Power Generation in Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Advanced Research and Technology: “Propulsion is the key to space exploration and our push to the moon in this decade will depend completely on chemical propulsion. We see a large and continuing role for chemical propulsion in the next decade. The advent of nuclear and electrical propulsion will greatly increase our capability and enable us to use each type in the application best suited to its characteristics. We see much larger chemical propulsion systems than we have today. Some of these may use air augmentation and will be capable of ferrying large payloads economically from earth to manned satellites and between distant points on the earth. We see chemical propulsion packages carried dormant for months on long space missions but ready at the touch of a button or a signal from earth to perform their task. We see chemical propulsion systems for landing and take-off from the moon, Mars, and Venus where compact systems of high thrust per pound of weight are needed. Some may be carried as extra stored energy sources for emergency use . . . .” (Testimony)
nasa awarded contract for designing and fabricating advanced four-man, six-month, life-support system to General Dynamics Corp.’s Astronautics Div. (gd/a). 18-month contract called for research, design, fabrication, testing, and delivery to nasa Langley Research Center of fully operating prototype life-support system for space flights, (nasa Release 63-126; Langley Release) Jwne 5: usaf conducted successful test-firing of “second generation” Minuteman icbm from Cape Canaveral, its re-entry vehicle impacting target area near Ascension Island, (dod Release 820-63)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began full committee hearings on proposed nasa budget for FY 1964 and authorized expenditure of $3.9 million for nasa proposed electronics research center. However, Committee deleted references to Boston area as site in FY 1964 budget authorization and also directed nasa to first undertake detail study of “geographic location, the need for, and the nature of the proposed center.” (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/95; Quincy [Mass.] Patriot-Ledger, 6/25/63; Boston Traveler, 6/26/63) ./une %5: nasa announced receiving from eight nationally known artists 60 sketches made during Astronout Cooper’s MA-9 mission under nasa Artists’ Cooperation Program. Sketches were preliminary to finished paintings, which would be exhibited and from which reproductions would be made. MA-9 was first event which nasa invited artists to cover; other nasa activities of historic interest would be recorded by artists, (nasa Release 63-140)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced study contract award to Sjlace Technology Laboratories, with objective of identifying and defining essential design requirements for an operational nuclear space propulsion system in the 1970’s. Study would be based on Saturn V or Nova-class first-stage booster, msfc also let conceptual design studies to Douglas Aircraft Co. and General Dynamics/Astronautics for parallel studies of launch vehicles having chemical-propulsion first stages and nuclear-propulsion upper stages, to be used in mid-1970’s. Chemical-nuclear rocket configuration would have one-million-lb. orbital capability. (Huntsville Times, 7/4/63; S-pace Bus. Dally, 7/8/63, 33)
Senators Warren G. Magnuson and Henry M. Jackson announced three nasa study contracts awarded to Boeing Co.: $199,920 contract to continue studying methods of recovering Saturn first-stage rocket boosters for reuse; $106,000 award to continue studying large clustered solid-propellant rocket motors; and $84,108 contract to study vehicle-integrated rocket powerplant with air augmentations. Contracts were let by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. (7/l 1/63)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director, Marshall Space Flight Center, addressing Chamber of Commerce, Charleston, West Virginia, said : “In support of Project Apollo major manufacturing, testing, and launching facilities are now under construction. Years of construction, personnel buildup, and training for activation will be necessary before they can be put to use. If Project Apollo should be short-changed, these unfinished buildings would stand as monuments to America’s folly. You simply cannot turn a complex project like Apollo off and on like a faucet.” (Text)
First meeting of nasa Advisory Committee on Biotechnology and Human Research held at Ames Research Center. {Av. Wk., 5/6/63,103)
Speaking at Boston College Seminar, Franklyn W. Phillips, Director of nasa’s North Eastern Office, said: “At the request of the Congress, nasa is conducting additional studies on a need for an Electronics Center, the nature of the Center, and its geographical location. The results of these three studies will be presented to Mr. Webb, who after making nasa’s decision on the location of the Center will forward these reports to the House and Senate Space Committees for their consideration on or about the first or February. These Committees have 45 days in which to take action on nasa’s report. If they take favorable action or for that matter if they take no action in the 45 days after submittal of the report, nasa can proceed with its plans. On the other hand, should these committees take negative action of any kind, it would force a further reconsideration of the proposal. “The proposed Electronics Research Center will employ approximately 2,000 people of which six to seven hundred would be scientists and engineers. Estimates of the investment to be made in constructing the Center amount to 56 million dollars. When the Center is fully operative, it wTill have an annual operating budget of $20 to $30 million, and will be expected to disburse considerably more than that through a contract research and development program with industry and universities.” (Text) December 17: First successful flight of the C-141 Starlighter took place at Dobbins afb, Ga. Featuring four fan-jet engines, the plane can cross any ocean nonstop at speeds of more than 500 mph. (AFSC Operational Highlights, 13)
Addressing National Rocket Club in Washington, Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “To me, the most important indirect benefit we are gaining [from the space program] is probably the least tangible, the least measurable, and yet the most far reaching in effect insofar as our future national growth is concerned. I am referring to the impact our space program is having upon our educational programs and institutions. The fact that NASA places demands upon and draws from almost every academic discipline has produced a stimulus in universities and colleges that is unprecedented in peacetime .... “What is important to understand is that scientific research and development is for the first time in our peacetime history being organized within one agency to accomplish a national goal. The achievements of our immediate space objectives are, of course, of paramount importance. But, I have little patience with the critics who cry out that our tax money is being thrown away in the exploration of space, or that going to the moon will result in the neglect of our problems here on earth. “It should be obvious to those critics, if they take the time for a short historical review, that many years of experience have shown that the indirect payoff in human terms for technical innovation is many times more valuable than the original investment . . . .” (Text)
Clarence A. Syvertson, nasa Ames Research Center scientist, said in paper presented at Space Rendezvous, Rescue and Recovery Symposium at Edwards afb that future spacecraft based on M-2 lifting body design could satisfy requirements for maneuvering re-entry vehicles on missions from near-earth orbit and on return from manned Mars missions. With lift-drag ratio of over one, M-2 lifting body allows use of maneuvering technique to solve critical heating problems of re-entry. Choice of M-2 rather than spacecraft covered with heavy ablative material could save considerable spacecraft weight. (Ames Release 63-34)
Dr. John V. Harrington of mit Lincoln Laboratory was selected to direct new mit space research center, to be completed in 1965. Dr. Harrington was also named professor in departments of electrical engineering and aeronautics and astronautics. (Boston Eve. Globe, 4/23/63)
nasa Ames Research Center announced award of contracts to naa Space and Information Div. and Space Technology Laboratories (stl) for studies of manned Mars landing-and-retum missions. Each contract called for nine-month studies to determine requirements for possible Mars missions and to decide what research would be required during next several years to implement such a flight program. Other studies of manned Mars missions were being managed by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and Manned Spacecraft Center, emphasizing use of Apollo-class booster and spacecraft; Ames-managed studies emphasized Mars-landing mission with no restrictions as to type of vehicle and spacecraft. (Ames Release 63-21)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, director of President Kennedy’s Office of Science and Technology, was asked in Voice of America interview whether an attempt to land astronauts on Mars in 1971 or 1973 “could be considered.” Dr. Wiesner replied: “I think it could be considered, but I don’t think it would be done. I think it is a very major effort, even considerably larger than the moon effort. We have made estimates of a Mars program cost and a round number like one hundred billion dollars seems to be a reasonable figure. It is obviously technically possible, [but] I doubt whether one could do it in the time period between now and 1970 without just an unbelievable crash program. I think that before the century is out we will probably have done just that, and it would be interesting to do, but I don’t believe anyone can deny the vital reason for undertaking the program of the kind you are talking about.” (Transcript)
nasa and Government of Malagasy Republic announced agreement for installation of transportable tracking station at Majunga, Madagascar, for monitoring injection phase of such U.S. satellites as Nimbus, Echo, and Orbiting Geophysical Observatory. (nasa Release 63-279)
In a ceremony coincident with nasa’s fifth anniversary, Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa’s Langley Research Center, presented a model of a Mercury space capsule to the new municipal aerospace park in Hampton, Va. (Newport News (Va.) Times-Herald, 10/1/63,13)
Soviet news agency Tass announced launching of cosmos xiii (apogee: 209 mi.; perigee: 127 mi.; inclination to equator: 64° 58'; period: 89.77 min.). Tags stated that all systems were functioning and that onboard equipment was “intended for continuing outer space research in conformity with the program announced . . . March 16, 1962,” but gave no payload weight or specific mission details. In an interview in Guinea, Cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Pavel Popovich said that the Soviets plan more tandem manned orbital flights. In response to questions, they said that women sometimes have “physical superiority over men.” cosmos xiii was launched after 89 days of no announced Soviet space flight activity, longest period of space inactivity to date. ( upi, Wash. Post, 3/23/63, A8; Av. Wk, 3/25/63, 26; Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/22/63,1, afss-t Trans.)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences voted to delay nasa proposed electronics research center until nasa provided detailed study justifying need for center and for its location in the Boston area. (Finney, NYT, 6/14/63, 12)
nasa Flight Research Center announced award of $1.325-million contract to Lockheed-Georgia Co. to purchase Lockheed Jet-Star aircraft. Aircraft would be used for research investigation of aircraft flying qualities, automatic and manual control systems, pilot instrument displays, and pilot training, with special emphasis on supersonic transport research, (frc Release 2-63)
At annual dinner in New York, American Meteorological Society presented posthumously the Carl-Gustaf Rossby Award for Extraordinary Scientific Achievement to the late Dr. Harry Wex-ler, who had been head of U.S. Weather Bureau’s Office of Research ; Dr. Wexler was cited “for his contributions to knowledge of the atmospheric heat balance and dynamic anticyclogenesis, for his interdisciplinary studies in meteorology, oceanography, and glaciology, and for his outstanding leadership in international programs in the atmospheric sciences.” Other awards: Charles Franklin Brooks Award for Outstanding Service to the Society, presented to Dr. David M. Ludlum “for his continuing effort, on behalf of the Society, to popularize meteorology and to stimulate the interest of young people in the field, for establishing Weather-wise, and for his effective participation in Society affairs over many years”; Cleveland Abbe Award for Distinguished Service to Atmospheric Sciences by an Individual presented to Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, President of Graduate Research Center, Dallas, Tex., for “his scientific work on the upper atmosphere and for the stimulation he provided to the field of meteorology by his work as Chairman of the Committee on Meteorology of the National Academy of Sciences”; the Meisinger Award, presented to Prof. Edward N. Lorenz of mit “for his introduction of concepts leading to a better understanding of the energetics of the general circulation, and for his recent work on low order systems indicating aperiodic vacillations from one regime of motion to another”; Award for Outstanding Services to Meteorology by a Corporation, presented to rca Astro-Electronics Div., “for contributions to meteorology through its role in producing the successful Tiros meteorological satellites”; ams Award for Outstanding Contribution to the Advance of Applied Meteorology, presented to Herbert C. S. Thom, Chief Climatologist, U.S. Weather Bureau, “for a quarter century of contributions to applied meteorology, including furnished climatological estimates to the armed forces during World War II, major contributions to the problems of statistical analysis of climatological data, development of wind design data, and development of a much improved formula for calculating annual and seasonal energy use for domestic heating”; Award for Outstanding Achievement in Bioclimatology, presented to Prof. Konrad J. K. Buettner, Dept, of Atmospheric Sciences, Univ. of Washington, “for his distinguished and continuing studies on the influence of the atmospheric environment on man.” (ams Release)
Aerobee 150A rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried instrumented payload to 147-mi. altitude in experiment to flight-test components of equipment for Eogo satellite and to measure propagation of vlf signals through ionosphere. Flight was joint project of Stanford Research Institute and nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-32; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
. . . Government’s part in the research and development business has now reached the point where it commands attention because of its sheer size and propensity for growth. From here on, we will have to be more choosy in what we do, and better prepared to supply answers to questions about marginal costs and benefits. The budget this year for research and development is a husky $15 billion. Its growth potential dwarfs anything else in the budget. Someone has figured out that the doubling time for research and development as a fraction of national income is only 7 years, and that if this continued for 30 years research and development would rise to one-half of the national income.
Text of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement on legal principles of space exploration was released at the U.N. in New York. The document would be brought before the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on Nov. 22. Even if approved, the statement of principles would not be legally binding on U.N. members. The plan was for two treaties based on the principles to be submitted to member nations early in 1964. The treaties would cover (1) rescue and return of astronauts and space vehicles, and (2) liability for death, injury, or damage caused on earth by space vehicles. (Wash. Post, 11/22/63; Text, NYT, 11/22/63, 18)
More than 150,000 visitors visited nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, more than 50,000 visits recorded by persons on business. Biggest single attraction was Space Orientation Center, drawing about 83,000 visits during the year. (Marshall Star, 1/22/64, 1)
U.N. General Assembly’s Political Committee approved draft resolution and declaration on international cooperation in space sciences and law. The resolution endorsed recommendations by U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, which called for proposals on exchange of scientific information, consideration of agreements on legal principles “governing the activities of the states in the exploration and use of outer space," and other steps toward cooperation. The declaration was an endorsement of legal principles drafted jointly by U.S. and U.S.S.R. representatives last month. Provisions of the nine-point draft included statements that celestial bodies should be regarded as free territories not subject to national sovereignty; exploration of space should be for the benefit of all men of all nations; and all nations engaged in space exploration should observe international law. With adoption of the two drafts, the Political Committee concluded its present consideration of space exploration. (Lubasch, NTT, 12/6/63,1 & 17)
nasa Ames Research Center was assigned direction of future Pioneer space probes, first of which would be launched in 1964. Newly created Space Sciences Div. would direct scientific aspects of the project. (San Jose News, 1/1/63)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Director of the White House Office of Science and Technology, appeared before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee to request restoration of $245,000 that the House had cut from his office’s $1,025,000 budget request. If the cut were not restored, he said, he would have to cut back his 29-member staff just as the one-year-old organization was beginning to “realize some of the potential foreseen for it as a new innovation in the Federal science structure.” (NYT, 10/15/63, 25)
nasa’s Flight Research Center, faa, and U.S. Navy announced completion of a series of test flights simulating the supersonic transport aircraft (sst) flying in the air traffic control network. A Navy A5A jet aircraft was used to simulate the sot because its thrust-to-weight ratio enabled it to simulate closely the performance of the sst up to 50,000 ft. Some 21 flights were made into Los Angeles along Federal airways, starting from level flight at 50,000 ft. and mach 1.7, then decelerating to mach 1.4 and descending, dropping below the speed of sound before reaching 30,000 ft., and flying at 340 mph at 20,000 ft., not much faster tban present-day jet transports. Flight controllers reported no problems with descent and landing, although takeoff and climb did present more problems because of the high performance of the aircraft, (frc Release 31-63)
D. Brainerd Holmes announced his resignation as nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, effective some time next autumn. Holmes had joined nasa autumn of 1961, would return to industry “within the period of two years which was understood to constitute his obligation for government service at the time of his appointment.” (nasa Release 63-133)
New nasa-dod Contractor Performance Rating System would be “just like pulling a Dun and Bradstreet report on a contractor’s performance,” nasa Director of Procurement and Supply, Ernest Brackett, said in Missiles and Rockets. System would provide central file of past contractor performance evaluations which dod and nasa would be required to consult before awarding future contracts. It would apply only to engineering and systems research and development contractors—not to small study contracts. Bracket disclosed the plan was first considered by committee in office of John Rubel, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering. “We joined the effort later,” he said. (M&R, 2/11/63,14)
Editorial in the Washington Sunday Star commented on U.S.S.R.’s latest space feat, the launching of the maneuverable spacecraft polet i: “Russia’s newest venture in space has come at exactly the right time. Although not so intended, it pulls the rug from under those among us—such as economizing Congressmen and excessively zealous scientists like Linus Pauling—who have been clamoring for an end to our country’s program to place Americans on the moon by 1970. “These people, with much naivete (to use a polite word), have attached an extravagant degree of importance to Premier Khrushchev’s recent remarks vaguely suggesting that he may be withdrawing the Soviets from the lunar race .... their latest space shot plainly, and disturbingly, indicates that they are well ahead of us with the kind of rendezvous capability that is essential to efforts to place men on the moon and bring them back safely .... “Clearly, we must run this race as swiftly as we possibly can.” {OR, 11/4/63, A6869) November S: Reviewing the U.S. manned lunar landing program, John Finney of the New York Times concluded that the race to the moon had always been a one-sided one, that there was no evidence that the Russians were building the large rocket that would be necessary for such a venture, that they were rather proceeding on a building-block program in space tnat eventually would lead to a lunar landing, but not as a special, high-priority project. This, Finney said, was also the approach of the U.S. until May 1961. “Then, in the wake of the Bay of Pigs fiasco and the first Soviet manned space flight, the Kennedy Administration ordered an abrupt change in course.” The original justification was that U.S. prestige was at stake. As time went on and budget resistance developed in Congress, the Administration argument shifted to one of attaining “a position of preeminence” in space. Also the potential military benefits were emphasized more and more. Finally, the President’s proposal for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar program seemed to undercut all preceding positions. To Mr. Finney, all this added up to the certainty that the U.S. would continue its program for a manned lunar landing “but it will be pursued with less competitive zeal and at a more leisurely pace.” (Finney, NYT, 11/3/63, 5E)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb issued statement to press: “The record shows that Congress has consistently taken the necessary action to support the space program, and I am confident that this Congress will continue this record. Although the report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics is a major milestone on the road to approval of the 1964 nasa Budget, it is still too early in the consideration of this budget by Congress to draw firm conclusions as to what the final result will be. The House subcommittees have given the nasa programs a most careful review, accumulating data from hearings which will total more than 4,000 pages of testimony. Their devotion and attention to details has been impressive, but in my opinion the overall result of their actions is an inadequate level of support for a program that is urgently needed, has achieved a high level of success, and is now giving this nation the promise of early preeminence in all phases of space exploration and use. In the areas reduced, nasa will present a strong case for restoration as the legislation proceeds to enactment. “After its many details were brought under close scrutiny, and the possibility of postponement of many of these examined, the Committee has endorsed the program and the way it is being carried out but decided to defer approval until subsequent budgets in a number of important areas. My view is that the necessary resources should be authorized this year, rather than have important segments postponed with the consequent introduction of uncertainty at many levels in the government-industry -university team now engaged in this urgent national effort. “At the reduced level of funding recommended, we will certainly have to slow up or postpone a number of programs and direct a reduction in the scheduled level of effort in the plants of our contractors where 90% of the work of the space program is done. Unless an adequate level of support is restored, momentum already attained with great effort and difficulty will be lost and the stretch-out required will add to the final cost of the work required to carry out the program.” (Statement)
In address at dedication of General H. H. Arnold advanced range instrumentation ship (aris), Cape Canaveral, General B. A. Schriever (usaf) said: “Instrumentation is a key element of technology in the Space Age. It plays a crucial role in the rapid progress of our research and development efforts, through the provision of more complete and accurate information on test results. As a result, far fewer tests are required than was formerly the case . . . .” Comparing the 2,500 test firings of V-2 to the less than 50 of Thor irbm, he said: “Better instrumentation is a major factor in this dramatic reduction.” He recalled General Arnold’s foresight “demonstrated as far back as 1917,” when he and Charles Kettering worked on development of “The Bug” pilotless guided airplane—in many ways “25 years ahead of its time . . . .” “Throughout his career ‘Hap’ Arnold was a pioneer of new ideas . . . .” In 1938 he predicted development of variable-wing aircraft. In 1944 he organized Army Air Forces Scientific Advisory Group, under Dr. Theodore von Karman, charging these scientists to “‘think about supersonic speed airplanes, airplanes that would move and operate without crews, improvements in bombs . . .; communications systems . . . television, weather, medical research; atomic energy, and any other phase of aviation which might affect the development and employment of the air power to come ....’” (Text, afsc Release 35-R-36)
nasa’s Langley Research Center asked 36 companies for proposals on Project Scanner, a spacecraft that would establish the radiation characteristics of the Earth’s horizon and develop horizonscanning techniques. Program would involve two flight models complete with re-entry heat shield, plus one backup. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/29/63,165)
First complete night system test of the Sert (space electric rocket test) payload under simulated space conditions at Lewis Research Center. Two engines in the Sert package would be the first electric engines to operate in space. (Lewis Chronology, 11)
Two flight tests of M-2 wingless lifting body conducted by nasa Flight Research Center, with Milton O. Thompson as test pilot. Towed to 13,000-ft. altitude by C-47 aircraft, M-2 glided each time to landing on Rogers Dry Lake bed in a few seconds over three minutes. These were sixth and seventh air-tow flight-tests of M-2 in series to investigate man’s ability to control M-2 during low-speed operations, particularly during landing phase. ( frc Release 17-63; M&R, 9/9/63,14)
D. Brainard Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, said before Electronic Components Conference in Washington: “Today, the people of the United States are reappraising the commitment made in 1961. These discussions are natural and healthy. One of the fundamental elements of the strength of the American system is the forum of public debate. However, those of us who understand the long-term nature of major research and development programs have a duty to warn of the pitfalls involved in making frequent, drastic revisions in such programs unless it is demonstrated after thorough study that such changes are necessary. Such a course always results in excessive delays and increased costs. There is an efficient pace at which a program should proceed. To reduce this pace substantially or to pull out all stops and operate on a crash basis would result in increases in the total program costs in manpower and dollars. . . .” (Text)
Two contracts were awarded by nasa Lewis Research Center to study possibility of “floxing” the Atlas booster. If feasible, the mixture of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen might increase the Atlas payload capability for earth orbit by as much as 88%. (Lewis Chronology, 4)
Brainerd Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, said in address before Washington Day Banquet of Creve Coeur Club, Peoria, 111.: “For centuries men have gazed at the moon; have written poems and composed songs about it; have proposed to their ladies beneath it; and now they wish to stand upon it. To do this we must hurl men some quarter of a million miles through space to rendezvous with the moon, and then return these men to earth safely. This surely is a dear goal. All men know what it means when we say ‘leave the earth and go to the moon and return safely again to earth.’ A further parameter is also clearly defined and that is time. Our goal is to accomplish this mission within this decade . . . .” (Text)
Attempt to launch series of three Hopi-Dart wind research vehicles from nasa Wallops Station was canceled when first vehicle failed to perform properly. Tests, to gather wind-flow data at altitudes approaching 60 mi. for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, would be rescheduled after analysis of cause of rocket’s malfunction. (Wallops Release 63-21)
Boyden Observatory near Bloemfontein, South Africa, had confirmed location of stncom i communications satellite, Harvard Univ. Observatory Director Donald H. Menzel announced. stncom i was tumbling end over end in its orbital path about 19,000 n. mi. high. Boyden’s unconfirmed photographs of the satellite, missing since Feb. 14, were reported Feb. 28, and nasa requested that the findings be confirmed by further observation. “Since then it has been cloudy over the Boyden Observatory until last night, when it cleared and we obtained two good plates showing images in the expected position. With this final confirmation, we have no doubt whatever of the location of the satellite. It behaved approximately as expected.” (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 3/3/63) March, 3: Whilden P. Breen, Jr., 35-year-old research assistant, spent his 106th consecutive day living in specially constructed isolation chamber in Univ. of Maryland’s Space Laboratory building, in NASA-sponsored experiment to “obtain basic information on how man perform under certain conditions of stress, and methods to deal with such problems so that astronauts of the future [confined for prolonged periods within interplanetary spacecraft, orbiting space stations, or extraterrestrial bases] will be able to perform their duties at highest efficiency.” With no direct view of outside world nor of any other person, volunteer Breen was under constant surveillance by experimenters outside and did communicate with them by teletype and voice. Subject’s activities were programed automatically, with panel of illuminated pushbuttons identifying each activity for him. Experimenters said he had “responded well in the performance of his tasks . . . [and had] displayed heightened capability and richness in those creative activities which are available to him (e.g., writing and painting). He appears to be in good physical and mental condition and is eager to continue the study.” (nasa Release 63-45; nasa Fact Sheet)
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Adminis-strator and Director of Manned Space Flight, told Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics that current cost estimate of Project Apollo was $20 billion or less. (Transcript)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of lewis Research Center, said in testimony before Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics that Centaur liquid-hydrogen vehicle could lift 250 additional pounds of payload because of design improvements in the vehicle. Dr. Silverstein described design changes and testing program undertaken by Lewis, and said that the second and third of the planned 15 Centaur vehicles were scheduled to be launched in last half of 1963.	(M&R, 3/25/63, 17)
President Kennedy appointed Robert M. White to succeed Francis W. Reichelderfer as Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau. White was president of Travelers Research Center, Inc., an independent nonprofit organization engaged in rad in environmental and mathematical sciences. (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/30/63)
nasa launched kxpioher xvn (S-6) atmospheric structure satellite from Cape Canaveral, using Thor-Delta launch vehicle m (its 16th consecutive success in 17 attempts). Satellite attained orbit of 571-mi. apogee, 158.9-mi. perigee, 96.4-min. period, 57.6° inclination to the equator. The sphere-shaped satellite, measuring 35 inches in diameter and weighing 405 lbs., contained instruments (two neutral mass spectrometers, four pressure gauges, and two electrostatic probes) to measure density, composition, pressure, and temperature of the atmosphere; it was equipped to make direct samplings of atmospheric constituents such as helium, nitrogen, and oxygen. Under project management of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, explorer xvii was the first scientific earth satellite to use new pulse-code-modulation telemetry system, a solid-state system providing output power of 500 milli-watts and capable of supplying 40 separate channels of information in digital form. LTseful lifetime of the satellite was estimated at two-three months. (nasa Release 63-59 ;nasa Project explorer xvii Prog. Rpt. No. 1)
Findings of Trendex survey of public attitude on space exploration, conducted by Hicks and Greist, Inc., advertising agency: “There seems to be a definite relationship between age and attitude toward the space program. Generally, there is an increasingly negative opinion about the program with increase in age . . . .” (Kaselow. N.Y. Herald Trib.. 8/15/63)
Soviet Academician Nikolai Kozyrev of Pulkovo Observatory wrote in British magazine Nature describing evidence of volcanic processes on the moon. Ejection of gases, including molecular carbon, was observed from (1) central peak of Alphonsus crater on Nov. 3, 1958, and Oct. 23,1959; and (2) Aristarchus crater in Nov. and Dec. 1961.	(Nature, 6/8/63,979-80)
Sir Charles (C.P.) Snow, British scientist and author, said in New York interview that pace of U.S. lunar program was “probably a mistake,” an “all-out” effort in race with U.S.S.R. Most dramatic scientific achievements of next decade, he said, would be in molecular biology. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/21/63,11) Jv/ne 20-21; In hearings conducted by House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby outlined details of proposed Government-industry project to develop supersonic transport, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpts. 11/93 and 11/94) June 21: Addressing Conference of National Organizations in Atlantic City, nasa Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight Dr. Joseph F. Shea said that “now that the costs are rising as predicted, the country is reappraising the commitment [to land men on the moon in this decade]. Such discussions are entirely proper. Indeed, the resolve with which we carry out our national activities is frequently strengthened [by the] tempering in the heat of debate . . . .” (Text)
nasa announced preparations for dual launching of satellites with Scout launch vehicle late this year. Under contract to nasa Langley Research Center, State Univ. of Iowa would provide Injun satellite containing instruments to record corpuscular radiation streaming into earth’s upper atmosphere from space. The other satellite, a 12-ft. inflatable sphere to measure air density, was being built by LaRC. The two satellites would be launched into near-polar orbit from pmr. (nasa Release 63-170)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced Belgian astrophysicist, Dr. Francois V. Dossin, working at gsfc on a National Academy of Sciences fellowship, discovered faint comet about 5° from sun during July 20 solar eclipse. Dr. Dossin made seven camera-plate exposures of comet from Pleasant Pond, Me., during 60 sec. of total eclipse. He used blue-green filter to bring out the light of carbon molecules in the comet. Microscopic examination of developed plates showed a diffuse image emitting the light of molecular carbon, (gsfc Release)
Secretary of the Interior Stewart L. Udall announced U.S. Geological Survey had completed second in series of geological maps of the moon. Map was prepared by C. H. Marshall, astrogeolo-gist of Flagstaff, Ariz., Observatory. (AP, NYT, 5/12/63, 64)
Soviet Ambassador to U.N., Nikolai T. Fedorenko, announced Soviets had broken off private talks with U.S. on uses of space and would submit its own declaration on space exploration to the Legal Subcommittee of the Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. (NYT, 4/17/63,1; Wash. Post, 4/17/63)
Summary article entitled “Ames Hypervelocity Free-flight Research’’ by Alvin Seiff in Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering reviewed shock-tube wind tunnel and light-gas gun experiments at Ames Research Center. Model speeds up to 41,000 fps and at air densities from 0.0002-0.16 times that at sea level have been achieved. {A&AE, 12/63,16-23)
nasa Hq. had tentatively approved Project Luster, designed to capture lunar dust that was in orbit around the earth, Missiles and Rockets reported. Proposed by Ames Research Center, the project is based on the assumption that meteorite impacts on the moon above a certain velocity should throw out more than the meteorite’s own weight in dust. Some of this lunar dust should find its way into earth orbit. Ames would launch an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket to attempt to trap some of the dust. (M&R, 10/14/63,9)	...
Reorganization at nasa Ames Research Center was put into effect by Director Smith J. DeFrance, designed to accommodate new Pioneer spacecraft program assigned to Ames. In addition to other changes, two new Assistant Directors were appointed: Assistant Director for Development, Mr. Robert M. Crane; and Assistant Director for Research and Development Analysis and Planning, Dr. Alfred J. Eggers. (Ames Memo For Staff, 1/31/63)
nasa and Australian Dept, of Supply jointly announced manned space flight tracking and data acquisition facilities were being moved from Muchea, Australia, to a new site being built near Carnarvon, on the west coast. Move would consolidate at one site nasa’s ground support facilities in Australia for manned Projects Gemini and Apollo. Site also would include tracking and data acquisition facilities for unmanned Orbiting Observatory satellites—Oao, Ogo, and Oso. ( nasa Release 63-266)
General Thomas S. Power (usaf) , CinC of Strategic Air Command, predicted at aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting that ‘‘space potentially offers unique military advantages, and we must anticipate that some nation or nations will endeavor to exploit such advantages to help them attain their political objectives .... We may find that, eventually, the only really surviv-able command and control structure would be one employing a maneuverable command post in space.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/24/63)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper arrived in home town of Shawnee, Okla., for weekend celebrations in his honor, his first visit there since Project Mercury MA-9 space flight (May 15-16). (AP, Wash. Post, 6/29/63)	...	.
At hearings on nasa proposed patent policy before Senate Subcommittee on Monopoly, Committee on Small Business, Senator Wayne Morse (D.-Ore.) charged nasa Administrator James E. Webb with tiying to give away “basic, substantive rights” of the public in Government financed research. Mr. Webb cited Section 305 of the Space Act of 1958 authorizing the nasa Administrator to waive Government patent rights, then outlined present nasa patent policy, and explained how proposed policy would extend patent waiver. “A careful comparison of the proposed revision with the terms of the present regulations . . . will show, I believe, that the public interest in inventions which come out of nasa’s research and development contracts is more clearly stated and would, in practice, be fully protected .... “It is evident from nasa’s present waiver regulations and the proposed revision that we are convinced that the public interest is often best served by permitting a contractor or subcontractor to retain commercial rights to inventions made in the course of doing research and development work funded by nasa—provided, of course? the Government acquires a royalty-free license for use of the invention for governmental purposes, and provided, also, that the invention is actually worked, nasa’s policy is intended to encourage use of inventions in two ways: first, by bringing the stimuli of the patent system into play and, second, by withholding the full benefits of waiver until public realization of the fruits of the invention have been achieved. Such a policy offers many advantages over a restrictive policy which would permit contractors to retain patent rights only in the exceptional case. The economy should not be deprived of the substantial benefits of the patent system. Incentives for contractors to conceal and protect new technological developments as trade secrets rather than to disclose them as patentable inventions are not desirable in government contracting for research and development. Historically, patent protection has been one of the rewards for full disclosure and publication . . . .” (Testimony; Wash. Post, 3/15/63)
Ivan A. Getting of Aerospace Corp., in address to space flight testing conference at Cocoa Beach, Fla., estimated that 90 percent of all current in-flight rocket failures could be detected and corrected by better preflight checking, including “preliminary designs, design reviews, re-design, testing, additional redesign and additional testing. The probability of a successful perform-anee of sucli R product is directly related to th.s thorough~r*ess of this evolutionary process .. . “There is an unfortunate tendency in our rush to meet end objectives and time schedules, and in our desire to save money within the program, to cut out important steps in developmental tests and ground systems tests. Not only are such economies false, but they impinge on our reputation as a nation for excellence in scientific achievement and engineering design.” (AP, Wash. Post, 3/20/63. A2)
oso i solar observatory satellite completed its first year in orbit, exceeding its estimated operating life by six months. Eleven of its 13 scientific experiments were still operating, having provided more data on behavior and composition of the sun than any single ground-based observatory and all previous rocket, balloon, and satellite flights combined. Preliminary results from oso i would be presented at a symposium March 14. (Goddard Release)
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, sent letter to all Committee members and to Panel on Science and Technology, saying: “The Subcommittee will explore plans and programs to accomplish the best orientation and use of science and its resources .... [For example], what standards may effectively be applied to determine the need and the priority for scientific research, how much may be evaluated as conforming with national scientific policy and goals, and what proper levels may be established for basic, applied and developmental research.” (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. II/17)	‘	.
Nike-Apache and Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were launched from nasa Wallops Station with scientific experiments designed to measure atmospheric temperatures, winds and diffusion rates at high altitudes. Nike-Apache’s payload ejected sodium vapor trail from 25-mi. altitude to 100-mi. altitude, the vapor clouds visible for several hundred miles. Nike-Cajun’s payload consisted of 12 special explosive charges ejected and detonated at intervals from 24- to 55-mi. altitudes. Experiments were part of continuing program by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center to study characteristics and composition of the upper atmosphere. (Wallops Release 63-17)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said he believed Soviet Union is building super-rocket that would dwarf any flown before. “We would be foolish to think they are standing still,” he remarked. Dr. von Braun was at Michoud Operations, near New Orleans, formally accepting the first Saturn S-I booster built by private industry (Chrysler Corp.). (upi, Chic. Trib., 12/15/63; Marshall Star, 12/18/63,1)
Senate Committee on Aeronautics and Space Sciences voted (6 to 5) to delete nearly $5 million requested in nasa budget for FY 1964 for proposed electronics research center. Vote was tentative, "“ti<iinrr fijiai mmmittee action on nasa FY 1964 request. (ATT, •
Speaking in New York at a special seminar at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies, Dr. Wemher von Braun, msfc director, told scientists that benefits from America’s space program would far outweigh the cost. The revenues from communications satellites alone would, by 1975, exceed the cost of nasa’s program in that area. There would also be benefits on which no pnce tag could be placed, such as discovery of the Van Allen radiation belts and the accomplishments of the weather satellites. Dr. von Braun said that man himself is a very important link in space exploration, and that the value of placing a man on the moon cannot be debated. . “Instrumented equipment can do the job if one knows exactly what he is seeking,” he said. “However, if one doesn’t know, then automated equipment is not quite good enough.” (Goddard News, 2/25/63, 2)
Lt. Col. Robert E. Warren (U.S. Army), nasa Deputy Director of Communications Systems, reviewed launching and performance of syncom i communications satellite before Senate Commerce Committee’s Subcommittee on Communications. After syncom was successfully launched by Delta vehicle, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had determined apogee of syncom’s elliptical transfer orbit would occur at 21,700-mi. altitude, about 600-mi. short of synchronous altitude but well within allowable error. So that more nearly synchronous orbit could be achieved, signal was sent from usns Kingsport in Lagos harbor, Nigeria, commanding satellite’s apogee motor to fire 10 min. earlier (at 5:42 a.m.) than firing time set on onboard timer, syncom received and stored signal, and at 5:42 a.m. signal was sent from Kingsport to execute the command. 20.1 sec. later, ground reception of satellite telemetry abruptly ceased. Because apogee motor was to have fired for 21.2 sec., Colonel Warren said it was “difficult to imagine that these two events are unrelated .... “So, what can we make of all this ? First we know that synoom is in orbit. If the apogee motor did not fire, it is still in the elliptical orbit and will eventually be found, either by optics or by radar. If the apogee motor did fire, syncom is in a very high altitude orbit, and without telemetry, there is only a slim chance that it will be found. A search has been organized which will continue until such time as it is found, or until further search seems unwarranted. If it is found, we will have another chance to try out the command system, and if it works, we could again be in business. “Secondly, we know that one of the communications transponders worked well in the transfer ellipse. “Thirdly, we have shown once more that the Delta launch vehicle is a reliable booster, this being its 15th successive flight with performance well within acceptable error.” (Testimony) • Bill to create Commission on Science and Technology (S. 816) introduced in Congress by Senator John McClellan (D.-Ark.). Commission would be charged with bringing about more economy and efficiency in scientific programs carried out and funded by Federal Government. (Space Bits. Daily, 2/20/63, 224)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb addressed Kansas State Univ. in Manhattan, and said: “It might surprise you if I were to suggest that, in an important sense, Kansas had a part in the beginnings of the scientific age in America, almost 160 years ago. It was in 1804 that Lewis and Clark camped for three days at the junction of the Kansas and Missouri Rivers while en route to the Pacific Northwest on the United States’ first important scientific exploration. “Although the Congress authorized the investment of only $2,500 in that expedition, it established the precedent for a growing federal participation over the next 150 years in scientific research and exploration .... “And what of today ? In Fiscal Year 1964, Congress is considering the investment of almost $15 billion for scientific research and development and the tools and facilities with which to do it. More than $5 billion 700 million is being requested for the civilian space program alone—an activity so vast and so demanding of resources that it is something which only an entire nation could undertake ....'' (Text)
Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.) and nasa Administrator James E. Webb were co-hosts at luncheon at Senate for three women accorded national recognition for space age accomplishments—Marcia S. Miner, student at American Univ. and winner of National Rocket Club’s 1963 Goddard Memorial Scholarship Award; Dr. Nancy C. Roman, Chief of Astronomy and Solar Physics in nasa Geophysics and Astronomy Program and 1962 winner of Federal Women’s Award; and Eleanor C. Pressly, Head of Vehicles Section, Sounding Rocket Branch, in nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Spacecraft Integration and Sounding Rocket Div., and 1963 winner of Federal Women’s Award. ( nasa Release 63-94)
nasa announced six-month contract with Space Technology Laboratories, Inc., for study of and recommendations for nasa management of manned space flight program. Study was associated with nasa organizational changes necessitated by completion of Project Mercury and focusing on Projects Gemini and Apollo. Included in study would be ways of improving relationship of nasa centers and industrial contractors involved in manned space flight program, (nasa Release 63-156)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced sodium-vapor cloud experiments by Goddard during past two years had shown wind behavior 44—50 mi. above earth becomes erratic and unpredictable. Below that altitude, winds generally follow global pattern, regularly reversing with the seasons. Region between 56- and 68-mi. altitudes is characterized by “remarkable wind sheers”—within altitude span of less than three miles, wind speed was observed to increase swiftly by more than 250 mph and even to reverse direction. Immediately above this band of maximum wind velocity, wind diminishes almost to zero. Above 70 mi., research indicated region of “strong but more uniform winds” with velocities of about 200 mph. Goddard experiments, launched on sounding rockets from nasa Wallops Station, did not extend beyond 105-mi. altitude. (Goddard Release; AP, Wash. Post, 1/13/63, A16)
usaf announced Minuteman icbm was flown on 3,000-mi. research and development flight from Cape Canaveral, the launch conducted by an all-usAFcrew, (dod Release 247-62)
In Wells College (Aurora, N.Y.) commencement address, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight D. Brainerd Holmes said: “How about women in space ? The answer is yes, but not immediately. At the moment, however, all of the qualified pilots are men. “In a larger sense, of course, women are already in space. The astronaut does not fly alone. He relies on the thousands of people in his supporting team on the ground. These include women as well as men. On the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, there are about 150 women scientists and engineers. Many more are employed by the contractors throughout the country who perform the bulk of our work. In this rapidly growing program, there are many interesting career opportunities for those of you who complete the necessary preparation . . . .” (Text) Jwne 3: Students in Washington, D.C., area began helping Weather Bureau in Project Skywatch—drawing cloud formations, recording wind speed and direction, temperature and relative humidity and precipitation, in project to identify specific cloud formations photographed by Tiros meteorological satellites. About 50 students were participating in project. (Commerce Dept. Release WB-63-6)
Testifying before House Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, nasa Deputy Associate Adihinistrator and Director of Manned Space Flight D. Brainerd Holmes said that “the present Gemini is a different program than the one with which we started. It had two fundamental purposes originally which we have not given up and which we still consider to be of paramount importance—to gain experience in prolonged weightlessness and to gain experience in rendezvous before Apollo .... “However, as we developed the Gemini program, we found it was not wise to have only an updated Mercury spacecraft. We. found as we developed the subsystems for Gemini that it was much wiser to incorporate technology known today—not something that was early developmental technology of the past. This concept would lead us step by step toward Apollo, and we would reap tremendous benefits from it. Ip addition ... it became quite apparent to us that this would be a very useful Earth orbital spacecraft .... “In developing the Gemini subsystems, we find that they are better and more sophisticated than initially conceived and the spacecraft is much more sophisticated than anticipated. Therefore, the costs tend to be higher and the time scales longer .... “We had planned to have the first manned Gemini flight the second flight, during the first quarter of 1964. Our present plan is that the first manned flight in the series would not be until the fourth quarter of 1964. Our current plan grew in part from the advisability of having more sophisticated subsystems, which required more time, and in part from a reorientation of the profram to include a second unmanned flight before the manned ight .... “. . . the Titan II . . . has had some developmental problems over and above what we had anticipated. However, the problems are always encountered in a developmental program. In our opinion it will be safer to use the Titan II for manned flights if we have two structural missions. We will have more time to eliminate the developmental problems .... “We are planning an unmanned flight at the end of this year and about the middle of next year. We plan to have a manned flight in the last quarter of 1964 . . . .” (Transcript)
Kaj Aa. Strand, former Chairman of Northwestern Univ. Astronomy Dept., succeeded retiring Gerald M. Clemence as Scientific Director of U.S. Naval Observatory. (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/27/63)
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket carried 153-lb. instrumented payload to 139-mi. altitude in experiment from Wallops Island to study spectra] emission lines in upper atmosphere and measure their intensity as function of altitude, thus determining distribution of certain molecular and atomic species in upper atmosphere. Experiment was designed by The Johns Hopkins Univ. under nasa research grant administered by Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-46)
gsfc announced that under a $2 million contract now under final negotiation, Sperry Rand Corp.’s Univac Div. would deliver eleven Model 1218 computer systems to manned space flight tracking stations for operation by July 1964. These computers would automatically summarize telemetry from the spacecraft, provide summaries for display in the mission control center so that the controllers can select and examine certain data on a real-time basis, and prepare the telemetry data for final processing in the more elaborate computers at gsfc and msc. During the Mercury program, controllers at the tracking stations had to select data manually. (gsfc Release G-26-63)
In realignment of nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, two new deputy directors were appointed: Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director for Systems, and George M. Low, Deputy Director for omsf Programs. All major omsf directorates had previously reported directly to D. Brainerd Holmes, Director, omsf. In realigned structure, reporting to Dr. Shea would be Director of Systems Studies, Dr. William A. Lee; Director of Systems Enginering, John A. Gautrand; and Director of Integration and Checkout, James E. Sloan. Reporting to Low would be Director of Launch Vehicles, Milton Rosen; Director of Space Medicine, Dr. Charles Roadman; and Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, presently vacant. Director of Administration, William E. Lilly, would provide administrative support in both major areas, (nasa Release 63-32)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director, nasa Lewis Research Center, expressed appreciation to John W. Macy, Jr., Chairman of the U.S. Civil Service Commission, for commission’s contributions to the Lewis recruiting program. During Fiscal Years 1962 and 1963, Lewis hired 1,280 engineers and scientists from all over the U.S. (lrc Release 63-9; Lewis Chronology, 2)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wemher von Braun announced reorganization of msfc, designed to strengthen the Center’s dual function of performing in-house r&d and monitoring industrial contracts. In Office of the Director, Deputy Director Dr. Eberhard Rees was designated Deputy Director-Technical, and Deputy Director H. H. Gorman, Deputy Director-Administrative. Hans Maus was designated Director of newly formed executive staff replacing msfc Central Planning Office. In second major group, msfc’s nine technical divisions were formed in new Research and Development Operations, with Hermann Weidner as Director. Third major group was new Industrial Operations, comprised of msfc elements concerned with work performed bv industrial contractors, and headed by Robert Young. (Marshall Star, 9/4/63,1, 3; N.O. Times-Pic., 9/1/63)
In paper presented at Lunar Surface Materials Conference, Boston, nasa scientists Curtis W. McCracken (gsfc) and Maurice Dubin (Hq.) asserted moon is covered with dust from four inches to three feet deep. Basing estimate on data gained from spacecraft and ground observations of interplanetary dust particles, McCracken and Dubin said particles traveling at hypervelocities impact moon at such speed that both particle and its impact point are destroyed, creating lunar dust. They supported theory that dust layer is porous cobweb-like structure, (nasa Release 63-109)
Perth, Australia, was ablaze with Christmas lights far into the night. Perth was celebrating its new tradition as “City of Lights” begun Feb. 20,1962, when its lights were a beacon for Astronaut John H. Glenn’s orbital Mercury space flight. (Lukas, NYT, 12/28/63,_6) _	_	__
Medical investigation of the 4,565 general aviation accidents in the U.S. in 1961 was inadequate, a group of usaf doctors reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Physicians should autopsy the dead and examine survivors with the aim of making flying safer, the medical officers asserted, but this is done only for military and commercial airline accidents—not for general aviation, where often only a single investigator from faa or cab visited the crash. (NYT, 5/24/63,6) June 24-July 10: Fourth Annual Aviation Education Workshop, sponsored by Mississippi State Dept, of Education, various aviation interests, military services, and nasa, was held at Univ. of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg. Robert F. Thompson, Head of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center’s Flight Operations Recovery Branch, was principal speaker June 26, with addresses on “Tracking, Search and Rescue Procedures” and “Past and Future Programs of Manned Space Flight.” (msc Release 63-104)
Former nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, said in Hartford address that industry and government leaders must discover better ways to manage the U.S. space proSram. He discussed Project Apollo plans and said the space ight programs must be based pn better mutual confidence between Government and industry. (Hartford [Conn.] G our ami, 11/19/63)
usaf announced series of 27 upper atmosphere chemical releases (Project Firefly III), completed in mid-December, had “ended a four-point basic research program aimed at learning more about the ionosphere.” Information gathered during tests, which were made at Eglin Gulf Test Range, would eventually aid pilots of X-20 vehicle. ( dod Release 70-63)
