frc test-flew modified X—15 No. 2 with Maj. Robert Rushworth (usaf) as pilot, the aircraft remaining attached to B-52 mother craft for airborne checkout of the aircraft systems. Flight was first for this X-15 since Nov. 1962 landing accident. Modifications, completed by North American Aviation, included four astronomical cameras mounted on fuselage, designed to take stellar photographs above ozone layer of earth’s atmosphere, and external propellant tanks which would enable engine to increase top speed by at least 1,000 mph, to a maximum speed over 5,000 mph. (fro Release 15-64; NASA Release 64-138)
Western Union announced it had completed a microwave system for the next lunar spacecraft’s communications with earth. The system was in test operation, linking Goldstone Tracking Station with Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 164 mi. away. For the next lunar probe, gs well as subsequent lunar and planetary probes, data obtained by the spacecraft would be sent through Goldstone to JPL for computer analysis; commands to the spacecraft would be sent from jpl through Goldstone to the probe. (Wash. Post, 4/21/64)
At his Washington press conference, President Johnson announced successful development of an advanced, long-range reconnaissance aircraft to be employed by Strategic Air Command: “This system employs the new SR—71 aircraft and provides a long-range, advanced strategic reconnaissance plane for military use capable of worldwide reconnaissance for military operations. “The Joint Chiefs of Staff, when reviewing the RS—70, emphasized the importance of the strategic reconnaissance mission. The SR-71 aircraft reconnaissance system is the most advanced in the world. “The aircraft will fly at more than three times the speed of sound. It will operate at altitudes in excess of 80,000 feet. It will use the most advanced observation equipment of all kinds in the world. “The aircraft will provide the strategic forces of the United States with an outstanding long-range reconnaissance capability. The system will be used during periods of military hostilities and in other situations in which the United States military forces may be confronting foreign military forces. “The SR—71 uses the same J—58 engine as the experimental interceptor previously announced, but it is substantially heavier and it has a longer range. “The considerably heavier gross weight permits it to accommodate the multiple reconnaissance sensors needed by the Strategic Air Command to accomplish the strategic reconnaissance mission in a military environment. “This billion-dollar program was initiated in February, 1963. The first operational aircraft will begin flight-testing in early 1965, and deployment of production units to the Strategic Air Command will begin shortly thereafter. “Appropriate members of Congress have been kept fully informed on the nature of, and the progress in, this aircraft program. “Further information on this major advanced aircraft system will be released from time to time at the appropriate military secret classification levels.” (Transcript, NYT, 7/25/64, 6)
Soviet satellite cosmos xxnr burned up in the atmosphere between the Great Lakes and the northeastern Canadian coast, according to NORAD. Observers in Pendleton, Ore., and Duluth, Minn., reported seeing fiery streak in the sky, and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory officials at Cambridge, Mass., said they assumed the streak was the reentering cosmos xxiii. (AP, Balt. Sun. 3/28/64; AP, NYT, 3/29/64, 31)
NASA explorer xxi scientific earth satellite (imp b) was launched into orbit from Cape Kennedy with a Thor-Delta rocket booster. Onboard instrumentation was working excellently, but the satellite’s orbit (59,400-mi. apogee; 120-mi. perigee; 34-hr., 57-min. period; 33°53' inclination to the equator) fell far short of the intended deep-space path which would have enabled the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform to measure magnetic fields, cosmic rays, and solar winds in interplanetary space. Planned apogee was 161,000 mi. Robert H. Gray, Director of Goddard Launch Operations, said minimum apogee required for mission success was about 97,750 mi. As in launch of explorer xviii (imf a), the Delta rocket used higher-thrust third-stage motor, the X—258, to give the satellite its final boost into orbital injection. Preliminary tracking data indicated this stage had not provided the required thrust. Designed and built by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, explorer xxi contained nine experiments. Five of these were provided by GSFC researchers and four by experimenters at Univ. of Chicago, Univ. of California, NASA Ames Research Center, and mit respectively. (nasa Release 64-242; AP, Balt. Sun, 10/5/64; upi, Chic. Trib., 10/5/64; M&R, 10/12/64, 24)
Vice Adm. William F. Rabom, Jr. (usn, Ret.), told industry delegates to conference at Georgia Tech that primary purpose of nuclear and space exploration was “the maintenance of national defense to guarantee a continuation of our way of life.” Technology assures “not so much a better texture for our bread but the fact that we will have that bread to eat,” he maintained. Conference was sponsored by Southern Interstate Nuclear Board and Georgia Tech’s School of Nuclear Engineering in cooperation with aec and NASA. (Rutherford, Atlanta Const., 4/3/64)
Speaking on the floor of the House, Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) pointed out: “In our preoccupation with our national space program, we often overlook the fact that aeronautical research and development is a very important and productive part of the whole NASA program. . . . “I should point out that the technology that has evolved from the X-15 program has made possible the creation of the A-ll and the RS-71, hypersonic aircraft in the 2,000-mile-an-hour range, which offer great potential to our Air Force as versatile, high-flying reconnaissance vehicles. NASA, with the X-15, is contributing significantly to the supersonic transport program through new materials, construction techniques, guidance and control systems, and aerodynamic designs that are available now because the naca had the foresight and determination to undertake the X—15 program in 1954, in association with the Air Force and the Navy. “In 1959, the first flight was made. Since then, the X—15 pilots have rocketed out into near space, where 99 percent of the earth’s atmosphere is below them, have reached speeds 6 times the speed of sound that have made the plane glow red hot. “Now, an advanced X—15 is ready to reach for new heights and even greater speeds. Our investment in the X-15 program and our confidence in the men and pilots who have made it so successful, have paid off handsomely for the individual taxpayer and for the country. Our world leadership and prestige in aeronautics have been enhanced manifold by the X-15. It has played an indispensable role in making sure that America’s place in the search for new knowledge of flight will never be less than it is now.” (CR, 8/20/64,20046)
Rep. Bob Wilson (R.-Calif.) said in the House: “Atlas has more scheduled launches during the 1960’s than ever before for missions of the Air Force Systems Command and NASA, a demand so great that a new standardized Atlas space launch vehicle called SLV-3 or Atlas-3 has been designed. This standardized vehicle will produce lower long-term costa while increasing flexibility and flight reliability. Development of this standardized vehicle is an excellent example of how existing space systems can be improved to satisfy new requirements. Improvement of a flight proven system such as Atlas is inherently more efficient and economical than designing new vehicles for new missions. Research and development costs are already expended and Atlas has certainly proven its reliability. . . .” (CR, 3/4/64, All 15)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced contracts for construction of facilities at lrc’s Plum Brook Station: $1,160,000 contract to Roediger Construction, Inc., and $1,386,000 contract to Mosser Construction Co. (lrc Release 64-100)
Dr. Donald F. Homig, Director of President’s Office of Science and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development in its hearings on geographical distribution and indirect costs of Federal R&D. Dr. Hornig said Congress was cutting administrative overhead funds in Federally financed research at universities, and universities were forced to divert funds from other needs to help pay for Federally sponsored research. “Since the university has many scholarly functions to perform, while Federal funds are devoted generally to the sciences or to areas within science, it does not seem to be in the national interest to pursue a policy which diverts private funds from the education of students or the performance of scholarly research in non-scientific areas.” Dr. Homig stated Federal support of research in past decade had produced “a dispersal of university strength,” adding that Southeast and Mountain regions now were producing proportionately more doctorates than 10 years ago. (nasa lar III/102; NYT, 5/22/64,8)
Eighty-three scientists, engineers, and operating groups received medals, citations, and cash awards totaling 87,900 for outstanding contributions to U.S. civilian space program, in NASA’s 6th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony. Recipients of awards for exceptional scientific achievement: William R. Lucas, msfc; Ernst Stuhlinger, msfc; Frank B. McDonald, gsfc ; and Daniel G. Mazur, gsfc. Recipients of award for outstanding leadership: Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, ksc; Dr. Harry J. Goett, Director, gsfc; and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director, msfc. Group achievement awards were accepted by Dr. Debus for ksc and by Dr. von Braun for msfc. Recipients of awards for exceptional service: I. Edward Garrick, Oran W. Nicks, and Leonard Jaffe of NASA Hq.; Hans F.	Gruene of ksc; and Wesley L. Hjornevik of msc. Public service awards went to Bernie P. Miller, of rca, and Harris M. Schurmeier and Allen E. Wolfe, of JPL, for their work on ranger vii lunar-photography mission. Special award was presented to Newton W. Cunningham, Hq., for his work on ranger vn. Cash awards for inventions and contributions were presented to personnel from Ames Research Center, Lewis Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Personnel from Hq., frc, LaRc, lrc, msc, and msfc received Presidential citations for contributions to economy and efficiency in Government. (Program; NASA Release 64-263)
Three contracts were awarded by NASA Lewis Research Center to Hughes Aircraft Co. The first contract, totaling $1,151,370, was a 12-mo. continuation of a previous contract for research and development of a contact ion engine using cesium as a propellant. The other two contracts were also follow-on efforts: a contract for $202,915 provided for fabrication of porous alloy and solid sintered ionizers; a contract for $243,061 covered tests and evaluation of physical, electrical, and cesium ionization properties of porous ionizers and evaluation of the electrical properties of solid sintered ionizer material, (lrc Release 64-114)
Membership on the NASA Policy Planning Board, established November 1, was formally designated, with Langley Research Center Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson as Chairman and NASA General Counsel Walter D. Sohier as Vice Chairman. (NASA Circ. 317)
“Astrometric” telescope of the U.S. Naval Observatory went into operation at Flagstaff, Ariz. The telescope featured world’s largest known telescopic mirror, 61 inches in diameter, ground from huge block of synthetic quartz. New telescope would be used chiefly to measure distances to nearby stars that are too faint for such study by other existing telescopes, thus exploring previously unknown regions of the universe. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/25/64,14)
Eleanor Pressly, head of Vehicle Section, Spacecraft Integration, Sounding Rocket Div. at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and winner of a 1963 Federal Women’s Award, was guest speaker at Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson’s White House luncheon for “women-doers.” (Wash. Post, 3/17/64)
Vladimir Kotelnikov, member of Soviet Academy of Sciences, proposed one-year radio search of the universe for signals from extraterrestrial civilizations, according to Tass. He proposed that network of antennas be assigned to “listen to” specific target points in space. The antennas would be connected to a central multichannel receiver. U.S. radioastronomers at National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W.	Va., had conducted similar experiment in 1960 (Project Ozma) without detecting messages. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/18/64)
Soviet members of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space visited NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. They were Prof. 0. G. Gazenko, Prof. Yu. D. Kalimin, and Mr. I. V. Milovidov. (Goddard News, 12/14/64, 2)
NASA announced three-month expedition at sea using converted Navy aircraft transport to launch sounding rockets would be conducted next year as part of International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy). 40 or more scientific experiments would be carried by Nike-Apache and Nike-Cajun sounding rockets as well as Areas and Hasp weather rockets to areas of the upper atmosphere and the ionosphere that cannot be reached by land-based rockets. Exact locations of the launches had not yet been determined, but it had been decided that a number of experiments would be made in region of the magnetic equator in eastern portion of the South Pacific Ocean. NASA Wallops Station was assigned project management of the expedition and Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for coordinating most of the scientific experiments, being provided by universities, other Federal agencies, and NASA field centers. Project was under overall direction of NASA Office of Space Science and Applications. ( nasa Release 64-246; Wallops Release 64-73)
NASA announced that Joseph T. Dickerson, Jr., was appointed Special Assistant to Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Mr. Dickerson would assist Dr. Mueller in the areas of management, labor relations, and Government-industry relationships. (nasa Release 64-119)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said before National Security Industrial Association meeting in Washington that many achievements had been made “in that area where science and technology are indivisible. . . . Many of the most significant technological advances, for example, have been made in NASA’s space science effort. “Outstanding among them are our proven ability to launch payloads from earth orbit to deep space with consistent success; and the companion ability to make the necessary mid-course corrections far out in space. . . .” (Text)
Philip Donely, Chief of Flight Mechanics and Technology Div., NASA Langley Research Center, received 1964 Laura Taber Barbour Air Safety Award of the Flight Safety Foundation. Citation said that Donely’s “diverse and unique contributions to air safety during his service of over 30 years with the NACA and NASA have made him an internationally recognized authority in the areas of aircraft loads, operating problems, and airworthiness requirements. . . . The counsel he has given to industry, operators, and government agencies on matters such as airworthiness aspects of new aircraft, assessment of design criteria, and airworthiness problems related to aircraft accidents has contributed significantly to the development and operation of safe aircraft.” (nasa Release 64-92)
NASA Electronics Research Center Site Evaluation Committee was formalized by Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden. First task of the six-man committee would be to draft proposed plan for criteria and procedures to be used in the site evaluation; after doing this, the Committee would begin evaluating proposed sites in the Greater Boston area. Col. Robert P. Young, nasa Executive Officer, was appointed Chairman of the Committee. (NASA Release 64-67; NASA Circular 311)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, gave address at dedication of Magic Mountain Laboratory of the Marquardt Corp., Van Nuys, Calif.: “There is a considerable degree of misunderstanding of the overall purposes of our national space program. Many people seem to believe that a landing on the moon is our paramount objective. This is not so. “Our principal goal is to make the United States first in space. The Apollo mission milestones—manned flight in earth orbit, into deep space, and to the moon and back—provide a focus for the development of the total capability that will enable the United States to compete in the race for space. . . .” (Text)
Astronomers at San Miguel Observatory near Buenos Aires, Argentina, reported seeing a red-colored, unidentified flying object, traveling at four and a half times the speed of an ordinary man-made satellite, cross the sky from west to east at 8:30 p.m. local time, from east to west five minutes later, and then from west to east at 9:05 p.m. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 11/16/64)
In Fortune article on “Khrushchev’s Paper Bear,” Charles J. B. Murphy reviewed the background of U.S. intelligence concerning Soviet missile development as related to the first icbm’s, the first Sputniks, the high-altitude U—2 operations, and the so-called “missile gap.” He related these to American decisions and politics. Author submitted that Soviets failed to exploit early lead in missiles and that U.S. miscalculated relative missile strength in 1960. (Fortune, 12/64, 114f.) During December: Karl G. Harr, Jr., Pres, of Aerospace Industries Assn., editorialized: “To those familiar with the technical achievements of the past few years there is no doubt that aviation is on the threshold of its brightest era. . . . Enough is known of the potential of the new aeronautical technology to predict that all types of aviation—military, airline, and general aviation—will be completely transformed in the next two decades. The day of the manned military airplane is far from over. Today’s civil jet transports, which enjoy a high reputation, are far from the ultimate in economical flying machines. The usefulness of all types of aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper to operate in the future. “Perhaps even more important will be the widespread benefits of the new aeronautical technology outside of aviation. In the past, aeronautical technology, which has provided major advances in high performance engines, efficient air flow design, lightweight structures and material, and high reliability, was put to wide use after it was given in aviation. . . . This pattern of transfer of aeronautical technology will not change. In fact, the opportunity should be greater in the future because the jump in efficiency now considered possible for aircraft structure and powerplant technology is greater than anything yet experienced. . . .”	(Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9) During 1964: The deepening and broadening of the U.S. space program continued at an accelerated pace in 1964. The U.S. orbited a total of 76 payloads, of which four were deep-space probes, while the U.S.S.R. orbited 35, of which two were deep-space probes. Of the U.S. total NASA orbited 23 payloads. Other major NASA launches (not included in orbital total) were one unsuccessful attempt at orbit (Beacon satellite) and 5 suborbital tests of a burgeoning roster of new launch vehicles, spacecraft, and space equipment. dod’s launch program continued to be numerically larger than NASA’s, with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year. NASA’s most publicized flight of the year was the RANGER vii flight to the moon with its close-in photography of the moon. Other solid achievements were apt weather photos from tiros VIII and the much improved clarity and coverage of weather photos from the first advanced research weather satellite, NIMBUS I. The first generation of active communications satellites concluded with syncom ill, which was maneuvered into the first truly synchronous orbit of the space age and performed beyond design requirements as a communications relay between Asia and the U.S. A significant scientific contribution was made by explorer xvn, which in 1964 mapped the earth’s magnetosphere and found it, instead of the sphere it was previously thought, to be a tremendously elongated comet-like shape. In flight tests Gemini and Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated. The Saturn I completed its seventh (out of 7) successful test flight and orbited a new world weight record of 39,000 lbs. The Centaur continued a successful flight-test program to work the bugs out of the first liquid-hydrogen engines in an operational space vehicle. In ground tests the Saturn IB and V launch vehicles took significant strides in testing of new large engines find of complete stages. In advanced research two achievements of high promise were the full-power runs of solid-core nuclear rocket engines that confirmed the engineering feasibility of nuclear rocket engines with their tremendous increases in specific impulse over chemical-fueled engines, and the successful use of laser in satellite tracking, promising a new order of tracking accuracy for geodetic and other uses. In DOD’s launch program, the most publicized flight was that of Titan III-A on Dec. 10, when the big booster for the proposed MOL successfully flight-tested its crucial transtage. Also dod continued its policy of launch economy with 8 multiple-satellite launchings, including one (Jan. 11) in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites. The most publicized event of the Soviet space program in 1964 was its orbiting of VOSKHOD I, a new 3-man spacecraft, with 2 of the crew not trained pilots. For both the U.S. and Russia, one major effort in each program remained a question mark at the end of the year. Each country had a deep-space probe (mariner iv and zond ii) enroute to Mars, due for flyby in July 1965. Perhaps never in its seven years had the space age offered such a direct confrontation as this promised to be. (hhr-s; hhn-48 ; NASA Release 64-321; A&A, 64, passim.) During 1964: Soviet scientists P. M. Bayevsky and K. I. Zhukov reported in the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’ Journal, Cosmic Research, that two of their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability in their heartbeats while in space. The condition, cardiac arrhythmia, was observed in both Valery Bykovsky, who spent five days aloft, and Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited the globe for 71 hrs. Both flights were made in June 1963. Changes were attributed to “normal” reactions to weightlessness, but the doctors warned that the condition should be watched closely on future iong-duration flights since it could be a clue to more serious “pathologic changes,” including a possibly fatal heart attack. Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace, NASA Director of Space Medicine, saw the electrocardiograms while in Russia and said they showed only “variations we’d expect.” NASA doctors agreed that cardiac arrhythmia should be watched as a potential danger signal but said they had seen “nothing dangerous” so far in U.S. astronauts’ heart rhythm changes, (tns, Bylinsky, Huntsville Times, 12/27/64)
Results of meteoroid-protection research were presented at aiaa Structures and Materials Conference in Palm Springs. North American Aviation said its research suggested that current protective requirements against impact hazard might be reduced. GM Defense Research Laboratories reported on hypervelocity impact studies that showed meteoroid bumper concept may do more harm than good at lower impact velocities. NASA Ames Research Center research indicated use of honeycomb material for meteoroid protection would increase damage from impacts, because honeycomb walls channel sprayed particles into highly damaging clusters of pulverized material that blast through rear sheet of target material. Investigation of fiber metals by iit Research Institute showed that fiber metal bumpers were more efficient than solid bumpers in preventing damage to target material. {M&R, 5/25/64,29)
Soviet annual report to cospar listed 21 satellite and 114 rocket launchings for 1963. Omitting any mention of when U.S.S.R. might launch major spacecraft, report said past manned space flight had “set some new problems before scientists requiring immediate solution for successful preparation and realization of more prolonged space missions. ...” A major question to be answered was whether it was “possible for an astronaut, after two or three weeks stay under conditions of weightlessness, to endure satisfactorily stresses acting on an organism during re-entry.” Also studies must be made of methods to safeguard astronauts’ cardiovascular systems. Longest section of report was on medical and biological problems of manned space flight; it offered evidence that U.S.S.R. was paying increasing attention to weightlessness and other problems of manned space flight. Soviet report was first such version ever submitted in English and was thought to be strikingly free of propaganda. Possibly significantly, report referred to U.S. space research in correlation with Soviet research ; for example, findings of mars I were said to correlate with findings of U.S. explorer x and mariner ii. (AP, 5/9/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 5/13/64)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced award of $1,356,000 contract to Blaw-Knox Co. for design and fabrication of three 85-ft.-diameter dish-shaped antennas to be used in manned space flight tracking network for Project Apollo lunar mission, (gsfc Release G-4-64)
NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden announced to newsmen the bilateral agreement negotiated between U.S. and U.S.S.R. in June 1962 (the “Dryden-Blagonravov Agreement”), by which the two countries would cooperate in space programs for communications, meteorology, and geophysics, was discussed by him and Academician Blagonravov at Geneva. Cooperation in Soviet-American communications for global meteorology was to be implemented by the two countries’ sharing costs equally, each supporting the program in alternate months; a bilaterally financed communications link between Moscow and Washington was to be solely for the purpose of exchanging cloud pictures. The 1962 agreement grew out of correspondence -between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev in Feb. and March 1962. Dryden and Blagonravov also discussed American-Soviet cooperation in space biology. Agreement was readied, subject to review before final approval, by which American and Soviet space biologists would prepare bilingual reports on similar subjects. Soviets had proposed cooperation in biology and medicine, both of which had great bearing on manned space flight when exploration extended beyond the moon. (Wash. Post, 6/9/64; NASA Transcript, 6/8/64[2] “Background Information,” “News Conference.”)
Soviet astronomer Nikolai Barabashov said Kharkov Univ. observatory ultraviolet photographs might show surface of Venus. Tass quoted Barabashov as saying a large dark spot appeared on the planet in pictures taken before dawn, and he believed this indicated a clearing in the clouds normally covering Venus. “The position of the spot on the disk warrants the assumption that we have here a glimpse of a part of the surface of Venus, the closest neighbor of the earth.” He added that further studies and analyses would be made. (AP, Houston Post, 9/12/64)
Robert G. Deissler, NASA Lewis Research Center, received the Heat Transfer Division Memorial Award of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers in New York City, (lrc Release 64-108)
In Columbus, Ohio, Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., first American astronaut to orbit the earth, announced that he would he a candidate for the Ohio Democratic nomination for U.S. Senator in the May 5 primary. He added that he was retiring from the U.S. Marine Corps after 22 years of service. After explaining his party affiliation, he said Congress “is an area in which I have had a life-long interest. To serve in a body whose actions help mold the destiny of America and the free world is certainly a challenge and a high calling.” Regarding his departure from the space program, Glenn said: “It could very well he wishful thinking on my part to train for another six or seven years for flights for which I might be too old. “I have chosen this course because I feel that it provides the best opportunity to make use of the experience I have gained in 22 years of Government service. Today, well over half our national budget goes toward the support of our military forces, our space program and other research and development activities. These are areas with which I am well acquainted. . . .” (AP, Parks, Wash. Post, 1/18/64, Al; Finney, NYT, 1/17/64,17)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of Beckman Instruments Corp. to negotiate final contract for three Satellite Telemetry Automatic Reduction Systems (Stars) at slightly more than $1,000,000. The contractor would be responsible for manufacture, installation, and maintenance of the system as well as training of Goddard personnel. This second phase of the Goddard Stars project would provide a highly automated method of preparing large quantities of data for later analysis by the scientific community, (gsfc Release G—33-64)
John H. Boynton of MSC discussed pilot’s role in Mercury space flight systems failures, in paper to aiaa first annual meeting. He summarized: “For the two unmanned missions, MA-4 and MA-5, control system difficulties made impossible the successful completion of a three-pass orbital flight, which was the design mission for the Mercury spacecraft. But in both cases, the presence of a pilot and the capability to control the spacecraft attitudes manually would have made die three-pass mission possible. This fact was demonstrated in the MA—6 mission in which a similar malfunction occurred but in which the astronaut completed the flight by using his manual control modes. . . . “For the MA-6 mission, . . . the flight would undoubtedly have been terminated before the planned time because of an excessive rate of fuel consumption in the automatic control mode. In the successful MA—7 flight, manual initiation of the retrorocket-ignition sequence prevented the horizon scanner malfunction from significantly delaying this critical event. Although an error in yaw angle caused the spacecraft to land somewhat beyond the planned landing area, this error would have undoubtedly been much greater had the pilot not been present. The six-pass MA—8 mission was successful, although a problem of an abnormal increase in suit temperature could have terminated the flight early had no means been available for reducing this temperature. The pilot, however, was able to correct this situation by manual adjustment of his coolant flow valve. Short circuits in the automatic control circuitry during the MA-9 flight made it essential for the pilot to control the spacecraft manually during retrofire and reentry.” (Text)
Rep. Harold M. Ryan (D.-Mich.) said on House floor that if NASA’s proposed electronics research center were located in Michigan it “would provide a stimulus to the heartland of America, and bring into geographical balance the national capability in the field closely related with the electronic industry. “It is important that the resources of our part of the country be taken into consideration and the fact recognized that they are not presently being used to their fullest capacity. . . .” (CR, 1/15/64, 434-35)
First launch of NASA Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was conducted at Wallops Island, Va., the rocket reaching 6,000-ft. altitude in successful test. For this first test upper stage was inert, the main objectives being to demonstrate compatibility of Aerobee 350 with Aerobee launch-tower rail system and evaluate performance of Aerobee 350 during first-stage (Nike) boost. Preliminary evaluation of test indicated NASA Goddard Space Flight Center could proceed with plans to launch complete live Aerobee 350 without redesign of the rocket or the launcher rail system. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
Sen. Stuart Symington (D.—Mo.) speaking before the Annual Meeting of the Cape Girardeau, Mo., Chamber of Commerce, said: “Our policies are peaceful in nature, and our space program is peaceful in purpose and content; but it is also a sound investment for our future national security, economic as well as military. . . . “Landings on the moon will add to our knowledge of the origin of the universe, and also contribute to our knowledge of the broad spectrum of science and technology in such areas as meteorology and communications . . . “But the lunar project is not the whole space program; and the military significance of the program cannot be judged by examining that project alone; nor can anyone today estimate the great wealth and resources that will flow from this new knowledge. Knowledge is, and will be, the basic power of modern states. “Moreover, the Defense Department is now deeply engaged in the space effort . . . “The true defense value of the lunar project rests with the development of our over-all space capabilities; and no one can say today how this stockpile of knowledge will be used in the defense of this Nation or how important it will be. . . .” (Text)
Edmond C. Buckley, Director of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, testified before Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “We are requesting $274.4 million to support the Tracking and Data Acquisition program in fiscal year 1965, as compared to $307.7 million in fiscal year 1964, a decrease of eleven per cent. The reason for this decrease is that most of our .new station construction requirements in all three networks, were funded in fiscal years 1963 and 1964. . . .” Mr. Buckley pointed out that the largest single item in ot&da budget for FY 1965 was $106.9 million for equipping the manned space flight network for Projects Gemini and Apollo. (Testimony)
Dr. Winston E. Kock, Director of NASA Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, Mass., announced that Dr. Lester C. Van Atta and Dr. W. Crawford Dunlap would head two of the Center’s major operations. Dr. Van Atta would direct research in electromagnetics, including microwave and optical research. Dr. Dunlap would direct research in component technology, including solid state and materials and qualifications standards. (NASA Release 64-317)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said at Washington press luncheon that the two astronauts in Project Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module would stand up during the descent to the moon. He described support gear—like elasticized parachute harness—which would cushion the landing for the crewmen. Elimination of chairs and rearrangement of Lem’s gear permitted weight reduction of 1,000 lbs., he said. (Halsell, Houston Post, 2/4/64)
Senate received President Johnson’s nomination of Dr. Donald F. Hornig to be Director of Office of Science and Technology, succeeding Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner. (CR, 1/14/64, 371)
NASA announced Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, assumed the role of acting director of Project Gemini. George M. Low, former Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight at Hq. and since February 1964 Deputy Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, had served as acting director of Gemini since last November. (NASA Release 64-247)
Harlan Cleveland, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, addressed the Conference of U.S. National Organizations of the U.N.: “The technological imperative—the impulse to build worldwide technical agencies—comes of course from the headlong pace of scientific discovery. A world technical community is in the making because international communications, international transport, and international economics demand international organizations—and because you can’t deal with world health or world weather or radio frequencies and a lot of other things except on a world basis. . . . “Taken together, three new kinds of technology—weather satellites, communications satellites, and computer technology—now make it technically possible to work out a global weather reporting and forecasting system, a prospect too valuable to all nations to leave unexploited. The United States is now engaged in a very large program of research and development in this field that will involve the cooperation of more than 100 other countries. This, together with what other countries are doing, will fit into an overall plan for a World Weather Watch being worked out by the World Meteorological Organization, a specialized agency of the U.N.	_	_ “In just 2 years our first Tiros satellites discovered 20 hurricanes, typhoons, and tropical storms and observed the behavior of 62 others. And world data centers to process these and other reports and issue warnings have been established in Washington and Moscow....” (Text, CR,3/18/64,5462-64)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., said in informal press gathering in Washington that when nasa had decided on 30 trainees for its astronaut pool, it had anticipated losing 4 of the 30 men, for various reasons, before completion of Project Apollo. Commander Shepard said, “we figured on two casualties as a result of space flight,” explaining that the figure was “just pulled out of the air” but was considered a reasonable guess. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden emphasized “We have no idea what the casualty rate will be. We’re hoping it will be zero.” (Troan, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 2/21/64)
In its first five years of powered flight, the X-15 aircraft amassed total of 17 hrs., 52 min., 7.1 sec. of flight, of which 4 hrs., 8 min., 16.8 sec. was powered flight. The rocket-powered research aircraft accrued 4 hrs., 13 min., 11 sec. of flight at speeds above 2,000 mph (mach 3), far more flight time at mach 3 than any other aircraft. It achieved a total of 2 hrs., 39 min., 47.4 sec. at macn 4 (about 2,700 mph), a speed impossible for any other manned aircraft; 40 min., 45.1 sec. above mach 5 (about 3,400 mph); and 11.6 sec. above mach 6 (about 4,000 mph). The X-15 was built for top speed of 4,000 mph and altitude capability of 250,000	ft. Piloted by Joseph A. Walker (nasa), the X—15 set unofficial world speed record at 4,104 mph and unofficial world altitude record of 354,200 ft. It held current official FAI world altitude record of 314,750 ft., set July 17, 1962, with Maj. Robert M. Rushworth (usaf) as pilot. The No. 2 aircraft, modified to provide longer engine burn time, was expected to attain much higher speeds—possibly as high as mach 8 (more than 5,000 mph). In its first five years the X-15 made 116 flights. It was expected that the three aircraft would bring the total to twice that many within about five more years, (nasa Release 64-265)
nasa announced it had completed its experimental research and development program with syncom II and SYNCOM III and would transfer operation of the synchronous satellites to dqd, starting Jan. 1, 1965. The transfer would be completed Mar. 31, 1965. dqd would operate the satellites for the remainder of their useful lifetimes and would provide NASA with any significant telemetry and ranging data. Communications ground stations used to relay transmissions via the two Syncoms had been furnished by dod for the past two years, (nasa Release 65-5; dod Release 1/4/65)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced U.S. Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife would administer for NASA the entire buffer zone Merritt Island lowlands, nearly 40,000	acres, (ksc Release 34-64)
Yuri M. Vorontsov, Soviet delegate to U.N. Legal Subcommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, said orbiting of three-man voskhod i spacecraft represented “a great achievement of Soviet science and the Soviet people ‘on behalf of all mankind.’ ” Dr. N. M. Sissakian, member of presidium of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in Paris that U.S.S.R. Hoped to present scientific results of voskhod i space flight to international symposium on manned space flight in Petris next June. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/13/64; Sullivan, NYT, 10/13/64, 18)
Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in speech before Professional Group on Antennas and Propagation of the ieee, Kennedy Airport International Hotel: “In the development of national [space] capability, nasa is carrying forward the work begun a half-century ago by its predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. Like the naca, the space agency is concentrating its efforts on research and development. The only important difference is that NASA also carries out operations in space and, in so doing, develops methods of operation as well as the needed technology. . . . “The facilities, manpower, flight hardware, and experience being created in the Apollo program will serve the country long after the program itself has been completed. In fact, fully 90 percent of the work now in progress in Apollo would be done to create space power even if there were no moon and our efforts in manned space flight had an entirely different goal. “It may be compared with the Paris objective of Lindbergh’s flight. His primary purpose was not to reach Paris but to develop and demonstrate the capability of transatlantic flight. . . .” (Text)
NASA announced the next U.S. manned space flight, Project Gemini GT-3, had been delayed into 1965 because of time lost as result of lightning damage to GT-2 launch vehicle and removal of the rocket from launch pad during hurricanes Cleo and Dora. Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said GT—2 unmanned suborbital mission would be made in last quarter of 1964. GT-3, with Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John Young as crew members, was scheduled for first quarter of 1965. (nasa Release 64-233)
Westinghouse engineer Harry L. Thurman, Deputy Director of laser program in Westinghouse’s Defense and Space Center in Baltimore, told aiaa meeting in Los Angeles that laser may someday be used to cook meals in microseconds. Citing many present and future applications of laser, Thurman said industry spent $1,000,000 on laser research in 1960 and estimated Government laser contracts alone in 1964 would amount to $27,000,000. (Roberts, Balt. Sun, 5/7/64)
Four-day Conference on Space Nutrition and Related Waste Problems, sponsored by NASA and organized with assistance of National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board, opened in Tampa, Fla., with some 200 engineers and scientists attending. In introductory remarks at Conference, NASA Associate Administrator 'or Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said that in both the life sciences and the physical sciences, “when we strip away the unessentials, we are really dealing with the conversion and control of energy. There is the muscle with its tiny fibrils on the one hand and the chemical fuel energy converters on the other. There are the electrical activities of the brain and nerve impulses on the one hand.and the computer and feedback loop on the other. “The state of man’s technology in every age has depended on his ability to convert and control energy. The Industrial Revolution brought on an economic structure that could not be operated without knowledge of the equivalence of different forms of energy. . . . “The opportunities that are now presented for advancements in energy conversion and control are breathtaking. New methods of energy conversion from solar, chemical, and nuclear energy sources which will be useful to all of mankind are being pioneered in the space program. . . . Perhaps the most dramatic energy conversion devices in the NASA program are the propulsion devices that convert chemical or nuclear energy to kinetic energy. The Nerva rocket engine converts nuclear energy to kinetic vehicle energy by passing liquid hydrogen through a graphite reactor at 6000° R and ejects it through a nozzle. In these devices we will convert as much energy as is converted by the Grand Coulee Dam in a device about the size of an American motor car. . . .” (Text) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of nasc staff said in address at the Conference: “. . . As of April 24, the United States had orbited 203 payloads, and the Soviet Union 65 since 1957. But weight comparisons are quite different. They have put up about three times as much net payload as we have. What is more discouraging, every year for the last five years, the lead of the Soviet Union in that year has grown larger than it was for the year before. ... “My 'best assessment is that the Soviet [space] program has close to the same variety of goals as our own, including undertaking very complex missions. Let us look at j ust the main outlines. “Scientific Exploration in Earth Orbit: . . . The Soviet Union is clearly interested in more than spectaculars. In the Earth-orbital regime, it has put up 28 Kosmos class scientific and engineering-test satellites with a minimum of fanfare, and these have included a range of experiments. . . . Additionally the pair of Elektron satellites are providing synoptic measurements of the radiation belts out to 40,000 miles. “Space Applications: When it comes to practical applications of unmanned satellites, the United States has the lead in demonstrated accomplishments. . . . But similar flight operations are not beyond Soviet capabilities. . . . “Lunar and Planetary Probes:. . . In absolute number of launchings the Soviet Union has made a larger commitment to such flights than we have. As a percentage of total flight effort, their commitment for that purpose is running about five-fold our own. And they use larger vehicles by far. Take a part of the comparative planetary effort for example. Of our two launch attempts to date, the 447-pound Mariner II carried about 40 pounds of instruments near Venus and returned some data. We are rightfully proud of this accomplishment. “The Soviet pattern has been to orbit 14,300-pound platforms from which a probe weighing up to 2,000 exclusive of the rocket casing can be launched on the interplanetary trajectory. Between 1960 and 1962, ten such launchings were made. Typically, the comparison is a difficult one to make. We met with a great success in Mariner II. Not one of the Soviet craft attained its full objective. . . . “While neither country should he overly proud of its lunar probe record, the pictures taken by Lunik III back in 1959 are still a high-water mark. “Manned Space Flight: . . . Through the 1963 season each country had made six manned launchings, and neither side had killed an astronaut or cosmonaut. Stories to the contrary are fabrications. . . . “Human Safety: . . . The Russians sent up without recovery Laika, four years before Gagarin. The Vostok ship itself completed 100 orbits of fully controlled flight, including successful recovery of four dogs, before the first man was sent. . . . “Future Manned Missions: ... To the best of our knowledge, the Russians have not yet demonstrated a launch system capable of convenient manned flight to the Moon for a landing and return. But then, if we chose to practice Soviet-style security around our launch sites and factories, there would be no hard evidence available to foreigners that the United States is building a lunar capability either. . . . “Because we are not permitted to inspect their facilities, we have to do our best by inference to judge the truth of their repeated statements that they intend to be first in ambitious manned flights. . . . With all this circumstantial evidence I feel it is entirely possible and even probable that they are planning officially to make long-duration and distant manned flights. . . . “I feel we have the knowledge, the manpower, the resources, and the facilities, to mount the finest space program in the world. I feel it is worth undertaking on its own merits. I am also aware that we are in a race with a competent and tough-minded competitor. We must recognize the nature of this race and organize to meet it, not by year-by-year reactions, but with sound, consistent planning. . . .” (Text)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President Johnson’s Special Assistant for Science and Technology, arrived in Moscow with a six-man group that would make a two-week tour of scientific and industrial institutions in Moscow, Leningrad, Minsk, and Novosibirsk to study Soviet methods of planning and coordinating scientific research. (NYT, 11/6/64,19)
Dr. George M. Knauf, NASA Acting Director of Space Medicine, described before Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics the procedures which NASA had followed for coordinating with USAF in bioastronautics-space medicine programs. Upon suggestions of this Subcommittee, NASA had “made a determined effort to coordinate our program with that of the Department of Defense so that all unwarranted duplication of effort would be eliminated.” Further, to assure that the coordination would be on a continuing basis, NASA established Space Medicine Liaison Office at Aerospace Medical Div., Brooks afb. nasa also obtained assurances from Army, usn, faa, and U.S. Public Health Service that NASA was not duplicating work being carried out by those agencies. (Testimony)
The Hermann Oberth Award, presented annually by the Alabama chapter of AIAA, was awarded posthumously to Hugh M. Taylor, former special assistant to the Chief of the Guidance and Control Division, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Taylor, who had worked at Redstone Arsenal since 1951, was killed in a plane crash July 9 near Newport, Tenn. {Marshall Star, 11/11/64, 1, and 11/25/64, 1)
NASA’s Lewis Research Center announced that it was testing a gas bearing, designed as a research tool, in a vacuum simulating space environment above 100 miles. Suspended from the top of a 60-ft.-long, 15-ft.-dia. tank, the bearing would provide complete freedom of motion to any payload attached to the bearing. A suspended payload would have three-axis mobility with a 10° swing in both pitch and yaw. The bearing, designed to carry an average 350-lb. payload, would enable scientists to evaluate low-thrust systems for attitude control or stationkeeping in on-the-ground tests, (lrc Release 64-105)
NASA extended until Dec. 31, 1966, its contract with the California Institute of Technology for research and development programs conducted at the Government-owned Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Work that would be performed included research and development in lunar and interplanetary programs, aeronautics, development and operation of deep space tracking facilities, providing NASA with technical advice, scientific studies, rad reports of investigations, rad providing supervision of related work given to contractors. Requirements from NASA would be issued in the form of written Task Orders, and the cost of this contract would be determined by the sum of these task orders. In addition, the two parties would negotiate each fiscal year for a fixed fee for the management of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. (NASA Release 64-320)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, discussed utilization of space technology for commercial application before American Management Association in New York: “In the present century, the lag from basic discoveries to applications has become progressively shorter. The Space Age is still further reducing the lag. “Two major programs are under way to meet the Congressional mandate for the widest possible dissemination of the results of space activities. The first aims to make available the primary technical data to aerospace scientists and engineers. The second repackages the information and moves space-generated technology out of the agency’s laboratories and the plants of its contractors into the non-space industrial complex. “NASA collects, organizes, and disseminates scientific and technical information on its in-house and contractor work by means of the latest in computer, microfilm, and other methods. Decentralization with local access is the keynote. “To be of most use this information must be identified and repackaged to meet the special needs of nonaerospace industries. This is the purpose of the Technology Utilization Program, the first national program of its type. Staffs at each NASA Center are systematically organizing the reporting of new or improved ideas, materials, methods, and technology developed in the course of research and development activities. The more promising reports go for analysis to a group of industrial research institutes familiar with current industrial needs and requirements. If the analysis indicates promise, reports are published and indexed so that they are readily available to any segment of the economy that may find them useful. “NASA is making significant contributions to the growth of science and technology in most major fields. More important, NASA is dealing with the organization and utilization of expanding knowledge in a highly advanced and, we believe, very effective manner.” (Text)
NASA began recruiting 10-20 scientist-astronauts for future manned space flights. Qualified applicants—with doctoral degree or equivalent experience in natural sciences, medicine, or engineering—would be screened and evaluated according to standards established by NASA and ad hoc Committee on Scientific Qualifications of Scientist-Astronauts of the nas Space Science Board. Before final selection as astronauts, applicants would receive training in a limited space-simulation program designed to familiarize them with space environment and test their ability to withstand physical stresses of space flight. Departing from previous requirement that astronaut candidates be experienced jet pilots, NASA said selected astronauts not already qualified pilots would be given individual flight training to qualify them as pilots of high-performance aircraft and helicopters. (NASA Release 64-248)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center selected Bendix Corp. and Boeing Aerospace Div. for negotiations of separate identical nine-month $1.5 million studies of lunar exploration payloads for Apollo Logistics Support System (alss). Payload would be carried to moon by Saturn V/Apollo using modified lem (“lem truck”) to deliver from lunar orbit to lunar surface, (Marshall Star, 5/20/64,1)
New research project would study feasibility and design concept of advanced hypersonic ramjet engine, NASA announced. The work would extend ramjet propulsion technology which NASA and NACA had been developing for more than 15 years. To be conducted under direction of Langley Research Center, the project was being organized to determine potential of the ramjet as a propulsion system for hypersonic flight. Project would use hydrogen as fuel, (nasa Release 64-158)
First major test of revamped NASA worldwide tracking network, part of preparation for manned earth-orbital space flights in Project Gemini. During nine-day drill, simulated flight missions were conducted which involved Goddard Space Flight Center, Mission Control Center, and eight sites in the worldwide tracking network. (msc Roundup, 10/14/64,1; Goddard News, 10/19/64,1)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said at University of Cincinnati: “We have reached a state where we can do a lot more things [in space exploration] them we may be allowed to do. . . . “The work of my office is to develop the concepts. I can only say what can be done. It may never be approved. . . . “The scientist and engineer cannot answer what is next. He can only answer by outlining the options which science will permit as the next Btep. “What is in fact done next must be determined by an assessment of the scientific, social, economical and political implications of these options. . . .” (Text)
Results of Soviet biological experiments reported to cospar meeting. Discussing fruit fly experiments in space [see May 8], report said fruit flies mated in space apparently normally, but when the eggs hatched in the laboratory after the flight there was excess number of females. Furthermore, report said, average weight of male fruit flies was lower than of flies bred in the laboratory. Soviets disclosed that Cosmonaut V.	Bykovsky had conducted fixed biological experiments during his five-day vostok v space flight, killing specimens to stop their development at various intervals. In {mother biological experiment, Soviets reported that normal cell division in spores of Tradescantia plant was upset in space environment, with rearrangements of plant chromosomes as well as development of freak cells. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/17/64)
Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson visited NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, where she toured the facilities, witnessed a Saturn I and an F-l static firing, presented awards to msfc employees, and was honored at luncheon and tea with her Alabama relatives. At awards ceremony, Mrs. Johnson presented 30-year service pin to Michael J. Rahatin, program coordination officer, and a 20-year pin to Mrs. Mary Derryberry, engineering designer. She presented five invention awards: $300 to Robert J. Carmody for invention of highly flexible cellular structure; $400 to Klaus Juergensen for invention of bilateral energy transfer system; $400 to Lester Katz and Jack J. Nichols for force measuring instrument; and $300 to Benjamin M. Saunders for self-latching handle. Group achievement award of $500 went to Walter F.	Gillespie and Alonza J. Davis for contributions to recoverable motion picture camera system developed for the Saturn ISA—5, SA-6, and SA-7 launch vehicles. Mrs. Johnson also presented a $250 Sustained Superior Performance award to Mrs. Hazel T. Atchley, contracts assistant. In letter to msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun, the First Lady described her visit as “stimulating, exhilarating, informative. . . . The significance of the Saturn has come home to me.” (Marshall Star, 3/25/64, 1, 4; Robertson, NYT, 3/25/64; Marshall Star, 4/1/64, 1)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Chamber of Commerce dinner in Oxford, N.C., clarified the cost of a U.S. manned lunar landing in this decade: “This $20 billion outlay for manned space flight for the period 1961 through 1970 is for Projects Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo. . . . “Of the $20 billion marked for manned space flight in the present decade, $18 billion will be expended for the launch vehicles and spacecraft, the ground facilities, the astronaut training, and the management skills and other human factors that are an integral part of our nation’s capital investment. These are all things we must have—in any event— to achieve the across-the-board competence in every major area of manned space flight that security, well-being, and progress of the nation may demand. “The portion of this total effort devoted to landing on the moon will cost only about $2 billion—that is, sending three Americans on a round-trip voyage of lunar exploration, along with everything in the way of spacecraft and special equipment that the expedition will require. . . . “I hope that this brief and somewhat simplified explanation will put the correct price tag on the extra cost of the lunar mission. Let us all endeavor to put the emphasis where it really belongs: on the rapid growth of American competence in all areas of manned space flight particularly in the area near earth which is the prime importance for national security.” (Text)
Dr. Harry J. Goett, Director of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said in address at centennial convocation luncheon, Worcester Polytechnic Institute:	* “The new era promised by the Space Age perhaps connotes a return to what was once called natural philosophy. The unifying element of these developments of the space program is a general spirit of inquiry into the nature of the external physical world. It represents a re-direction of interest away from the increasingly narrow specialization which has characterized the physical sciences in the last decades. “The second distinguishing feature of the scientific research in space is the fact that the various scientists have only been able to make their observations ... by virtue of the hardware developed by the engineer. This is in distinct contrast to the biologist who could invest in a good microscope and do research comparable with the best. . . . Generally, the engineer exploits and puts to practical use the knowledge acquired by the scientists. But in space, the scientist seems to be particularly dependent on the engineer to develop new devices and techniques. Engineering, in this context, has become a more creative and trail-blazing profession. “The third and possibly most imposing challenge of the space age is the potential feed-back of its developments into the civilian economy. In the long run, the justification of our space budget must stand on this ‘fall-out.’ . . .” (Text)
NASA announced Franklyn W. Phillips would be Assistant Director for Administrative Operations at NASA’s new Electronics Research Center, Cambridge, Mass., effective Sept. 1. A veteran NACA-NASA executive, Phillips had been serving as Director of NASA Northeastern Office, which would Se absorbed within the new Center. As Assistant Director, Phillips would be responsible for administrative matters, including procurement, personnel affairs, management analysis, administrative support, and technical information. (NASA Release 64-218)
Appointment of Brig. Gen. David M. Jones (usaf) as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, effective Dec. 15, was announced by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller. Gen. Jones would be primarily concerned with major development problems in Gemini and Apollo programs, planning for advanced missions and all mission operations. His most recent assignment had been as Deputy Chief of Staff (Systems), AFSC. (NASA Release 64-277)
MSC Public Affairs Officer Paul Haney said it was doubtful that there would be a manned space flight this year. The two-man Project Gemini flight (GT—3) had previously been planned for late 1964. However, lightning damage at Cape Kennedy where Titan II launch vehicle was being prepared for GT—2 unmanned flight would cause minimum delay of three weeks in GT-2, Haney said. Length of time GT—3 would be delayed would depend upon how long GT—2 would be delayed. (upi, NYT, 8/25/64; Maloney, Houston Post, 8/25/64)
NASA and Australian Ministry for Supply announced agreement for establishment of space tracking and data acquisition station in the Orroral Valley near Canberra, Australia, for ground support of NASA’s Orbiting Observatory satellites. The facility would be a sister facility to NASA stations near Fairbanks, Alaska, and Rosman,. N.C., which monitor, control, and command the Orbiting Observatories, as well as receive, record and forward to the control center information transmitted from the satellite to the ground, (nasa Release 64-55)
Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Director of Lindheimer Astronomical Research Center and head of astronomy dept, of Northwestern Univ., Evanston, 111., said in an interview that remote control telescope on the moon was practical as well as desirable. Heart of lunar telescope would be image orthicon, comparable to picture tube in TV camera; signals would travel to the telescope and pictures would travel back to earth on laser beams. “. . . If you had a telescope on the moon, you could point it where you want to by remote control and the picture would go into an image orthicon to be flashed back to earth on the same laser beam that controls the moon telescope.” (Hughes, Chic. Trib., 2/19/64)
The first of three giant Pegasus satellites arrived at NASA John F. Kennedy Space Center. A Saturn I space vehicle (SA—9) would launch the 3,200-lb. satellite into an orbit visible from earth and ranging from about 310- to 465-mi. altitude, sometime in the first quarter of 1965. Primary mission of the Pegasus satellites would be to use its 2,000 sq. ft. of capacitator panels to measure, record, and transmit back to earth data on the frequency, size, direction, and speed of meteoroids in nearearth space. This information would be important to development of manned and unmanned spacecraft, (ksc Release 227-64)
NASA Director of Personnel, Robert J. Lacklen, who had been with NASA since its inception, resigned to accept a position with the Richardson Foundation of Greensboro, N.C, Mr. Lacklen would head a Personnel Research Institute which would conduct research in personnel selection and appraisal. Mr. Grove Webster was named Acting Director of Personnel, (nasa Ann. 64-300)
At Manned Spacecraft Center press conference, MSC Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth announced Astronauts Gus Grissom and John Young would be prime pilots for the first manned Gemini space flight (GT-3), with Astronauts Walter Schirra and Tom Stafford as backup pilots. Also at the press conference it was disclosed that Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was suffering from labyrinthitis, msc’s Dr. Charles Berry emphasized that Shepard’s inner ear inflammation was not caused by space flight but by infection that spread into his inner left ear. (msc Press Conf., msc Historian)
mariner iv Mars probe finally locked its sensor on the star Canopus after fixes on three wrong stars. Jet Propulsion Laboratory officials noted that picking up wrong stars was not critical in the early stages of the flight. If the mariner iv had not dropped these wrong fixes of its own accord, the action could have been commanded from the ground. Only if Canopus were in the sensor’s sights would the TV camera be aimed at the Martian surface when mariner rv flew past the planet 7% months from now; only with Canopus in vieiw would scientists know the spacecraft’s attitude with the precision needed for a midcourse rocket firing of maximum accuracy to refine the course of the trajectory and bring the mariner iv within about 8,600 mi. of Mars instead of the presently anticipated distance of 151,000 mi. (Miles, Wash. Post, 11/30/64; Witkin, NYT, 11/30/64, 1; National Observer, 11/30/64; Witkin, NYT, 12/1/64, 1) .
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) said in Air Force and Space Digest article on technological goals: “A creative idea may be born in the mind of one man. Of primary importance is the basic and fundamental research necessary to spell out this idea. Here the financial investment is probably the smallest, limited to the man, his instruments, and the time. The amounts of money are relatively modest, except for capital facilities. Indeed, sometimes this money is used and. reused, for basic research is often done in the university climate where its effects nourish graduate students as well. “The planning, the adaptation, and the oversight of applied research and development is a more resource-consuming operation. By skilled and thoughtful planning project managers can avoid difficulties which tend to drag on important programs. Here the important resource is people, for the decisions are difficult. The history of many important programs in the United States in recent decades affords case studies of matters where waste might have been avoided if top-level people could have anticipated and eliminated specific problems. “One of the most difficult problems facing the United States is to determine the standards by which we can exercise the necessary judgment to avoid moving into the most expensive areas of technology— development, testing, and production—at an appropriate time to ensure that we do not become prisoners of high costs and unnecessary use of resources. We need to exercise more rigorous standards, more decisive judgment, and action.” (AF Mag., 4/64, 53-56)
Douglas Aircraft Co. Missile and Space Systems Div. summarized study on Manned Orbital Research Laboratory (morl) made for NASA Langley Research Center. Douglas said it would be possible for U.S. to have a six-man operational space station within the next five years. MORL would be launched with Saturn IB, would remain in orbit just over one year. (Houston Post, 5/25/64)
A basic principle in bearing technology, discovered by NASA Lewis Research Center engineers, was hailed in 53rd Annual Report of the Fafnir Bearing Co. as “carrying bearing technology a step beyond conventional upset forgings.” The underlying principle was first reported by the lrc engineers in 1957; now the principle was developed into a manufacturing process. Walter T. Olson, assistant director of Lewis, said this was one instance where results from exploratory research had been adapted to production techniques, an important aim of NASA. (lrc Release 64-76)
President Johnson sent $97.9 billion FT 1965 budget to Congress. Of space research and technology, he said: “Our plan to place a man on the moon in this decade remains unchanged. It is an ambitious and important goal. In addition to providing great scientific benefits, it will demonstrate that our capability in space is second to no other nation’s. However, it is clear that no matter how brilliant our scientists and engineers, how farsighted our planners and managers or how frugal our administrators and contracting personnel, we cannot reach this goal without sufficient funds. There is no second-class ticket to space. “Appropriations enacted for 1964 for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration were $6008 million below the amount requested. As a result, major development programs leading to the manned lunar landing have fallen behind schedule. Careful replanning of the entire program, including a reduction in the number of test flights, will offset some of this delay. Even so, more funds are needed in 1964, and I am therefore recommending a supplemental appropriation of $141 million for this year. “For 1965,1 am requesting appropriations of $5.3 billion, $63 million above the 1964 amount, including the proposed supplemental appropriation. The 1964 and 1965 recommendations represent the minimum amount needed to achieve our goals in space. The estimated increase of $590 million in expenditures in 1965 is due principally to payments required by commitments made in 1964 and earlier years. With the leveling off of appropriations, annual outlays should remain relatively stable in subsequent years. “In addition to the manned space flight program, though related to it, funds are included to support unmanned space flights for lunar exploration and supporting research and development. Funds are also included for scientific satellites, planetary probes, and experiments with meteorological and communications satellites. “The programs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration are designed to maintain American supremacy in space and to demonstrate this supremacy by achieving a manned landing on the moon in this decade. . . . “The level of activity in support of the 3-man Apollo lunar spacecraft development program will reach its peak during 1965 with 13 flight spacecraft in production by the end of the year. The Saturn V rocket program will be proceeding rapidly along its development cycle in preparation for launching the Apollo spacecraft, and will account for about $850 million of the estimated 1965 expenditures. . . (Text, NYT, 1/22/64119-21)
New, improved solar cell was described at Conference of Photovoltaic Specialists by Joseph Mandelkorn, head of group at NASA Lewis Research Center that developed the solar cell. The new cell was made of pure silicon with small amount of aluminum added. Before 1960, solar cells were made of silicon with small amount of phosphorus added. In 1960, Mandelkorn discovered that substituting boron for phosphorus made cells with greater radiation resistance; these cells were used on telstar i, whose orbit passed through Van Allen radiation belts. The newest cells, even more radiation resistant, were expected to have useful lifetime of 25-50 times that of silicon-phosphorus type. (lrc Release 64-51)
NASA announced $1 million facilities grant to Texas a&m Univ., which would build an activation analysis laboratory for use in its space-related research program for remote analysis of materials through nuclear activation, (nasa Release 64-102)
Water-cooled space suit, employing plastic tubing sewn into long underwear, was in research and development at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Begun by Royal Aircraft Establishment in 1962, suit was undertaken by MSC in 1963 when Dr. John Billingham left RAE to join msc. Dr. Billingham said, “In operation and in theory the suit looks acceptable. But we must test it much more for reliability.” (M&R, 6/22/64, 28) During June: Detailed report on global satellite weather prediction system, “Swami” (Stanford Worldwide Acquisition of Meteorological Information), was completed by 31-man team of Stanford Univ. students. Three 1,200-mi. circular polar orbit satellites orbiting 120° apart would receive meteorological data from global network of weather balloons, transmit the stored information after each two-hour orbit to a single ground command station. (M&R, 6/22/64,25)
Performance of its two nuclear-test detection satellites has been excellent in all respects, dod announced. The two satellites, launched more than two months ago for ARPA by USAF, were performing almost perfectly, and their reliability has been excellent, dod anticipated the satellites would provide data on background radiation and other measurements in space for useful lifetime of more than six months. Success of this initial detection effort “has moved the research program forward by more than one year,” dod said, (dod Release 30-64)
Cosmonautics Day in the Soviet Union, commemorating the day when Yuri Gagarin made the first space flight in 1961. U.S.S.R. announced steerable spacecraft polet n had been placed in orbit. Purposes of the launching were said to be to “further improve space vehicles capable of maneuvering extensively in all directions, and to work out questions concerning the problem of space rendezvous.” After being placed in initial orbit, polet II was maneuvered in various directions by means of special engine system. “As a result of one of these maneuvers in the area of the equator, the space vehicle substantially changed the angle of inclination of its orbital plane.” After the progranted space maneuvers, polet n was in the following orbit: apogee, 500 km. (311 mi.); perigee, 310 km. (193 mi.); period, 92.4 min.; and inclination to the equator, 58.06 degrees. (Tass; Shabad, NYT, 4/13/64, 4)
X—15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Milton 0. Thompson in flight to test and measure heating effect of atmospheric friction on certain aircraft structural components. Aircraft reached altitude of 81,000 ft. and traveled at 3,511 mph (mach 5.32) in the 7-min. flight near NASA Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif, (nasa X—15 Proj. Off.; CR, 8/20/64, 20046)
NASA announced grant of $1,125,000 to Univ. of Illinois to finance construction of research laboratory facilities as wing to university’s Coordinated Science Laboratory. To be called Aerospace Research Center, the facilities were to be for investigations of ionosphere properties, propulsion, molecular densities, rendezvous problems, and plasma physics, (nasa Release 64-169)
nasa announced selection of Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to supply liquid hydrogen to nasa Mississippi Test Operations and Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn launch vehicle test program. Contract called for supply of up to 30 tons of liquid hydrogen per day by no later than mid-1965, would be renewable annually through December 1970. (nasa Release 64-10)
Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation received four NASA contract modifications worth $22,378,626 on existing research and development production contracts for the F—1 engines, which provide thrust in first stage of Saturn V launch vehicle. NASA also awarded contract modifications to Douglas Aircraft Co. totaling $31,471,836 for additional work on the S—IV and S—IVB rocket stages. (Marshall Star, 7/15/64, 1,9; Nashville Tennessean, 7/9/64)
Examining the failure of ranger vi as well as previous Ranger lunar probes, William Coughlin pointed out in Missiles and Rockets editorial that Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Ranger project manager, is “the only NASA facility where NASA owns all the land, owns all the equipment, pays all the bills and allows a non-profit corporation to run the facility. . . . “An academic environment is neither comparable nor conducive to the kind of hard-driving industrial atmosphere required to make complex space hardware function in a highly reliable manner ... we think Congress should reopen the whole question of the JPL-Cal Tech relationship.” (M&R, 2/10/64,50)
James J. Haggerty, Jr., predicted that assignment of Manned Orbiting Laboratory to dod was “an ominous harbinger of a reversal in trend, an indication that the military services may play a more prominent role in future space exploration at nasa’s expense. . . . “mol is a starting point. Whether you label it development platform, satellite or laboratory, it is clearly intended as a beginning for space station technology. It is also clearly the intent of this Administration that, at least in the initial stages, space station development shall be under military rather than civil, cognizance. . . .” (A—N—AF J&R, 1/11/64, 10)
Giving his Sunday blessing to the public, Pope Paul VI referred to the successful U.S. RANGER Vii lunar flight: “We also would unite ourselves in the admiration of all for a happening that concerns the life of all humanity and that shows how far the man of science and technology has prbgressed. . . .” (AP, Houston Post, 8/3/64)
Thomas L. McGrath, director of R&D Dept, of Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce, said in Christian Science Monitor interview that NASA’s electronic research center would be a stimulus to Boston area economy. When the center is completed in 1969, he said, a “conservative” estimate would be $250 million contribution to income of the area. “The center will pull in a lot of capable people, and it’s impossible to say what they’ll add to the income of the area. Also one good research discovery coming out of the center might be worth millions to industry.” (Russell, CSM, 2/10/64)
Titan II icbm was launched on successful usaf test flight down the Atlantic Missile Range. This was the 33rd and final R&D firing of the Titan II. (upi, Wash. Post, 4/10/64; Witkin, NYT, 4/12/64,31)
Britain’s VC-10 long-range jet aircraft made its first commercial passenger flight—a boac flight'from London to Lagos, Nigeria. The aircraft featured rapid lift, allowing it to use shorter runways than its U.S. counterparts, the Boeing 707 and Douglas DC-8. (Farnsworth, NYT, 4/30/64,57)	_ April 29—May 1: Air Transport and Space Meeting and Production Forum held in New York, sponsored by Society of Automotive Engineers and American Society of Mechanical Engineers. At the meeting, NASA Ames Research Center scientists reported results of a study of a manned Mars mission: Nova-class launch vehicles and nuclear-propelled spacecraft, combined with extensive aerodynamic braking techniques at Mars and Earth, would allow manned Mars mission to be made with a single, direct launch from Earth. Use of aerodynamic braking at Mars and Earth would reduce total velocity requirements 50 per cent. (M&R, 5/4/64, 17)
14 men selected last October for astronaut training reported to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center to begin training for the Gemini and Apollo space flight crew pool. ( msc Release 64-24)
Two-man crew and backup crew for first manned Gemini space flight would be selected in May or June, according to Astronaut Donald K. Slayton at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Flight was expected in late 1964. (Houston Chron., 2/16/64)
It was reported that President Johnson would give special attention to science and technology programs in budget-making conferences at his Texas ranch. Dr. Donald S. Hornig, the President’s special assistant for science and technology, said in Austin Press Conference that the significance of his presence as a participant in all meetings was that Johnson was looking at the “totality” of the various Government enterprises supporting science and technology in an effort to pursue a balanced program. Hornig said the Federal government was spending about $15 billion—roughly 15% of its budget—on scientific research, technical development, test, and engineering programs with about half this amount spent by dod. Dr. Hornig also said he believed the hundreds of millions of dollars going into the effort to put an American on the moon by 1970 was well spent because “the moon is a very interesting place scientifically.” It will “take a lot of going” to achieve that goal, he said, but present schedules “will allow it.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/23/64)
NASA announced that its Office of Technology Utilization had issued Technical Briefs describing two instruments for measuring the rates of human respiration and heartbeat. The devices were a pneumotachometer (Tech Brief 64-10259) which would measure respiration rates per minute on a breath-to-breath basis and a cardiometer (Tech Brief 64-10258) which would compute the heartbeat rate from the wave-form output of an electrocardiograph (eicg) and visually display the data in beats per minute. Both were developed in connection with NASA’s manned space flight program. (NASA Release 64-311) A NASA technology utilization report described the effects of extremely low temperatures on structural metals. Based on studies at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, the report outlined some of NASA’s experience with various metallic materials and their capabilities at cryogenic temperatures. (nasa Release 64-325) NASA Tech Brief 64-10006 described a speed-sensing device to help power crane operators judge payload movements more precisely. Visual and audible signals would be produced in the crane cab to indicate the rate of load movement. The device would eliminate the necessity of a relay man to transmit hand signals to the crane operator, (nasa Release 64-300)
Echo, Relay, and Syncom communications satellites were presented to the Smithsonian Institution in ceremony at Museum of History and Technology. Among the NASA officials participating in the presentation were Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Langley Research Center Director Dr. Floyd Thompson, and Goddard Space Flight Center Director Dr. Harry Goett. Carl T. Rowan, Director of U.S. Information Agency, said in address at the ceremony: “As we view the unfolding drama of the American space program it can be clearly seen that one of its most significant aspects is that it has been carried out in the full, open view of an interested and anxious world. When it was written into the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 that the activities of the new space agency were to be open to the widest practicable and appropriate spread of information, the Congress cast into law one of the deepest instincts of the American people. It was an act of faith to specify that this enterprise should be carried on openly before the gaze of those who wished us well and those who hoped otherwise; it was truly an expression of faith in freedom and the ability of Americans to meet the challenges and opportunities of an era when each day unfolds new perils and new promises. “If openness to public scrutiny was a basic concept in the entire space program, the decision to carry out a satellite program dedicated to freedom of communications on a global scale represented that concept converted into a highly meaningful fact. . . . “It is obvious that the over-riding quality of communications satellites is their internationalism. A practical system based on communication satellites is inherently universal, for it would be of little use if it did not mean communicating between the peoples of widely separated lands. Its basic premise involves the inclusion of as many countries as possible in the interchange that the system allows. “This presentation of communication satellites to our national museum of science and technology is, therefore, most truly an international occasion. For it is their international utility in the cause of world understanding, peace and progress which gives them their deepest meaning.” (Text)
nasa Flight Research Center awarded a $1.2 million contract to the Norair Div. of the Northrop Corp. of Hawthorne, Calif., for the design and construction of two full-scale lifting body research vehicles. The two research vehicles (the M-2 and HL-10) were to be used initially by NASA for full-scale wind tunnel testing and for free flight tests as manned subsonic gliders, (frc Release 14-64)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Douglas Aircraft Co. for S-IVB stage mockup to be used with Saturn V launch vehicle simulator at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Expected to cost about $5 million, the mockup would be used in study of prelaunch, launch, and orbital checkout of third stage. (NASA Release 64-123)
A team of Canadian scientists from McGill Univ., conducting Project Harp (High Altitude Research Program), was using a 250-ton, 16-in. naval gun to launch scientific rockets to heights of nearly 100 mi. The method was both reliable and economical (more than 80 shots had been fired, most of which were successful), and the launch procedure relatively simple. Objective of experiments was to find the secret of the lower ionosphere’s influence on radio communications. Dr. Gerald Bull, who conceived the idea of Project Harp, said that a new technique was being developed whereby a combination of gun and rocket could place a 100-lb. payload in earth orbit. (Jeffrey, London Daily Telegraph, 12/8/64,14)
NASA Flight Research Center Director Paul Bikle said in Missiles and Rockets that rocket engines to power M—2 and HL-10 lifting bodies would accelerate the manned mockups to mach 2 for investigation of their handling characteristics. “The maximum altitude they reach will not be very high, maybe 70,000 or 80,000 ft.” frc planned to select the engine by mid-July. (M&R, 6/22/64, 20-21)
Interview with General John P. McConnell (usaf), Vice Chief of Staff, usaf, in The Airman. General McConnell gave his opinion of USaf’s future role in space: “First, to augment the existing defense capabilities of the U.S. land, sea, and air forces by using space systems for such things as better communications, weather reporting, and navigation. Second, to develop a military capability for protection of U.S. interests in space. “I think the Air Force, by virtue of its overall mission and experience, as well as its DOD-assigned responsibilities for space developments and boosters, must seek to obtain space capabilities for our defense as quickly as they become economical and practical. “Our role to support the national goals of both the scientific exploration and the high-priority defense projects should continue. “I also visualize that in the long run, future manned vehicles will play an increasingly vital role. It is essential that the Air Force vigorously pursue space research and development as well as operations.” (Airman, 9/64,12-15) During September: Writing in U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, Capt. R. C. Truax (usn, Ret.) described early naval rocket development work at Engineering Experiment Station, Annapolis. Captain Truax was in charge of all rocket propulsion work for usn Bureau of Aeronautics from 1946 to 1949.	(U.S. Naval Inst. Proc., 9/64, 82-108)
D. Brainerd Holmes, vice president of Raytheon Corp. and former director of NASA manned space flight program, was interviewed in the Boston Globe. Asked if he still thought the 1970 manned lunar landing goal was realistic, he replied, “The timetable now is tougher than it was, but still possible.” (White, Boston Globe, 4/16/64, CR, 4/21/64, A2002-03)
Industry sources revealed only one more Ranger lunar probe could be launched before NASA’s contract with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory expired in December. If Ranger 7 failed, the sources said NASA might remove JPL from Cal Tech’s management, might remove Director William H. Pickering from his post, and might hire a “hard-headed businessman” to manage the facility. (AP, Boston Globe, 4/6/64)
Analyzing the U.S. aerospace industry Richard Rutter said in New York Times: “There have been some reductions in employment here and there and some production cut-backs. On the whole, however, the aerospace-defense industry remains not only very healthy but still growing. . . . “Change, of course, has been the hallmark of the aerospace industry almost since its very beginning. This characteristic continues. At present, for instance, there is some shift in production and procurement from aircraft and missiles to space vehicles and related space projects. This is not yet a sharp trend, but it may be indicative of the industry’s future course. . . .” (Rutter, NYT, 8/16/64, FI)
Conference on New Technology at Lewis Research Center was opened by LRC Director Dr. Abe Silverstein: “The vehicles and spacecraft launched from Florida are the visible results of our nation’s space effort. Less evident is the body of technology that makes these and future flights possible. Almost half of NASA’s 30,000 employees are among those creating this technology.” Attending the two-day conference were some 350 representatives of industry; area development groups; universities; Federal, state, and local government; labor; banking; and nasa Hq. and Centers. (Lewis News, 6/6/64,1)
Invention of pocket-size x-ray unit, smallest in the world, was announced by iit Research Institute. Device was invented by Dr. Leonard Reiffel, vice president of the Institute, and developed by James J. Ezop, Institute physicist. Besides uses by doctors for home calls, Dr. Reiffel said the instrument would be useful in testing mechanical parts in aerospace hardware. {Chic. Trib., 4/14/64)
Employment in aerospace industry during the past year reflected overall downward trend, according to Aviation Week survey. Exceptions to the general trend were McDonnell Aircraft Co. and Douglas Aircraft Co., the former mainly due to work on Gemini spacecraft and F—4 Phantom II aircraft and the latter due to increased work for Saturn launch vehicle program and commercial programs. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 20)
NASA and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had begun operating “Prairie Network” in midwestern U.S., a network of 16 automatic camera stations to photograph falling meteors and aid in tracking and recovering meteorites, NASA announced. Photographic measurements would assist scientists in determining how much mass is lost by bodies during atmospheric entry and in calculating origin of meteors. (NASA Release 64-106)
NASA Langley Research Center asked industry for proposals on the kind of launch vehicle it would take to put a small spacecraft into orbit around the sun. The purpose of the program would be to put an instrumented satellite into position for a clear view and study of the sun’s plasma corona. (Newport News Daily Press, 7/24/64)
NASA announced it would negotiate one-year cost-plus-incentive-fee contract with General Electric Co., Computer Dept., for continuation of engineering services at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s computation laboratory, (nasa Release 64-31)
Rep. F. Bradford Morse (R.—Lowell) of Massachusetts said he had written letter to NASA Administrator Jame E. Webb recommending NASA abandon plans to locate Electronics Research Center in Cambridge and, instead, select another site in a nearby community. In his letter, he said: “It is difficult to understand why the administration [nasa] persists in locating in Cambridge when there is such intense opposition. . . .” (Boston Sun. Globe, 10/4/64)
Rep. James C. Cleveland (R.-N.H.), member of House Select Committee on Government Research, wrote in Washington World magazine: “Fourteen to fifteen billion dollars of the taxpayer’s money is going into R&D this year. The figure was only $2 billion 10 years ago. “More than 30 different departments, bureaus, and agencies of the Federal Government conduct research or have it conducted for them, often in the same fields. . . . “A breakdown of Federal research and development spending shows that five organizations account for 90 percent of it. These are the Department of Defense, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the National Science Foundation. About 70 percent of these funds support military research and development. About 10 percent of the total funds is channeled to colleges and universities. . . .” (CR, 2/4/64, A563)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He mentioned that NASA’s Advanced Research and Technology program encompassed more than 2,000 separate tasks and projects, and highlighted a few areas for illustration. “. . . Considerable effort is concentrated on commercial supersonic transports, a subject of nasa research for many years. Various aircraft configurations embodying widely differing design features have resulted from this research. All of these designs appear promising, particularly with regard to supersonic performance. In September 1963, at the Langley Research Center, the results of preliminary design studies and of related NASA in-house research programs were presented to all interested government agencies and major aircraft manufacturers. In general, it was concluded that a supersonic transport for airline use is technically feasibly. It was stressed, however, that additional research will be required in order to raise the level of technology to the point where a supersonic transport can be designed which is economically attractive to the airlines. . . .” (Testimony)
West Germany’s Ministry of Scientific Research said estimated 4,300 West German scientists had left to work in U.S. between 1949 and 1961, and number was expected to increase. (Reuters, NYT, 10/31/64,8) October 30~November 1: Inventors’ Congress and Space Symposium held in Little Rock, Arkansas. NASA Administrator James E. Webb spoke on American progress and goals in space. He described “the Southern Crescent of the space program”—Cape Kennedy, Fla.; msfc, Huntsville, Ala.; Michoud Operations, La./Mississippi Test Facility; and msc, Houston, Tex. “One of the central facts about this great complex of space activities ... is the possibility that many varied research, development and production activities will gravitate in this direction. This is made likely by reasons of economics and of convenience. “By and large, these will be activities that require heavy contributions from science and technology, and Arkansas and the other states of the South are now in a position to get ready to take full advantage of the
First of two main experiment units for Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) was delivered to NASA by Univ. of Wisconsin. Designed and built by Cook Electric Co. under contract to the university, the experiment consisted of clustered 16-in. nebular photometer telescope, four 8-in. stellar photometer telescopes, and two scanning spectrometers. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 55)
NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center held Open House with more than 4,200 visitors attending. (Goddard News, 6/1/64)
First tracking station to be built for Project Gemini was dedicated at Carnarvon, Australia, a site close to the antipodal point to Cape Kennedy, the launch site. Carnarvon was first land station over which Gemini spacecraft would pass as it went into orbit. NASA Administrator James E. Webb participated by telephone in the ceremonies, and his remarks initiated the new station into “scama,” the nasa 13-country network of operational voice communications connecting the manned space flight tracking network, (nasa Release 64-155)
In testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said that “1963 was a milestone year. It was the year of transition to hardware—now we can fill the pipeline and move forward to a manned lunar landing in this decade. . . . “The resources for the Gemini and Apollo programs are moving forward. The major developmental resources are essentially completed; the manufacturing resources are under construction and approaching our goal; the test and operational resources have been initiated; a logistics program is being formulated and our personnel build-up is progressing. “The personnel staffing at the NASA Centers ... is increasing from 11,858 at the end of FY 1963 to 13,711 at the end of FY 1964 and a forecast total of 14,711 at the end of FY 1965. In addition to the government team of personnel there are approximately 181,000 contractor personnel who are working on Manned Space Flight programs. With the continued buildup of construction, manufacturing, test and operations, it is anticipated that this figure will approximate 300,000	personnel at the peak of the Manned Space Flight Program. ...” Discussing planned activity in manned space flight program, he said: “A major decision was made in 1963 to adopt the ‘all-up’ testing concept as a basic approach to our flight verification test program. ‘All-up’ testing means, all flights will be scheduled with complete space vehicles using live stages and flight type spacecraft. ... “There are several advantages to the ‘all-up’ approach. It will permit us to land an American astronaut on the moon, and return him safely to earth, in accordance with our schedule even though we are operating this year on a reduced budget. It will permit us to capitalize on successful flights. It will also allow us to gather a very large amount of data early in the flight program and thereby provide much needed information to our design organization. It is planned in the Saturn IB and Saturn V programs to launch a complete unmanned space vehicle on the first flight in an earth orbital trajectory.” (Testimony) February 6: NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, appearing before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, outlined NASA’s program of advanced research and technology and proposed activities for FY 1965. Objectives in advanced research and technology were summarized: “1. Basic research aimed toward an understanding of the natural laws underlying aeronautical and space technology. “2. Engineering research aimed at the application of these laws and at codifying them in terms of engineering design principles. “3. Experimental subsystem development, using advanced concepts and components, to produce test ‘know-how’ for the design of future operational systems. “Our aim in basic research is to contribute to the fund of relevant scientific knowledge and, in so doing, to maintain the best possible contact with the scientific and engineering community. Engineering research, that is the creation of engineering design principles, is also conducted by these same institutions with industry playing a somewhat greater role than in the case of basic research .... “A program of [advanced] research . . . which looks beyond today’s technology is believed to be a pre-requisite for continued advancement in the performance and efficiency of aeronautical and space vehicles.” (Testimony)
NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Dr. Eugene B. Konecci said in keynote address, Fifth Annual Conference on Human Factors in Electronics, in San Diego: “There is a great need today for simplification through a more fundamental understanding of phenomena we take for granted. Mathematical theories to aid in simplification and a better understanding of the cosmos around us are needed. Specifically in Electronics we need to re-examine our traditional complex circuitry and the logic behind it, so we can make even more rapid strides in solid state physics and electronics without imposing old circuit theory and wiring diagrams on new active elements.' In 50 years an electron tube as we know it will be an archaic museum piece. “The greatest need in Human Factors research is a better understanding of man, his capabilities and limitations. The study of human brain mechanisms promises the greatest rewards to science and technology and in turn to the betterment of mankind. We need more cross fertilization between neuro- and psycho-physiologists and electronic engineers, through a new educational tool ‘Systems Engineering’ that includes the human element. . . .” (Text)
In a speech before a briefing conference on contracting for research and development sponsored by the Federal Bar Association and the Bureau of National Affairs, General Bernard Schriever, AFSC, stated that in his opinion “when understanding is fostered and encouraged among the various sectors of national life, such as industry, the professions, the scientific community, and government, then rapid progress can be made toward national objectives.” He cited the usaf ballistic missile program as an example of this principle at work and stated that the long-range usaf planning study (Project Forecast) set up in 1963 attempted also to put this principle to work, by employing broad participation by all the services, several Government agencies, and personnel from universities, corporations, and non-profit organizations. ( afsc Release 47—R-91)
B. K. Heusinger of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center said in Astronautics & Aeronautics article about present arid future improvements in Saturn launch vehicle propulsion: “First and foremost, the Saturn-I testing program has already made possible an additional payload capability of approximately 4300 lb. without major redesign efforts. A substantial portion of this gain has come from altered operational and procedural techniques developed during the normal course of static and flight testing. The impact of major redesigns will not be felt, as a result of the lead times involved, until the first of the Satum-IB vehicles. . . .”	(A&A, 8/64,/ 20-25) During August: J. S. Butz, Jr., said in Air Force and Space Digest article on the future of aviation: “Aeronautics in the 1970s and 1980s promises to eclipse anything of the past in both scope and the performance of individual aircraft. Although missile and space systems will continue to furnish strong competition for national support, aviation activity in the decades ahead will be much more extensive and important than it is today. . . . “The revolutionary effect of the new technology on future aircraft can be best illustrated by discussing two key areas. One is propulsion. The other is materials. Light, more powerful engines, and lighter, stronger structures always have been key design objectives. This is still true. . . .” He quoted Dr. Alexander H, Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development: “‘It is possible today to begin the development of lightweight gas-turbine engines with a thrust-to-weight ratio of better than 10 to 1.’ Dr. Flax points out that installed thrust-to-weight ratios apparently can rise to higher than 20 to 1 on the second generation of future engines. “Ten years ago such a statement would have got him laughed out of most scientific and engineering meetings. A few people may still argue that the estimate is high. But the main argument now is over how best to achieve this truly stunning performance rather than over the possibility of achieving it.” He detailed some of the r&d areas with great potential for future aircraft, then said: “Technical evidence abounds to prove that an aeronautical revolution is at hand and that the first step in that revolution can have great economic importance. It clearly is time for more resolute action. Britain and France, and possibly the Soviet Union, have approximately the same opportunity as the US to capitalize on what is known now. In western Europe, at least, engine and materials technology is well advanced. . . .” (AF Mag., 8/64)
Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Deputy Chief of Staff for Manned Space Flight, afsc, said that usaf would sharply increase its participation in NASA’s manned space flight program; usaf astronauts might be assigned for training as crew members on some Gemini and Apollo flights, and 100 officers would help staff Integrated Mission Control Center (imcc) at msc. [George Low, msc Deputy Diricetor, denied this claim three days later (see June 9).] General Bleymaier disclosed that: (1) flight crews of Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) would come from nine Dyna-Soar pilots now at Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb; (2) usaf would begin discussing specific flights aboard Gemini and Apollo when Sec. of Defense Robert S. McNamara gave approval for production of mol; (3) 17 Titan III—C launches were planned, two allocated to MOL; (4) payloads of 6,000 lbs. would contain scientific research projects, with NASA experiments to be accommodated. (Houston Post, 6/10/64; M&R, 6/15/64, 12)	_
U.S. Senate passed H.R. 10456, authorizing $5,246,293,250 budget for NASA in FY 1965. Included in this amount was $52,482,750 restored by Senate Space Committee from the $110,189,500 reduction made by the House. The hill would authorize $4,354,150,000 for research and development; $262,880,500 for construction of facilities; and $629,262,750 for administrative operations. Bill was passed by voice vote, was reintroduced two days later for record vote (see June 24).	(CR, 6/22/64, 14069-78)
Prime contractors of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center were assuming additional responsibilities in Saturn launch vehicles program, MSFC Director Dr, Wemher von Braun announced. Principal contractors immediately affected would be Boeing Co., Chrysler Corp., ibm Corp., and General Electric Co. Dr. von Braun said this was “a continuation of the Marshall policy to transfer research and developmental work, as well as fabrication, from ‘in house’ to contractor plants as soon as practical. Not only has this been our philosophy but prime contracts in most cases have spelled out the eventual taking over by industry of full responsibility for major elements and stages of the vehicles. . . .” MSFC would retain overall systems management responsibility for the three Saturn launch vehicles and continue to “maintain a technical and managerial competence in our own organization. Without it we cannot monitor the work of our contractors to insure that we are getting the quality and reliability that a manned space program demands. . . .” (Marshall Star, 2/26/64,10)
In address to the Wayne State University College of Engineering Honors Convocation in Detroit, Mich., Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said: “In the manned space flight program, we have tried to profit from t)he experience of the past. We are creating this very great capability in advance of the formulation of many of the specific operational requirements, which inevitably will emerge when it becomes clear what can be done. There are many elements to this capability. It includes trained people, a base of industry throughout the United States, ground facilities, launch vehicles, spacecraft, operational experience, and the ability to manage large research and development efforts. All of these things will enable the United States to undertake whatever exploration of space the national interest may require. “In the three years since 1961, the manned space flight effort has built up at a rapid rate until there are now 250,000 persons at work throughout the country—more than 90 percent in private industry—and their numbers will increase to 300,000 when we reach the peak activity of the presently approved programs next year. About 15 percent of these are scientists and engineers. The program has become a major element in the economic life of the country. Prime contractors assign work to subcontractors, who in turn engage second and third-tier subcontractors. “As the program progresses, we are now beginning to realize some of the benefits. Whereas six years ago we were extremely limited in the power available to place objects in space, we are now approaching a period when we will have the rockets available to do things beyond those being used in present programs. “The time is approaching when we must give more thought to the exploitation of the capabilities provided through these efforts. To avoid the pitfall into which we have fallen in the past, we must plan for the future even while we press vigorously to accomplish present programs.” (Text)
Results of decompression experiments with mice in atmospheres of helium-oxygen, nitrogen-oxygen, and argon-oxygen were reported in Missiles and Rockets. Performed by group at Purdue Research Facility, experiments showed mice survived decompression markedly longer in helium-oxygen atmosphere than in air. In one experiment, eight mice decompressed in helium-oxygen atmosphere survived an average of 6.1min. longer than six mice decompressed in air. Extrapolation of these results might indicate desirability of helium-oxygen atmospheres in spacecraft for prolonged manned flights; the extra minutes of survival would provide safety margin, in case of accidental decompression, for crew to take necessary emergency measures. (M&R, 8/3/64, 32)
Michael I. Yarymovych, Director of NASA Manned Earth Orbital Mission Studies, said before Canaveral Council of Technical Studies, Cape Kennedy, that NASA was coordinating fully with dod in exploring four different types of orbital systems: Extended Apollo, Apollo Orbital Research Laboratory (aorl), Medium Orbital Research Laboratory (morl), and Large Orbital Research Laboratory (lorl). The first three concepts were designed to be orbited by Saturn IB; lorl, by Saturn V.	Yarymovych said that it was “becoming increasingly clear that the Extended Apollo is an essential element of an expanding Earth orbital program. ... “In the initial stages, it would be used as a laboratory and later it could be converted to a logistics system.” aorl, morl, and lorl were in competition with each other, he said, and a decision would have to be made among them. USAF’s Gemini B/Manned Orbiting Laboratory was being studied as possible integral element of Orbital Research Laboratory program. (M&R, 4/27/64, 16)
At annual meeting of National Academy of Sciences, in Washington, Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, President of Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, was elected to a second four-year term as Treasurer. Also at the meeting, NAS elected 35 new members on the basis of distinguished and continuing achievements in original research, among them: George Howard Herbig, astronomer and assistant director of Lick Observatory; and Clark Blanchard Millikan, professor of aeronautics and director of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory. Election of six distinguished foreign scientists also was announced, among them: Marcel Gilles Josef Minnaert, Professor Emeritus at the Univ. of Utrecht and co-inventer of the stellar curve of growth, one of the most significant developments in modern astronomy; and Maurice Roy, Directeur General de l’Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales and currently President of the International Committee on Space Research ( cospar ). ( nas-nrs Releases)
In an interview with U.S. News & World, Report, Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, defended the U.S. program to land a man on the moon by 1970 and stated that it was his belief that at the present time the chances were “better than 50%” that the project would be successful by the target date. In commenting on reports that the Russians had forsaken a race to the moon, von Braun ventured that it was possible that the Russians had “picked another focusing point besides the moon for their manned spaceflight program” such as the development of a large manned space station orbiting earth. In addition, he commented: “I don’t think the Russians have ever said they aren’t going to the moon. But, even if we are going alone, this would not hurt one bit. The purpose is not so much to race the Russians—or, for that matter, even to land on the moon—but to design a hard-hitting program to develop an American space-flying capability.” (U.S. News, 6/1/64)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, answered gop critics, complaining of a “crash program” to reach the moon, with a “Not so. The eight years devoted to the Apollo Project is a longer period than the duration of any previous United States research and development program.” He continued: “Apollo’s time scale for development is four years longer than the time scale for the Mercury spacecraft, two years longer than the B-58 bomber and one year longer than the X—15.” (Houston Post, 6/7/64)
NASA Lewis Research Center granted $900,000 authorization to AEC Hanford Atomic Products Operation for r&d in connection with advanced nuclear rocket engines—fabrication, test, and evaluation of tungsten uranium oxide fuel elements for advanced nuclear rocket engine now under study at Lewis. The agreement brought value of work being performed at Hanford for NASA to more than $1.5 million, (lrc Release 64-21)
Lt. Gen. James H. Doolittle (usafr) was awarded the Pennsylvania Military College Engineering Centennial Medal. In his acceptance speech, General Doolittle spoke on usaf Project Forecast report, which considered “national policy, technological opportunities, and capability” in its 10-year predictions. Based on the technological opportunities evaluated (including materials, propulsion, aerodynamic development, special weapons, and guidance), there would be eight important possible technical advances: Advanced Manned Precision Strike System (ampss), very accurate icbm’s, very precise air-to-ground missiles, a Vtol fighter, a Vtol light transport, a large cargo aircraft (cx—x), Mobile Air Defense, and a hypersonic mach 6 reconnaissance aircraft. General Doolittle concluded: “. . . our national security and our national welfare, in future, will depend very largely on military technology and, of course, as always, on the spirit and will of out citizens. Our Nation must become and remain superior in science and technology. We must have more and better scientists and engineers. This is one of the very important challenges to Pennsylvania Military College and to all of the other fine educational institutions of our land. . . .” (Text, CR, 8/31/64, 20404-06)
At a symposium sponsored by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Dr. Norman F. Ness likened the earth to a kind of comet with a long magnetic tail that extended for an unknown distance. The “new look” was drawn from results of the first detailed mapping of the earth’s magnetic field on the nighttime side of the magnetosphere by explorer xvm (imp I, Interplanetary Monitoring Platform), launched Nov. 26,1963. Until recently, scientists had believed that the earth’s magnetosphere was basically spherical; however, data from explorer xviii indicate that countless magnetic lines of force stretched out like the tail of a comet to an unknown distance in space, apparently beyond the moon. Within this comet-like tail, the lines of force in the Northern Hemisphere were directed towards the sun; in the Southern Hemisphere, away from the sun. In between, there was a neutral zone. Dr. Ness characterized this neutral zone, which had been hypothesized but never before detected, as a thin sheet which was a permanent part of the earth’s environment and virtually void of any magnetic activity. Though the neutral zone’s exact role was unknown, Dr. Ness speculated that it might be responsible for formation of the auroras, creation of the Van Allen radiation belt, and presence of the gegenschein. Ness concluded that in view of the evidence from explorer xviii, “The only difference between the earth and a comet is that the earth possesses a strong magnetic field and comets do not.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/16/64; Hixson, N.Y. Her. Trib., 12/16/64; Wash. Daily News, 12/16/64; Toth, Detroit News, 12/16/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/64; AP, NYT, 12/16/64, 30; Av. Wk., 12/21/64, 25)
A Saturn S-IVB stage began a 6,000-mi. land, sea, and river trip from the Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div., Calif., to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. At msfc, the stage would be mated with a first stage of the Saturn IB, built by msfc and modified by the Chrysler Corp., and an Apollo spacecraft. Tests of the assembly would check the complete Saturn-Apollo vehicle for its ability to withstand vibrations and other stresses expected in flight. (Marshall Star, 12/9/64, 1-2)
Boeing announced that Dr. George M. Knauf, for the past three years deputy director of space medicine in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, would join the company as chief of bioastronautics. He would manage groups working on life support rad protection, engineering psychology, rad program support. (Seattle Post-Intelligence, 12/18/64)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced Sylvania Electronics Systems-East had been selected to negotiate $1.8 million contract for transportable ground station (“Advanced Technological Satellite Transportable Ground Station”). Sylvania would design, fabricate, install, test, and check out the system, which featured two sxtremely low noise amplifiers: one a maser and the other a parametric amplifier. These amplifiers operate at temperatures in the range of —440° F and prevent spacecraft signals being overshadowed by heat-induced noise generated inside the receiver. (GSFC Release G—23-64)
NASA selected International Business Machines Corp. Federal Systems Div. to supply technical services for support of Goddard Space Flight Center’s computer facilities. The computation services and allied systems permitted GSFC to acquire high-speed raw data from spacecraft and to convert it almost instantaneously into intelligible information concerning the spacecraft. Contractor was to staff and operate computer facilities related to launch monitoring system at Cape Kennedy, the early flight tracking station on Bermuda, and gsfc control center, (nasa Release 64-166)
Linde Division of Union Carbide has “grown” a new solid-state laser material for use by scientists in laser research at the Marshall Space Flight Center Astrionics Laboratory. The new material was yttrium aluminum garnet doped with neodymium. It supported solid-state continuous-wave laser action, with common tap water as the only coolant. Toughness of the garnet was comparable to that of ruby laser rods. {Marshall Star, 11/18/64, 2)
U.S. Army’s Redstone rocket, developed by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center team when it was formerly part of Army Missile Command, was officially retired from active military operation in ceremony at Army Missile Command, Redstone Arsenal, Ala. Dr. Wemher von Braun, msfc Director, spoke on Redstone’s contributions to U.S. space exploration, including serving as launch vehicle for first and second U.S. manned space flights. Redstone was replaced as military missile by Army’s Pershing. (Marshall Star, 10/4/64,10)
In article from Houston, upi reported on first manned space flight in Project Gemini (GT-3), quoting “informed sources” as saying: “We cannot possibly make it this year. It will be early 1965.” NASA’s officially announced planning date was in last quarter of 1964. (upi, L.A. Times, 8/2/64)
NASA’s Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight was holding three days of meetings with msc officials on problems related to Project Apollo. Members of Committee, established by nasa Administrator James E. Webb in December 1963, and which functioned in advisory capacity to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, delved into problems posed by launch vehicle systems, spacecraft systems, launch operations, science program, and space medicine. MIT physicist Dr. Charles Townes said at msc meeting of the Committee that he believed astronauts, not scientists, should be first men to explore moon. Scientists, he said, would concentrate on their own specialties in exploring the moon’s surface, but astronauts trained in scientific principles would bring back important information on the moon as a whole, (msc Roundup, 7/8/64, 1; Houston Chron., 7/2/64)
Edward Z. Gray, Director, Advanced Manned Missions Program, Office of Manned Space Flight, addressed the National Space Club: “From [the objectives of the Space Act of 1958], the objectives of the Manned Space Flight Program are . . . derived. They are: “1. The conduct of manned scientific space flight missions ... as an integral part of a total program to expand our knowledge of the universe. “2. The development of launch vehicles, spacecraft, lunar and planetary surface equipment . . . and a broad foundation of industrial support, all of which are required to support manned space flight. “3. The utilization of the space environment to provide direct benefits to the earth. . . . “4. The application of manned space flight activities to promote the national security and to stimulate the national economy, scientific achievement, technological growth, and educational capability.” (Text)
NASA Langley Research Center issued requests for proposals for the conceptual and preliminary design of a hypersonic ramjet research engine to be used in the Hypersonic Ramjet Experiment Project announced by NASA last June. Since the project would ultimately include flight research with the engine mounted on the X-15 No. 2 aircraft, the guidelines included a weight limitation of 800 lbs. for the final research engine, including necessary flight-test instrumentation and dimensions compatible with mounting the engine near the lower aft fuselage of the X-15. (LaRC Release)
New maps of the moon made by usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center, St. Louis, were termed “the best lunar maps ever made” by E.	A. Whitaker, astronomer at Lunar and Planetary Laboratory in Tucson, Ariz., and Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker, lunar geologist of U.S. Geological Survey Observatory in Flagstaff, Ariz. Maps were on scale of one inch equals eight miles. (Burkett, Houston Chron., 6/28/64)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center officials announced they believed they had successfully “hit” explorer xxii satellite with laser beams fired one-per-second across more than 500 miles. Whether the hits were definitely achieved or not would await further analysis. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/14/64; Wash. Post, 10/14/64)
X—15 No. 1 flown by John B. McKay (nasa) to 2,932 mph (mach 4.44) and 82,000 ft. near Edwards, Calif. This was first flight of No. 1 since it was modified for high-altitude flight research (wing-tip pods containing micrometeoroid and dust collectors, spectrometer, and densitron; new inertial guidance system originally designed for use in usaf X-20). Purpose of this flight was operational checkout of new equipment and evaluation of flight characteristics with the wing-tip pods added. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; frc Release)
“Boosted Areas” sounding rocket was launched from NASA Wallops Station to 59.5-mi. altitude with sodium-lithium payload designed and built by Sweden’s Uppsala Ionospheric Observatory on contract to Swedish Space Committee. The wide and reddish sodium-lithium cloud ejected in the atmosphere was visible for many miles and was photographed from several locations. The test was in preparation for series of such launchings in the auroral zone in northern Scandinavia later this year, to study causes of aurora and airglow. This first launch of Boosted Areas from Wallops was quite successful. Small booster included in the Areas increased its altitude from normal 225,000 ft. to 314,000	ft. (Wallops Release 64-24)
NASA announced that it had selected 22 scientific experiments for the fifth Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo-E), scheduled to be launched in 1966. 54 scientists from four countries (U.S., U.K., France, and the Netherlands) representing universities, government, and private industry would take part in designing and constructing the experiments. The satellite was scheduled to be launched into an eccentric orbit, with an apogee of 92,000 mi. and a perigee of 170 mi. The Ogo-E experi766-598 0—65----17	, ments would study energetic particle radiation, earth and interplanetary magnetic fields, effect of solar gases on the earth’s magnetic fields and radio communication, and the effect of solar radiation on the earth. (nasa Release 64-171)
NASA announced Langley Research Center would conduct tests with Boeing 707 air transport prototype to find ways to lower landing and takeoff distances required for large jet transports. NASA pilots and engineers would study performance and handling characteristics of the aircraft in three-month program. (NASA Release 64^100)
A new division was formed within the NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology. The new Programs and Resources Division of oart would be headed by Merrill H. Mead who came to Hq. from the Ames Research Center. Dr. R. L. Bisplinghoff, Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said the new division was created to “improve the program planning capability and provide common objectives toward which all of the elements of the office can be directed. ” (NASA Release 64—132)
NASA awarded two contracts to Aerojet-General Corp. for development of M-l 1.5-million-lb.-thrust rocket engine. One contract was for $190,075,635 and provided for R&D work; the other contract was for $48,550,074 and provided for necessary test facilities. Development of the liquid hydrogen/Iiquid oxygen engine was under technical direction of NASA Lewis Research Center, (nasa Release 64-66; lrc Release 64-31)
Speculation about why Soviet voskhod i space flight was terminated after 24 hours was proferred by experts around the world. U.S. space engineers generally indicated Soviets operated according to plan by terminating flight when they did. However, officials of other Western countries speculated voskhod i was brought down prematurely, for reasons variously given as illness among the crew, faulty radio transmitter, and improper orbit. Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said, “We knew the shot was coming and we had information it would involve a week— that’s why they had the doctor along.” He suggested technical problems had caused premature ending of trip. Some sources pointed to Soviets’ own announcement the previous day, which referred to “conditions of prolonged flight.” At least one press analysis, in retrospect, said vosk-hod i was perhaps ordered back to earth because of political events in the Soviet Union—Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was being removed from office by Presidium of the Communist Party Central Committee, an occurrence not made public until Oct. 15. (Ubell, N.Y. Her. Trib., 10/14/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 10/14/64; Time, 10/30/64, 37)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, interviewed in Washington World, replied to interviewer’s question: “Yes, Gemini is really necessary to the Apollo program. As a matter of fact, Gemini would be necessary as the next major step in manned space flight even if there were no Apollo mission. Gemini provides the United States large increments of manned space flight capability. Gemini is vital to the Apollo program since our astronauts must learn— and perfect—the techniques of rendezvous and docking in space before attempting the trip to the moon and hack. . . .” (nasa)
Dr. Nancy Roman, Chief of NASA Astronomy programs, told Space Business Daily that her office had a program under consideration for a 50-55-in. telescopic mirror manned orbiting observatory which might orbit in the mid-1970’s. Although she emphasized that all plans were in the “thinking stage,” Dr. Roman said the 50—55-in. configuration would provide another interim link between the unmanned Orbiting Astronomical Observatory series and the manned 100-in. configuration being considered for launching in 15 to 20 years. “The 50-55-in. interim configuration should be such,” she said, “that it could be used either manned or unmanned. But it will have as its principal objective the proving of man’s ability as an orbiting astronomer.” (SBD, 11/30/64, 132)
U.S. Committee for International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy) and usn announced satellite to monitor solar x-ray emission, instrumented by Naval Research Laboratory scientists, was launched recently to initiate continuous “watch on the sun” during iqsy (1964-65). First signals from the satellite showed the sun now is close to its minimum activity, reported nrl scientists Robert W. Kreplin, Talbot A. Chubb, and Herbert Friedman. Any solar activity that occurs this year should be isolated and relatively uncomplicated, permitting the satellite to record individual storm centers, in contrast to igy which was marked by succession of overlapping storms. Observatories in 14 countries joined U.S. in preparing to utilize continuous data transmissions from the satellite. At press conference, the NRL scientists said that astronauts on lunar flight would be under no more radiation danger during maximum period of solar cycle than during minimum period. Friedman explained: “All available evidence indicates that solar minimum is as bad as solar maximum for superflare eruption.” To date, superflares occur at random and cannot be predicted, (nas-nrc Release; USN Background Statement; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/5/64)
nasa announced selection of 23 scientific and technological experiments to be flown aboard Gemini spacecraft, selected by NASA Manned Space Flight Experiments Board from almost 100 proposals made by scientists and engineers in NASA, dod, and the scientific community at large. 13 of the experiments—eight scientific and five technological— were sponsored by nasa; ten experiments, all technological, were sponsored by dod. (nasa Release 64-78)
Dr. Winston Edward Kock, vice president-research for Bendix Corp., was named Director of NASA’s Electronics Research Center to be located in the Boston area, effective Sept. 1. As director, he would have charge of fundamental work in space and aeronautical electronics. (NASA Release 64^172; upi, Wash. Post, 7/11/64)
In his Economic Report to the Congress, President Lyndon B. Johnson reviewed progress toward economic goals and presented his programs for “achieving our national economic potential.” On transportation and technology, he said that the “. . . Federal Government provides major support for the research and development which underlie our striking technological advances. In the past much of our research and development has been connected with national defense. Now, as military outlays level off, we face:
DOD announced award of $1,692,001 contract for construction of dual vertical checkout and pneumatic test station Saturn S-II facility at Seal Beach, Calif, (dod Release 788-64) Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Planetary Mission Studies, said in a speech: “Our studies indicate that the next major phase in manned earth orbital operations should be a space station with a 6-9 man capacity. This would be specifically designed for long-duration earth orbital flights and would directly further the routine exploitation of near earth space for peaceful purposes. The studies on this concept have shown that the basic station module should have a usable total volume in the order of 8,000 cubic feet with continuous ‘floor’ areas of not less than 300 square feet.” (Text) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke at the awards banquet: “There is a wonderful thing about the space business. It has a vitality and a deep sense of challenge, which most other activities do not have. If it is not a way of life, it is at least a way of looking at life. The space program is the program for the optimist, the person who is willing to look ahead with confidence, the individual who sees no limits to what can be done and no horizons to the scope of doing. One of the greatest benefits already obtained from the space program is its revitalizing effect upon our whole economy—our whole educational system— our whole attitude toward the future. Let us use all our power of persuasion against any individual or any group who would slow down the pace of this program.” Referring to statements that the military possibilities of space have been “downgraded,” Dr. Welsh said: “During the four-year period of 1957 through 1960, space expenditures for the dod totaled $1 billion. On the other hand, during the last four years, that is 1961 through 1964, the dod spent about $4.6 billion on its space responsibility. The fact is that the Department of Defense is annually spending about a billion and a half dollars in space research and development. This includes projects in navigation, communications, observation, detection, booster development, scientific instrumentation, command and control techniques, interception, and manned and unmanned space flight.” He would make no prediction regarding next year’s space budget, but suggested that “space expenditures over the coming years, even with occasional plateaus, would be characterized by an upward trend.” Dr. Welsh confirmed the Russians were relying heavily upon unmanned Vostok spacecraft in their Cosmos program. He said the Vostoks had accumulated “more than 2500 orbits”; since the seven Soviet manned flights to date accounted for only 10% of this, the balance must have been achieved in the more than 20 Vostok flights from Tyuratam range at the 65° inclination. Unlike the Cosmos satellites, these unmanned Vostoks had been recovered after as much as two weeks in orbit. Dr. Welsh also disclosed that Soviet launching reliability was “comparable” to the 85% attained by U.S. in past three years. (Text; A&A, 11/64,116; Dr.EdwardC. Welsh) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, staff member of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, in a comparison of U.S. and Soviet space flights, said that 262 military and civilian launch vehicles had been launched by this country between 1957 and October of this year as opposed to at least 81 launched by the Russians. Of the total U.S. launch attempts, 192 were successful, and 231 payloads were put into earth orbit, eight were injected into escape trajectories, and 84 were listed as failures. (Text) Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, AFSC Space Systems Div. deputy for manned systems, said that studies by Jet Propulsion Laboratory and by General Electric, under JPL contract, showed that payload capacities of both Surveyor and Mariner could be doubled if the Titan III, rather than the Atlas-Agena, were used to launch them. The GE study, he said, determined that the Voyager Mars soft-landing mission objectives could be accomplished more effectively if the lander and or-biter were launched as two separate Titan III payloads, rather than as a combined package atop a Saturn IB. (Av. Wk., 11/9/64, 27) aiaa made the following awards: 1964 Astronautics Award to Walter C. Williams, vice president and general manager of the Manned Systems Div. of the Aerospace Corp. and until April 1964 NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Operations, for “outstanding and continuing achievements in successful aerospace systems operations”; Octave Chanute Award to Fred J. Drinkwater and Robert C. Innis, usaf pilots at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif., for their work on the V/Stol and Stol aircraft; John Jeffries Award to Dr. Eugene Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, until Oct. 1964 NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, for his contributions to life sciences; Robert M. Losey Award to Col. Robert C. Miller (usaf) , Kansas City Weather Bureau, for his work on turbulence. (Av. Wk., 11/16/64,19; msc Roundup, 11/11/64,1) Joseph A. Walker, project pilot for NASA’s Flight Research Center, described the first flight of the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (LLRV). Walker said this was the first of several pilot familiarization and checkout flights. Simulated lunar missions were scheduled for early 1965. The first flight consisted of three separate take-offs and landings. Total free flight time was just under one min., with a maximum altitude of approximately 10 ft. He used only the jet engine for lift power and did not activate the lift rockets. All eight of the standard control rockets were operated briefly. The llrv was equipped with a jet engine that could be automatically regulated to counterbalance five-sixths- of the vehicle’s weight to compensate for the gravitational difference between the moon and earth. This engine was also used to provide take-off power. During forthcoming checkout flights, two hydrogen-peroxide rocket motors, capable of delivering from 100 to 500 lbs. thrust each, would be used to regulate lift. The program, in support of Project Apollo, was designed to study the piloting and operational procedures involved during the final phases of a manned lunar landing and during the initial portion of the lunar take-off. (frc Release 28-434) Paper on launch vehicle engines by A. O. Tischler, Director of NASA oart Chemical Propulsion Div., and Leland F. Belew, Manager of msfc Engine Program Office, covered current status of solid- and liquid-propellant rocket engines for Saturn and Titan launch vehicles. The authors reported that the F-l engine represented “the largest thrust engine fired to date. Started in early 1959 the F-l engine has been under development for six years. Five F-l’s will be used in the first stage of the Saturn V vehicle to produce a take-off thrust of 7,500,000 pounds. . . . “Nominal firing duration is 150 seconds and we expect better than 15 times that life to be in the engine at qualification. . . . “[Design refinements to correct combustion-driven oscillations] have produced an engine which in the last five months has accumulated almost as much test time as in the previous five years. . . .” (Text) November 4: Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa’s Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, cited during a luncheon of the AIAA Third Manned Space Flight Meeting in Houston four important decisions made in the past ten years: “The first was in 1954 when as the result of the Von Neumann Committee’s recommendations we began the ballistic missile program on a top-priority basis. . . . The second decision a year later was to undertake the Vanguard program as the second priority effort, completely separate from the ballistic missile program. . . . The third decision . . . was the passage of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. . . . The fourth major decision was President Kennedy’s 1961 proposal to expand and accelerate United States space activity.” Dr. Mueller said that there is no such thing as unmanned exploration of space. “As sensor, manipulator, evaluator, and investigator in space, as the scope and range of our activities continue to increase, the role of man assumes increasing importance. Our challenge is to capitalize on his presence in space.” (Text) 766-598 0—65----25
Discovery of relatively cool region inside three-million-degree solar corona was announced at cospar meeting by Dr. Armin Deutsch of Mt. Wilson and Palomar Observatories and Dr. Guglielmo Righini, Director of Astrophysical Observatory at Arcetri, Italy. The corona clouds were believed to contain ionized calcium at relatively cool 20,000 degrees. They were discovered in analyzing spectrogram taken while the two astronomers were in DC—8 “flying observatory” during solar eclipse last July. (Reuters, Houston Post, 5/19/64)
usaf space medicine team, in paper delivered to seminar at Brooks afb, reported on experiment with 12 volunteers committed to “absolute bed rest” for four weeks, in attempt to simulate conditions of extended space flight. After the period, subjects showed marked increase in tendency toward fainting, but when protected with antigravity suits this tendency nearly disappeared. Heartbeat rates were faster in stand-up test after the bedrest them in similar test before it. High gravity loads in centrifuge did not adversely affect the subjects after their long rest. The volunteers lost about one-fifth of a gallon of their total blood volume, and increase in calcium loss was apparent, but was not considered hazardous. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/21/64)
Dr. John J. Brennan, Jr., speaking for Committee to Preserve Cambridge (Mass.) Industries, said he would petition court to decide that proposed Kendall Sq. site for NASA. Electronics Research Center did not meet urban renewal standards. Dr. Brennan said he received reply from White House to his letter of protest in which Presidential aide Kenneth O’Donnell said Kendall Sq. would have to meet all legal requirements for urban renewal before NASA could locate there.	(Boston Globe,
Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of NASA Langley Research Center, said in speech before National Space Club in Washington that the problem of maintaining radio communications with astronauts during atmospheric re-entry may have been solved. He said LaRC research in Project Ram (Radio Attenuation Measurement) showed that ejection of small amount of liquid into the air “provides an effective means of dealing with radio blackout,” the liquid apparently preventing buildup of an ionized sheath that cannot be penetrated by radio waves. While it may not be the “completely workable answer, it looks like a very promising method of dealing with the problem.” (nsc Release)
NASA announced establishment of new research program with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. to develop advanced technology for large nuclear and chemical rockets. The program would continue certain research begun under Project Rift (Reactor-In-Flight Test), principally insulation development, cryogenic testing, structural development, application of Rift technology to Saturn stages, and documentation of pertinent technology for future use. NASA had committed an initial $500,000 letter contract to the program; cost of seven-month period was expected to be about $1.5 million. (NASA Release 64-57)
Western Devices, Inc., was awarded SI,615,111 nasa contract for work at Launch Complex 39, John F. Kennedy Space Center Merritt Island Launch Area. Contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers. ( dob Release 605-64)
NASA Flight Research Center announced award of $82,000 contract to General Electric Co. for study of flight instrumentation for use on a research ramjet to be carried on the X—15A—2 aircraft. Major portion of the instrumentation would be thrust/drag measuring device and appropriate sensors to measure net thrust or drag transmitted to the X-15 aircraft from the ramjet. Design of this device also would provide capability to jettison the ramjet from the aircraft, (frc Release 21-64)
NASA announced it would purchase 102 additional J—2 rocket engines for Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles at cost of about $165 million. Contract would be negotiated by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center with Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc. (nasa Release 64-211)
In satellite communications demonstration at AIAA Washington meetings, Lt. Cdr. J. F. Debold, Commanding Officer, U.S. Naval Research and Development Satellite Communications Group, spoke via syncom ii satellite with his second in command on board USNs Kingsport. Kingsport, which can acquire, track, control, and communicate via a satellite while cruising at sea, was built by Navy to complement two Army-developed communications terminals on East and West Coasts, (aiaa Booster, 7/2/64, 2)
Harold Goldstein, Assistant Commissioner of U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, discussed changes in the labor force at symposium in New York. “We now have about 1.2 million engineers and scientists. Their numbers may rise to somewhere in the neighborhood of 2 million by 1970. “There productivity is also rising rapidly. New inventions can be made faster, because as science and technology have progressed the techniques available for analyzing a problem, the knowledge of scientific principles that can be brought to bear, the different types of hardware that are readily available to be adapted in a new invention are increasing at a geometric rate.” (Lissner, NYT, 4/26/64,85)
NASA employees Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., and Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr., were among the 10 outstanding young men in Government service awarded the 1963 Arthur S. Flemming Awards. Kraft was Assistant Director for Flight Operations, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; Townsend, Assistant Director of Space Science and Satellite Applications, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Notice)
nasa Ames Research Center announced that the Carl N. Swenson Co., San Jose, Calif., had been awarded a $992,000 contract to construct a reinforced-concrete vacuum chamber and Structural Dynamics Laboratory at ARC. The space chamber would be in the form of a ten-story, 30-million-lb., hollow concrete pentagonal tower with walls three feet thick, would accomodate full-scale segments or smaller-scale models of rockets and spacecraft, and could be evacuated to a pressure of ten millimeters of mercury, (arc Release 64-31)
Addressing Aerospace Industries Association Council in Seattle, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, summarized future aerospace trends. He foresaw no immediate substantial decrease in dollar amount of defense spending, but said industry should be able to shift emphasis from production of weapon systems to “other useful types and forms of economic activity”— which he said should be toward an expanding space program and an increase in r&d of advanced weapons technology. Of space program values he said: “The space program has been a catalyst, a stimulus to education at all levels, with particular attention to science and engineering. How much is it worth to have raised the educational sights of our young people and at the same time to have increased significantly the wealth of knowledge with which to condition them? I cannot put a price on it, but I believe its value will exceed the total cost of the space program. “The contribution of our space program to our national security is also considerable. How much more secure are we, due to improved communications, more accurate navigation, more complete weather information, and better world-wide mapping? How much is it worth to be better informed about potential sources of danger? How can we assess the advantage of developing competence to detect and offset possible aggression from space? I cannot put a price on these contributions to national security, but I am confident that their value also exceeds the total cost of the space program. “The space program stimulates the development of new products, new productive processes, and new managerial techniques. I cannot place a precise value upon such innovations, but I would estimate that such investment will repay itself many times over. “A substantial difference in influence in world affairs evolves from whether a country is in a first position or a second position in power. To a significant degree, a nation’s relative position depends on how it stands in advanced technology. . . . “Combining, as the space program does, the best talents in management, in engineering, and in science, with the most modem facilities available, the net result is the production of progress. A program which stimulates education, expands research and development, augments total productivity, increases employment, and improves our international relations, is a program of the greatest economic significance. . . .” (Text)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, addressed banquet of Aviation/Space Writers’ Association in Miami. Discussing possible hazards to Apollo astronauts, he said that based on data from explorer xvi satellite it was “not anticipated at this time that meteoroids will constitute a major problem in the planning or scheduling of the first manned lunar exploration.” Radiation did not present a hazard either: “. . . In the case of solar flares, we compared the allowable safe dose with what would have been produced within the Apollo command module by the worst flares on record, that of July 1959. If an Apollo spacecraft had been in flight on a lunar mission at this time, the astronauts would have received only 15 percent of the safe dose, calculated on the basis of a report by a group established by the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences. . . . “Very recently there have been suggestions that space flight—even relatively short duration flight—is harmful to man. There is no evidence from Project Mercury to support these fears. Based on our experience in Mercury, which included a flight of 34 hours by Gordon Cooper, there is no reason to believe that flights of two weeks or less will be harmful. . . .” Dr. Mueller then outlined nine medical experiments to be conducted during the two-man orbital space flights of Project Gemini. (Text; NASA Release 64^128)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said in Gatlinburg, Tenn., speech to nasa-aec—usaf symposium on radiation protection that “not too far in the future huge nuclear-propelled spacecraft will take crews of men on long voyages deep into space. . . . “The problems of man-made radiation connected with these space ships will prove far more challenging in the long run than those of the natural radiation in space. . . .”	(NYT, 10/13/64, 18)
NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket with University of Pittsburgh and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center instrumented payload was launched from Wallops Island, Va., to 74.5-mi. altitude. Primary objective of flight was to obtain propulsion and environmental data on the Aerobee 150A. New severance techniques also were employed. Additional experiments included low-energy gamma-ray measurements, study of yellow radiation from sodium vapor, Dovap transmitter studies for tracking rockets, nuclear emulsions for cosmic-ray studies, and attitude control system employing new techniques for pointing. Rocket performance was good, and excellent propulsion and environmental data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
At NASA Hq. awards presentation ceremony, Joseph Mandelkorn of Lewis Research Center and William R. Cherry of Goddard Space Flight Center jointly received NASA Contributions Award for development of improved (n-on-p) radiation-resistant solar cells. Mandelkorn received $5,000 cash award and Cherry, $1,000. William W. Smith, formerly of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and Bruce W. Schmitz of JPL received $1,000 award for their contribution of Trajectory-Correction Propulsion System, used recently in ranger VII lunar photography mission. Wilmer H. Reed III of LaRC received $1,500 award for his contribution of a Test Unit Free-Flight Suspension System. Howell D. Garner and Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., of Langley Research Center, received $1,700 award for their contribution of Dynamic Precession Damper for Spin Stabilized Vehicles. Awards were presented by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. HughL. Dryden. (Program)
First manned Gemini space flight (GT-3) was scheduled for late December, msc public affairs official Ben Gillespie told reporters at weekly press briefing. (Maloney, Houston Post, 6/23/64)
Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, advocated international controls on space experiments. In Saturday Evening Post article, he said: “It is now time for concern about the ethical standards which man must apply to embryonic dangers which are not obvious. We cannot afford to wait until the dangers become practically apparent, since some experiments may create an irretrievable condition. . . .” As an example, he described the ozone layer, and continued: “. . . it happens that zone is rather easy to destroy. And if it is intentionally or accidentally removed, then the ultraviolet radiation would penetrate to earth. If this happened for a sufficiently long period, then human beings migh suffer severe sunburn and possible sterilization. Further, the temperature distribution in the atmosphere could be radically altered and, in the state of our present knowledge, no one could predict what climatic changes might occur. “It is not difficult to estimate that a few tons of suitable contaminant, deposited in the atmosphere 25 miles above the earth, would destroy the ozone over several miles for a few hours.... a rocket launched from earth to land a man on the moon might bum up 2,000 tons of fuel in its passage through the earth’s atmosphere . . . [and] the launching of one such rocket a week might well lead to a permanent transformation of the conditions in the high atmosphere,” according to recent study by the Advanced Research Projects Agency. “. . . when one turns from the contamination as an accidental byproduct to an intentional act, an ugly array of possibilities is revealed. To begin with, specially selected substances could be deposited in great quantities at precise altitudes. . . . The American [arpa] report states that 25 tons of fluorine would be sufficient to depopulate the ionosphere of electrons and so blot out all long-distance radiotelephony. The deposition of large quantities of gases like carbon monoxide at an altitude of 25 miles might radically alter the temperature distribution and the climatic conditions by absorbing some of the sun’s infrared radiation.... “The human race therefore faces a critical situation in the next few decades, because there is at the moment little evidence of the moral and legal controls which must be enforced if man’s continued life on earth is not to he jeopardized by the accidental or intentional results of space research. There are large areas of uncertainty, so that it is not yet possible to assess whether various other space activities may affect man more directly than in the inhibition of his study of the cosmos. It is a vital necessity of our age that the political decisions on these problems should be based on the judgment of the international scientific community, and that this judgment should govern the future space launchings of the world.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 2/22/64,10,14)
Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, noted on Senate floor that 100th flight of X—15 was made yesterday. “During the past 4^ years the program has achieved a very commendable record, providing a wealth of research data for the aeronautical and space program of the United States. The past accomplishments of the X-15 program reflect a superb job of management, flight-test operation, and cooperation between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Air Force, and the Navy. . . . “The X-15 program not only has contributed to the increased confidence of designers of current high-performance aircraft but, in doing so, has focused attention on a few areas which require additional research. The planned program will be directed toward these areas. This program is providing information for the next logical step in the NASA’s flight research program, the hypersonic. “In addition . . ., the X—15 program is going to produce information of value, I believe, to the development of supersonic commercial airplanes. This data will include flight controls, materials and surface temperatures.	, “The lesson from the X—15 is that cooperation among agencies having an interest in a project pays off.” (CR, 1/29/64,1358-59)
Gen. B. A. Schriever (usaf), Commander AFSC, at a 10th anniversary commemoration of usaf ballistic missile and space programs, said Communist drives toward world domination presented challenge to U.S. to maintain technological superiority as war deterrent. At same time we should develop military flexibility to deal with conflict levels below all-out war. In future such flexibility would be provided by manned aircraft of novel design, to be used for support as well as actual lighting. Next step in space would be to investigate military strategy of manned space flight. This was a major purpose of usaf’s recently acquired mission of developing Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol). Another possibility to investigate would be recovering used boosters to save new construction costs. “This would be a very important building block for future operations in space.” (afsc Release 46-R-72)	_	_
NASA Technology Utilization Division and the Food and Drug Administration reported that preliminary experiments by fda’s Dr. Jacqueline Ver-rett indicated that a piezo-electric transducer invented at NASA Ames Research Center could, for the first time, monitor the heartbeat of a chick embryo quickly, continuously, quantitatively, and without egg damage. Instrument was invented to measure impact of micrometeoroid dust in space by Ames’ Vernon L. Rogallo, who suggested its potential in chick embryo research. Through its Technology Utilization program, NASA informed fda of the innovation. FDA had been conducting research during past four years using chick embryo technique, correlated with animal tests, to study effects of drugs, pesticides, and food additives. (NASA Release 64-76)
NASA Lewis Research Center awarded a 02,315,400 contract to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc,, for design, development, and testing of an Atlas launch vehicle sustainer engine that would use flox (liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen). The contract provided for firing a complete Atlas sustainer engine for the first time using flox as the oxidizer; RP-1, a type of kerosene, would still be the fuel. (NASA Release 64r-306; lrc Release 64-113)
Dr. Eugen Saenger, eminent European space scientist, died at 58 in West Berlin. Dr. Saenger was best known for his World War II study “Rocket Propulsion of Long Range Bombers” and his post-war theoretical investigations of photon-powered rockets. He was one of the first to investigate use of liquid hydrogen as a fuel and of metal powders mixed with rocket fuels. Formerly head of Institute of Jet Propulsion Physics in Stuttgart, since last May he held chair of space flight technology at Berlin Technical Univ. Of him, Dr. Walter Dornberger said: “He didn’t see the goal of human endeavor as travel just in our planetary system. He wanted to see travel to the outer galaxies. He made very extensive studies in this field, which one day—maybe 40, 50 years from now—may be looked at very seriously.” (NYT, 2/11/64,39)
Republican six-man study group headed by former Secretary of Defense Neil H. McElroy released report charging that Kennedy-Johnson Administration had neglected research and development of new weapon systems. In reply to the charges, dod issued statement saying it was “pursuing a vigorous and effective research and development program designed to keep this nation the strongest in the world ...” and citing more than 200 major new projects initiated since 1961. (AP, NYT, 10/20/64)
faa began sonic-boom study program at Oklahoma City, Okla., generating sonic booms at the levels predicted for supersonic transport operations to determine public acceptability of these levels. Data acquired from the 26-week program would be used in planning and design of U.S. supersonic transport, faa conducted the program with cooperation of usaf and nasa; usaf provided F-104 aircraft to generate the booms and NASA researchers provided ground instrumentation to measure booms and boom effect. (FAA Release 64-3)
Tass disclosed that zond II was equipped with a new type of rocket engine known as a plasma accelerator and that the engine, on radio command from earth, had successfully operated the attitude-control system that oriented the spacecraft with respect to the sun. It was the first time that such a plasma engine had been tested under conditions of actual space flight. Information continued to be received on the operations of die systems and units aboard the spacecraft; radio communication with the station was stable. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 12/19/64, 1, atss-t Trans.; Shabad, NYT, 12/18/64, 12)
Rep. Olin Teague (D.-Tex.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center with members of the subcommittee. Rep. Teague said at msc that the manned space flight budget for FY 1965 “is a tight budget and we have a good program. No major cuts are foreseen.” (Houston Chron., 2/16/64; Houston Post, 2/16/64)
Space flight of NASA’s Sert I (Space Electric Rocket Test) spacecraft marked first successful operation in space of an electric rocket engine. NASA launched the Sert I on a suborbital trajectory from Wallops Island, using four-stage Scout booster rocket which lofted the Sert I to 2,500-mi. altitude before impacting in Atlantic Ocean about 2,000 mi. downrange from Wallops. One of the two ion propulsion engines aboard the 375-lb. Sert I was operated twice, for total run of 30 min.; this engine was built by NASA Lewis Research Center. The other engine, built by Hughes Research Laboratories, did not produce thrust. Primary purpose of the experiment was to verify that electrostatic (ion) engines can produce thrust in space, and all technical objectives were achieved. NASA later announced the test was so successful that a second test would not be necessary (Oct. 16). (nasa Releases 64^167, 64-180; lrc Release 64-63; Wallops Release 64-58)
usaf announced it had built the T-27 space flight simulator—a $5,500,000, 15-ton machine which would be used for astronaut training at the Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards afb, Calif. The simulator was built under a contract with the Link Group of General Precision, Inc. (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 12/23/64, 24)
NASA Flight Research Center formally accepted from Bell Aero-systems Co. the first of two Lunar Landing Research Vehicles (llrv), to be used in extensive flight research program conducted by frc in support of Project Apollo. The program would investigate possible operational and piloting problems that might occur during final phase of manned lunar landing and initial phase of lunar takeoff, (frc Release 5-64)
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center awarded 29 contracts involving studies of advanced manned missions. The 29 studies, which were designed to look beyond the time when American astronauts would have landed on the moon, covered the subjects of launch vehicle development, earth orbital operations, lunar exploration, and planetary exploration. (NASA Release 64-175)
Search for fragments from the moon would be conducted this spring in six western Iowa counties by NASA and U.S. Dept, of Agriculture, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. John A. O’Keefe announced. Western Iowa was chosen after Dr. O’Keefe had found some “promising” specimens there on an exploratory trip last summer. Residents of select counties were requested to turn over any unusual stones found during spring plowing of loess soil areas to local usda offices. Stones seeming most likely to have nonterrestrial origins would be forwarded to GSFC for further scientific examination and study, (gsfc Release G-6-64)
First of series of background briefings on scientific and technical aspects of NASA programs was held at NASA Hq., with Dr. John E. Naugle, Director of Geophysics and Astronomy Programs, reviewing the broad scientific objectives of the space program. Dr. Naugle revealed NASA planned to ask three separate companies for independent design studies of Advanced Ogo’s and Oao’s (Orbiting Geophysical Observatories and Orbiting Astronomical Observatories). The Advanced Oso (Orbiting Solar Observatory) design work by contractor Republic Aviation was progressing, and Aoso should be in operation in 1969. (NASA Memo; SBD, 3/6/64, 360)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s deadline for industry proposals to design a lOO-lb.-thrust rocket engine for manned space systems. Designated “C-l,” the engine would be powered by monomethylhydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide, which would be hypergolic and storable. The engine could be employed for attitude control, maneuvering, and ullage control purposes. (A&A, 12/64,75)
Vincent L. Johnson, NASA Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, was interviewed in Data on Centaur launch vehicle. “At this point in the Centaur development program, the major portion of the ground tests have been completed, and three development flights have been accomplished. Three more devlopment flights remain before the vehicle will be considered operational in a single-bum configuration in early 1965. The two-burn capability will be certified by two additional development flights providing a proven operational two-bum capability in 1966. I would like to note, however, that lunar flights can and will be accomplished by single-burn Centaurs in 1965 and 1966, and perhaps also in future years during those lunar opportunities that allow single-burn trajectories. . . .” {Data, 10/64, 27—31) During October: Lt. Cdr. M. Scott Carpenter was awarded special gold medal by International Association of Man in Space, commemorating Astronaut Carpenter’s Project Mercury orbital space flight. (Dryden, Ltr. to Carpenter, 11/5/64)
The Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv) , piloted by Joseph A. Walker of NASA’s Flight Research Center, attained an altitude of 30 ft.—the highest point in five brief flights—and landed safely. Walker said he was highly pleased with the craft’s performance. The flight was conducted at Edwards afb, Calif. (AP, NYT, 11/26/64, 9)
Based on reports circulated at recent cospar meeting, Missiles and Rockets said that U.S.S.R. probably would not attempt another manned space flight for about a year but that flight probably would be an orbital rendezvous mission. (M&R, 6/22/64, 33)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with sodium-vapor payload was launched to 106-mi. altitude from Thumba Range, Trivandrum, India, in joint effort of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad, India. Rocket performed as predicted, sodium ejected as predicted, and temperature and turbulence measurements were made with ground-based cameras and instrumentation. (NASA Rpt. srl)
At closing plenary session of 15th Iaf Congress in Warsaw, Dr. William Pickering, Director of Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, was named new iaf president. At the iaf banquet, Dr. Leonid I. Sedov (U.S.S.R.) said: “When we tell people we can land on the Moon by 1971, they say to us ‘why so long, what is holding you up?’ ” Also at the banquet, Dr. Wallace O. Fenn, thirty-five years prominent in biological sciences and Dept, of Physiology of Univ. of Rochester Medical School, and Secretary General of International Union of Physiological Sciences since 1959, was awarded the iaa’s Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1964. (Wash. Post, 9/13/64; M&R, 9/21/64, 16; iaa Annual Rpt. 1963-64)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, announced agreement with National Academy of Sciences that the academy would serve as adviser to the Congress. In recent years nas, created a century ago by act of Congress, has established active working relationship with Executive Branch. Today’s agreement was to establish similar relationship with the Congress. Agreement was result of recommendation by Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development, chaired by Rep. Emilio Q. Dad-dario (D.-Conn.), which has been investigating relationship of science and Government. (Finney, NYT, 1/3/64, 9; Simons, Wash. Post, 1/3/64)
John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced 14,760 visitors to the facility during 1963. (ksc Release 16-64)
Commenting on Republican Presidential candidate Goldwater’s recently published views on the space program, Warren Burkett, science writer for the Houston Chronicle, pointed out that a good deal of research which can be of use to the military services was being carried on as part of NASA’s Project Apollo. He suggested that an Apollo Orbital Research Laboratory, based on components being developed in the Apollo program, could be used for military aspects of the space program such as space patrol and interception. The article suggested that the Apollo program was generally developing a group of “off-the-shelf’ space systems which could be adapted for military use should this appear desirable. (Houston Chron., 7/26/64)
It was reported that technicians had experienced some difficulty returning to their spacecraft couches during test designed to see how well astronauts would be able to perform certain functions in weightless space flight. The tests were performed inside a mockup of a Gemini capsule mounted in a KC-135 flown to produce short periods of weightlessness. The difficulty was caused by pressure suits swollen by pressurization and couches designed to fit the astronaut only when his suit was not pressurized. Dr. M. Debrovner of msc said that the difficulty would soon be overcome. (Houston Post, 6/9/64)
James J. Kramer, research scientist at NASA Lewis Research Center, was named Project Manager of large (260-in.) solid-propellant rocket motor demonstration project at LRC. (Lewis News, 9/25/64, 1)
NASA selected 14 firms for negotiation of contracts to provide engineering, fabrication, and institutional support services to six laboratories and three offices of the Marshall Space Flight Center. Work would be in support of the Saturn/Apollo launch vehicle program with cost estimated at $68 million for one year, (nasa Release 64-322)
NASA Administrator James E. Wdbb, addressing Texas Technological College, said that the role of NASA was “essentially the same as that of its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. Both were created in an atmosphere of chagrin and deep concern because prior to World War I and following World War II the nation had forfeited early leadership in a new field of technological opportunity—aeronautics in 1915 and space in 1957. In recommending the creation of naca in 1915, a committee of the Smithsonian Institution presented a Memorial to the Congress which began: ‘This country led in the early development of heavier-than-air machines. Today it is far behind. . . .’ “This was at the outset of a war in which, despite the fact that the Wright Brothers had first demonstrated powered flight at Kity Hawk in 1903, the United States had no aircraft design or manufacturing capability of its own. No aircraft of American design or manufacture flew in Europe during World War I, and it remained for naca, in the years which ensued, to provide the basic research and development upon which achievement of ultimate U.S. air supremacy, civil and military, was based. . . . “The advent of Sputnik I in 1957 revealed that once again, this time in space, the United States had neglected a clear opportunity for technological leadership and to overcome the deficiency, the President and the Congress turned once again to the formula which had proven so effective in aeronautics for more than 40 years. It created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration as a research and development agency charged with restoring the nation’s leadership in space by developing the rockets, the spacecraft, the facilities, the scientific knowledge, and the operational skill required. And like naca, nasa has fulfilled its mission to the extent that we have now reached a point of parity in space with the Soviet Union. . . .” (Text)
NASA established ranger VI Review Board, composed of members from NASA Hq., Langley Research Center, and Goddard Space Flight Center, and chaired by Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs Earl D. Hilburn, to review program effect of ranger vi failure. The Board would review results of failure analyses and corrective procedures being prepared by jpl, then make recommendations regarding remainder of Ranger flight program. At press conference, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., explained that the single aim of the Board was to determine when Ranger 7 would be launched. Until the mystery of ranger Vi’s failure was solved, NASA was delaying launch of Ranger 7, which also would have mission of photographing lunar surface, (nasa Release 64-26; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/4/64; Finney, NYT, 2/4/64)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb informed Mayor Edward A. Crane of Cambridge, Mass., that 29-acre site offered by Cambridge had been selected for NASA’s new Electronics Research Center. Decision was result of four-month study of 160 proposed sites in the greater Boston area by nasa committee. (NASA Release 64-208)
Dr. Robert L. Sproull, Director of DOD Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), speaking at the dedication of the Xerox Corporation’s new research and development laboratory in Rochester, N.Y., cautioned that the “spillover” from the Federal Government’s own development programs would in the future be less beneficial to industry than it had in the past. Dr. Sproull explained that this would come about because of increased efficiency in Federal research programs and “good management will focus funds and attention ever more precisely on the specific mission and that mission is not the stimulation of American industry.” Dr. Sproull offered two suggestions to fill the gap created by the disappearance of Federal “spillover”: (1) that a governmental extension service be set up to channel the university-scientific effort into businesses unable to provide their own basic research; (2) that there be more encouragement of industry-research institutes such as the one maintained by the textile industry at Princeton, N.J. (Frost, NYT, 11/13/64, 47)
syncom ill communications satellite, high above Sumatra in the Indian Ocean, was boosted into near-circular orbit above the equator by its apogee motor. The motor burned for 19.6 sec. at the command of ground station at Salisbury, Australia, which based its command on computer calculations at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The satellite was now in orbit of 23,550-mi. apogee; 21,235-mi. perigee; 14° inclination; and 1,449-min. (24 hr. and 9 min.) period. It was drifting westward at rate of about 3(4° Per day. (NASA Press Conf. Transcript; nasa Release 64-193)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists would evaluate two H—10 atomic hydrogen maser clocks for possible use in high-precision satellite tracking as well as experiments testing Einstein’s prediction of the effect of gravity on time. The clocks were developed by the Quantum Electronic Devices activity of Varian Associates and would use the natural oscillation resulting from the interaction of the proton and the electron in the hydrogen atom. (M&R, 12/7/64,17)
Dr. J. E. Geake of the Manchester College of Science and Technology said that undamaged material on the moon brought to the surface By the impact of a meteorite or by possible volcanic activity could account for patches of red light observed there. He suggested that if the impact were in a region of luminescent material, the rocks would emit light when hit by charged particles. The impact could have occurred 10,000 or even 100,000 years before the luminescence was observed. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 12/1/64,19)
NASA announced Flight Research Center’s selection of Norair Div., Northrop Corp., for design and fabrication of two “lifting body” research gliders. The fixed-price contract was expected to amount to about $1 million. The research gliders would be used by FRC in studying problems of piloting advanced spacecraft during landing, (frc Release 7-64; NASA Release 64-93)
Dynatronics, Inc., Orlando, Fla., was selected by NASA to negotiate an estimated $3.5-million contract award for design, manufacture, and on-site engineering support of 19 pulse code modulation (pcm) systems in NASA’s worldwide Apollo Manned Space Flight Network, with options for additional systems. (NASA Release 64-319)
oco I satellite probably would obtain 50%—and perhaps as much as 75%—of planned scientific data, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Director Dr. Harry J. Goett said at Washington news conference. The satellite was still not locked onto the earth but was spinning at rate of 5 rpm. All 20 experiments had been turned on and had transmitted data, but only 17 were sending back useful information. Although oco I was “crippled,” Dr. Goett said, “we have quite a vigorous cripple.” For example, the satellite was transmitting 10 times more data bits than ever received from the most advanced Explorer-class scientific satellite. (NASA Transcript)
George M. Low, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, was named Deputy Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, replacing James C. Elms. Low would assume his new duties in February, would continue present position until May 1. Low joined NACA Lewis Research Center in 1949, became Chief of Manned Space Flight Programs upon formation of NASA in October 1958. (nasa Release 64-13)
Air Force Systems Command announced that Air Force pilots would fly a high-altitude Lockheed U-2 aircraft in a research program directed by the Research and Technology Div.’s Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory, to measure and predict high-altitude clear-air turbulence (Hi-Cat). The U-2 would gather Hi-Cat data at altitudes above 55,000 ft. for developing a worldwide statistical model showing occurrence of clear-air turbulence, (afsc Release 47-30-144)
NASA announced frc had issued requests for proposals for construction of two low-speed lifting-body gliders. NASA would furnish the selected contractor with information obtained in research with M—2 concept at Ames Research Center and the HL-10 lifting-body at Langley Research Center. Both vehicles would undergo thorough testing in Ames wind tunnel, then be tested in Bight at FRC. (nasa Release 64-41)
Speaking at commencement exercises at New Mexico State University, University Park, N. Mex., Dr. George Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, noted that the NASA program for manned space flight has recorded 16 successes in 16 attempts. He explained this record: “A rather simple formula has contributed to the success to date. We fly a spacecraft, manned or unmanned, only after a comprehensive set of ground and flight tests has been completed and every deviation from expected performance has been explained. We are continuing to follow that policy.” (Text)
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, in paper delivered at iaf in Warsaw, examined man’s possible roles in space flight. As a transmitter, receiver, or control mechanism, he said, man’s capacity and speed are limited as compared with a machine’s. Boredom, he said, makes man ineffective “in tasks that call for long periods of relative inactivity.” However, he said, man “is the only available computer which can solve problems by logical induction, although unfortunately he cannot keep emotions out of this thought process. He can make sense of fragmentary information.” (nasa Release 64-229)
nasa announced selection of Trans World Airlines for negotiation of contract to provide base support services at John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Under this contract twa would provide general maintenance, utilities operation, and supply operations on a cost-plus-incentive-fee basis; and janitorial, fire protection and prevention, security, and medical services on fixed-price basis, (nasa Release 64-32; ksc Release 13-64)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., Assistant Director of Ames Research Center, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. In the newly created position, Dr. Eggers would work closely with staff members in planning NASA’s advanced and supporting research programs. Specialist in problems of hypersonic and space flight research, Dr. Eggers made many contributions to theories of hypersonic aerodynamics and atmospheric entry problems of motion and heating. Among his past awards were Arthur S. Flemming Award in 1956 and Sylvanus Albert Reed Award (1962) of the ias. (NASA Release 64-110; NASA Announcement 64-95)
Lewis Research Center announced awarding of three contracts: $3,117,387 contract for continued development of Centaur launch vehicle stage and $1,800,000 contract for Oao shroud system and Pt. Loma test program, both to General Dynamics/Astronautics; and $2,110,000 contract to Aerojet-General Corp. for continued development of M—1 rocket engine. (WSJ, 2/24/64)
Static test-firing of NASA-USAF 120-in.-diameter solid-fueled rocket motor was successful at Aerojet-General facility south of Miami, Fla. The motor produced about 600,000 lbs. of thrust, met its major objective of proving the design concepts, materials, and processes to be used in building 260-in.-diameter motor. Initiated by usaf in 1963, program was being directed by joint NASA—USAF team under existing contracts until the end of this fiscal year, with project management responsibility assigned to NASA Lewis Research Center, (lrc Release 64-87; Lewis News, 10/9/64, 1)
NASA announced that Francis J. Sullivan had been appointed Acting Director of the Electronics and Control Div., Office of Advanced Research and Technology. The position formerly was held by Dr. Albert J. Kelley, who became Deputy Director of the Electronics Research Center, Cambridge, Mass, (nasa Announcement 64-274)
Test of parasail spacecraft recovery system for manned space flight was conducted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center over Trinity Bay, Tex. Unmanned boilerplate Gemini spacecraft carrying parasail system in stowed position was dropped from C-II9 aircraft at H,000-ft. altitude. Parasail deployed properly and landing rockets reduced impact to 10 fps, but because of rigging error in parachute installation the spacecraft descended straight down instead of making programed turn, msc’s John Kiker said everything functioned in proper sequence and the test was considered successful. (Av. Wk., 12/14/64, 61)
In Astronautics & Aeronautics article on Germany’s space program, Dietrich E. Koelle discussed recoverable sounding rockets being studied. Preliminary research and development as well as testing had been begun on the new guidance system for these rockets, which would make guided descent with assistance of Rogallo wing. Largest German space project was production of third stage for eldo launch vehicle, which would have its first live flight-test in 1966.	(A&A, 5/64, 66 ff) During May: At annual meeting of Soviet Academy of Sciences, Academician L. A. Artsimovich, physicist, observed that U.S.S.R. did not have a leading role in astronomy because of inadequate facilities. He said that astronomy was more important than high-energy physics, but “our expenditures on high-energy physics many times exceed those on astronomy.” Head of the Academy M. V. Keldysh replied: “There are some areas of science in which it is necessary for us under all conditions to maintain a high level. But we don’t have to try to maintain such a level in absolutely all sectors. In scientific development, it is necessary to base oneself on international scientific cooperation. “I think that it is from this aspect we must examine the problems of astronomy’s development and in this area broadly utilize international cooperation. It is not obligatory to try to have in our country the world’s largest telescopes and radio telescopes, and telescopes in balloons, and on sputniks, etc.” (Schwartz, NYT, 6/1/64, 2)
In presentation to NATO’s agard, Frank E. Rom of NASA Lewis Research Center discussed fast and moderated low-power, lightweight nuclear reactors and their applications. Both one- and two-stage nuclear rockets had significantly superior performance over the best chemical rocket systems, Rom said. Further, he said, “The development of a low-power nuclear rocket would be the quickest and least costly way to achieve a practical nuclear powerplant for space use. Since early use of these smaller powerplants would be possible, operational and flight experience would aid in the development of larger nuclear rockets.” (lrc Release 64-88)
Tass reported monument to mark man’s first space flight would be erected in Moscow. The monument would consist of bust of Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin and a meteorite of white metal, 'both the work of Lev Kerbel, attached to metal pylon about 80 ft. high. (Reuters, NYT, 4/10/64)
Sen. Gaylord Nelson (D—Wis.) spoke in the Senate about the pattern of Federal r&d expenditures which he said was “having an unfavorable effect on the Midwest, home of many of our greatest industries and our greatest universities. . . . We cannot pursue a policy, even unintentionally, which has the effect of wasting the industrial and intellectual potential of the American heartland. . . .” He pointed out that “not all the blame for lack of Federal research and development activity can be attributed to the Government. The industries and universities of the Middle West have not in all cases been as aggressive as they should have been in seeking Federal contracts.” (CR, 9/29/64, 22355-58)
Fifteen years ago Eastern Test Range was activated at Long Range Proving Ground. Hq. were established at Patrick afb, then still the Banana River nas, some 18 mi. south of Cape Kennedy (then Cape Canaveral) rocket launch site. (A&A, 1915-60; AP, Tulsa Daily World, 10/1/64) October 2: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center conducted tests of astronauts floating in model Gemini spacecraft in the open seas, simulating astronauts awaiting recovery after splash-down from space flight. MSC project engineers considered the tests successful, despite the fact that the two astronauts became ill while the enclosed spacecraft pitched and rolled in the rough Gulf of Mexico waters. The astronauts considered the heat in the spacecraft to be cause of sickness. Tests were ended after 16 hrs. rather than lasting the planned 36 hrs. because of approaching Hurricane Hilda. Astronaut participants: Lt. Alan L. Bean (usn) and Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn). (Maloney, Houston Post, 10/3/64)
usaf and usn astronomers planned special telescopic observation of the moon on June 4 and 5 in an attempt to identify the mysterious red spots first observed by Sir William Herschel in 1738. The spots, located in the crater Aristarchus, were observed in October 1963 by astronomer J. C. Greenacre from the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Ariz. They indicate the possibility of volcanos below its barren surface. (Ubel, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/4/64; AP, Balt. Sun, 6/5/64)
afsc announced its Research and Technology Div. had completed tests on most effective method of heating high-pressure air to simulate aerodynamic conditions of earth’s atmosphere. Wind-tunnel arc air heater produced direct power current of 5.1 megawatts [previous high was 4.2 megawatts]. During the 5.1-meg a watt run, 3.85 megawatts were contained in the gas, representing higher efficiency than had been predicted. New designs based on the test would extend the probable lifetime of a projected 50-megawatt heater to be used in electrogas-dynamic facility being built at Wright-Patterson afb. Both afsc’s Arnold Engineering Development Center and NASA Ames Research Center would use data from the test program for their work with similar heaters, (afsc Release 42-R-119)
First four divisions of NASA Lewis Research Center had completed moving into new Development Engineering Building, lrc announced. Occupancy of the building by lrc units temporarily housed in a Cleveland shopping center would be completed by end of summer. (lrc Release 64-58)
Details of Phoebus-powered nuclear rocket engine, as described by Harold B. Finger, Director of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, in series of lectures sponsored by NATO Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research and Development (agard) : The second-generation nuclear rocket would have 250,000-lb. thrust, using 5,000-megawatt Phoebus reactor. In clustered formation, the engines could launch manned spacecraft out of earth orbit on Mars trajectory. Ground-test firings of first-generation (low-power) Phoebus would be conducted in 1965-66, and tests of the heavier Phoebus reactor in 1967. (M&R, 10/12/64, 17)
Three persons were killed and eight injured when small missile exploded during preparations for test-firing from an airplane at Tyndall afb, Fla. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/19/64) containing hollow glass and plastic spheres in plastic honeycomb matrix to provide structural strength. Lunar Landing Research Facility and lunar mission simulators also were among the featured attractions. In conjunction with the inspection was the LaRc Open House on May 23. (Program; NASA Release 64-99; arc, larc, lrc Releases; AP, 5/18/64) nasa Administrator James E. Webb remarked on May 18: “Years ago, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, one of NASA’s ancestors, annually conducted field inspection trips so that the nation’s leaders in aviation could have a first-hand look at the progress in research made by the scientists and engineers of naca. “Today, we are gathered for a first-hand look at advanced research and technology not only in aeronautics, but also in the new realm of space. “It is most fitting that the revival of the annual field inspection trip takes place first at the Langley Research Center, for Langley was the first research center of the original naca, and is today, as it was in 1917, working at the frontiers of scientific and technical knowledge. . . . “It is important to remember that nasa is not an operating agency, in the sense that the Weather Bureau and the Air Force are. Rather, NASA’s role is much closer to that of the naca, a research and development organization. . . .” (Text)
Edward Z. Gray, Director of Advanced Studies in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, said in Space Business Daily interview that when NASA builds a manned space station it would be “more sophisticated” than the dod Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL), nasa now has 13 studies dealing with concepts leading toward development of an orbiting manned space station; when these studies are completed, NASA would be able to appraise “the space station requirements and what will be the best method of pursuing the development of a manned orbiting space station system.” (SBD, 1/8/64, 34)
NASA launched a Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops Island to an altitude of 76.8, with grenade payload to obtain temperature, wind, density, and pressure measurements. Experiments were provided by Goddard Space Flight Center (csfc) scientists. Rocket performance was excellent but instrumentation performance was unsatisfactory since grenades did not eject or explode. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Because of the initiative and the daring of the Wright Brothers, this nation gave man the capacity for powered flight, freeing him forever from the bonds which for thousands of years of human existence had confined his activities to land and sea. The United States became the first country in the world to possess a military airplane when, in 1908, the Army Signal Corps contracted for a Wright biplane. “Yet, prior to World War I this nation was still so pre-occupied with conventional weapons systems that it totally neglected the development of aeronautics—the force which was to dominate warfare for the next quarter century. In 1914, the United States possessed fewer military aircraft and of inferior types than the six leading aeronautical nations (including Mexico). The United States in 1914 was the only major nation in the world not to possess an aeronautical laboratory with an up-to-date wind tunnel. By November 1918, not one aircraft of American design and manufacture had entered combat operations during World War I. “In the 30’s we were so pre-occupied with refinement of conventional piston-driven aeronautical systems that we made little progress in jet propulsion. Meanwhile, the Germans set out to build a bigger and better NACA and to a large extent, they did, developing jet propelled military aircraft and 5%-ton V-2 rockets, which almost spelled disaster in World War II. “In the late 40’s, despite the fact that Robert Goddard had demonstrated the feasibility of a liquid-fueled rocket engine in this country in 1926, and despite the memory of V—2’s raining on London during the blitz, we were so pre-occupied with mating jet carriers to our exclusively held atomic bomb capability that we neglected missilry while other nations forged ahead. And finally, in the 50’s, our A-bomb advantage gone, we were so pre-occupied with the development of our ballistic missile program that we neglected a clear opportunity to become first in space. “Today, the nation faces, we all face, this question: Have we learned enough from the often bitter and always costly experience of the last half century not only to carry out with determination this effort to meet the requirements of the present in space research and exploration, but to exercise the vision which is demanded if we are not, once again, to find ourselves lagging in the next phase of this most challenging effort? . . . “The present gap in manned flight activity is a direct consequence of a postponement of the decision to proceed beyond Project Mercury from September 1960, until May 1961, when President Kennedy recommended the present manned lunar landing project as a national goal. “The decisions which confront us today are those which will determine whether this kind of history will repeat itself a few years hence and whether we will once again experience a bitter awakening to the fact that others have seized the initiative in the more advanced space missions of the future. . . .” (Testimony; CR, 2/5/64, A548-50) February 4: Nike-Cajun sounding rockets with grenade experiments were launched at Wallops Island, Va., and Ft. Churchill, Canada, in current nasa series of comparative upper atmosphere studies. The experiments were designed to obtain wind and temperature data and to measure the effects of the “warming trend” at altitudes ranging up to 55 mi. Nike-Cajun launched from Wallops reached 73.8-mi. altitude, with all 12 of its grenades exploding; Nike-Cajun from Ft. Churchill reached 78-mi. altitude, with 11 grenades functioning normally and the twelfth ejecting but not exploding. (Wallops Release 64-14; NASA Rpt. SRL)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman, spoke at 10th National Symposium on Reliability and Quality Control on misconceptions about national space policy: “First, the lunar project should not be confused with our total space effort. Of course, it is a complex, expensive, and difficult task, but it’s just a part of our young and growing national space program. Its major significance is that it sets a goal for an orderly development of competences—all of which will be useful for a wide range of space activities in the future. “Second, the national security aspects of space are not being neglected. The National Aeronautics and Space Act requires that they receive attention and they are receiving it. Careless thinking prompts critics to assert that practically nothing is being done by the military in the space field. For example, about two-thirds of all our space flights in the past two years have been launched by the Department of Defense. And just as careless thinking assumes that a larger space budget for NASA than for Defense means a neglect of the latter. While one need not be satisfied with the rate of progress in either the civilian or non-civilian aspects of space, nevertheless it is worth noting that national security objectives are being pursued by both nasa and the Defense Department. ... The fact that we do not plan space programs for aggression does not mean that we have a national security space gap or that we will allow one to develop. “Third, there is another misconception to the effect that the national space program is employing an unduly large portion of our engineering and scientific manpower. Added to this misconception is the parallel view that the space program is creating a shortage of such talents which otherwise would be applied in our civilian economy. Actually, profits in private enterprise are at an all-time high and, in general, higher in the non-space and non-defense companies than in those whose business is primarily government-financed for space and defense. If those very profitable companies do not hire scientists and engineers to engage in research and development, it is not because they can’t get them as their profit position gives them remarkable bargaining power. Rather, failure to employ such scarce talents in large numbers is the result of deliberate decisions on the part of private entrepreneurs and not because there are no such persons available. . . . Furthermore, government-financed research and development—particularly in such challenging fields as space—is having a salutary effect in stimulating an increase in the number of highly trained scientists and engineers. “Fourth, there has also been some criticism and confusion on the subject of international cooperation in the space program. We have formed a useful base for peaceful and constructive relationships with some 60 other countries in space activities. The benefits are mutual. Some of our projects could just not have been conducted successfully without the tracking facilities, sites, and other cooperative efforts of countries around the world. In no case do we impair our national security through such cooperation, and we do not plan to do so. . . . “Fifth, there are those who argue that it would be better to slow down—or even stop—our space effort in order to divert the resources to education, slum clearance, medical research, and other such purposes. As much as we need to do more in those important areas, it is unrealistic to believe that the resources are transferable—even if it were desirable to attempt the shift. . . . What is more, there is no assurance that the Congress would vote more funds for education or public housing just because it voted less for space. . . (Text)
U.S.S.R. launched into orbit vosichod i spacecraft with three-man crew: pilot-cosmonaut, Engr. Col. Vladimir Mikhailovich Komarov; scientific co-worker cosmonaut, Candidate of Technical Sciences, Konstantin Petrovich Feoktistov; and physician-cosmonaut, Boris Borisovich Yegorov. This was history’s first multi-manned space flight and marked the entry into space of a scientist and a physician. Initial orbit (as given by Tass): 409-km. (254-mi.) apogee, 178-km. (110-mi.) perigee, 90.1-min. period, and 65° inclination to the equator. Tass announced purposes of the space flight were to: test new multiseat manned spacecraft; investigate work capability and interrelationship, in flight, of a group of cosmonauts consisting of specialists from various branches of science and technology; conduct scientific physico-technical research under actual spaceflight conditions; continue study of effects of spaceflight conditions on human organism; and conduct expanded medico-biological investigations under conditions of prolonged flight. Television photographs of the cosmonauts, wearing lightweight woolen suits rather than spacesuits, were received in U.S.S.R. and transmitted both taped and live by TV stations during the day. On its eighth orbit, as the spacecraft passed over U.S., the crew radioed greeting: “From aboard the spaceship voskhod we convey our best wishes to the industrious American people. We wish the people of the United States peace and happiness.” (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 10/13/64, 1, atss-t Trans.; Tanner, NYT, 10/13/64,1)	...
Orbital tanker study by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. for NASA Marshall Space Flight Center was discussed in Aviation Week & Space Technology. Tanker would be unmanned and would be used to transfer propellants to other unmanned or to manned spacecraft in earth orbit. Concepts in which orbital refueling capability was underscored were future manned planetary flights and potential reusable lunar transport ferries. (Av. Wk., 8/10/64, 55-57)
ARIEL ii (UK—C) scientific earth satellite, the second in series of three U.S.—U.K. satellites, was orbited by NASA Scout booster launched from Wallops Island, Va. Initial orbital data: 843-mi. apogee, 180-mi. perigee, 101-min. period, and 52° inclination to the equator. Under overall administrative responsibility of the British Office of the Minister for Science, the three onboard experiments were designed and built by the U.K. to measure vertical distribution of ozone in the upper atmosphere, measure galactic Tadio noise, and detect micrometeoroids encountered by the satellite. The experiments were chosen by the British National Committee on Space Research, chaired by Sir Harrie Massey, in consultation with NASA. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center built and tested the spacecraft and contracted with Westinghouse Electric Corp. for subsystems. (Wallops Release 64-30; NASA Release 64-56)
nasa launched second modified Areas sounding rocket with white rat as part of the payload, the rocket carrying the rodent to 21.4mi. altitude where payload separated from booster and parachuted to ocean surface. Payload was recovered by helicopter a few minutes later about 27.8 mi. from Wallops Island, Va., launch site. Total flight time was 24.5 min. Purpose of this launch and the previous one Sept. 3 was to demonstrate feasibility of using Areas to familiarize scientists with technological problems associated with space flight studies on small animals. (Wallops Release 64-67)
First large batch of unusual stones arrived from Iowa at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center for analysis in Project Moon Harvest. Residents of six Iowa counties were gathering the specimens, which GSFC scientists were analyzing to determine if they were of lunar origin. Dr. John A. O’Keefe, project scientist, theorized that pieces of the moon’s surface were chipped off the moon by meteorite impapt and attracted by gravity to the earth. (Goddard News, 4/20/64, 4; GSFC Release G—13-64)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications, held hearing on geographical distribution and indirect costs of Federal research and development, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, Earl D. Hilburn, said it was NASA’s policy to “locate and fully utilize the best technical competence available wherever it might be.” It was not NASA policy to award contracts on a geographical basis, Hilburn said, but NASA tried to “provide opportunities for and encourage all qualified industrial firms, universities and non-profit organizations to participate in our program.” He added: “NASA makes every effort to award negotiated procurements to contractors who will perform a substantial proportion of their work within labor surplus areas.” (nasa lar III/89; SBD, 5/6/64,30-31)
In keeping with NASA reorganization, subcommittees of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were revised as follows: Manned Space Flight; Space Sciences and Applications; Advanced Research and Tracking; and Science, Research, and Development. (NASA lar
NASA Flight Research Center requested bids for construction of a high-temperature heat facility at Edwards, Calif. The completed facility would include enough test area to permit heat load testing of actual aircraft of the size of the XB—70 and the proposed supersonic transport. It could produce temperatures up to 3,000° F on small isolated areas of the test aircraft; large areas could be heated up to 600° F. The contract would be administered by the U.S. Army Engineers, (frc Release 33-64)
Four-stage Javelin (Argo D-4) rocket vehicle was launched at 12:01 a.m. est from Wallops Station, Va., carrying 120-lb. instrumented payload to 587.22-mi. altitude. Payload experiments: magnetic mass spectrometer to identify ions in upper atmosphere and measure their distribution; Lyman-alpha radiation experiment to determine spatial variation of atomic hydrogen in atmosphere; and experiment to measure altitude distribution and intensity of night airglow from atomic oxygen. Impact occurred 727 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Data were telemetered to ground stations and no recovery operation was attempted. Experiment was designed and built by E. 0. Hulburt Center for Space Research at U.S. Naval Research Laboratory and flown in cooperation with NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-6)
Interviewed in Missiles and Rockets, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) discussed the work of his research and development subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. One current activity: “The National Academy of Sciences is undertaking several studies for us through a 14-man committee headed by Dr. George Kistiakowsky, science advisor to former President Eisenhower. It will look into such questions as what is the level of basic research that should be supported Federally to maintain the nation’s security, economy and industrial strength. . . .” (M&R, 8/10/64, 26)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of GE Command Systems Div. to negotiate contract for additional spacecraft tracking system for Stadan (Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network) station at Fairbanks, Alaska. The new system, known as Goddard Range and Range Rate System because it was originally developed by gsfc engineers, was designed to provide improved tracking data for space probes, satellites, and launch vehicles traveling in elliptical or synchronous orbits. Two previously completed systems installed at Rosman, N.C., and Carnarvon, Australia, had proved highly successful in tracking EXPLORER XVIII (imp) . (gsfc Release G-21-64)
The day after RANGER vn’s historic photographs of the moon climaxed a “textbook flight,” President Johnson was briefed on the mission by NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell and Jet Propulsion Laboratory Director Dr. William H. Pickering. Discussing the lunar surface photographs, Dr. Newell said the principal investigators (Dr. Gerard Kuiper and Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker) had tentatively concluded that “because there exists such sharp little craters here on the surface, this indicates that there is not a deep layer of dust in this area. There would be expected to be a layer of dust on the lunar surface . . . there has been much speculation about how deep it would be. . . . Some people had speculated as much as a thousand feet. Many as much as 30 or 40 feet. Others had said no, it can’t be. And those who said no, it can’t be, Dr. Shoemaker now thinks were right. At least as far as this area is concerned.” Asked by the President whether the ranger VII success confirmed “that you folks had known what you were doing,” Dr. Pickering replied: “Yes, I think it does. “First of all, it confirms we know what we are doing technically when we design something to do this job. Secondly, that as far as the Apollo Program is concerned, it confirms that the basic assumptions that they were making about the sort of surface we are going to have to land on is probably correct.” The President asked, “What similar achievements, scientific achievements, can be compared to this?” and Dr. Newell replied: “Dr. Kuiper was asked this question yesterday. He stated he felt this was comparable to the photographing of the sun in the ultraviolet light by the Naval Research Laboratory a number of years ago. “Someone else said that this amounts to a big jump in lunar science, equivalent to the jump that occurred when Galileo turned the telescope on the heavens.” President Johnson said: “If we were to conclude—if I were to conclude, if the Budget were to conclude, or if the American people should conclude—that we want to effect a savings here of a few billion dollars, would it he your opinion, Doctor [Pickering], that we would be pennywise and pound-foolish?” Dr. Pickering replied: “It would indeed, sir, because I believe that this is truly an investment not only which is needed to demonstrate our leadership in the relatively near future, but it is a long-term investment for the future. ” (NASA Transcript)
echo ii passive communications satellite was used for transmission of two radiophotos between Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station at Manchester and Gorki University’s radioastronomy observatory at Zimenki. A third space telegram was sent from Jodrell Bank to Zimenki via the moon, and its quality was comparable to those received via echo n. The U.S. satellite was termed by Tass commentator “the Friendship Sputnik.” (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64; NYT, 3/2/64, 9; Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/1/64, 4, Atss-t Trans.)
NASA announced award of three-year contract to Bendix Field Engineering Corp. for launch support services at John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Contract was expected to cost about $2.8 million for the first year hut could amount to as much as $17 million for the three-year period. (NASA Release 64-256)
Library of Congress had distributed to 30 large city and state libraries copies of Braille translations of books on space exploration. These information aids for the blind had been published by Library of Congress under a NASA grant. (Las Cruces Sun-News, 7/5/64)	.
NASA issued its first exclusive patent license to Satellite Div. of Union Carbide Corp. for commercial development of a nickel alloy invented by John C. Freche, metallurgist at NASA Lewis Research Center. For as long as it develops the alloy for commercial use, Union Carbide agreed to spend at least $20,000 a year for not more than three years. After fully developing it, Union Carbide would hold exclusive marketing rights for not more than four years, at which time exclusive license would expire and product would be made fully available to the public. (nasa Release 64-30)
House passed H.R. 11296 by voice vote, making FY 1965 appropriations for independent offices but excluding the $5.2 billion for NASA. Because Senate had not yet acted upon NASA authorization legislation for FY 1965, Congressional rules permitted any member to block appropriations on a point of order. Rep. John W. Wydler (R.-N.Y.) objected to the construction and administrative operation appropriation—because of $60 million included for electronics research center in Boston—and his objection was sustained. Then Rep. Olin E. Teague (D.—Tex.), Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, objected to remainder of the NASA appropriations, thus blocking any attempts to cut them further. (NASA LAR ni/102; CR, 5/21/64,11241 ff)
Reviewing the worth of scientific results gained in the first years of U.S. space exploration, Fortune magazine said: “. . . new knowledge is a dukedom whose great wealth and resources cannot even begin to be estimated or exhausted. Already the new knowledge acquired in space exceeds by far the value of funds so far spent. For knowledge, more than guns and butter, is the true power of modem states.” (nasa FY 1965 Auth. Hearings, Part 1,3)
Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D.-Okla.) wrote in Washington World: “Space research and development may be the glamour girl right now, but the lady-who can do the work for us is aviation. . . . The market exists in the field of aeronautics, while it is still too soon to start printing tickets for round trip flights to the moon. “Government itself is in danger of being too yielding to the glamour girl. My principal complaint is about NASA’s division of the $5.5 billion it will spend in Fiscal year 1965. Only $37 million is budgeted for aeronautical research. The percentage for aeronautics is only seven-tenths of one per cent. Space exports will develop as we excel in this field, but by products—not systems—will constitute the commodities. Aviation has immediate economic potential, and we must pursue it vigorously.” (Wash. World, 5/18/64)
Members of Local 1685, United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, ended a 24-hr. strike at the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) and nearby Patrick AFB facilities. The walkout had tied up $246 million in construction for space projects, including construction on an assembly building for the Saturn V lunar rocket, and work at the Titan III and Saturn IB launch areas. Carpenters had protested the use of nonunion workers by the Akwa-Downey Construction Co., a subcontractor on one of the projects. It was the fourth major labor difficulty at NASA Kennedy Space Center in 1964. (upi, NYT, 12/18/64, 39 and 12/19/64, 48; Chic. Trib., 12/18/64) During the eclipse, extensive heat-map measurements of the lunar surface were made from Egypt by team of Boeing Scientific Research Laboratories scientists. Preliminary analysis of their measurements showed hundreds of “hot spots,” or surface temperature anomalies, on the lunar surface, although the experimenters had expected to find only a few dozen. The experimenters made 12 20-min. scans of the moon during the eclipse, in both the visual and infrared portions of the spectrum. Measurements were made at El Kottamia Observatory, 50 mi. east of Cairo, at invitation of United Arab Republic Astronomical Service. (M&R, 1/4/65, 21; NYT, 12/22/64.; M&R, 1/18/65, 28)
NASA launched re-entry heating experiment aboard Scout booster at 2:06 a.m. edt from Wallops Island, Va., in test of low-density charring ablator materials’ ability to withstand intense heat during spacecraft re-entry into earth’s atmosphere. In addition to the four stages of the Scout launch vehicle, 17-in. spherical rocket was attached to the payload as velocity package. First two Scout stages lofted remainder of the vehicle to altitude of about 130 mi.; then the vehicle arced over in descending path and remaining stages fired the payload back into the atmosphere, attaining maximum speed of about 19,500 mph. Payload impacted about 1,265 mi. downrange after 11-min. flight. No attempt was made to recover it. Experiment was devised by NASA Langley Research Center scientists. (Wallops Release 64-62; NASA Release 64-202)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Pageant article: “Our [U.S.] drive since Sputnik I has led skeptics to call the manned lunar program only a race to beat Russia. This is a fallacy. The moon is not an advantageous spot from which to shoot nuclear-tipped missiles. We already have rockets that can hit the Soviet Union’s interior in 20 minutes. Polaris missiles can hit Russia in one or two minutes, maybe less. It would take two and a half to three days for a moon-based rocket to reach Russia. “But the Soviet Union’s design to rule the world makes it essential that we reach the moon. This goal isn’t, as skeptics argue, just a couple of weeks of good publicity. Sure, we have a signed United Nations agreement forbidding any nation from claiming the moon or space as a colony. But Russian domination of the moon would equate, in world opinion, with the dominance of all space. We can’t afford that false impression. The nation that retains space superiority holds an immeasurable psychological advantage. Space feats are an index of a country’s strength. If Russians were the only earthmen on the moon, you’d hear people around the world saying, ‘If they can do that, no telling what they can do to us.’ ” (Pageant, 7/64) During July: It was reported that nine payloads had been chosen for flight aboard the research and development launches of the USAF Titan III. Five of the experiments were said to be experimental communications satellites built by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, and the sixth a backup communications satellite from Lincoln Lab. The remaining three were scientific satellites using the modified Arents spacecraft shell. To avoid confusion with the defunct Arents program, the latter spacecraft were to be called Orbiting Vehicle 2 (OV-2). (M&R, 8/3/64, 8)
Dr. Thomas B. Weber, formerly at Aerospace Medical Center, Brooks afb, Tex., and now manager of advanced research for space engineering at Beckman Instruments, Inc., Fullerton, Calif., said that all space-cabin simulation experiments so far have had to be called off within a few days because of accumulation of toxic elements in the closed atmospheres. “This may be the reason Russia’s recent three-man space flight, which was expected to last several days, ended after only 24 hours.” Dr. Weber continued, “Unless an answer is found, this is a definite threat to our own plans for a manned orbiting laboratory and it could delay the Apollo program to land men on the moon.” Working under usaf contracts, Dr. Weber had devised instruments to collect and identify more than 400 contaminants given off by the human body and by space cabin equipment. So far he had found that 20 were potentially lethal, including highly explosive hydrogen given off by water used in cooling systems; ozone, given off by electrical equipment; and ammonia, acetone, and alcohol found in breath, perspiration, and body wastes. “None of these occurs in dangerous amounts in a normal environment,” Dr. Weber said, “but in a small cabin they build up to lethal concentrations in short periods of time. . . . Our longest space flight so far lasted less than two days, but even on that one we ran into trouble filtering out the carbon dioxide exhaled by the astronaut.” (AP, Denver Post, 11/8/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/64)
Dr. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development, addressed aiaa in Cleveland: “. . . the number of new systems which can be fully developed is limited. The future, on the other hand, is highly uncertain. The inevitable result ... is that the number of major weapon systems being developed for the inventory is relatively small. The number of concepts and potential weapon systems being explored in other categories of r&d are very large but still not all inclusive. The approach which we are taking to assure the availability of proven technology and prototypes of critical system elements is through exploratory and advanced development programs; this does not usually include full vehicle or system prototypes although in some cases it may. By working on the critical technical, cost or operational problems of a potential new system intensively while ignoring the other elements of the system, we are placing ourselves in a better position to decide to buy that system and to get it in reasonable time, in the event that either our own national policy, the international situation (especially the actions of our adversaries), or obsolescence arising from new technological developments in counterweapons make necessary the rapid acquisition of a new system, and we are doing this at considerably lower cost than the cost of developing all the candidate systems even if these developments were at a very low rate. For example research and exploratory development on high energy fuels for both solids and liquids support potential needs both for larger and improved ICBMs and for new space boosters. The 120" and 156" solid rocket under development by the Air Force and the 260" solids being supported by NASA provide at the prototype level the necessary components of much larger ballistic missile and space launch vehicle systems over a wide range of payload capacities. The application of the 156" solid technology to a new missile in the Minuteman tradition would provide a payload capability many times that of Minuteman. Studies are under way to examine the payoffs and tradeoffs relating to the application of high energy fuels to a new upper stage suitable for application to both dod and NASA launch vehicles. The aim of these programs is to reduce the degree of uncertainty and the element of risk which would he associated with the decision to proceed with such systems. Yet there is no assurance that these developments will, in fact, be used in their present form. They may simply be stepping stones to a later generation of propulsion systems in advanced development. The coupling of requirements for economy, reliability and commonality has led to the dictum for technical advances that many are called, but few are chosen. . . .” (Text, dod Release 361—64)
usn announced $36,000 contract with the Convair and Electric Boat divisions of General Dynamics Corp. for analytical and design studies of a flying submarine—a small craft capable of flying to and submerging for operations in relatively closed waters. (AP, Balt. Sun, 11/27/64) November 27: Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, announced that about 100 of the 140 personnel in the Kennedy Space Center Launch Support Equipment Engineering Div. would move from Marshall Space Flight Center to ksc by Aug. 1965. ( nasa Release 64-298; NYT, 11/28/64,16)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved $764 million for advanced research and technology in NASA’s FY 1965 budget authorization, a cut of nearly $30 million from NASA’s request. The Committee restored $10 million for initiating construction of electronics research center, which the Advanced Research and Tracking Subcommittee had cut. (Wash. Post, 3/13/64)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC), said during the career guidance clinic held at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center that there was a need for a national information center to make new space knowledge available to educators. (Lee, Houston Post, 11/17/64) Dr. James A. Van Allen, for whom the Van Allen radiation belts were named, said in a speech that radiation from solar flares would have been dangerous to space travelers only three days in the past four years. After his address, Dr. Van Allen told reporters “there would be no serious danger to travel to any point in the solar system caused by solar flares.” Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of the Astrophysical Observatory of the Smithsonian Institution, said that explorer xvi experienced 55 meteoroid punctures during a seven-month period. However, all were in patches of the satellite’s skin made very thin to assess the collision hazard. The patches, made of beryllium copper, were of three thicknesses: 1/1,000, 2/1,000, and 5/1,000 of an inch. None of the cells with the thickest skin was pierced. It was thought that the puncturing particles hit at typical meteor velocities of about 15 mi./sec. Dr. Whipple told reporters that the chances of a spacecraft being seriously damaged by meteoroids was about the same as being struck by lightning. Dr. John W. Firor, Director of the High Altitude Observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, Colo., said astronauts on the moon would have to be exposed to solar flare radiation for “many hours” before they would suffer serious damage. Attempts to forecast solar flares accurately “have not shown any success,” Dr. Firor said. (Maloney, Houston Post, 11/17/64; Sullivan, NYT, 11/17/64,16) Dr. Frank J. Malina, chairman of the Lunar International Laboratory (LIL) program at the International Academy of Astronautics in Paris, said: “The principal justification for the operation of a manned center on the moon on an international basis may well be a financial one.” He explained that it was estimated that with present rocket technology, it would cost about $5,000 per pound of payload carried from the earth to the moon, and that one man-hour on the moon would cost as much as $80,000. Dr. Malina also mentioned that plans for LIL' were begun before President Kennedy announced this country’s intention of going to the moon before the end of the decade. (Maloney, Houston Post, 12/19/64) Soviet scientists reported that the entire voskhod i space flight was conducted by the three-man crew without spacesuits. U.S.S.R. space physiologist, Dr. O. Gazenko, said that the absence of spacesuits made it possible to perform a number of experiments using sensors directly on the skin, even during boost and re-entry. Among these were measurements of the electrocardiogram, respiration rate, electroencephalogram, eye movements, and seism ocardiogram. Dr. V. V. Antipov, a radiologist, said that voskhod preliminary results indicated a substantial contribution to knowledge about the effects -of space flight factors upon biological organisms. He said that significant changes revealed in tissue experiments showed that new, spherical fragments occurred in cells in all stages of division and had only been duplicated in Soviet research under extremely high g forces, such as 4,000 g. They had thus far been tied to the boost and descent phase of the flight, with the greatest number of changes occurring during the first hours of flight, and the least just before re-entry. Antipov also disclosed that in one voskhod experiment, a number of cells were flown which had been flown on previous space flights. He said this indicates that the tissues could maintain viability with repeated exposures, and possibly that some selection took place. By studying the ones which “selected themselves,” he said, a great advantage would be gained in calculating what happened to human cells. Missiles and Rockets reported that during an interview Dr. Gazenko stated that due to the thermal and decompression advantages it offered, helium would eventually 'be used as a diluent gas for spacecraft atmosphere instead of the nitrogen gas that had been used on all Soviet space shots to date. He said the subject is a matter of scientific controversy in the U.S.S.R., but that “undoubtedly” there would be a shift to helium at some time in the future. (M&R, 11/23/64, 14-15) At a press conference, Dr. 0. G. Gazenko reiterated that the voskhod crew did not use space or pressure suits at all. He was asked when the Russians plan to rendezvous and dock two spacecraft and if they would both be manned. “We will, of course, try to do this as soon as possible, but I have the feeling that it would be very nice to have two humans meet in space. . . . It is possible one will be a man and one will be a woman.” His answers were relayed to reporters by Dr. Boris Mandiovsky, a librarian from the Library of Congress. Dr. Gazenko, giving an oral summary of his much longer paper, said medical results of seven Russian manned space Eights had not shown any insurmountable barriers to space flight. “The analogy of the physiological data obtained during manned orbital flight of up to five days duration proves that man, specially selected and trained, can satisfactorily tolerate all orbital flight stresses,” Dr. Gazenko continued. “However, as can be seen in the material, important individual variations are noted. We have to devote special attention to this factor in future cosmonaut selection and training,” he said. He told scientists that there are problems still to be solved for true long space flights, and expressed the hope that between Russia and the United States there could be closer cooperation in solving these problems. (Houston Post, 11/18/64) Col. Charles E. Yeager, Commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School at the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, Calif., called for an end to the use of heavy work-retarding pressure suits. “We are relying entirely too much on the suit to pull the guy out of a problem,” he said. (Houston Post, 11/19/64) Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter called for a “new approach” in development of wearing apparel for astronauts in space. He termed the pressurized spacesuit “the greatest single handicap we have to operations in space. To do useful work is almost impossible. I’m sure there is a better way.” Carpenter said that he had proposed an investigation of a “spray-on” spacesuit that would permit astronauts to move freely about die cabin of the capsule. (Webb, Boston Globe, 11/17/64; Houston Post, 11/18/64; NYT, 11/18/64,24) Maj. Herbert H. Reynolds (usaf), Chief of the Comparative Psychology Branch of the Aeromedical Research Laboratory at Holloman AFB, N. Mex., said that chimpanzees had performed so well within an almost total vacuum that there was hope space travelers could survive a vacuum caused by a puncture of their vehicle long enough for the hole to be plugged. Research was conducted at Holloman for NASA. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/64,19) Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma, biochemist at NASA Ames Research Center, told newsmen that “there is a very good possibility of finding the answer to the question of the existence of life in our own planetary system by an inspection of the planets with our immediate or remote sensors.” [Houston Post, 11/17/64)
Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman of Malaysia toured John F. Kennedy Space Center. Rahman stated after his tour: “I can’t say what impressed me most. Everything impressed me. It was so scientific.” (AP, N.O. Times-Picayune, 7/27/64)
RELAY n communications satellite transmitted portions of Soviet-American championship hockey game of the 1964 Winter Olympics at Innsbruck, Austria, to the U.S., the first public demonstration of RELAY n. Transmission of the event was made via French ground station at Pleumeur-Bodou and U.S. ground station at Andover, Me. By this time numerous communications tests of the satellite had been made, and NASA scientists said that all communications experiments were of excellent quality. RELAY n also was sending back information on radiation collected by onboard instrumentation, (gsfc Historian; nasa Release 64-24)
NASA reported, that a magnetometer hammer developed at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to remove distortions from rocket fuel tank “gore segments” had salvaged rocket hardware valued in the millions of dollars. (nasa Release 64-328)
Sh. P. Darchiya, an astronomer from the Pulkovo Observatory, succeeded in photographing details of the lunar surface on the unexposed side of the lunar disk, i.e., under conditions of earthlight. Astronomers had previously recorded the luminescence of individual details of the lunar surface on the unexposed side of the lunar disk, but according to A. A. Mikhailov, Director of the Observatory, this phenomenon had never been confirmed by instrument observation. (Izvestia, 6/3/64, 4, atss-t Trans.)
Nike-Apache launched from Wallops Island, Va., to 90.6-mi. altitude, in flight to detect quiet-day ionospheric electric currents using for first time a very small rubidium vapor magnetometer designed for use in small rockets. Experiment was project of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
nasa announced granting 28 waivers of U.S. commercial rights to inventions resulting from work performed under nasa contracts, bringing total of nasa’s patent waivers to 74. Under policy “designed to encourage prompt public and industrial benefit from the scientific byproducts of its research and development activities,” NASA granted the patent rights to 12 companies, one university, one research organization, and two individuals (jointly). NASA retained royalty-free license for any governmental use of the inventions. (NASA Release 64-52)
NASA released to industry its first technology utilization report, entitled “An Improved Precision Height Gage.” NASA Ames Research Center developed the report. (NASA SP-5001)
A $700,000 contract was awarded to the Defense and Space Operations Division of the Westinghouse Corp., Baltimore, Md., Operations Center by the Goddard Space Flight Center. The contract called for the complete integration, checkout, and testing of the ground communications system for NASA’s Rosman, N.C., Stadan (Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network) station’s second 85-ft. antenna system which would support the new Advanced Technological Satellite (ats) . (gsfc Release G-16-64)
NASA Lewis Research Center employees Robert Steinberg and William B. Schwab won $700 NASA incentive award for invention of method and device for rapidly mapping neutron flux of each section of nuclear research reactor. Other LRC awards: John W. Macomber won $500 for invention of nuclear reactor control rod assembly with improved driving mechanism; Joseph M. Savino and Chester D. Lanzo, $200 award for developing simulated fuel assembly for nuclear reactor; and John C. Sturman, $100 award for transistorized logic circuit to handle data accumulated by satellites and transmit it back to earth, (lrc Release 64-8)
NASA Kennedy Space Center awarded a $1.5-million contract to Monitor Systems, Inc., of Fort Washington, Pa., for two digital telemetry systems to be installed at ksc’s Central Instrumentation Facility on Merritt Island. The systems would be used as intermediate data converters and processors during Apollo/Saturn V rocket launches from Merritt Island, (ksc Release 220-64)
explorer xvni, the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (imp) satellite, survived sub-zero temperatures during eight-hour flight in the earth’s shadow, a duration record for satellites, imp remained in the shadow for so long because of its highly eccentric orbit, carrying it out 122,000	mi. at apogee. As it entered the shadow, imp shut off automatically, and temperatures on imp’s surface fell to more than 400° below zero. After it emerged once again, imp’s transmitter signal was picked up by nasa tracking station at Santiago, Chile. Preliminary evaluation of telemetry tapes at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center indicated data from the imp experiments were of good quality, (nasa Release 64-111)
Appointment of Maj. Gen. Alvin R. Luedecke (usaf Ret.) as Deputy Director of Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory was announced by JPL Director Dr. William H. Pickering. General manager of aec since his retirement in 1958, General Luedecke would replace Brian Sparks effective August 1. (nasa Release 64-159)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of nasa Lewis Research Center, was presented 1964 Sylvanus Albert Reed Award at aiaa dinner in New York. Dr. Silverstein was cited for “major contributions toward the development of propulsion systems for aircraft and spacecraft and for outstanding leadership in the nation’s programs of scientific satellites and manned space flight.” Also presented were AlAA’s Research Award to Henry M. Shuey and Space Science Award to Herbert Friedman, (lrc Release 64-6; “aiaa Honors & Awards”)
Canaveral District of the Army Corps of Engineers announced award of $19,055,953 firm-fixed-price contract to the George A. Fuller Co., for construction of Pad B of NASA’s Saturn V Complex 39 at Merritt Island, Fla. The contract also provided for building a two-mile section of crawlerway for transporting launch and arming towers to the pad. (dod Release 844-64; M&R, 11/30/64,22) November 30—December 3: James T. Ramey, a commissioner of the Atomic Energy Commission, analyzed the use of cost-effectiveness techniques in a speech to the Atomic industrial Forum in San Francisco. He said: “The cost effectiveness technique assumes end-applications or requirements, and then figures out the costs of alternative systems of achieving equal or greater effectiveness ... it would seem that the requirements system, and the cost effectiveness techniques, tend to favor the status quo in technology, if not in economics or politics. . . . “This leads me to the conclusion that the underlying problem is really whose judgment and recommendations should receive most weight in determining which development programs and projects should go forward. Should these decisions be made by the science advisors and coordinators, and budget specialists who have no direct programmatic responsibility and are not accountable for failure to carry out the directives of the President and the Congress? Or should the judgment of the developmental agency which has the statutory responsibility for the program and the technical depth and experience receive the most weight? . . . I have a certain affinity for giving considerable weight to the judgment of the development agency, which, in regard to atomic energy, would be the aec and its laboratories. In regard to nuclear energy in space, it would be aec and nasa, and to some extent the Air Force. . . . “I am quite optimistic about achieving the great possibilities of atomic energy in space. I firmly believe the atom will provide the means for the propulsion and servicing of manned space ships for moon missions following Apollo, and to and from the planets . . .” (Av. Wk., 1/11/65, During November: NASA’s Flight Research Center completed a series of wind-tunnel tests of X—15 models with canard stabilizers mounted on the nose to determine if a canard'surface would permit the X-15 to re-enter the atmosphere at higher angles of attack. Tests were carried out in a Jet Propulsion Laboratory tunnel. (M&R, 11/9/64,9) During November: The Titan III-C 120-in. solid strap-on engine was fired successfully at United Technology Center’s Coyote, Calif., development center. The engine burned for 110 sec. (M&R, 11/23/64, 9)
NASA launched four-stage Javelin (Argo D—4) sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with sixth payload of Japan-U.S. experiments in cooperative program to investigate properties and characteristics of the ionosphere. Payload was sent to 521-mi. altitude before impacting in Atlantic Ocean 840 mi. from launch site. Telemetry during flight was intermittent, so preliminary results of the experiments were inconclusive. For the cooperative experiments, Radio Research Laboratory, Tokyo, supplied radio frequency (RF) resonance probe and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center supplied Langmuir probe. (Wallops Release 64-75)
Catalyst for use with monopropellant hydrazine rocket engines has been developed by Shell Oil Co.’s General Chemistry Dept, working with Jet Propulsion Laboratory in NASA-sponsored project, NASA announced. Development of the catalyst permits use of hydrazine for spacecraft guidance and control rockets. NASA scientists reported that hydrazine compounds produced by the catalytic reaction were 50% more energetic than monopropellant hydrogen-peroxide now used. (NASA Release 6429)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced researchers had developed first known high-temperature-resistant ceramic potting compound in which space electronics could be imbedded for protection against extreme heat. The ceramic potting compound can be cured at temperatures as low as 150° F, permitting it to be cured in place around the electronics without subjecting the delicate equipment to damaging heat. The ceramic potting compound combined protection against heat up to 2,500° F with protection against vibration, (gsfc Release G—18-64)
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and aiaa Board Member, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial: “For some years past, it has been asked whether electric propulsion meets a ‘requirement’ in our space program. It may be well to remember that the airplane, the atomic submarine, the radio, and the first satellite were not developed in fulfillment of ‘requirements.’ An artificial atmosphere is certainly a requirement for an astronaut in space, and must Be developed for that reason. But the astronaut does not go into space because it is his requirement, but because our country has decided to excel in the exploration of outer space with the most appropriate means. Electric propulsion promises to be a very appropriate method of vastly expanding our exploration capability in space beyond that of chemical and nuclear systems. For that reason, its development should be pursued with high priority and great vigor.” (A&A, 8/64, 14—15)
A Naval Research Laboratory team under Dr. Herbert Friedman announced that it had disproved the theory that the Crab Nebula in the constellation Orion had a superdense neutron star at its center. The experiment was carried out July 7 by means of x-ray detectors flown to an altitude of 144 mi. over New Mexico by an Aerobee sounding rocket. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/18/64)
Astronaut Russell Schweickart removed spacesuit at NASA Ames Research Center, where he had undergone three rides on centrifuge. Schweickart, who had celebrated his 29th birthday in the spacesuit, had worn it constantly since Oct. 19. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/27/64)
Results and new research of X—15 project were detailed in Astronautics & Aeronautics article by Thomas A. Toll, Chief of Research Div., NASA Flight Research Center, and Jack Fischel, head of FRC Manned Flight Control Branch. “. . . In the area of aerodynamics, problems resulting from the heat generated by high-speed flight were of most concern to designers at the time of the X-15 feasibility studies. . . . “At the time thermodynamic design of the X-15 was first contemplated, it was thought likely that fairly extensive regions of laminar flow might be achieved in flight, thereby alleviating the problem of heat protection as it would exist for an all-turbulent condition. This reasoning was based largely on rocket-model and wind-tunnel results available at the time. These results indicated a stabilizing effect on the boundary layer at hypersonic speeds for low ratios of the surface temperature to the stagnation temperature. As the design of the airplane progressed, it became evident that the probability of obtaining laminar flow would be greatly reduced by the presence of unavoidable surface irregularities. As a basis for the aerodynamic heating design, a relatively low value of the transition Reynolds number (Rr=100,000) was therefore stipulated. Flight results have generally confirmed this design approach, inasmuch as it has been found that at the lower altitudes, where the heating rates are highest, the boundary layer is largely turbulent, due primarily to the surface irregularities. Regions of laminar flow generally are limited to the immediate vicinity of the leading edges and are quite small. The conditions found to exist on the X—15 are consistent with results of refined wind-tunnel techniques now being used. . . . “Maximum structural temperatures have been experienced during X-15 operation at high speeds and comparatively low altitudes, with accompanying normal-acceleration values much lower than those experienced during recovery from high altitudes. . . . “By way of assessing die [structural] failures experienced, there appear to have been no cases in which the structure deteriorated to such a degree as to seriously endanger the integrity of the airplane. It is entirely probable, however, that had a less-conservative design been followed the problems noted might have resulted in greater deterioration with more serious consequences. . .	(A&A, 3/64, 20-28) During March: Martin-Denver revealed design concept of its Astrorocket, a proposed reusable aerospacecraft. Launched vertically, the vehicle would have two stages—both manned—equipped with auxiliary fan jets as well as rocket engines. After stage separation, first stage would re-enter atmosphere and land on airstrip like conventional airplane. Second stage, carrying payload, would also land at air base after completing mission. Astrorocket concept employed parallel staging rather than conventional bottom-to-top staging. Martin said advantages of the Astrorocket were its reusability and its capability to operate with existing air bases for space operations. (A-N-AF J&R, 3/7/64, 38)
NASA announced appointment of Ray Hooker, Chief of Research Models and Facilities Div. at Langley Research Center, as nasa’s Senior Scientific Representative in Australia. Hooker would replace Edwin P. Hartman, first nIsa Senior Scientific Representative in Australia, now completing his second two-year term. Hooker would leave in June for Melbourne, where his primary function would be liaison with the Ministry of Supply of the Commonwealth of Australia, the cooperating agency which builds, staffs, and operates NASA facilities there. (NASA Release 64-85)
NASA announced modifications to X-15 No. 1 rocket-powered aircraft that would enable it to carry on scientific experiments above much of the earth’s atmosphere were being made at NASA Flight Research Center. The aircraft would have new inertial guidance system, originally designed by Minneapolis Honeywell Regulator Co. for the usaf X-20, and streamlined compartments for experiments at each wing tip. One compartment would contain device to collect micrometeoroids and extraterrestrial dust and special spectrometer to measure radiation and polarization of daytime sky-light; other pod would contain densitron to measure air densities at high altitudes, (nasa Release 64-184; frc Release 19-64)
Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, touring Copenhagen, predicted that U.S.S.R. would conduct another manned space flight sometime this year. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/4/64) March 5:1,300-lb. instrumented payload was carried to 97,000 ft. by balloon in Coronoscope II project, sponsored jointly by ONR, nsf, and NASA. Released from National Center for Atmospheric Research near Palestine, Tex., the balloon traveled about 105 mi. eastward, then doubled back to travel another 100 mi. before dropping its instrument payload on radio command signal, 50 mi. from the launch site. Dr. Gordon Newkirk of High Altitude Observatory at Boulder, Colo., said photographs made by the instruments were expected to aid in study of effects of sun’s corona upon earth’s magnetic field and upper atmosphere. (Houston Chron., 3/6/64; Houston Post, 3/6/64)
First Soviet-American space communications experiment, with British cooperation, was conducted successfully at 2:00 a.m. Moscow time, Tass reported. Radio signal sent from Jodrell Bank Experimental Station bounced off echo n balloon satellite and was received by Zimenki Observatory near Gorki. Tass said, “This marks a success of the first experiment in super-long distance international cosmic radio communications on ultra short waves.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/64)
British astronomer Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank observatory, told newsmen in Boston that there were “indications the Soviet economy is being strained” by their space program. He predicted that U.S.S.R. would next attempt “to achieve a rendezvous of two spaceships and to circumvent the moon.” (Long, CSM, 10/19/64)
Maj. Gen. O. J. Ritland (usaf), Deputy Commander for Space, afsc, discussed in aas luncheon address the role of usaf in U.S. space program, tracing history of icbm development: “The task for the Air Force in those early days was a tremendous one. It had full responsibility for the development, acquisition, and deployment of an icbm force capable of deterring any missile threat the Soviets might develop. This meant that we had to develop reliable high thrust boosters, materials that could withstand extreme heat caused by re-entry friction, guidance components, and a host of subsystems for use in our icbm’s. We had to develop command, control and tracking systems, and a wide range of support and test facilities for launch and retrieval. We had to recruit and train a tremendous force of highly skilled specialists and technicians. In addition we had to set up whole new management structures and apply expedited management methods under which these tasks could be accomplished with the greatest possible speed. “Time was the critical factor. The Soviets had a very substantial advance in technological lead times over us. For this reason it was essential that we have the fullest cooperation and support from all segments of our society. The response to these needs was characteristic of the American people. . . . “We had tremendous support from many government agencies. The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, which became the National Aeronautics and Space Agency in 1958, gave unfailing support. For example, naca’s Moffett Laboratories did a major portion of the high speed wind tunnel testing for our nose cone development program. naca’s Cleveland Propulsion Laboratories provided vital support to the Air Force in the rocket engine field. These are just two examples of the highly successful partnership which has evolved between the Air Force as the primary military agency in space and the NASA as the primary civilian agency in space. The partnership continues to be one of the most vital and dynamic aspects of the national space effort. . . .” (Text, afsc Release 45-R-51)
Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, opened hearings on problems of the Government-Science relationship. Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.), Subcommittee Chairman, said the Subcommittee would inquire into (1) geographical distribution of Federal r&d contracts and grants, and (2) allowance of indirect costs by those performing basic research for the Government, (nasa lar III/85)
Findings of survey on distribution of Federal research and development funds, conducted by Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, were made public by subcommittee chairman Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.—Conn.). Said to be first definitive, Government-wide survey of this subject, survey showed that during FY 1963 California received 38.4% of the total $12 billion spent by the Government on R&D, New York received 9.2%, and Massachusetts, 4.6%. Nine states accounted for 70.9% of the total, and the 41 remaining states had less than 2.5% each. Regionally, Pacific Coast states received 41.8%; Middle Atlantic states, 15.7%; Mountain region, 8.7%; South Atlantic, 8.5%; East North Central, 6.6%; New England, 6.1%; West South Central, 5.5%; West North Central, 3.6%; and East South Central, 2.8%. (Finney, NYT, 9/11/64)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said in press conference preceding address at Texas a&m Univ. that a geologist would be in crew of second Apollo lunar landing mission. Geologists probably would be sought when NASA recruited astronaut trainees for subsequent Apollo lunar flights. In his address, Dr. von Braun advised that U.S. must protect itself from any hostile force that attempts to “use space as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us.” (Houston Post, 2/15/64; Houston Chron., 2/16/64)
Open House at Langley Research Center, in conjunction with field inspection during the past week, featured specially prepared exhibits and other items of interest for citizens of Virginia and nearby areas. (NASA Release 64^-99; NASA Announcement 64-89)
JPL dedicated its new Space Flight Operations Facility at Pasadena, Calif., the facility to act as command center for future unmanned space flights to the moon and planets. Participating in dedication ceremonies were Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Rep. George P. Miller, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Dr. Homer E. Newell, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, and Dr. William H. Pickering. At dedication ceremony, radar signal was bounced off planet Venus, the 83 million mi. round trip taking seven minutes and 25 sec. (SBD, 5/14/64,75-76; AP, Houston Post, 5/14/64) 9 At the dedication of the jpl Space Flight Operations Facility, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, remarked: “Often in our discussions of the Space Program we refer to the ‘manned program’ and the ‘unmanned program.’ We even talk about manned space science and unmanned space science. Strictly speaking, this is loose talk. There is, in fact, no such thing as unmanned science. Man and his thinking are the prime ingredients of science. “In the Space Program, it becomes simply a matter of where the man is in relation to his instruments and measuring devices. For those space missions that we call unmanned, man is back on earth while his eyes and ears and other senses are extended electronically and mechanically far out into space by the spacecraft and its instrumentation. From his remote position, he must monitor, issue commands, receive and record data, make routine or emergency decisions as required in a continuing interchange with his inanimate partner out in space. “It is to make this partnership effective and productive of data, measurements, observations, and information that a centralized facility like the sfof is necessary. . . .” (Text)
In article on “The Politics of the Space Age” in the Saturday Evening Post, President Lyndon B. Johnson essayed his views on the manner in which space exploration may bring an end to hostilities among nations on earth. In this abridgement of forthcoming volume edited by Lillian Levy entitled Space: Its Impact on Man and Society, President Johnson said; “. . . Any discussion of the ‘politics’ of the space age is, necessarily, a discussion of politics in the classical sense, not the convention-and-campaign sense. If the space age has not eliminated the smoke-filled room, it has at least opened a window and given air to fundamental and sometimes obscured values. “The fate of the free society—and the human values it upholds— is inalterably tied to what happens in outer space, as humankind’s ultimate dimension. While the response of our technology is important, no less important is the response and the role of our political institutions—both to the challenge of the present and to the opportunities of the future. “The vital role of politics in tbe space age has been evident since October 4, 1957, when the Soviet’s Sputnik I was launched. The orbiting of that first unmanned earth satellite was a feat of science. But the worldwide impact and importance were essentially political. Sputnik I was proclaimed by the Soviets as validation of Communist prophecies about the superiority of their political system. Such conclusions have been proved premature ... “Why did this occur ? Self-examination is imperative. In retrospect, the answers seem to be these: “1. Despite two decades of intensive scientific advance we had failed to establish adequate relationships between the scientific community and the political community—to the blame of each and the disservice of both. “2. Inherent in the political miscalculation toward Space exploration was the influence of the unfortunate anti-intellectualism of the early 1950’s. . . . The open contempt with which the Sputnik I success was greeted by some in positions of political trust betrayed a degeneration of the respect for intellect which is indispensable to the governing of a free and open society. “3. Perhaps the greatest failure of all was devaluation of the first— and the hardest—responsibility of elected representatives of the people in our system: the responsibility to lead. . . . “In the years since 1957 the American political system and its politicians have acquitted themselves well, as have our scientists. An orderly program of space exploration has been devised and financed without unbalancing the values of our free society. . . . “Our most important achievement politically in the space age has been this retention of basic national character, purpose and political values in our space program. It is reflected by a primary objective of our program, clearly stated at the outset, to gather knowledge for the benefit of all nations and to join with all nations in this endeavor. . . “Thus far the space age has 'been characterized as a period of competition. It is important, however, that we keep in mind the fact that the competitiveness is 'between political systems, not between national scientific communities. In the world of science the logical instinct is toward cooperation without regard to political boundaries. This impulse we must preserve. The real challenge of the space age is for the politician to tear down the walls between men which have been erected by his predecessors and contemporaries in the political field, rather than to raise its barriers higher into the free and peaceful vastness of space. If the potentials of the age of space are fully realized, this period will someday be known—and blessed by all people on earth—as the Golden Age of Political Science.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 2/29/64, 22, 24) February 29: Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col. usmc), hospitalized with minor concussion suffered in accidental fall, announced he would remain on active duty in USMC until April 1; after this retirement date, he would be free to campaign for Democratic senatorial nomination in Ohio, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64, A2) During February; Second 30-day test of effects of 100% oxygen on men began at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks AFB. The four subjects would remain in space cabin 42 days, with 12 days at sea-level atmosphere before change to oxygen atmosphere and pressure of about 5 psia. (Av. WL, 2/24/64,27; M&R, 2/24/64,9)
NASA announced its Ames Research Center would negotiate with J. W. Fecker Co., division of American Optical Co., for satellite attitude control simulator. Contract would amount to about $1 million. The simulator would be used in vacuum chamber to evaluate performance of systems and components being developed for attitude control of spacecraft, (nasa Release 64-188)
afsc issued annual report of its 1963 highlights and accomplishments. In preface summarizing and evaluating significant activities, AFSC Commander General B. A. Schriever said: . . In 1963 afsc made maj or contributions to the nation’s defense and space exploration programs. These included delivery of ballistic missiles at an average of one per day, completion of vital early warning and air defense systems, first flight of the transport aircraft which will make world wide airlift a reality, and delivery of the launch vehicles which made possible the orbital flights of Commander Schirra and Major Cooper. . . . “Cancellation of the X—20 DynaSoar program in late 1963 and assignment to the Air Force of responsibility for development of a near-earth Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) represent a shift in emphasis from reentry technology to on-orbit experiments. MOL, which is designed to provide a means of obtaining hard, factual data concerning man’s capabilities in operational space vehicles, is among afsc’s most urgent projects. . . .” (afsc Release 42-R-24; afsc 1963 Ann. Rpt.)
NASA selected six firms for competitive negotiations leading to contract for launch support services at Kennedy Space Center, NASA: Aerojet General Corp., American Machine and Foundry Co., Bendix Corp., Chrysler Corp., General Dynamics Corp., and Westinghouse Electric Corp. The contract would be cost-reimbursement type with incentive-award fee provisions, and would be awarded for one year with renewal options for two more years. Total cost of three-year contract was expected to be more than $20 million. Most of the work would be performed at new facilities now under construction on NASA Merritt Island Launch Area, (nasa Release 64-95)
Soviet Academician Anatoli A. Blagonravov announced in Moscow that U.S.S.R. would participate in three-nation experiment of bouncing radio signals off U.S. balloon satellite echo ii beginning Feb. 22. Signals would be transmitted from Jodrell Bank, England, to echo ii, and reflected back by radioastronomy observatory near Gorki. (NYT, 2/7/64)
Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, appointed William B. Rieke, president of Lockheed Aircraft International, Inc., as his deputy. Rieke would succeed George M. Low, who had become Deputy Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, (nasa Release 64-261)
NASA spokesman said echo ii balloon satellite was still operating with “great success” despite preliminary radar reports that it was deflating and losing its reflectivity. The 135-ft. balloon was tested in transmission between Rome, N.Y., and Ohio State University at Columbus, Ohio. (upi, NYT, 1/30/64,12)
U.S. manned space flight plans were outlined in Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) article with Col. G. Terent’yev byline. Saying that the U.S. was “not leaving a stone unturned in trying to outstrip the Soviets in the conquest of space with manned space vehicles,” the writer gave particular attention to Gemini and Apollo plans, then went on to claim that U.S. policy “in the conquest of space is far from a peaceful one; it has a clearly evident military (more accurately, aggressive) nature.” (KrasnayaZvezda, 3/26/64,3, ATSS-TTrans.)
Shipments of nearly six million pounds of large components for NASA Langley Research Center’s $12.5 million Space Radiation Effects Laboratory began arriving. Beginning in mid-1965, the new facility would be operated by Virginia Associated Research Center (varc), comprised of representatives of the College of William and Mary, U. Va., and vpi. (LaRC Release) During April: NASA awarded contract modification exceeding $12 million to North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. for further work on Saturn V’s S—II stage. (Marshall Star, 4/22/64, 4)
NASA announced initiating Atlas flox program, involving addition of about 30% fluorine to the rocket’s oxidizer to obtain “flox,” which would significantly increase booster performance. In first phase of program possible hazards and operation problems of flox would be studied, including component compatibility tests and rocket engine static-firing, at estimated cost of $8 million. Second phase, not yet funded, would conclude with r&d launch of flox Atlas with dummy upper stage in 1966. NASA Lewis Research Center would negotiate contracts with gd/a for work on the Atlas and with Rocketdyne Div. of naa for work on the engines. (NASA Release 64-150)
NASA announced preliminary negotiations had begun to lease Convair 990 jet transport, with option to buy, from Convair Div. of General Dynamics Corp. The aircraft would be based at NASA Ames Research Center. Stripped of passenger accommodations, the aircraft would be used as a flying laboratory for research in aeronautical technology and the space sciences, (nasa Release 64-269)
nimbus I meteorological satellite, which had lost its electric power and stopped functioning Sept. 23, revived and was returning useful engineering data. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center said the solar paddles, which had been locked, had apparently directed themselves at the sun long enough to recharge the spacecraft’s batteries but the gas for stabilization had been exhausted and the craft was tumbling at about 15 rpm. This caused photographs to be fuzzy and useless, (gsfc Release G-64-34)
Rep. Carl Albert (D.-Okla.), speaking on the House floor, praised the team of scientists and technicians that made the successful RANGER VII lunar flight possible, and said that the “validity of the space program has been reconfirmed.. . Also in the House, Rep. Louis C. Wyman (R.-N.H.) said the transmission of lunar photographs was “a great tribute to the scientific progress of our experts in America’s space program,” and RANGER VII was “a highly technical success ... in the right direction; namely, the use of machines” rather than man in space exploration. He added that Project Apollo need not be called off, but he felt Congress should “hold back on the appropriations for Apollo space vehicle procurement until we have established that man can rendezvous in space by completing successfully the present Gemini program. . . .” He also advocated elimination of a target date for U.S. manned landing on the moon. (CR, 8/3/64,17203)
Harold Gold, head of Spacecraft Branch of nasa Lewis Research Center, discussed Sert I project at the Air Transport and Space meeting in New York. Scheduled for launch on a ballistic flight this summer, Sert (Space Electric Rocket Test) would be NASA’s first electric engines in space. The two electric engines aboard Sert I would differ: (1) built by Lewis was electron-bombardment ion engine using mercury propellant; (2) built by Hughes Aircraft’s Hughes Research Laboratory was contact-ionization thrustor using cesium propellant. Hughes engine would operate for first half of flight, then Lewis engine would take over. “If Sert I data indicate that beam neutralization is completely effective the development of ion thrustors for space missions can continue in vacuum chambers. However, if beam neutralization is of limited effectiveness a new program of vacuum chamber and flight tests may be undertaken,” Gold said. (NASA Release 64-101; lrc Release 64-39)
At nasa Hq. news conference, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said new contract with Jet Propulsion Laboratory would specify changes to improve JPl’s organization and management, “nasa is not going to try to impose rigid methods of organization and management on the Jet Propulsion laboratory. We believe they know a great deal about how to succeed at this business. But neither are we going to abdicate our own responsibility for this expenditure of public funds and for the success of the missions. “We are in a process by which we are both working to solve the problem. If this process produces the kind of organizational changes and the kind of ability to fix organizational responsibility that ... [is desired], then we will go forward. If they don’t both we and jpl will be looking for some other arrangement. . . . “I think all of us see the total picture better. Each of us tended to see one part of the picture rather than the total picture.” Under the new contract, jpl would be organized more like the NASA Centers. “. . . the United States government cannot find any arrangement under which the high quality of work which jpl has done and is capable of doing in the TO0-598 0—65—10 future can be available to the country better than the arrangement that we have negotiated. I hope and believe it will be signed. But I still feel it is my responsibility to make very sure that the contract represents a full meeting of the minds.” Mr. Webb stressed that he was not singling out anyone for blame for Ranger lunar spacecraft failures. “Our objective is success on the next flight and not to find a scapegoat for this kind of thing.” Of the next Ranger lunar probe, he said, “We are still striving to get it off about June, but there are lots of problems that have to be settled. Some of us feel quite strongly that we must have a very strong assurance of success before we would be ready to launch. But we also run into the problem if we don’t launch then we may have difficulty fitting into the schedule hiter.” Asked about effect of the delay in Congressional appropriation of $141 million supplemental requested for FY 1964 manned space flight, he said: “. . . this delay is at least reducing what the President gave us— a fighting chance. I mean, with each passing chance we have a little bit less of a fighting chance to do the job within this decade. ... I would say that costs are going to increase for the same amount of work with each passing month, and that each month roughly delays one month on the other end, or maybe more, and that this does certainly reduce the fighting chance.” (Transcript)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists Saul H. Genatt and Edwin Reid said they had seen “red and blue bands” on the moon last Aug. 25 through a 16-in. telescope at GSFC, Greenbelt, Md. Reid first sighted the hands, which appeared at the crater Aristarchus, then he and Genatt continued to observe them for an hour. Two bands were red and one was blue, Genatt said; the two red bands lay across the southern half of the crater and the blue band lay across the northern half parallel to the other two. The colors were “very strong” at 10:00 p.m., when the men began observations, then gradually faded in intensity until the blue band disappeared at 10:30 and the red bands, shortly after 11:00. Similar sightings had been reported by Lowell Observatory scientists in October and November 1963, and prior to that time, by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Kozyrev. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/64; Perkinson, Balt. Sun, 9/14/64; A&A 63) *	usaf launched Thor-Agena D satellite booster with unidentified payload from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (M&R, 9/21/64, 11)
Publication of Advanced Bearing Technology (SP-38) by Lewis Research Center engineers Edmond E. Bisson and William J. Anderson, was announced by NASA. The book was described as “an important step in NASA’s Technology Utilization Program aimed at making new space technology available to all branches of industry.” (NASA Release 6458; lrc Release 64-22)
Ironworkers who had walked off the job at Cape Kennedy and Merritt Island Launch Area (MILA) when their contract expired March 31 began returning to work at the request of the Missile Sites Labor Commission. Contract negotiations continued in Washington. Construction projects that had been delayed by the walkout included three mila buildings of the Kennedy Space Center, NASA, the Saturn Vertical Assembly Building, as well as facilities for usaf Titan III, Army Corps of Engineers said, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/9/64; M&R, 4/13/64, 10-11)
An article in the Russian publication Krasnaya Zvezda {Red Star) reported a speech delivered by Russian Premier Khrushchev before a group of professors and students in Mishkol’tse in April 1964. In the speech Khrushchev noted that in the U.S. “the scientists to a considerable degree are not Americans . . . the U.S. has pirated its scientific staffs from the representatives of various nations.” The article went on to call attention to British criticism that the U.S. was drawing scientists out of Britain and detailed the activities of the American army at the end of World War II in attempting to capture German rocket scientists. The article concluded, “We can justifiably be proud that all our achievements in the field of rocketry and cosmonautics, to be sure in all fields of science and technology, are due to the brains and the talent of the Soviet scientists alone, without any help from the outside.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/17/64,4, ATSS-T Trans.)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $2,017,400 contract to Granite Construction Co., Houston, Tex., for construction of a vehicle component supply building and a hazardous materials storage building at its Saturn rocket production plant (NASA Michoud Operations) in New Orleans. (Marshall Star, 11/18/64, 4)
Committee for the Preservation of Cambridge Industry, made up of representatives from each of the 94 industrial firms that would be disclocated by location of NASA Electronics Research Center on Kendall Square site, announced it would wage a legal battle to prevent NASA’s obtaining the site. Committee said implementation of NASA’s plan would “disrupt the jobs of 4,000 employees within this area,” contended it would cost some of the industries $200,000 to $400,000 to relocate although maximum renewal funds available for business relocation were only $25,000. (Lewis, Boston Globe, 9/23/64)
Nobel Prize in Physics awarded to Dr. Charles H. Townes (mit) and two Soviet physicists, Aleksandr M. Prokhorov and Nikolai G. Basov, for research in quantum electronics leading to production of oscillators and amplifiers for lasers. Dr. Townes was Chairman of NASA Manned Space Flight Advisory Committee. (NYT, 10/30/64, 1)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics was briefed on comparative U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs by National Aeronautics and Space Council Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh and NASC staff members. Committee Chairman Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) said the executive session gave the committee a better appreciation of Soviet scientific space exploration and reaffirmed his belief that the U.S. “must keep up its effort to stay in the space race.” (Av. Wk., 4/20/64, 30)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told group touring Saturn-Apollo industrial facilities at NASA Michoud Operations that astronauts on flight to the moon would not be harmed by radiation from Van Allen belts or solar flares. Project Apollo astronauts would be “safer than test pilots in industry have ever been,” he declared. (Maloney, Houston Post, 5/12/64)
Seventeen of the buildings programed for the John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, in the Merritt Island spaceport area had been completed or were about ready for occupancy, ksc announced, (icsc Release 69-64)	'
Interviewed in Boston Globe, Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control Section of NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, said nasa planned a gradual buildup of personnel for the proposed electronics research center to a maximum of 2,100 in 1969. Year-by-year buildup: 1964, 50; 1965, 250; 1966, 550; 1967, 1,000; 1968, 1,600; and 1969, 2,100. Nucleus of the center’s staff would be electronics task force currently operating in Washington. (White, Boston Globe, 2/3/(A)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Sanders Associates, Inc., for purchase of seven display systems to be used with computers for checkout and launch of Saturn V launch vehicles. Three of the systems would be used at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and four at Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Cost of the cost-plus-incentive-fee type contract may exceed $5 million. (NASA Release 64-249)
West Germany’s vertical take-off aircraft successfully passed the speed of sound in a test flight. The two-jet VJ101 achieved its vertical rise by tilting its jets downward and then went into forward flight by swinging them up to a horizontal position. The plane was being developed by the West German firms of Boelkow, Heinkel, and Messerschmitt. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/31/64)
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci of the nasc staff addressed the National Space Club on the Soviet bioastronautics program. He said that although some American scientists had been critical of the amount and kinds of data released by the Soviets, Soviet scientists appeared to be desirous of further opening their research in technological areas such as life support. On choosing the proper atmosphere for space flight, Dr. Konecci said: “Some American scientists . . . advocated a two-gas system. . . . Others chose a 5 psi 100% oxygen system. . . . Animal and human experiments to date indicate that there are no apparent physiological effects due to 100% oxygen up to and beyond 30 days. “What is important to mention is that we had the technology as part of our aircraft system in handling 100% oxygen in low pressure-high pressure and liquid states, and we have extended this use to space cabins. The Soviets . . . have not been confronted with 100% oxygen problems. Because of the near sea-level atmosphere in their Vostok and Voskhod flights . . . they were concerned more with weightlessness and radiation effects. . . .” Dr. Konecci said that both U.S. and the U.S.S.R. had much research work ahead. “The Soviets have still to fly their life support systems for the full designed parameter ... in Vostok this was supposed to be ten days with later literature indicating a twelve-day capability. I expect the Voskhod has the comparable capability, that is, about twelve days, but because of the three-man crew this would in fact mean a threefold increase of their life support capability, i.e. on a man-per-day basis. I think we can also expect the Soviets to attempt manned rendezvous maneuvers. I really do not believe at this time that they will attempt manned extravehicular experiments until (1) they have a better space suit, which they appear to be working on; (2) that they have a better fix on the possible decompression sickness (bends or dysbarism) problems of decompressing from a sea-level atmosphere with nitrogen to a compatible space suit environment; and (3) until we perform the Gemini intentional decompression and extravehicular experiments.” (Text)
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center announced that two barnacle-encrusted capsules, each containing 100 ft. of color motion-picture film in good condition, were found, one on a beach at Eleuthera Island in the Bahamas, the other near a beach in San Salvador in Central America. The capsules had been ejected from Saturn I SA—7 booster rocket launched Sept.'18, 1964, from Cape Kennedy, (upi, NYT, 11/14/64, 24)
Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, head of Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona, said at meeting of American Geophysical Union in Washington that Mars did not have enough water to support any but microscopic life forms. He described recent observations from McDonald Observatory in Fort Davis, Tex., that showed Mars to be enveloped in sheath of atmospheric ice crystals. Dr. Kuiper said in Martian spring the frost covering its pole during the wintertime evaporates directly into the air rather than melting. He estimated Martian air to be two parts nitrogen to one part carbon dioxide, with small amount of argon and even less water vapor and oxygen. Dr. Hyron Spinrad of Univ. of Calif. (Berkeley) described recent observations of Mars from Mt. Wilson Observatory. He said Mars was so cold that water melted only in the afternoon and when Mars was nearest the sun; amount of water in the Martian air was a thousandth of that in sea-level air in the arid southwestern U.S. The speakers rejected the idea that Martian air contained nitrogen-oxygen compounds, proposed last December by Georgetown Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl C. Kiess and chemist Dr. Sebastian Karrer. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/25/64,8)
Moscow Radio quoted Cosmonauts Andrian Nikol’ayev and Pavel Popovich as saying their “standbys” were ready for space flight and that their scientists were “planning new experiments in space exploration.” (Wash. Post, 8/14/64)
Dow Chemical Corp. selected by Kennedy Space Center, NASA, for contract to provide engineering support services at Merritt Island Launch Area facilities. Cost-plus-fixed-fee contract was estimated at $1.4 million for the first year, with two one-year options for extensions. (SBD, 6/26/64, 315)
Speculation that U.S.S.R. timed their three-man voskhod i space flight “to take the edge off the Chinese atomic demonstration which is expected very soon” was offered by Max Lerner in New York Post. (Lemer, N.Y. Post, 10/14/64)
Herbert Friedman of Naval Research Laboratory reported to cospar a new picture of space cosmic rays, based on results of experiments with rocket-borne x-ray telescope. New results showed that less than one per cent of all cosmic rays could be produced in intergalaotic space. Therefore, Friedman said, all cosmic rays would appear to come from exploding stars. He said these findings showed that there were too many x-rays to support theory that x-rays are produced by cosmic rays’ colliding with starlight, and too few x-rays to support theory that they come from the near-collision of electrons and protons (formed by neutron’s disintegration in so-called “hot universe” theory). Further experiments were planned to gather more evidence. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/18/64)
NASA Lewis Research Center issued requests for proposals for initial construction of 500-ft. drop tower for producing zero gravity environments. The facility would be largest of its kind in the U.S., would be able to provide weightlessness for periods up to 10 sec. (lrc Release 64r-12)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control in NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, said in address before Aero Club of New England, in Boston: “ .. . the NASA effort is not confined to a single objective such as landing men on the moon. Rather, it is a broad-based research and development effort which is designed to meet the needs of any agency of the government having work to do in space. And the vigor with which we pursue this activity will determine how effectively those agencies can meet their responsibilities, and cope with their problems in space, in the years ahead. . . . “With respect to such a large, complex, and unknown environment as space, and the still not precisely defined characteristics of the earth’s atmosphere, this nation would be be oblivious to the lessons of history if it, in every case, required that exploratory research and development be matched to a completely defined mission. . . .” (Text)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to present FY 1965 funding requirements for the manned space flight program and to discuss Project Apollo schedule considerations in detail. Dr. Mueller observed: “The funds thus far appropriated by the Congress represent about one-third of the cost of the manned space flight program—up to and including the first manned lunar exploration. We now approach the period of maximum effort. The measure before you will bring us about half way to the moon.” (Testimony)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in speech at Engineers’ Week dinner, Los Angeles: “At present, we estimate that more than 35,000 engineers and scientists are at work in the Gemini and Apollo programs and the studies of possible advanced manned missions. This number will reach a level of 45,000, about 2.8 percent of the national employment of scientists and engineers, when our currently approved programs reach their peak of effort next year. . . . “In recent months, we have reviewed thoroughly the status of program technology . . the pace of the program for its impact on total cost . . and the possible effects on the program of the hazards of interplanetary space. . . . “First, with respect to technology ... we have found all of the knotty questions involved in advancing the state of the art are yielding to hard work. We know of no technological problems that would prevent our accomplishing the Apollo program in this decade. . . . “[Second], . . . starting with the level of funding planned for the current fiscal year there is sound economic justification for maintaining the program on its present schedule. To stretch out the program at this time would add to the cost and unnecessarily delay this first major step in space exploration. “The final area of examination of the program has been with respect to the hazards of interplanetary space. . . . Estimates based on present information indicate that meteoroids will not constitute a major problem in the planning of the first manned lunar exploration. . . . “Altogether, the present evidence indicates that radiation does not present a hazard that would prevent ^accomplishment of manned lunar exploration in this decade. Indeed, there is no serious evidence that the radiation factor would inhibit us in selecting the time of a lunar mission. . . .” (Text)
Judge Charles Fairhurst issued temporary restraining order preventing Cambridge City Council from voting on application for $663,000 in Federal funds for survey and planning the proposed area for NASA Electronics Research Center. Judge Fairhurst granted the order after six Cambridge firms requested declaratory decree that Kendall Sq. “cannot and does not legally qualify as a valid subject for an urban renewal project.” (Boston Globe, 10/8/64)
Thomas M. Canning, chief of Hypersonic Free-Flight Branch of NASA Ames Research Center, described aerodynamic shape being studied for spacecraft of the future, at Conference on the Role of Simulation in Space Technology, vpi, Blacksburg, Va. Canning said laboratory tests were being made of high-angle (wing-shaped craft) as possible optimum design for manned spacecraft entering atmosphere at speeds ranging from 50,000-55,000 fps returning from interplanetary journeys. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/19/64)
usaf launched Titan II on successful test flight from Cape Kennedy. The nose cone, carrying malfunction detection instrumentation to be used in Project Gemini manned space flights, impacted 5,000 mi. down the Atlantic Missile Range. (AP, NYT, 3/24/64; M&R, 3/30/64, !6)
Lockheed-Califomia Co. engineers disclosed concept for a reusable rocket plane to transport 10 passengers between earth and orbiting space station. Prepared in a study for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, the design concept was a winged, two-stage carrier with two-man crew in each stage and capable of hauling three tons of cargo in addition to the passengers. Lockheed engineers said if the vehicle system development program were begun in 1967, the transport could be operational in 1975.	(Huntsville Times, 8/19/64)
Joseph A. Darr, Jr., and John Reeves of NASA Flight Research Center received plaques from President Johnson for their dollar-saving contribution to the X—15 research rocket airplane. Darr and Reeves were cited for the design and construction of a portable engine inspection cart that was used to check the systems operation of the LR—99 rocket engine which powered the X—15. Use of the cart saved 500 man hours and about $150,000, NASA estimated, (nasa Release 64-303)
In the President’s proposed budget for FY 1965, dod expenditures were estimated at $51.2 billion, of which $5.5 was for research and development (including military space expenditure). Requested budgets for operation of ranges: $231 million for amr, $159 million for pmr, and $93 million for wsmr. (NYT, 1/22/64, 21, 22; M&R, 2/3/64, 9)
Brig. Gen. Benjamin G. Holzman (usaf, Ret.) was sworn in by Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, as consultant to NASA for planning and administration of its advanced research and technology program. General Holzman would work on staff organization and formation of a program for NASA Electronics Research Center, (nasa Release 64-271)
NASA announced 1964-65 Alfred P. Sloan Fellowships in executive development were awarded to three NASA employees: Walter C. Scott, Chief of Chemical and Solar Power Generation Branch in Office of Advanced Research and Technology; Edward J. Lievens, Jr., member of Technical Staff, Plans and Analysis, in Office of Manned Space Flight; and Neal A. Holmberg, Aerospace Technology Program Manager at NASA Western Operations Office, (nasa Release 64-94)
First two-way telephone call between U.S. and Japan via a communications satellite was conducted by personnel of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md., and Radio Research Laboratory Station, Ka-shima, Japan, using relay II satellite in orbit about 4,000 mi. above the Pacific Ocean. (NASA Release 64-122)
nasa Flight Research Center completed the first series of flight tests of the Bell Aerosystems Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv). Program officials observed that the llrv could simulate many nonaerodynamic space-flight maneuvers in addition to the lunar landing for which it was primarily designed and asked for a full year of experimentation with the craft. (M&R, 12/14/64,10)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, appearing before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, reported on NASA’s activities in international cooperation during 1963: “Six new international satellites, to be built and financed by three other nations, were programmed as contributions to the NASA scientific satellite effort over the next six years, bringing to ten the number of such cooperative satellite projects completed, in process, or agreed. . . . Seven foreign experiments were selected in competition with domestic proposals for flight principally on NASA observatory satellites during the next three years. . . . “Nineteen sounding rockets carrying scientific payloads were launched here or abroad in joint projects with nine countries, raising to forty-six the total of such launchings to date. “New agreements were concluded with India and Pakistan under which both countries will j oin the UK and Australia in a year-long test of meteorological sounding rocket systems. ...” After listing NASA activities in the categories of international ground-based experiments and relationships with European agencies (eldo and esro) , Dr. Dryden discussed implementation of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. bilateral agreement for space cooperation: “. . . Correspondence has been maintained [with the Soviet Academy of Sciences], although the Soviet side has not met time schedules on most agreed action items. However, the Soviet Academy of Sciences has just conducted optical observations of the echo ii satellite during its early orbits and we were able to begin the telecommunications experiments with echo II between the Jodrell Bank Observatory in Great Britain and the U.S.S.R. on February 21. While we have not yet received detailed data of the optical observations and have still to evaluate the results of the telecommunications tests, which we have received, I think the real significance is that we are taking advantage of existing programs, approved and executed on their own merits, to provide an opportunity for scientists and engineers of both countries to gain experience in working together for their mutual benefit. This is obviously a pioneer venture and it has purposefully been designed as a coordinated rather than a joint effort. There is no provision for exchange of funds between the two countries, no exchange of equipment is involved and all exchanges of data are to be on a reciprocal basis and made available to all other interested countries. . . .” (Testimony)
usaf Captains Albert R. Crews and Richard E. Lawyer emerged from twoweek stay in simulated-space cabin at GE Space Technology Center, Valley Forge, Pa. Officials said test showed that man can perform more tasks in extended space flight than previously supposed. (Wash. Post, 9/2/64)
NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Ft. Churchill, Canada, and Wallops Island, Va., two with grenade payloads to investigate winds, temperature, density, and pressure in the upper atmosphere. The first, a Nike-Cajun was launched from Wallops; it sent payload to about 57-mi. altitude, where aluminum-coated mylar plastic sphere was ejected and inflated to 26-in. diameter. The sphere continued up to about 78.4-mi. altitude before floating down to earth. Radar tracking of ascent, descent, and drift provided data for calculating densities at various altitudes. Less than two hours later the Ft. Churchill rocket was launched, sending 82-lb. payload which ejected grenades detonating at intervals in region of 28 to 58 mi. 20 min. later the final rocket—the second carrying grenades—was launched from Wallops Island, with grenades exploding in about the same altitude range. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center conducted the flights to observe characteristics of the upper atmosphere and to measure variations occurring through the period of increased heating. The grenade experiments were an extension of series conducted from Jan. 23 to Mar. 6 involving 13 Nike-Cajun flights which “yielded excellent data on the characteristics in the upper atmosphere during winter conditions,” according to project scientist Wendell S. Smith. Follow-up experiments were planned for late summer when solar heating would be near maximum, for comparative data. (Wallops Release 64-38)
George M. Low, NASA MSC deputy director, said all pilots in Projects Gemini and Apollo would be astronauts trained by NASA for its own manned space projects. Brig. Gen. Bleymaier (usaf), in interviews at Houston, had previously said he thought pilots selected by usaf, whose mol project he heads, would participate in Apollo and Gemini in order to acquire experience for the MOL project. Without NASA training for its astronauts, usaf would have to orbit its men without previous space flight experience or launch its own Gemini training flights. (Maloney, Houston Post, 6/10/64; HoustonChron., 6/10/64)
New York State Atomic Research and Development Authority signed contract with General Electric Co.’s Aerospace and Defense Service Engineering Dept, for continued operation of Malta Test Station, which New York recently acquired from Federal Government through competitive bidding. Station has been operated by GE for Federal Government since its establishment in 1945, when facilities were installed there to duplicate German V-2 facilities at Peenemiinde. New York Authority would operate the station’s expanded test and research facilities in continued support of industrial contractors of Federal defense, space, and atomic energy programs. (CR, 2/19/64, 2011—12)
nasa Electronics Research Center was formally activated in Cambridge, Mass., and Dr. Winston E. Kock took the oath of office as Director. Electronics Research Task Group from NASA Hq. and NASA North Eastern Office in Cambridge were absorbed in the new Center to form initial nucleus of 80 personnel. Design and construction of the facility would begin late this year and be completed in four or five years, (nasa Release 64-219; NASA Announcement 64-189; NASA Circulars 320, 321)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dry den, appearing on CBS radio program “Capitol Cloakroom,” said that before U.S. and U.S.S.R. could cooperate in a manned space flight effort, the U.S.S.R. would have to radically change its secrecy policy in space exploration. Some changes might be required in U.S. space policies also. “To conduct cooperative manned flights,” Dr. Dryden said, “I think you’d have to . . . start from the beginning with a joint team to consider all the problems together.” Regarding U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements reached on weather satellites, communications satellites, and magnetic field studies, Dr. Dryden commented that “implementation of the agreements has been proceeding rather slowly. . . . We hope they’ll give us some clear indication as to whether they are ready to exchange cloud pictures in 1964, or not.” Regarding Project Apollo timetable, Dr. Dryden said that if Congress supported the proposed budget for the project it should be possible to land a man on the moon by 1970. However, two year’s “slack” built into the schedule to allow for contingencies was lost by the FY 1964 budget reduction, (upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/3/64; Wilson, Minneapolis Morning Trib., 1/3/64)
NASA and Canada’s Defence Research Board announced reaching agreement for joint multi-satellite ionosphere-monitoring research program, designated Isis (International Satellites for Ionospheric Studies). Agreement called for orbiting of a second Alouette and Isis A, B, and C satellites at intervals between 1965 and 1970. The satellites would continue and expand experiments of alouette i topside sounder, and data obtained from the satellites would be made freely available to the scientific community. Under terms of the agreement, drb would design, construct, and test the satellites, provide basic onboard experiment, and operate at least one ground station to supply data on spacecraft operation. NASA would provide four launch vehicles, conduct launch operations, and provide and launch up to five sounding rockets to test components, subsystems, and experiments for the satellites. NASA also would launch an Explorer satellite in conjunction with the Alouette to obtain coordinated direct measurements. (NASA Release 64-6)
usn launched Polaris A—3 missile from land site at Cape Kennedy in successful flight test down AMR. This was 14th success in 23 land launches of the A-3.	(M&R, 1/13/64, 10) First Week in January: NASA lifted hiring freeze on about six manned space flight projects, including Apollo work at North American Aviation, Inc. (L.A. Times, Miami Herald, 1/10/64; naa S&ID Skywriter, 1/10/64,1)
NASA granted Dr. George Wharton, Ohio State Univ. scientist, nearly $70,000 for a three-year research program to determine the least amount of water necessary to sustain earth life. {Wash. Daily News, 6/18/64)
NASA’s newly created Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight convened for first time at John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Formed to advise Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, the committee met for briefings by NASA officials and tours of nasa facilities at Cape Kennedy and Merritt Island. (NASA Release 64-72)
H. J. High Construction Co. received $1,012,800 NASA contract for construction of third-floor addition to Operations and Checkout Building, John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA (Merritt Island). Army Corps of Engineers awarded the fixed-price contract, (dod Release 357-64)
In testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., discussed NASA’s relationship with jpl : “. . . [A] major contracting advance is taking place in our operating relationships with the California Institute of Technology . . . [which] manages the NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory under contract. Originally, the Laboratory and the contract for its operation were transferred to nasa from the Army in 1959. As the functions of the Laboratory have expanded and changed, we have modified the nasa/cit relationships to meet the current needs of the program. The present contract expires at the end of this year, and we have carefully negotiated its extension under terms more applicable to current agency requirements. A comprehensive review has been made of the operating experience gained since the inception of the nasa/cit/jpl relationship. As a result of this study, improved operating procedures in both the technical and administrative aspects have been developed and implemented. In addition to reflecting clauses which implement the above improvements in management, the new arrangements include three major departures from earlier agreements: “First, the earlier contracts were based on a principle of mutually requiring CIt/jpl concurrence before NASA directions would be carried out. This often resulted in lengthy ‘negotiations’ of assigned tasks. The new contract restricts the principle of mutuality to the broad terms of the operating relationship, but clearly gives NASA the unilateral right to issue task orders, require reports, and take other administrative actions as desired. “Second, a separate facilities contract is also being negotiated which will provide the government a more direct control over the planning, construction, and utilization of the facilities at jpl. “Third, a new principle is provided for determining crr’s fee for the operation of the Laboratory. The new contract contains a schedule which sets the upper and lower limits of the fee on the basis of the dollar volume of work which NASA places with cit/jpl. The exact fee within these limits, will be determined by how well cit/jpl performs in the management of the Laboratory.” (Testimony)
NASA’s Group Achievement Award was presented to Paul F. Bikle, Flight Research Center Director, and Brig. Gen. Irving L. Branch, afftc Commander, on behalf of all Government personnel connected with the X—15 program. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, made the presentation at fhc ceremony, and said in his remarks: “Earlier this month the Research Airplane Committee approved nine additional test-bed experiments for the X-15 Program. With the 19 experiments approved before and the flights required to complete the original research program, these additional experiments will require X—15 flight tests until the end of 1968. “The X—15 flight-test program has been eminently successful during the last four years. The Research Airplane Committee, by its action this month in approving these new experiments for the program, has given concrete evidence of its faith in the future program. . . .” (frc X—Press; Speech Text)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved authorization of $5,246,293,250 in the next fiscal year for NASA. This figure would be $52,482,750 more than was voted by the House, but still $57,706,750 less than the budget requests. The Senate Committee’s recommendations included restoration of budget cuts by the House from the unmanned Surveyor program, the Orbiting Geophysical Observatory program, and funds for tracking network operations. (Wash. Post, 6/3/64; Av. Wk., 6/15/64,30)	*
dod announced $2,641,430 contract to Akwa-Downey Construction Co. for construction of NASA test buildings at John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, Merritt Island Launch Area (mila). Contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers, (dod Release 688-64)
Rep. Hale Boggs (D.-La.) asserted that top management personnel would be moved from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., to Michoud Operations, Louisiana, quoting NASA Administrator James E. Webb as saying that NASA was analyzing the situation. Mr. Webb told Huntsville Times of difficulties in hiring and keeping top executives for 766-598 0-65—24 the Alabama installation, added: “There’s nothing in this situation that can’t be corrected, but it has to be worked out.” (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 10/25/64; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/26/64)
NASA position paper on DOD’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory, embodying eight principles of NASA policy toward the mol, was made public. The paper stated: “The dod Manned Orbital Laboratory is a single military project (a specific goal; not a broad program) within the overall National Space Program. . . . “The mol should not be construed as the national space station, a separate program currently under joint study by NASA and the DOD. Such a space station project would be considered under the terms of the Webb/McNamara agreement on manned orbital research and development systems larger than Gemini and Apollo. The mol is, rather, a specific experimental test bed utilizing NASA’s Gemini project and the Titan III for certain potential military space applications not within the scope of NASA’s activities. . . .” (Text; Simons, Wash. Post, 1/2/64,1; A&A, 2/64,90; AF Mag., 74)
NASA and dod began implementing agreement on a single new system to improve communication and coordination of research and technology information between the two agencies. The agreement abolished certains forms and procedures which the two agencies had used independently for reporting on research and technology data, and instituted a new standard reporting form for common use. After the changeover is completed (July 1, 1965), all research and technology work of NASA and dod will be covered on the new form, and any scientist or staff member from NASA or dod will be able to obtain full information by fast machine processing on any given type of work. Signed by NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director of Defense Research and Engineering Dr. Harold Brown, the agreement was worked out in a series of conferences over a period of more than one year. It was sponsored by and would be continued under the Supporting Space Research and Technology Panel of the Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board (aacb). (nasa Release 64-258) October I: Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper told MIT conference on earth sciences that continuing research had verified Mars’ atmosphere was too thin to allow spacecraft to land by parachute. Density of Martian atmosphere, according to Dr. Kuiper, had been found to be less than two per cent of that at sea level on earth. The new measurement was made by spectro-graphic studies. (Abraham, Phil. Eve. BuU., 10/1/64)
Major improvements in performance of supersonic transport shapes had come from aerodynamic refinements at NASA Langley Research Center, nasa announced. Applied to the wing design of supersonic transport concept known as “Scat 15,” the refinements achieved much better flight characteristics and more than 15 per cent increase in range. The improved concept—Scat 15F—was now regarded more favorably in comparison with the two established concepts, Scat 16 and 17. (nasa Release 64-120)
NASA announced that AC Spark Plug Div. of General Motors Corp. would become the prime contractor for production of the complete guidance and navigation systems for Project Apollo. Formerly, in the design and development phase of the systems, AC shared responsibility with Kollsman Instrument and Raytheon Missile and Space Div. The latter two firms now become subcontractors to AC. In this realignment of contractor relationships, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said: “. . . it has been determined that the most effective management of manufacturing complete systems can be achieved through a prime contractor.” (nasa Release 64-148)
Henry O. Slone, Snap-8 project manager at NASA Lewis Research Center, reported a successful 76-hr. test of Snap-8’s turbine alternator assembly (taa) using mercury as the working fluid. “This test demonstrated operational capability and machine performance up to 80% of its rated power,” Slone said. Snap-8 (System for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) was designed to supply electric power onboard a spacecraft and would use nuclear heat to produce 35 kw. of power. When fully developed, it would have the capability to operate unattended in space for 10.000	hours, (lrc Release 64-111; M&R, 12/14/64, 10)
Among persons listed by Aviation Week and Space Technology for significant contributions to the progress of aerospace in the U.S. during 1964 were: Harold Finger and Milton Klein, manager and deputy respectively of the joint AEC—NASA Nuclear Space Propulsion Office for “pushing the Rover program through four successful tests of a nuclear rocket reactor using liquid hydrogen and demonstrating the technical feasibility of nuclear propulsion for manned interplanetary flights of the future.” Harris “Bud” Schurmeier, Ranger program director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and his technical team for “their tremendous technical success with the Ranger 7 that produced the first detailed photographs of the lunar surface.” Paul F. Bikle, Director of NASA Edwards Flight Research Center, and pilots Milton Thompson and Jack Mackay of NASA and Maj. Robert Rushworth and Capt. Joe Engle of USAF for “their continued operation of the North American X-15 research aircraft into a wide variety of unexplored areas both in performance and equipment testing.” John Mengel of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for “direction of the global NASA tracking and data acquisition network which produced an average of 50 mi. of taped data per day from payloads in space.” Col. Harold W. Robbins, usaf Space Systems Div., for “technical direction and support of the large solid rocket program that culminated this year in the successful demonstrations of 156-in.-dia. motors and the initiation of a 260-in.-dia. program.” (Av. Wk., 12/28/64, 9) December 28-30: Dr. John H. Wolfe of NASA Ames Research Center suggested the probable source of Van Allen belt radiation at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Seattle. Dr. Wolfe said the Van Allen radiation belts probably had their source in the cometlike tail of the magnetosphere extending from the dark side of earth away from the sun. Spiraling protons and alpha particles emitted by the sun were shielded from solar wind in this area. Affected only by the geomagnetic field, they were picked up by the magnetic lines of force and conveyed to the Van Allen belts. New data collected by particle energy spectrometers and other instruments aboard explorer xxi imp-b (Interplanetary Monitoring Platform) and ogo I (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) led to this conclusion. Data collected from as far into space as 96,000 mi. revealed that interaction of the solar wind and the geomagnetic field around the sunlit side of earth created a boundary region 2^ earth diameters thick at a distance of five earth diameters from the point on earth closest to the sun. This expanded to six diameters thick 90° around earth. Hydromagnetic effects in this boundary deflected solar radiation around earth and prevented it from penetrating directly to the relatively low altitudes of the Van Allen belts except during the more energetic solar storms. Satellite data also indicated that the comet-like tail of earth extended directly along the line from the sun through earth, rather than being slightly deflected as had been believed. Wolfe said the tail seemed less tapered and more nearly cylindrical than had been expected, and extended at least as far as the orbit of the moon, (arc Release 65-2; AP, Detroit News, 1/8/65; M&R, 1/18/65, 28)
Navy dedicated 61-inch astrometric reflector telescope at Naval Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz. Its quartz primary mirror was largest quartz reflecting surface manufactured to date. It would be used primarily to study white dwarf, red dwarf, and sub-dwarf stars. (Wash. Post, 6/18/64)
NASA would negotiate with the Univac Div. of Sperry Rand Corp. for purchase of digital data processors to be used in the Apollo Manned Space Flight Network ground stations and tracking ships. The fixed-price contract would approximate $4.5 million for the ten systems with options for additional systems, (nasa Release 64-318)
John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced major reorganization. KSC Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus said objectives of reorganization were to: (1) realign Apollo program management functions in accordance with concept of NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller that these functions be standardized at NASA Hq. and the three manned space flight centers; (2) separate and strengthen administrative and technical support functions; and (3) reduce number of offices reporting to Dr. Debus and delegate more authority and responsibility to Assistant Directors. Under realignment there were five Assistant Directors, with authority to act for Center Director within their areas of responsibility: Program Management, Administrative Management, Launch Vehicle Operations, Technical Support Operations, and Instrumentation. Program Management was divided into two areas, Plans and Program Support Office and the Apollo Program Management Office, which was aligned as counterpart organization with Apollo program offices in NASA Hq. and the other manned') space flight centers (Manned Spacecraft Center and Marshall Space Flight Center). Unaffected by the change were Launch Support Equipment Engineering Div., Facilities Engineering and Construction, and five staff offices. New NASA Hq. office, NASA Regional Inspections, was attached to KSC. msc’s Preflight Operations Div. was renamed msc Florida Operations but its basic relationship to KSC was unchanged. Other NASA Center elements attached to KSC, such as GSFC Field Projects Branch, remained unchanged, (ksc Release.10-64)
Management changes in propulsion programs in NASA’s Office of Advanced Research and Technology were effective this date. John L. Sloop, head of oart Div. of Chemical Propulsion and Power. Generation, was appointed to new position of Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, assisting Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff. Propulsion division was redesignated Div. of Chemical Propulsion, with Adelbert 0. Tischler of NASA Office of Manned Space Flight as Director. At the same time, management of M—1 engine project was transferred from omsf to Div. of Chemical Propulsion, oart. (nasa Release 64-4.)
Lewis Research Center completed wind tunnel tests to study the aerodynamic forces which would occur on the launch vehicle when Mariner spacecraft was launched toward Mars, (lrc Release 64-55)
NASA announced signing Memorandum of Understanding with Norwegian Space Research Committee and the Ionospheric Research Laboratory of the Royal Technical Institute of Denmark to extend joint sounding rocket program of investigations of the ionosphere. Tentative schedule of new series called for two Nike-Apache launches this year and two more early next year from Norway’s Andoeya Range and two Nike-Apache launches from U.S. facilities. Scandinavian groups would purchase the four sounding rockets to be launched in Norway, fund their own experiments, and operate Andoeya Range. NASA would supply two sounding rockets to be launched in U.S., fund its experiments, and provide use of its Wallops Island, Ya., range. There had been 11 successful launchings in this program since 1962. (NASA Release 64274)
Research in use of laser radar to map air turbulence in the skies was described by Drs. Ronald T. H. Collis and Myron G. H. Ligida of Aero-physicS Laboratory at Stanford Research Institute. The laser equipment would be installed in aircraft. Dr. Collis and Dr. Ligida reported their research in Nature. (NYT, 8/7/64,8)
The platform adopted by the Republican National Convention contained a number of statements pertaining to the U.S. space program. The platform stated: “This administration has delayed research and development in advanced weapons systems and thus confronted the American people with a fearsome possibility that Soviet advances, in the decade of the 1970’s, may surpass America’s present lead. Its misuse of cost effectiveness has stifled the creativity of the Nation’s military, scientific, and industrial communities. “It has failed to originate a single new major strategic weapons system after inheriting from a Republican administration the most powerful military force of all time. It has concealed a lack of qualitative advance for the 1970’s by speaking of a quantitative strength which by then will be obsolete. It has not demonstrated the foresight necessary to launch as many as five satellites. The system, called Multiple Orbit“It has endangered security by downgrading efforts to prepare defenses against enemy ballistic missiles. It has retarded our own military development for near and outer space, while the enemy’s development moves on. . . . “We pledge . . . replanning of the present space program to provide for a more orderly, yet aggressively pursued step-by-step development, remaining alert to the danger of overdivision of skilled personnel in critical shortage from other vital areas such as health, industry, education, and science.” (Text, CR, 7/28/64, A3934, A3939) Mid-July: The U.S. Weather Bureau prepared a letter to the World Meteorological Organization advising that Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) pictures from TIROS VIII were no longer usable. Useful apt pictures totaled 4,067. (GSFC Historian)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced seven researchers had won awards for four inventions, the awards totaling $1,400 under provisions of the Government Employees Incentive Awards Act. Winners were: S. Stephen Papell, $500 for low viscosity magnetic fluid obtained by collodial suspension of magnetic particles; Paul D. Reader and Harold R. Kaufman, $500 for electrostatic ion engine with permanent magnetic circuit; Robert J. Branstetter and Allen J. Metzler, $300 for black-body furnace; John R. Jack and Paul F. Brinich, $100 for improved heat exchangers for electrothermal rockets. ( lrc Release 64-38)
NASA awarded $100,000 contract to North Carolina Science and Technology Research Center for establishment of experimental program for transfer of technology developed in U.S. space effort to civilian industry. Other participants in the program would be Univ. of North Carolina, Duke Univ., North Carolina State College, and Research Triangle Institute. (NASA Release 64-124)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in article on nasa and usaf relations in The Airman: “At a time when possible military missions for manned spacecraft have not yet been clearly defined, the nasa Gemini and Apollo programs and the Air Force mol program are developing American manned space flight technology and operating experience at a rapid rate. “We believe that the progress called for in the Gemini, Apollo, and mol will enable us to demonstrate clear superiority over the Soviet Union in manned space flight capabilities during this decade. “Our accomplishments in these three programs will prepare us much better for whatever further steps may be necessary to meet our national defense needs in space. . . .”	(Airman, 8/64, 6-11)
gao Comptroller General Joseph Campbell said that GAO would evaluate dod policies affecting nonprofit organizations performing design, technical direction, and systems engineering functions for the military services. “We have a continuing interest in finding out whether salaries higher than the government scale paid by some of these organizations are really necessary and justified or are only a way of indirectly paying higher [wages] for government work,” Campbell said. Another area of prime concern to GAO was relinquishment to nongovernment organizations of technical direction and similar activities it considered Government management functions. dod had already clamped fiscal ceilings on six of these organizations to prevent their growth and was inviting increased industry competition in the areas of technical direction and systems engineering. Campbell told Aviation Week and Space Technology that “if we are faced with any intention to sustain permanently some of these organizations as arms of government, we would have to look into the situation very carefully and thoroughly.” In commenting on NASA’s approach to nonprofit organizations, Ernest W. Brackett, Asst. Deputy Associate Administrator, noted that although NASA had “inherited” one nonprofit organization, the California Institute of Technology’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, it had not and would not establish any “captive” nonprofit organizations. Two other nonprofit organizations were also performing work for NASA—rand Corp., with contracts totaling $3.3 million, and mit’s Lincoln Laboratories, with contracts totaling over $7 million. (Av. Wk., 12/28/64, 31) December 28: Director General of the International Air Transport Association, Sir William Hildred, said in the association’s annual air traffic forecast, “Thanks to increased efficiencies and economies, the balance between revenues and expenditures should continue to improve. In fact, it just seems possible that the industry will succeed in making a positive net profit in 1965 for the first time in its life.” (upi, NYT, 12/29/64,50)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications, said before House Subcommittee on nasa Oversight about Project Ranger: “. . . From the outset, the concept was advanced. It was conceived to seize the initiative in space exploration from the Soviet as well as to obtain important information about the moon. Had it succeeded, it certainly would have been a major first for this country, and it may still obtain that objective. The spacecraft itself is quite complex. ... It is comparable to the most sophisticated launch vehicles in terms of electromechanical system complexity. Launch vehicles developed in this country have typically taken 20 or more flights to achieve 50% reliability. Some have not done much better than this after many more firings. Indeed, we have read recently that last year there were 13 consecutive failures of the Atlas. In addition, the Discoverer project took 13 attempts to recover its first payload from orbit. Polaris experienced 5 initial failures before its first success. Skybolt experienced 5 flights without achieving complete mission success. In each of these projects, partial success in early flights helped improve later flights. Although I believe Skybolt was dropped for other reasons, Atlas, Discoverer, and Polaris all went on to become vital elements in the defense posture of this country. “Ranger is going through this same process. We have solved some of our launch vehicle problems to the point where the reliability is improving appreciably. The basic spacecraft bus has been retained and has now demonstrated its capability to deliver a payload to a precise spot on the lunar surface. We now must make the payload work. The payload also is pushing the state of the art in high power television telemetry. This was necessary to obtain high resolution photographs. . . . “Our reviews of the Ranger system continue to convince us of its capability of performing the mission. While we know we cannot have 100% reliability with launch vehicle, spacecraft, or payload, we expect to achieve at least one complete success with the remaining three flights. . . . “Ranger is a tough job. Although success has eluded us, it is within our grasp. We must have the fortitude to proceed. Space will only he conquered by those who do have such fortitude. It might he well to point out that our competitors in this area of exploration are not lacking in this respect. It is reported that the Soviet Union has failed in from 15 to 20 consecutive lunar and planetary mission attempts since Lunik III photographed the hack side of the moon in 1959. “Even should subsequent Rangers fail through unforeseen causes, we must move ahead. We must look at the totality of the space program. . . . The over-all picture is very good and is most convincing of this country’s capability to successfully complete these undertakings. The trends are all in our favor. . . .” (Testimony)
Soviet radio astronomy expert Iosif Shlovsky said at a symposium on 1964 science conducted by Tass news agency that the biggest success of 1964 in world astronomy was an experiment by Dr. Herbert Friedman of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. The experiment showed that a large region of the Crab Nebula produced x-ray radiation. Data obtained by Friedman with an Aqrobee rocket launched July 5 from White Sands Missile Range “established how the flux of x-ray radiation coming from the Crab Nebula changed when the moon passed between it and the rocket,” Shklovsky said. Some scientists had attributed the radiation to a tiny, superdense “neutron star.” But observations from the rocket as the moon shut off direct view of the Nebula showed that a larger area was involved. (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/29/64; Sullivan, NYT, 12/19/64,3)
The impact of budgetary restraints upon the Nation’s research and development programs was marked in industry, Government agencies, and the university scientific community, John Finney claimed in the New York Times. Employment in the aerospace industry dropped from 1,186,000	in August 1963 to 1,112,000 in September 1964, and manufacturers were forced to turn to civilian products to augment sales. Limiting of NASA funds forced postponement of some of the follow-up programs for Apollo, such as a manned orbiting laboratory. Universities whose research programs depended heavily on Federal research support were having difficulty in obtaining funds to complete projects already undertaken and could no longer expect liberal Government support for their research proposals. (Finney, NYT, 1/11/65)
On third anniversary of his historic space flight, first American in space Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., usn) received the Langley Medal, highest award of the Smithsonian Institution, in ceremonies at the Smithsonian, Washington, D.C. (CR, 5/5/64,9767-68)
nasa Langley Research Center awarded two contracts for construction on Vehicle Antenna Test Facility to aid in solving spacecraft communications problems: $1,265,505 contract to Nat Harrison Associates for construction of the building, and $280,630 contract to B. F. Goodrich Sponge Products Div. for design and installation of anechoic chambers for the facility. (LaRC Release)
NASA announced it would join with Norwegian Space Research Committee and the Ionospheric Research Laboratory of the Royal Technical Univ. of Denmark in three sounding rocket launches from Andoeya, Norway, during February and March. The Nike-Apache sounding rockets would carry experiments to test theories of how D-region of the ionosphere is formed. Norwegian Committee was providing launch site and associated facilities; Norwegian Committee and Danish Ionospheric Laboratory together were purchasing sounding rockets and contributing scientific payloads. NASA was furnishing certain experiments for the payload, already had assisted Danish and Norwegian scientists by providing training in rocket handling and data acquisition. (nasa Release 64-27)
nasa announced signing preliminary $800,000 contract with Ball Brothers Research Corp. for construction of five additional Oso (Orbiting Solar Observatory) satellites. Ball Brothers already had built two Oso’s— one of which was orbited in 1962 and the other scheduled for orbit this year—and was in the process of building a third. The five additional Oso’s would study solar cycle through periods of increased activity during the late 1960’s. ( nasa Release 64-51)
FAITH 7 Mercury spacecraft, in which Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper made 22 orbits of die earth in final space flight of Project Mercury, went on display at NASA Hq., Washington. Nov. 2 the spacecraft would resume its tour of the 50 state capitals. (NASA Release, unnumbered)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from Wallops Island, Va., reached 95.3-mi. altitude in satisfactory flight to measure ambient electron density, measure ion densities, and monitor solar ultraviolet radiations. Instrumented payload, provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, contained CW propagation experiment, probe with Gerdien condenser, planar ion trap, and planar secondary emission detector. Another objective of the flight was to test efficiency of the 12.267 mc/s shroud antenna at D-region altitudes; one of the antennas performed unsatisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Maj, Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of usaf Office of Aerospace Research, addressed National Space Club in Washington: “I am sometimes asked how military space research differs from space research conducted by civilian institutions or other government agencies. The answer, of course, is that there is no difference, except in the ultimate purpose for which it is conducted. As a matter of fact, there is very close liaison in this field between my Command, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Office of Naval Research, and the scientific community. We make every effort to keep them informed about the work we are doing or sponsoring, and we are constantly exchanging information with them about our findings on the characteristics of space. Our job, however, is specifically to support the Air Force mission in space. . . . “I know that you are all familiar with the potential radiation hazards to man in space, particularly with the deadly proton showers that accompany certain solar flares. We have made great strides in predicting the onset of these showers at our Sacramento Peak Observatory in New Mexico. “We can predict safe periods with increasing accuracy—better than most weather predictions here on earth—but there is still a large gray area in which we do not know whether conditions will be safe or unsafe. It is possible that we could narrow this gray area significantly with that which penetrates the atmosphere and can be picked up at the observatory. “If we had this knowledge, it would extend the time we could operate in space with absolute assurance of safety. It would also give us advanced early warning that would enable us if necessary to get our astronauts out of danger. “Even in the present state of the art, our Sacramento Peak predictions have been crucial to the safety of the astronauts participating in the Mercury program. We have been able to give NASA absolute assurance of safe conditions, insofar as proton showers are concerned, when the astronauts have gone into orbit; and warnings of potential danger, at other times. . . .” (Text)
Astronomers at Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz., failed in an attempt to sight and photograph red spots in the vicinity of the Aristarchus region of the moon. Conditions were abont the same as on Oct. 29 and Nov. 27 when Lowell observers had sighted the red spots. (AP, Balt. Sun, 6/6/64)
Soviet Academician Anatoli Blagonravov, chief Soviet delegate to cospar meeting in Florence, indicated to newsmen in press conference that the next major Soviet space flight might be a year away: “We are trying to open a way to the nearest planet. It will take a long time.” Asked if this meant that no launch was planned for the present, he replied: “We are preparing projects. The preparation might take a year.” (Levin, AP, 5/9/64)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists, via Rosman, N.C., tracking station, succeeded in turning on 14 of the experiments onboard OGO I and received scientific data transmitted from the satellite. Power level in the NASA “space bus” was said to be satisfactory. OGO I was obtaining less than half the power it needed for full-time operation of its 20 experiments, because it was spinning slowly in space instead of having its solar panels constantly aimed at the sun. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/8/64; AP, NYT, 9/8/64, 31)
Cornell Univ. announced that scientists at the Ionospheric Observatory at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, bounced a radar signal off the planet Mars while it was about 138,000,000 mi. from earth today. Cornell said this was the farthest distance at which Mars had been detected by radar. (AP, Balt. Sun, 11/20/64)
House passed and sent to the Senate $1.6 billion military construction authorization bill for FY 1965 (H.R. 10300). Discussing the bill on the floor, Rep. William H. Bates (R.—Mass.) observed: “This year, research, development, testing, and engineering for our Federal Government projects will approximate $15 billion. This represents about 17 percent of our entire Federal budget and a much larger percent of those funds over which we actually have control. “In the various military services in fiscal year 1965, we will spend approximately $7.6 billion on research, development, testing and engineering. In the bill before you today about $90 million is set aside for research and development facilities. . . .” (nasa lar III/50; CR, 3/18/64, 5356)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, at the National Editorial Writers’ Conference in Cocoa Beach, Fla., said: “The Apollo development schedule is conservative. The Apollo spacecraft is being developed on a time scale four years longer than the Mercury spacecraft, two years longer than the B-58 bomber, and one year longer than the X-15.” (Text)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at Apollo electronics panel, IEEE Western Electric Show and Convention, Los Angeles:	“The United States is now completing the first decade of the exploration of space. During the last five years major strides have been made in exploring, understanding, and exploiting space. Today we have allocated almost half the resources needed to carry out the greatest adventure in the history of mankind—the manned lunar landing which is the goal of the Apollo Program. This goal could not have been conceived, much less achieved, without the amazing growth of knowledge, techniques, and technology in the field of electronics which has been ever accelerating since the last war. Communications, guidance, power, control, display, all these have passed and surpassed the maximum expectations of a decade ago. “In the Apollo Program we are developing a set of capabilities which will provide for manned exploration, understanding man’s proficiency in space and the vicinity of the earth. This is a capability which can be extended to meet the needs of this Nation for science or technology, for transportation or observation, for defense or commerce. “Although the end is manned exploration of space, the means, including the production of space vehicles, is being created here on earth. It is based in large measure on the expansion and growth of the electronics industry. It depends on that electronics industry to meet and exceed new goals for reliability and quality as well as performance in their products. . . .” (Text) August 28-September 7: In conjunction with Cleveland’s Parade of Progress exhibit commemorating opening of new Cleveland Convention Center, NASA exhibited Centaur space vehicle, full-scale spacecraft such as Ranger and Mariner, Sert spacecraft, ranger vii moon pictures, Gemini two-man spacecraft, and other exhibits. Space lectures and motion pictures were presented. NASA Lewis Research Center coordinated the display, (lrc Releases 64-72, -73, -75, -79, and -80)
NASA announced award by Langley Research Center of $2.5 million contract to Boeing Co. for dynamic flight simulation work for the supersonic transport program. The Boeing 707 prototype would be modified by installation of major control and computer equipment to permit complete simulation of a wide variety of supersonic transport types. (nasa Release 64-286)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in hearings before Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, that for Project Gemini “the year 1963 was, quite frankly, one of development headaches. It was the year of development and qualification testing of Gemini’s many equipments. The program is now largely over the development hump, however, and all Gemini spacecraft and launch vehicle subsystems will be fully qualified in 1964. Significant in 1963 also were a number of hardware deliveries. ... “In 1964, three vitally important flights will be made—the third one manned and orbital. The year will be characterized by production, test, and delivery of spacecraft and launch vehicles. . . .” Questioned about return to earth and landing in Project Gemini, Dr. Mueller and George Low said that plans now called for the two-man Gemini spacecraft to land on water rather than dry land. NASA had been investigating both procedures, and paraglider for land recoveries was still in development stage. Paraglider would be “available” at about the time of the last two Gemini flights but “not necessarily scheduled.” Dr. Mueller added that water landing also would be “characteristic” for manned Apollo flights. (Testimony; Finney, NYT, 2/19/64, \9-,M&R, 2/24/64,21)
The lowest altitude at which demarcation line between air space and outer space should be assigned is 100 km. (60 mi.), according to Norman Sissenwine, usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories scientist and cochairman of U.S. Committee on the Extension of the Standard Atmosphere. Sissenwine’s definition had been requested by Hyman, Hayman, and Harris law firm, which was attempting legislative interpretation for the International Astronautical Federation and the International Institute of Space Law. Sissenwine acknowledged that ultimately the line must be drawn arbitrarily, explained considerations favoring 100 km.: “Aerodynamic forces on most of the ballistic re-entry, lifting re-entry, and boost-glide orbital aerospace vehicles can generally be neglected at altitudes above 100 km. (This may vary from 80 to 120 km, depending upon the vehicle concept, but I believe 100 km is a good nominal altitude to use.) . . .” He pointed out that atmosphere’s basic composition begins to change near 100 km, “Specifically it has been determined that disassociation of molecular oxygen into atomic oxygen should be depicted at an altitude of 90 km in the Standard Atmosphere. . . Another consideration was that relationships of temperature and pressure fields to wind fields are generally constant to nearly 100 km. This is also true for speed of sound, coefficient of viscosity, kinematic viscosity, and thermal conductivity. Finally, he pointed out that meteors entering the atmosphere generally disintegrate below 120-km. altitude, and most meteor trails formed in atmospheric entry are observed below 100 km. (oar Release 1-64-4)
The Soviet Union launched zond ii probe in the direction of the planet Mars. The purpose of the launching was said to be trying of the station’s systems under actual conditions of prolonged space flight and gaining of practical experience. Scientific investigations in interplanetary space would be carried out simultaneously. The probe was proceeding along a trajectory close to the computed one. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 12/2/64, 1, atss-T Trans.; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/2/64; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 12/2/64)
His Majesty Hussein I, King of Jordan, visited NASA Kennedy Space Center and toured facilities at the Cape, (nasa Off. Int. Aff.)
NASA announced the first electric-rocket engine space flight (July20)	had been so successful that a second test would not be necessary. In Sert I (Space Electric Rocket Test), electron-bombardment engine using mercury propellant produced an ion beam developing .0055 Lb. of thrust, (nasa Release 64-264; lrc Release 64-93)
Stanford Research Institute was being awarded $1,409,346 contract for study and evaluation of Nike-X system’s potential effectiveness, dod announced. Nike-X project at Redstone Arsenal, Ala., awarded the contract, (dod Release 708-64) * Report of Aviation Human Resources Study Board, created by faa last February and chaired by Dan A. Kimball, was released by faa. Study showed that career planning and manpower training were deficient for meeting needs of civil aviation for the next 20 years. Comparatively few people under 30 were now learning to fly. Enrollment in aviation courses had declined, number of schools offering aviation training was decreasing, and only a few military trained airmen were seeking professional aviation careers. Number of professional pilots needed by airlines and general aviation was estimated at 3,650 in 1965, 4,300 in 1970, 5,700 in 1975, and 6,300 in 1980. Report urged expansion of on-the-job and apprenticeship training programs, scholarships, extensive career motivation programs, and other measures, (faa Release 64-89) September 30-October 1: faa sponsored National Aviation System Symposium in Washington, which was attended by leaders of airlines and aircraft manufacturing and officials in other Government agencies. In address at the symposium faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby discussed current national air space system and forecast the future of aviation. He outlined some aviation goals: “It is in the national interest to see the products of our entire aviation industry sold to the other nations of the world. . . . [Also, we must] promote the use of our concepts, techniques and procedures of managing an airspace and an airport system. “In my opinion, our most important domestic goal is the establishment of a truly effective air transportation system. In terms that the traveling public can. understand, this means the connection of any two population centers within the United States by a door-to-door travel' time of not more than 8 hours. . . . “Finally, there is an over-riding goal which must be uppermost in the minds of everyone. None of the accomplishments I have already discussed will be possible if they are not accompanied by improvements in air safety and, here, primary reliance must be on the aviation community itself. . . .” (Text, CR, 10/2/64, 23043-46) During September: After dod installed small ground station in Saigon, military communications experiments using syncom II communications satellite began between Saigon and Hawaii. Limited experiments also were made with syncom hi, which was in a position to relay messages from Saigon to Camp Roberts, Calif, syncom ii was being used on a virtually 24-hour basis, dod had been experimenting with syncom II for months—before installation of Saigon station, when syncom ii relayed messages between Manila and points in the U.S., and even earlier, when the satellite relayed military communications over the Atlantic Ocean. (Bus. Wk., 9/12/64; Finney, NYT, 9/29/64,4) During September: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, described use of nuclear energy in space propulsion and electric-power generation: “We have observed repeatedly how a given technology has been advanced 'by the military requirements and how this technology is later borrowed for consumer products. However, these underlying technologies may be catalyzed with equal effectiveness by significant peacetime objectives set by the President, as exemplified by the Nation’s space program. “Therefore, the nation must support activities during peacetime which have as their purpose large-scale technological goals separated from commercial and military needs. The application of nuclear energy to space exploitation offers such a goal—one which can provide enormous subsidiary benefits in addition to opening the gateway to deep space.” (GE Forum, 7/9/64,15-17)
Senator John Stennis (D.—Miss.) said on the floor of the Senate:	* “In exploring space, our Nation as well as any other nation is straining at the state-of-the-art and technology. We are moving into a medium where relatively little is known. As we move into such a medium we are confident that we can stay abreast in the field of scientific discovery and its application to space with any other nation. In this medium it is not a case of being able to defend ourselves by building ten planes to every five planes of a potential aggressor nation or five ships to two ships or three tanks to one tank in order to establish our superiority. By staying abreast of advancements in science and technology our Nation will be able to prevent any surprise in this new medium. Our national space program is geared to this accomplishment. As for the present, our Nation subscribes to the philosophy that space should be explored for peaceful purposes, and we will do so. However, should an aggressor attempt to utilize this medium for warlike activities in the future, I am confident that our Nation will be prepared to defend itself.” (CR, 8/5/64)
NASA Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock announced appointment of James T. Dennison as Director of Technology Utilization, erc. Dennison joined NASA in May 1963 as a consultant and had been serving as acting director of Technology Utilization Div., NASA Hq. Appointment was effective Nov. 1. (nasa Release 64-244)
Museum of Modern Art in New York opened exhibition titled “20th Century Engineering,” which featured 195 spectacular and dramatic structures combining beauty with utility. NASA Langley Research Center wind-tunnel was represented among the dams, antennas, observatories, skyscrapers, and other structures. (Huxtable, NYT, 6/30/64, 29)
Seventh anniversary of the Space Age—orbiting of sputnik i by the U.S.S.R. on Oct. 4, 1957. Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin said in Trud interview that U.S.S.R. was preparing a manned space flight: “We are working and making studies and are preparing for a new launching. It is not our custom to advertise, but I’ll tell you that new and more complicated research work is in store for us.” (upi, Chic. Trib., 10/5/64)
NASA Lewis Research Center was investigating several techniques for producing flexible, thin-film solar cells. One of the techniques being investigated was sputtering, which required absolutely clean atmosphere and a low pressure of inert gas. Sputtering apparatus in which controls were fully automated—rigidly controlling pressure, temperature, and voltage in relation to each other—had been built at Lewis. With this equipment, researchers were attempting to increase efficiency of thin-film cells to that of silicon cells, (lrc Release 64-28)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, described in Astronautics & Aeronautics the future space capabilities being developed for the U.S. through Project Apollo. The Saturn IB, Saturn V, and Apollo manned spacecraft would provide capabilities including extended lunar explorations, orbiting laboratory research, manned escape missions, and long-duration operations—including satellite inspection and repair. (A&A, 6/64,26—29) During June: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said in Scientific American article on the supersonic transport that NASA Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center had “devised several aerodynamic designs for what they call a scat, which is an acronym for ‘supersonic commercial air transport.’ Four of these designs, known as scat’s 4, 15, 16, and 17, are the products of eight years of research. Each design has characteristics that make it somewhat different from the others.. . . . “nasa engineers conducted extensive wind-tunnel tests of the four scat models at the Langley and Ames centers to evaluate and compare their aerodynamic characteristics. ... It is evident that we must discover how to combine the supersonic L/D [lift-drag ratio] characteristics of scat 4 with the subsonic performance of scat 16. We are optimistic that this can be done. . . . Discussing special structural problems of sst designs, Dr. Bisplinghoff said the metal fatigue would be accelerated under exposure to high temperatures of supersonic flight, hut at the same time it was essential that the airframe provide safety and serviceability for more than 10 yrs. or 30,000-50,000 hrs. flying time. “Prolonged screening of materials by NASA’s Langley and Lewis laboratories has identified a titanium alloy that appears to meet the unique and stringent requirements for strength, stiffness and high temperatures of an sst. The alloy contains 90 percent titanium, 8 percent aluminum, 1 percent molybdenum and 1 percent vanadium. . . .”	(Sci. Amer.,
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects Laboratory, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded the Hermann Oberth Medal by the West German Association for Rocket Research Technique and Space Flight at annual meeting of West Berlin’s Scientific Association for Air and Space Flight. (Reuters, Houston Post, 9/17/64)
nasa launched 250-lb. instrumented Ram (Radio Attenuation Measurement) spacecraft on a ballistic trajectory from Wallops Island, Va., on a three-stage rocket system. Experiment was one of series to investigate the problem of communications through the ionized plasmas created when a spacecraft re-enters earth’s atmosphere at high velocities. Spacecraft was to attain top speed of 18,400 fps. Preliminary data indicated the vehicle and payload performed satisfactorily; the flight lasted ahoul 10 min. and impact occurred approximately 650 mi. east of Bermuda. Plight measurements, telemetered to ground receiving stations would be reduced and analyzed at Langley Research Center, which designed and built the spacecraft. Ram series was under LaRC direction for NASA’s Office of Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Release 64-65; Wallops Releases 64-29 and 64-34)
nasa announced $300,000 contract award to Wayne State University to establish program to accelerate industrial application of aerospace-related technology. Organized under Wayne State’s Center for Applications of Science and Technology, the program would receive and would process technical information through NASA; evaluate applicability of the information to prospective industrial users; and train applications engineers to match needs of specific industries with specific innovations or new knowledge, (nasa Release 64-23)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center accepted the first of three new F-l rocket engine test stands at NASA’s engine test site at Edwards AFB, Calif. (M&R, 3/30/64,17)
Senate passed H.R. 11296 (FY 1965 appropriations for independent offices), after rejecting (69-20) amendment sponsored by Sen. William Proxmire to reduce NASA funds by $68,594,000 for Research and Development; by $17,880,500 for Construction of Facilities; and by $13,525,500 for Administrative Operations. As passed by the Senate, NASA appropriations for FY 1965 amounted to $5.3 billion, divided as follows: r&d, $4,413,594,000; CofF, $262,880,500; and AO, $623,525,500. Bill was sent to conference. (CR, 8/5/64, 17554-77)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert said in address at sixth Air Force Academy Assembly: “It is not possible to predict the course of events, but there are certain points I want to make tonight that might serve as benchmarks. “First, the nation has no choice but to pursue the almost limitless possibilities of space with energy and imagination. “Second, we must do everything possible to prevent exploitation of space for aggressive purposes, and be prepared to defend freedom in space. “Third, the emerging defense responsibilities in space exemplify and extend the requirements for professionalism in the military, focusing sharply on the mutual responsibility of the military and civilian professionals in science, industry, and government. “Fourth, despite the appeal of space exploration, we must continue to increase our investment of brains and money in the effort to build a a decent life on earth if this nation is to continue as leader of an expanding free world on the earth.” (Text)
NASA Summer Faculty Fellowships, a unique 10-wk. summer program, began at Lewis Research Center. The 12 Fellows, all young professors and instructors in engineering and the physical sciences, would work on space research projects at lrc and would attend a special graduate level course in chemical rocket technology at Case Institute of Technology. (lrc Release 64-53)
Four consecutive full-duration F-l engine test firings at new Rocket Engine Test Site at Edwards, Calif., demonstrated the operational readiness of the site, which was officially accepted by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wernher von Braun from the Army Corps of Engineers. In the ceremonies, Dr. von Braun assigned site operation responsibilities to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., which would use the site for qualification firings of F—1 rocket engines. {Marshall Star, 10/14/64,10; nasa Release 64-259)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed the American Assembly Student Conference at the Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs: “. . . in assessing the future one can always learn from the past, and if the thoughtful student of history learns anything from a review of the march of human progress, it is that the ultimate potential of contemporary undertaking is almost never perceived. “So, I believe, it is with research and exploration in space. . . . “Today, 500 years after Prince Henry and his use of the caravel to initiate die Oceanic Age, 400 years after Copernicus presented his theories about the solar system, 300 years after Newton worked out the formula for space flight, but less than 40 years after Goddard devised the vehicle to make it possible, man has left the earth, and widened his horizons to include the entire solar system. “Science today has at its disposal a modem caravel, the chemical rocket, which has already traveled to the moon and Venus. And, as with Henry and his explorations, we have improved navigation systems to guide them out and bring them back to make steadily more accurate measurements of the environment of space—that environment through which Gargarin and Glenn and others traveled, and through which our own planet, Mother Earth, is also traveling around the sun at the relative speed of 67,000 miles per hour. “And to complete the parallel, just as Prince Henry inaugurated an Age of Discovery which led man to all the seas and continents of the earth, and into the atmosphere up to twice the height of his tallest mountains, so have we today embarked on a new Age of Discovery in which there is no foreseeable horizon. . . .” (Text; CR, 4/6/64, 6686)
Kennedy Space Center, NASA, awarded $3,061,826 contract to LingTemcoVought’s Range Systems Div. for services at Merritt Island Launch Area: automatic data processing, technical information, photographic support, and printing plant operation. The one-year contract would be renewable for two more years through annual options. (SBD, 2/25/64, 296)
In Senate debate, Senator Frank Lausche (D.-Ohio) criticized NASA’s refusal to divulge to congressional space committees its documents concerning the selection of Boston as the site of the Electronic Research Center. He called NASA’s consideration of requests of other states for the installation “a mere front” hiding the fact that the decision had already been made. Senators Keating and Javits (R.-N.Y.), and Case (R.-N.J.) joined Lausche in criticizing NASA’s refusal to divulge the contents of its site selection studies. (CR, 6/2/64, 11951-52; upi, Boston Globe, 6/2/64)
NASA selected Genisco, Inc., to develop, fabricate, and assemble motion generator for research into guidance and psycho-physiological problems of manned space flight. The fixed-price contract was expected to be valued between $6 million and $6.5 million. Genisco had been selected last July for contract negotiations for the motion generator, major component of advanced space navigation simulator at NASA Ames Research Center; however, “during the negotiations a better understanding of the design problems was reached and it was determined that numerous changes were desirable.” NASA then directed Ames to request revised proposals from the five bidders. When the companies submitted new proposals in January, Genisco again received highest technical rating and proposed the lowest fixed fee. (nasa Release 64-35)
NASA purchased hingeless rotor helicopter, the XH—5 IN Research Vehicle, from Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for use in flight research at LaRC. The cost would be $556,158. It would be used as a flying laboratory to assess the loads and flying qualities problems that are likely to be encountered by operational aircraft of the hingeless rotor type. (NASA Release 64-147; LaRC Release)
Second rocket in India’s space program, a Nike-Apache, was launched from Thumba Range on southern tip of Indian peninsula, releasing sodium vapor clouds used to study high-altitude conditions. The Nike-Apache’s peak altitude was estimated at 106 mi. The Physical Research Laboratory of Ahmedabad provided the instrumented payload for the NASA rocket, (nasa Rpt. SRL; Reuters, NYT, 1/9/64, 15)
Glide parachute achieved glide ratio of up to 2:1 in wind-tunnel tests at NASA Ames Research Center, it was reported. Northrop Ventura, the parachute developer, was proposing it to NASA for later phases of Project Gemini, (arc; M&R, 4/6/64,25)
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and NASA announced the award of a contract for master planning of NASA’s $60 million Electronics Research Center to the joint venture firms of Edward Durell Stone, New York City; Giffels and Rossetti, Detroit; and Charles A. Maguire Associates, Boston-Providence. The contract was awarded by the New England Division of the Corps of Engineers, which had been designated by the Electronics Research Center as NASA’s design and construction agent for the buildings to be located on a 29-acre site at Kendall Sq., Cambridge, Mass, (nasa Release 64-307)
Douglas Aircraft Co. Missile and Space Systems Div. received nine-month study contract from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to study methods of uprating Saturn IB space vehicle and S-IVB Saturn stage. (Av. Wk., 8/31/64, 23)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, discussed NASA organization, management, procurement, and programing. “The management and programing processes . . . require continuing program support, assuming reasonable accomplishment by NASA compared with our stated goals. Little that we start in one year is completed in that year. On the average, flight projects require three or more years prior to launch, while total programs have a life of ten to fifteen years. The governmental process for allocating resources can lead to a funding pattern at odds with this inherently long-duration need. We plan to accomplish major objectives over the period of a decade, but we must tailor our actual accomplishment to those resources that we receive annually. “A budget of $5,445 billion, in our estimation, provides the necessary increment of resources to support the technical program .... This is divided into $141 million, requested as our FY 1964 supplemental, and a $5,304 billion budget for FY 1965. During the preparation of this budget, we were asked by the President to make major cost reductions, in part by introducing improved management practices. This was done prior to submission of the President’s budget, and the estimated cost savings are therefore reflected in our budgetary request. . . . Within these estimates, we propose to carry out this year’s increment of NASA’s program of aeronautical research, advanced technological development, space hardware development, and space exploration.” (Testimony)
In lead editorial on the RANGER vii flight, New York Times lauded the success of the experiment but expressed the opinion that the flight once more emphasized the possibilities for international cooperation in such efforts: “. . . Proud as this country has reason to be of Ranger 7’s accomplishment, we can only conjecture how much more rapidly and cheaply its photographs could have been obtained had Soviet and American scientists been able to pool their efforts and resources years ago, rather than being required to pursue their efforts in competitive— and costly—isolation. The ease for a unified international effort to reach the Moon—as urged by Presidents Kennedy and Johnson—is strengthened by every consideration of the needless waste and duplication that have marked humanity’s space exploration to date.” (NYT, 8/1/64,20)
NASA pilot Joseph A. Walker flew Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv) at NASA Flight Research Center. Total free-flight time in this first test was less than one minute, the llrv rising 10 ft. (M&R, 11/16/64, 8)
B. K. 0. Lundberg, Director General of the Aeronautical Research Institute of Sweden, predicted at Aviation/Space Writers Association in Miami that more than 15,000 passengers would be killed each year by the year 1990 unless aviation safety was improved. Deploring the aviation industry’s emphasis on supersonic transport development (“we are now apparently on the verge of plunging ourselves into a supersonic adventure”) , he stressed that the “No. 1 challenge to aviation and the aeronautical scientists” was aviation safety, and urged the world to adopt “new, radical and long-term aviation safety policy.” (Morrow, NYT, 5/31/ 64,78)
NASA and General Electric Co. announced they had accomplished precision tracking of explorer xxii with a laser device. Tests were conducted at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center using a ruby laser mounted on a telescope. With the telescope aimed along the predicted path, the laser was flashed several times as explorer xxii, containing an array of corner reflectors, passed overhead. The reflectors, made of quartz crystal, were designed to return the beam of the laser almost exactly where it came from. The optical signals were displayed on an oscilloscope. As the laser pulse traveled from the telescope to the satellite, then back to the ground, the elapsed time measured could be converted into distance. Expected accuracy was within 10 ft. {Chic. Trib., 12/7/64)
Sen. Mike Monroney (D.-Okla.) told American Fighter Aces Association, Washington chapter, that aviation was “short-changed” in research and development. He urged that more NASA effort go into aeronautical r&d, particularly on the supersonic transport, “nasa means National Aeronautics and Space Administration. I’m worried about what’s happening to the A-for-Aeronautics.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/25/64)
Addressing American Ordnance Association in Washington, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “It is my thesis that mutual disarmament—and prudence dictates that there should be no other kind—would greatly increase the flow of funds and effort into space exploration and into the building of greater space capability. This does not necessarily mean a full transfer of all available resources to space applications. But, just for illustration, suppose that there were a 10% decrease in weapon systems spending. With good planning at least half of it could be diverted smoothly and efficiently into an increased space effort. With greater difficulty, the remainder might be directed toward mending other inadequacies in our society. . . . “I am an avid supporter of the private competitive enterprise system. I also am an avid supporter of a responsible government which creates a climate in which the private system can work efficiently. My proposal to accelerate space activity to offset decreases in weapon system activity does not conflict with my support of private enterprise. In fact, it supports it, even though the funds would pass through government hands in ffie process. The basic objective is to strengthen our country. . . . “In conclusion, let me emphasize: “First. Disarmament, in the form of decreased production of weapon systems, does not need to cause an economic depression. “Second. Resources made available as a result of decreased production of weapon systems could most effectively be applied to accelerated development of space systems. “Third. While it is important to keep private industry healthy, government financing of research and development is not in conflict with such objectives. In fact, it may well stimulate increased production and increased employment by private companies. “And finally, I do not suggest that there should be a sharp increase in spending for space. But I do believe space spending should increase at a rate at least consonant with the increase in our gross national product, not only because increase in the gnp makes resources available for more space activities, but also because space exploration itself stimulated the gross national product.” (Text)
usaf announced that Aerojet General Corp. would receive a $2,744,000 increment to a previously awarded contract for research and development for the Titan III transtage engine, from Ballistic Systems Div. of Air Force Systems Command, (dod Release 888-64)
NASA designer of echo i, William J. O’Sullivan, said he believed the satellite still had its spherical shape after over four years in orbit. An optical investigation made by the Goodyear Aerospace Corp. for NASA Langley Research Center indicated that the satellite’s aluminum surface—which made the balloon highly reflective of light and radar waves, regulated its temperature, and protected the plastic film from space hazards—still reflected like a mirror. From calculations using the known reflective characteristics of echo I when it was launched and his interpretation of the Goodyear measurements, O’Sullivan concluded that echo I “is still essentially spherical and that its very thin coating of aluminum has suffered no measurable degradation in specularity or reflectivity.” (LaRC Release)
NASA announced appointment of Jennings Pemble Field, Jr., as Director of Gemini Program Control in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight. In this position Field would be responsible for Gemini program costs and budget. Field was an executive of imc Industries, Inc.; from 1954 to 1963 he was with Bendix Corp., and from 1940 to 1954 he was a commissioned officer in U.S. Navy. (NASA Release 64-257)
In letter to Speaker of the House and President Pro Tempore of the Senate, NASA Administrator James E. Webb indicated NASA electronics research center should be located in the Greater Boston area. “It is our carefully considered opinion that to meet the specific requirements of the nasa program in respect to time and in respect to existing resources, the center should be located in the Greater Boston area.” In accordance with P.L. 88-113, NASA had reviewed some 50 locations as possible sites for the center, (nasa LAR III/18; upi, Houston Chron., 2/1/64)
100th flight of the X-15 rocket aircraft was conducted near Edwards afb, Calif., with Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF) as pilot. X-15 No. 1 reached 3,682 mph (mach 5.4) and 107,000-ft. altitude in its “fully successful mission.” The X-15 was launched over Delamar Lake, Nev., its engine burning 76 sec. and the flight lasting 11 min. X-15 program was initiated in December 1954 with signing of formal memorandum of understanding by naca, usaf, and usn. Contracts were awarded to North American Aviation for construction of three X-15 aircraft and to Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s Reaction Motors Div. for manufacture of rocket engines. X-15 was designed to fly at mach 6 and 250,000-ft. altitude, objectives often exceeded in flight. First powered flight of X—15 was made Sept. 17, 1959, by NAA test pilot A. Scott Crossfield. X—15 research program has provided information on aerodynamics, structures, flight control, and physiological aspects of highspeed, high-altitude flight. Follow-on program, begun in 1962, utilizes X—15 as test-bed for scientific experiments beyond earth’s atmosphere. (twx, frc to NASA Hq.; FRC Release 2-64)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, reviewed 1963 highlights in testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “Although direct measurements of the physical properties of the Moon await successful lunar flights, our Earth-based work has continued with some exciting results. Lowell Observatory scientists detected evidence of gas escaping from three different spots in the area of the lunar crater Aristarchus. This observation suggests that the Moon may be far from inert, and it has an important bearing on how we may conduct our lunar investigation. For example, if the Moon is seismically active, the seismograph may play an important role in the investigation of the lunar surface. . . . “Also, much effort was applied to clarifying the data from Earth-based or balloon observations of Mars. One important subject of controversy developed. Whereas it had been believed previously that the pressure at the surface of Mars is around 85 millibars, where 1000 millibars is roughly one atmosphere of pressure, it is now believed by many that the surface pressure on Mars may be as low as 10 or 11 millibars. This has serious implications with regard to landing a capsule on Mars. If the lower pressure is correct then retrorockets have to be used, whereas with the higher pressure atmospheric drag could be used to slow down the incoming capsule. “Significant new knowledge on the fundamental physical nature of the universe may have to await the launching of the first oao. In the meantime, sounding rocket experiments continue to provide data in ultraviolet and radio astronomy. . . . “Although the formal development of Scout had been completed, additional work was required to improve its reliability. The primary objective of the December 1963 Scout firing was to determine the efficacy of the measures taken to correct observed deficiencies. The virtually perfect vehicle performance during this firing encourages one to look for a high success rate in future Scout firings. . . . “Performance of all Atlas-boosted launch vehicles would be considerably improved by introducing a mixture of fluorine and oxygen (flox) as the oxidizer. Careful study shows this can be done with admixtures of up to 30% fluorine without major redesign of the propulsion system. We are, therefore, planning to flox the Atlas. A primary objective of this program is to provide for additional payload in the Surveyor investigations. . . .” (Testimony)
The Federal government was critized by National Academy of Sciences committee for plunging into such major undertakings as a moon expedition or a supersonic airplane without assessing the effects on the Nation’s limited scientific and engineering manpower resources. The study, made public by President Johnson, said that since the Govern. ment supported about three fifths of all those engaged in research and development, it had a “massive influence” on the deployment and utilization of scientists and engineers. This, in turn, imposed an “entirely new order of responsibility” upon the Government to prevent “malutili-zation” of the manpower and to achieve a “balanced allocation of scientific and engineering talent.” Two of the committee’s principal recommendations: (1)	Steps be taken by the Executive Office of the President to develop an integrated program for collecting and analyzing information about scientific and engineering manpower. (2)	“Before the government reaches a decision to undertake a great technological program, it should make a careful assessment of the impact of the decision on the deployment and utilization of scientists and engineers.” Nowhere in its report did the committee suggest that the lunar expedition had unduly diverted manpower from other fields; in fact, the report showed that slightly less than 30 per cent of the Nation’s scientists, engineers, and secondary school teachers of science and mathematics were engaged in defense, space, and atomic energy research, and that space accounted for less than 5 per cent. The study, an outgrowth of a request by President Kennedy in 1961 for a review of the Nation’s scientific and engineering manpower resources, was prepared by a 17-man committee headed by Dr. James R. Killian, Jr., science adviser to former President Eisenhower and no^v chairman of the corporation of mit. (Finney, NYT, 7/12/64, 1, 33; Carey, AP, Wash. Post, 7/12/64)
NASA Telephone and Data Distribution Center became first technical support element of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, to become operational on Merritt Island, KSC announced. Some buildings were being serviced by telephone service through the Center and other buildings would be phased in as required. Fully equipped to handle all types of communications, the Center participated in its first technical support operation during launch of Saturn I SA-5, when it provided closedcircuit television service to Washington and other areas, (ksc Release 11-64)
Dr. N. A. Kozyrev of Pulkovo Observatory, U.S.S.R., told conference on geological problems in lunar research in New York that volcanic activity was evident in two of the moon’s craters—Alphonsus and Aristarchus. Overall, he said, “the Moon had an internal energy which can be not less than the internal energy of the earth.” And from analysis of certain light wavelengths, he believed there was “significant volcanic activity on Venus and only slight activity on Mars.” (AP, Houston Post, 5/18/64)
Rep. Carl Albert (D.-Okla.) submitted in Congressional Record “An Accounting of Stewardship 1961—1964,” which included summary of U.S. accomplishments in space: “Since 1961 the United States has pressed vigorously forward with a 10-year, $35-billion national space program for clear leadership in space exploration, space use, and all important aspects of space science and technology. “Already this program has enabled the United States to challenge the early Soviet challenge in space booster power and to effectively counter the Soviet bid for recognition as the world’s leading nation in science and technology. . . .” Among the achievements listed: Saturn I rocket’s successful flight; Saturn IB and V development; mastery of liquid hydrogen as rocket fuel; six manned Mercury space flights; Gemini spacecraft and Titaq II launch vehicle test-flight; Apollo spacecraft development; first close-up observations of another planet (Venus) with mariner ii and pictures of the moon with RANGER vu; orbiting observatory program initiation; Tiros weather satellite operation; and ComSatCorp establishment. “In short, the United States has matched rapid progress in manned space flight with a balanced program for scientific investigations in space, practical uses of space, and advanced research and technological pioneering to assure that the new challenges of space in the next decade can also be met, and U.S. leadership maintained.” (CR, 9/15/64, 21498)
usaf predicted reddish spots on the moon—observed last October and November—would reappear June 4 and 5. usaf astronomers at Lowell Observatory planned to take color photographs of the recurrence as well as scan Aristarchus area of moon with sensitive photoelectric spectrograph to determine nature of the “spots.” (Finney, NYT, 2/25/64,
Cook Electric Co., Chicago, unveiled a $2 million observatory to be included in NASA’s first Oao. Cook built the equipment for NASA under contract to Univ. of Wisconsin, where astronomers were planning observations in the far ultraviolet region of the spectrum.	(Houston Post, 6/12/64)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, said in address at Commercial Museum, Philadelphia: “It takes a certain type of ability to manufacture plausible-sounding myths, and unfortunately such ability has been working overtime regarding the space program. . . .” He examined “several of these confusing rumors”: national security— “The critic who belittles what is being done in space to strengthen the nation’s defense is either ignorant, irresponsible, or both. . . . Progress of a substantial nature is being made in strengthening our national security through space competence”; crash program—“Crash programs have unlimited funds, unlimited overtime, and parallel approaches to the end objective. None of these aspects applies to the space program or even to the lunar project . . .”; either /or philosophy—“Actually investments stimulate other investments; they do not deter them. . . . What is more, decreased spending in education, for example, does not automatically increase the funds available for space exploration, or vice versa . . .”; and slowdown—“such an approach would be of great benefit to the Soviets as it would make it easier for them to increase their lead in some aspects of space and attain the lead in others. Do not think for a moment that they are not trying hard to do just that. So far this year, the USSR has put more than twice as many spacecraft into orbit as they had put into orbit by this time last year. In a sense, they are doubling their space effort. . . . To slow down a carefully planned project, such as Apollo, would be to increase its cost and reduce its likelihood of timely success. ... Those who propose the stretchout or slowdown in the space program are in fact arguing for inefficiency and higher costs as well as delayed accomplishments.” (Text) *	Appointment of Charles W. Harper, authority on simulation and aircraft flight research at NASA Ames Research Center, as Director of Aeronautical Research, NASA Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Technology, was announced by Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Release 64-239)
NASA Flight Research Center’s selection of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratories, Inc., for contract negotiations on general purpose jet airborne simulator system was announced. The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract was expected to amount to about $1 million. The new system would be installed in Lockheed Jetstar aircraft (C-140A), purchased last year for use in extensive flight research directed toward problems of a variety of aircraft types, including supersonic transport, (nasa Release 64-97)
Reporting its findings after series of hearings, Senate Subcommitte on Employment and Manpower forecast “a leveling off or actual decline” in the present $55 billion annual expenditure for weapons and space programs. Among the report’s predictions: thousands of scientists and engineers may have to seek jobs outside the aerospace industry; thousands of skilled workers may have to learn now trades; at least 10 states should plan now for converting to non-government markets. Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D.-Pa.), subcommittee chairman, said studies showed that “nearly one-tenth of the Nation’s work forces is employed in defense-related enterprise.” (Haakinson, AP, Wash. Post, 4/5/64)
The House Science and Astronautics Committee Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development made recommendations to equalize the national distribution of Federal research and development funds: that additional funds be budgeted to the National Science Foundation to ensure at least one major center of excellence in research and technology in each appropriate region of the nation; that dod and NASA emphasize building new centers of science and technology when existing facilities in research-concentrated areas become obsolescent. The Subcommittee also called for the White House to convene a Government-industry conference to study such problems. (M&R, 11/16/64,11) During November: A team from Lockheed Propulsion Co. visited NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to brief scientists there on possible use of 156-in. solid motor as a strap-on for the first stage of both Saturn IB and Saturn V. (M&R, 11/23/64, 7)
Aerospace Corp. confirmed rumors that Walter C. Williams, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight and veteran of 24 years’ service with NASA and naca, had resigned to become vice president of Aerospace Corp. and general manager of its Manned Space Systems Div. Williams’ resignation was effective March 16.	(Houston Chron., 3/15/64; Houston Post, 3/17/64; NYT, 3/16/64, 34; msc Roundup, 4/1/64,1)
NASA GSFC-launched 201-ft.-diameter balloon carrying 160-lb. experiment package from Moberly, Mo., at sunrise. The balloon flew at altitude of about 24 mi. over 300-mi. course, ejecting its payload on signal about 12 hours after launch. The experiment package contained instruments to record and store data on cosmic rays in the earth’s magnetic field, data which would be used to help map radiation fields around the earth and in space. Experiment payload was designed and built by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center; the balloon was launched Under onr’s “Skyhook” balloon flight program, (gsfc Release G—22-64; AP, NYT, 8/19/64; K.C. Times, 8/20/64)
NASA Lewis Research Center program of metal fracture toughness testing was helping make supersonic transport possible, according to William F. Brown, Jr., Chief of lrc Strength of Materials Branch. Co-author of paper on fracture toughness test methods with John E. Strawley, Head of Fracture Section at lrc, Brown said listening to amplified sounds of metal cracking under stress was one of the techniques of testing fracture toughness, (lrc Release 64-59)
NASA’s ogo I (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) was launched from Cape Kennedy by Atlas-Agena B rocket booster into highly elliptical orbit (92.721-mi. apogee, 175-mi. perigee, 621%-hr. period, and 31° inclination to the equator). The huge 1,073-lb. satellite carried 20 experiments, inaugurating new “space bus” series of standardized observatories capable of conducting many related space experiments simultaneously in space. However, one of ogoi’s long booms, one short boom including the omnidirectional radio antenna did not deploy. This resulted in abnormal operation of the automatic control system, and most of the control gas was used in attempting to lock the satellite into its earth-stabilized orbit. Project officials attributed the satellite’s inability to lock onto the earth to the fact that its earth-seeking sensor was obscured by one of the undeployed booms. Scientists decided not to attempt turning on experiments for several days while calculating contingency operations for a spin-stabilized satellite. (nasa Release 64-213; gsfc Release G-26-64; AP, NYT, 9/6/64, 26; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/8/64)
Discovery by two astronomers of what they believed to be the most distant object identified to date was announced. Thought to be several billion light-years away, the object—named 3C-147—was considered to be from 10 to 20 per cent farther away than 3C-295, previously considered the most distant object. Both objects were “quasistellar radio sources,” which produce 100 times the brightness and energy of an entire galaxy of 100 billion stars. Dr. Thomas A. Matthews located the new object by observing its radio emissions with Cal Tech’s twin antennas. Then Dr. Maertin Schmidt photographed the object from Mt. Palomar Observatory. (Sullivan, NYT, 3/30/64, 27)
At AIAA meeting and press conference, Dr. Bernard M. Wagner, Chairman of New York Medical College’s pathology dept., reported Soviets had decided not to send any more women cosmonauts into space. Soviet doctors were not satisfied with performance of Valentina Tereshkova, first woman cosmonaut. She had been too excited during the space flight, as seen by wide variations in her pulse rate, and she did not recover from effects of space flight as quickly as the male cosmonauts. Dr. Wagner visited in Moscow earlier in June at invitation of Prof. Vassily V. Parin, Director of Institute of Normal and Pathological Physiology. Dr. Wagner reported Prof. Parin, prominent in Soviet space program, believed artificial gravity would be necessary for astronauts on long space flights, and Soviet space planners were considering possibility of equipping Vostok spacecraft with centrifuge providing periodic spin of Ys earth’s gravity for the crew. Dr. Wagner added that Soviets were preparing for another manned space flight before the end of the year. (Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/30/64)
In conjunction with dedication of the Center of Science and Industry in Columbus, O., NASA Lewis Research Center sponsored a comprehensive exhibit of U.S. space program. The new center was designed as a museum of science, industry, health, and history, (lrc Release 6425)
NASA announced award of three-year, $3.6-million contract to Federal Electric Corp. for instrumentation support services to the Merritt Island Launch Area of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (nasa Release 64-156)
Final S-I booster in Saturn I rocket program was static-fired at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for its second and final time. The 156-sec. test was “entirely satisfactory.” This S-I stage, the second one built by Chrysler Corp. for NASA, would power the last (SA-10) Saturn I launch vehicle. First Saturn I booster was static-fired at msfc in April 1961. Today’s firing ended about three-and-a-half years of testing in which r&d and flight vehicles underwent a total of 55 firings for cumulative time of 3,867 sec. (Marshall Star, 10/14/64,1)
Japan successfully launched three-stage Lambda III, its largest and most advanced research rocket, on a flight to collect data on the upper layer of the atmosphere. The rocket attained an altitude of 600 mi. in the 17-min., 20-sec. flight from Kagoshima Space Center in Kagoshima Prefecture, Japan. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/12/64; NASA Off. Int. Aff.)
Three Soviet cosmonauts spent the day undergoing medical checks and post-flight examinations, following their 24-hour orbital space flight. (Clymer, Balt. Sun, 10/15/64)
Reception honoring Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of NASA Lewis Research Center, was held on his 35th anniversary of service with naca-nasa. (Lewis News, 1/YIJ(A, 3)
NASA announced it had assigned management responsibility for large solid rocket motor development to its Lewis Research Center. The 260-in. solid motor development was formerly a program of the Department of Defense. Under its FY 1965 budget, NASA assumed funding responsibility for the program; it would begin management responsibility for it next July. Two contracts for the program, with Aerojet General Corp. and Thiokol Chemical Corp. and initiated by the Air Force in June 1963, had been transferred to NASA. Smaller, 156-in. solid motor program continued under Air Force development. (nasa Release 64-231)
NASA announced appointment of Francis J. Sullivan as Acting Director of Electronics and Control Div., NASA Hq. The position was formerly held by Dr. Albert J. Kelley, who became Deputy Director of NASA’s new Electronics Research Center. Sullivan was Deputy Director of the division since November 1963. (nasa Release 64-276)
Permanent Hall of Science was dedicated at World’s Fair, New York City. Participating in dedication ceremony, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said the Hall of Science would “contribute to the understanding of those many disciplines which comprise modern scientific undertakings. . . .” Robert Moses, World’s Fair president, noted particularly the “extraordinary public interest in space exploration” in his remarks. (Webb Text; nasa lar III/172-78; NYT, 9/10/64)
NASA and Univ. of Texas signed contract for 84-in. optical telescope to observe the moon and planets. NASA would provide $2.1 million to build the telescope, and the University would provide $759,000 observatory building and $1.2-million associated shop buildings. Scheduled to be operational in 1968, the telescope would be fifth largest in the world. (M&R, 9/28/64,13)
Studies of two-stage recoverable lifting body space vehicle, by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center were reported in Aviation Week. Envisioned primarily as a passenger/supply space ferry, the system could be launched by track-mounted rocket sled or take off horizontally similar to conventional aircraft. Both stages would be manned, the first with only a flight crew and the pickaback second stage with 10-14 men and supplies. In this concept, both delta-shape stages would be recoverable. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 38)
President Johnson sent to Congress his proposed $5,304 billion authorization for NASA in FY 1965, $600 million less than NASA earlier had requested. The proposed legislation (H.R. 9641) was introduced in the House by Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) and referred to Committee on Science and Astronautics. Of this sum, $641,000,000 would be for administrative operations; $281,000,000 for construction of facilities; and $4,382,000,000 for research and development. Of R&D amount, $3,011,900,000 would be for manned space flight—$2,677,500,000 for Project Apollo; $308,400,000 for Project Gemini; and $26,000,000 for advanced missions. At press conference on the budget, NASA made public its plans to request $141 million supplemental appropriation for FY 1964, to restore some of the budget cut by Congress. The NASA position, as expressed by Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.: “We have now been cut back to a point where we’ll have to admit we cannot carry out the [lunar landing] program in this decade without the full support of Congress for the supplemental and for our 1965 request.” Of supplemental request, $31 million would be for Apollo spacecraft development and the rest for Saturn launch vehicle. (NASA LAR III/7; Finney, NYT, 1/16/64, 1; WSJ, 1/16/64; Dodd, Chic. Trib., 1/16/64)
Atlas D launch vehicle sent NASA’s 200-lb. Project Fire spacecraft more than 500 mi. into space from Cape Kennedy in test to provide data on re-entry heating of spacecraft returning from the moon. As the spacecraft fell back to earth, a solid-fuel Antares II motor ignited for 30 sec. to hurl it through the atmosphere at the speed of 37,800 fps (about 26,000	mph). With exterior heating at estimated 20,000 degrees, instruments in spacecraft interior relayed data back to earth while cameras and other instruments recorded the “flaming meteor” descent. About 32 min. after launch the Project Fire craft impacted in the Atlantic more than 5,200 mi. from the launch site. Dr. Raymond L. Bispling-hoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, commented that the experiment, conducted by NASA Langley Research Center, “recorded the highest speed ever reached by a manmade object in free flight.” In conjunction with the Project Fire test, NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched to 97-mi. altitude from Ascension Island. Its instrumented payload, provided by Univ. of Michigan, measured pressure, temperature, and density in the equatorial atmosphere using pitot-static probe technique. (NASA Release 64-69; AP, Wash. Post, 4/15/64; Cine. Enqr. 4/16/64, nasa Rpt. srl)
House of Representatives voted (283-73) to approve nasa FY 1965 budget authorization of $5,193,810,500. It defeated the only two amendments offered: one proposed by Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R.—111.) to delete the $14 million for the new Electronics Research Center in the Boston area; and one proposed by Rep. Henry S. Reuss (D.-Wis.) to eliminate the $24.7 million for aeronautic R&D on supersonic transport aircraft. (CR, 3/25/64, 6071-6123)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in Space Business Daily interview that use of Centaur as a third stage for Saturn IB launch vehicle was now a “matter of study with a serious approach to the various alternatives” it could serve. He mentioned one such use might be as a booster for logistics support vehicle called Stay Time Excursion Module (stem) for establishment of lunar bases. Dr. Mueller also disclosed that payload for Saturn SA-10 flight had been changed from an Apollo boilerplate to a micrometeoroid detection satellite (mds), supplementing those for Saturns SA-8 and SA-9. Added mds was to further confirm that skin thicknesses on boosters and spacecraft can be reduced, thus trimming weight requirements for Project Apollo. (SBD, 4/15/64,83)
Appointment of Lt. Gen. Frank A. Bogart (USAF) as Special Assistant to Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight announced by NASA. Appointment would become effective shortly after his retirement from USAF Oct. 31. General Bogart would be concerned with industry relationships and special management problems of program control and contracting. (NASA Announcement 64-255)
S-I booster for Saturn I SA—9 was test-fired for 30 sec. in its initial firing at NASA JVlarshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. This S-I was the last Saturn I booster built by msfc; future stages were being built by Chrysler Corp., and would be shipped to Huntsville for static firings. Since the first Saturn I booster firing March 28, 1960, msfc had conducted more than 50 firings on eight flight S-I’s and one ground-test booster, all of which were assembled at MSFC. (Marshall Star, 3/18/64, 1)
Formation of a National Academy of Engineering under the charter of the NAS was announced by Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academy of Sciences, and Dr. Augustus B. Kinzel, President-elect of the National Academy of Engineering. Among the founding members were Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, and Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, (nas-nrc Release; Wash. Post, 12/12/64, 20)
NASA announced appointment of two directors in Advanced Manned Missions Program, Office of Manned Space Flight. M. J. Raffensperger assumed duties last week as Director of Manned Earth Orbital Missions Studies. F. P. Dixon would become Director of Manned Planetary Mission Studies on June 15.	(NASA Release 64-137)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb addressed Missouri Cotton Producers Association in Sikeston, Mo.: “Whether the Russians are attempting to build a rocket and spacecraft to match Saturn V and Apollo, we simply do not know. When they start flight tests of such a rocket, we should be able to identify it. Flight tests of our Saturn V will not begin until the 1967-68 period, and it is quite possible that the Russians may also be testing a super rocket by then. “This much we do know: It would be very foolish on our part to sit idle or to delay the Saturn V until we could confirm that the Soviets were also building super rockets. By that time, it would probably be too late for us to match them again in this century. “In our national space program we are moving rapidly and vigorously to do the things we need to do as a nation to prevent technological surprise, to prevent another major Soviet initiative based on space superiority. “We believe that peace and security and the possibility of useful cooperation with the Soviet Union all depend on our making doubly clear that they can hope to have no monopoly of space achievement to exploit for the purposes of communism. “Some people seem to think that our present space effort can be justified only if we are in a neck-and-neck race to the moon. These people miss the point. Our aim is not to race the Soviets, but to thoroughly discourage them from making an all-out effort to use space as a political, propaganda, or military weapon for greater power on earth. “I don’t believe the American people are investing $20 billion in the Saturn-Apollo program of manned space flight in this decade just to keep even with the Soviets. I think the American people want to lead, and lead without doubts and excuses. . . .” (Text)
Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, NASA, asserted that “we learned we had more work to do” in commenting on the fact that one engine in the Saturn I booster (SA-6) had shut down prematurely. Because the Saturn I booster was designed to operate successfully with one engine out, no damage was done by the early shutoff and the test was successful. (Houston Post, 6/2/64)
Langley Research Center aerospace engineer Dewey L. Clemmons, Jr., presented a paper at the Symposium on the Establishment of a European Geodetic Network for Artificial Satellites held in Paris, France, describing the U.S. Passive Geodetic Satellite (Pageos) planned for launch during the first half of 1966. He said: “The satellite will be an aluminum-coated sphere 100 feet (30.48 meters) in diameter, a near replica of echo I (1960 Iota 1) that was launched by the United States on August 12, 1960. No instrumentation will be attached to the surface of the Pageos satellite. Pageos will serve the geodesist by simply acting as a point source of light in the sky as it reflects the incident sunlight. Simultaneous photographs of this light source against the star background, taken by two or more widely separated ground-based cameras, will enable geodesists to determine the spatial coordinates of each camera position. An interconnected series of camera positions can be established that will cover the entire surface of the earth, thereby permitting geometric determination of each camera position within a single reference system. The use of this satellite for geodetic purposes will continue for at least five years during which the necessary photo-grammetric observations can be made and to provide a purely geometric determination of the shape and size of the earth.” (Text; AP, NYT, 12/15/64,41)
NASA Lewis Research Center undertook supervision at Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, Sunnyvale, Calif., of the design and development of a metal shroud section to replace the fiberglas section in Mariner 4. Investigations had indicated that the fiberglas fairing of mariner ill probably had structural failure when exposed to the flight environment and that this prevented shroud separation from the spacecraft, (ksc Release 206-64)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded an honorary degree by Iowa Wesleyan College. (MarshaU Star, 6/17/64,1)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Space Operations Control Center established that Soviet lunik iv spacecraft, launched April 21, 1963, was in a barycentric orbit—i.e., orbiting around the center of gravity (4,600 km. from earth’s center) of the earth-moon system. This unusual orbit was apparently a coincidence, because final Tass announcement about the probe had said it would become a satellite of the sun. (gsfc, and msfc SIN, 4/64,15-16)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of nasa Lewis Research Center, was awarded honorary Doctor of Applied Science degree by Fenn College, Cleveland, O.	(Lewis News, 6/19/64, 2)
NASA conducted three grenade experiments with Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched from Wallops Island, Va.; Fort Churchill, Canada; and Ascension Island in the South Atlantic, part of current series to gather comparative data on high-altitude winds and atmospheric temperatures at widely separated locations. At Wallops Island, Nike-Cajun lifted off at 11:11 p.m. est, followed by Nike-Cajun at Fort Churchill at 11:17 p.m. est, and Nike-Cajun at Ascension Island, 11:18 p.m. est. Grenades were ejected and detonated at altitudes ranging from 23 to 56 miles. The series of experiments was under direction of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-11)
USAF fired advanced Minuteman icbm down the Atlantic Missile Range and 30 seconds later followed it with a Nike-Javelin sounding rocket to study the Minuteman’s exhaust. This was first in 16-test series, (upi, NYT, 4/1/64,60; M&R, 4/6/64,10)	. During March: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center received design recommendations for 24-man Large Orbital Research Laboratory (lorl) that could be operational by 1968—the six-month study conducted by Douglas Aircraft’s Missile & Space Div. and IBM’s Federal Systems Div. The cylindrical space station would operate under zero gravity conditions in a 260-mi.-high orbit. (Maloney, Houston Post, 3/21/64)
Republican Critical Issues Council of the Republican Citizens Committee, chaired by Dr. Milton Eisenhower, issued statement calling upon U.S. to abandon the 1970 goal of a manned lunar landing. It also called for increased international cooperation in space exploration: “. . . The exploration of our universe is a goal too vast, too hazardous, too costly, and too important to all mankind to be financed and conducted by one country alone, and least of all in an atmosphere of unfriendly competition.” Council also deplored claims for military value of space exploration : “We are aware of no compelling argument thus far for the development and deploying of weapons in space. . . .” (Text, CR, 5/28/ 64,11775-77)	_
His Excellency Philibert Tsiranana, President of the Malagasy Republic, toured NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and received briefings on the Goddard mission by GSFC Director Dr. Harry Goett. In his official party were his wife, the Malagasy Foreign Minister, their Ambassador to the U.S., and officials of the U.S. State Dept, and NASA Hq. (Goddard News, 8/10/64,1)
NASA announced selection of Lear Siegler, Inc., Electronics Instrumentation Div. for negotiation of contract to install new electronic systems and modify present systems at East Test Area of Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. Contract value was estimated to exceed $4,000,000. (nasa Release 64-59)
(1) Isolated locations and atmospheric dispersion, and “(2) Containment and neutralization. . . . “In . . . our nuclear propulsion activities, neither routine reactor development testing and flight operations nor conceivable accidents are expected to release sufficient radioactivity into the atmosphere to constitute a hazard to public health and safety. “In chemical propulsion, there are some propellants that are toxic prior to combustion and some rocket exhausts that contain toxic products. Fortunately, the NASA space program is primarily concerned with non-toxic propellants. In our largest program, the Apollo effort, for example, the giant Saturn I and V boosters both bum oxygen and kerosene in their first stages and oxygen and hydrogen in their upper stages. The Apollo spacecraft uses toxic nitrogen tetroxide and a mixture of hydrazine and unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine, but the quantity is small compared to that used hy the Saturn boosters . . . [and is not used] until the Apollo is well into space under normal operation. . . . “In most rocket testing and in vehicle launches, the rocket exhausts directly into the atmosphere. The very high exhaust temperature and velocity serve to rapidly disperse the exhaust products. In some rocket testing we must simulate the low pressures encountered at altitude. In these facilities, the rocket exhausts into a duct where there is an opportunity to scrub the products with water before discharging into the atmosphere. A unique facility, an example of the containment and treatment method for use in populated areas, was built at the Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, for rockets using fluorine. This facility, put into operation in 1956, was designed to handle hydrogen-fluorine rockets up to 20,000 pounds thrust. . . .” (Testimony)
Testimonial dinner for Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, resigning to return to MIT as Dean of Science, held in Washington. For three years Dr. Wiesner had been Director of the Office of Science and Technology, Chairman of the Federal Council of Science and Technology, Chairman of the President’s Science Advisory Committee, Special Assistant to the President, and Acting Director for Telecommunications Management. (Miller, Wash. Daily News, 1/22/64)
Apollo spacecraft boilerplate command module and related equipment for first full-scale test flight of Apollo launch escape system arrived at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., where it would be flight-tested with Little Joe II booster, (msc Release 64-39)	•
First production J-2 rocket engine was accepted by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center from naa’s Rocketdyne Div., then turned over to Douglas Aircraft Co. for use in ground captive tests associated with Saturn S-IVB stage work. (Marshall Star, 5/6/64,1)
NASA announced Syncom C communications satellite would be assisted into proper orbit later this month by its sister satellite Syncom II, which would provide a reliable relay point in space for communications be« tween ground stations and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. NASA Syncom Project Officer H. N. Stafford said: “As far as we know, this is the first time one satellite has been used to help in the launch of another. Tiros satellites have been used to help predict weather before manned space flights. The Relay satellite carried pictures of the Cooper flight. But this appears to be the first case of direct use of a satellite in an operational role during a launch.” (NASA Release 64-204)
At the Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Afb, Ohio, four college men completed a test in which they lived on astronaut food for 28 days in a spacecraft type of capsule and 14 more days in hospital isolation. They ate what was called “freeze dehydrated foods” that came in one-in. cubes of beef, chicken, etc. Liquid was distilled water, tea, and fruit juices. No ill effects were apparent. (NYT, 11/27/64, 31)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists conducted interrogation of OGO I satellite through Rosman, N.C., tracking station, and 15 experiments were turned on to confirm their operation. Signals were weaker than previously received, because OGO i’s solar panels were not locked onto the sun; the satellite’s solar panels were successfully commanded to turn 42° into a more favorable sun angle, thus ensuring satisfactory power levels. As of this date, 19 of the 20 onboard scientific experiments had been turned on and had transmitted data, which were being evaluated by experimenters. (NASA Release 64-232; GSFC Release G-26-64)
A Japanese astronomer of the Kurashika Astronomical Observatory observed a new comet. It had been earlier sighted by an observer at Tokyo Astronomical Observatory on June 7, as well as by an Australian. On June 9, Soviet astronomer Anatoli Bakharev discovered what was described as a 9th-magnitude comet moving rapidly with respect to the stars. (AP, NYT, 6/15/64; Pravda, 6/13/64, 6, atss-t Trans.)
NASA announced that a 10-month study contract for $191,835 to assess the technological problems of designing, building, and operating a manned orbiting astronomical observatory had been awarded to the Boeing Co. Boeing would study possible ways in which such an observatory might he operated, with particular emphasis on the role of man in its scientific program. A requirement of the study was that the orbiting telescope be sufficiently adaptable to support a broad astronomical program. The study would assume that the telescope would be operated in conjunction with a proposed Manned Orbital Research Laboratory (morl) under study by NASA Langley Research Center for NASA Office of Manned Space flight. (LaRC Release)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in Tyler, Tex., that the U.S., “in the short space of three years, has more than tripled its industrial, scientific, engineering, and governmental space capability. This was accomplished through the close cooperation of what might be called the ‘triad’ of government, industry, and the university community, in carrying out the largest peacetime research and development effort in all history. Management techniques developed in coordinating this complex endeavor sure beginning to find their way into business and industrial executive processes. Experience has been gained that may prove useful in solving other difficult national and international problems... .” (Text)
In a speech to the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., NASA’s Director of Advanced Manned Earth Orbital Missions M. J. Raffensperger said: “Our limited flight experience to date indicates that any deleterious effects of space flight can be controlled, but man’s reaction to long-duration space missions is not yet quantitatively understood. Thus, the biomedical and behavioral areas must receive major attention in the earlier extended duration earth orbital flights.” Other areas that Mr. Raffensperger felt showed promise in providing beneficial returns to humanity were “research and observation of meteorology from a manned spacecraft” and “earth mapping and survey.” (Text)
Paul L. Styles, Chief of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s Industrial Relations Office, was named Labor Director of NASA. In the new position, which he assumed in addition to his present one, Styles would advise NASA management officials at Hq. and all field installations on all aspects of labor-management relations, also would serve as NASA representative with Dept, of Labor, nlrb, President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, and Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service. (NASA Release 64-14)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of Univac Div., Sperry Rand Corp., for negotiation of contract for Message Multiplexer communications processor systems. Final contract would call for Univac to supply, install, check out, program, and document two complete message handling systems to be installed in NASA communications switching centers at London and at an undetermined site in Australia. Contract was expected to amount to about $1.3 million, (csfc Release G-64-28)
At press conference, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center officials said nimbus I meteorological satellite was performing successfully and sending back cloud cover photographs of unexpectedly good quality. First nighttime pictures of cloud cover, made with the satellite’s infrared sensor, were comparable in quality and resolution to the TV pictures made by Tiros meteorological satellites. Unplanned orbit—eccentric rather than circular—reduced the satellite’s earth coverage from 100% every 24 hours to about 70%. (gsfc Press Conf. Transcript; Finney, NYT, 9/3/64,13)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $2 million contract to Motorola’s Western Military Electronics Div., to develop the Airborne Ranging Orbital Determination (arod) system. (M&R, 12/14/64, 21)
One-year program of general orientation for 60 recent university graduates beginning their professional careers at NASA Langley Research Center began with ceremony presided over by LaRC Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson. (LaRC Release)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell said in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications that some of the byproducts of space research included cure for some types of stuttering, diet that can sustain a man for a month on one cubic foot of synthetic chemicals mixed with water, and “fail-safe” method of producing oxygen and food for orbiting space stations through electrolytic splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen. (AP, Houston Chron. 2/26/64) Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R.—111.) noted in the House that House Committee on Science and Astronautics had approved NASA’s report providing for electronics research center in the Boston area. “There is, in my mind, still considerable question as to the need for this center. Furthermore, there is considerable question in my mind as to whether, if such a center is needed, as opposed to developing additional electronics capability at existing centers, the criteria used for selecting Boston as the site were sound. . . .” {CR, 2/25/64, A878)
Article in Pravda described Soviet radar observations of the planets Venus, Mercury, and Mars as “an outstanding achievement in Soviet science and technology.” The value of the astronomical unit was computed, as a result of radarastronomy measurements, to be equal to 149,599,300 km., with an error of ±2,000 km. Radar fixes on planets Mercury and Mars in June 1962 and February 1963 confirmed their reliability in determining the astronomical unit. First radio communications via Venus, transmitted in November 1962, also were described. Article was signed by M. Subbotin, Director, Institute of Theoretical Astronomy, and Member of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. (Pravda, 3/16/64,4, ATSS-T Trans.)
Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin told the Soviet parliament that expenditures for defense would drop by four per cent or 500 million rubles ($555 million) in 1965. He also declared that his government had acted after being informed by American officials that U.S. planned to reduce its military budget in the coming year. A spokesman for the U.S. Embassy said later that the embassy had no knowledge that such information had been given to the Soviet government. In his budget message, Premier A. N. Kosygin told the Supreme Soviet that “people of science must do a lot for us to be able to provide more material benefits for the satisfaction of the population’s growing requirements,” complained that the opportunities for doing this “have been by no means exploited.” After calling for scientific breakthroughs to the production process in chemistry, electronics, transistor technology, and biology, Kosygin said: “There are major shortcomings in scientific research planning. Our plans do not make use in good time of all that is progressive and useful in research discoveries. For this reason, scientific discoveries and technical inventions not infrequently become outdated and lose their practical worth. “Utilization of the latest achievements of science and technology should be made one of the main criteria in the appraisal of economic plans and their fulfillment. Unfortunately, many people employed in industry continue to regard further capital investments as the main and only source of increased output and do not really strive hard for the rapid introduction of scientific and technical achievements, which could produce a considerably greater effect than additional capital investments. Scientific and technical progress opens new horizons for a radical improvement in quality and an expansion of the range of goods produced.” (Av. Wk., 12/28/64,16; Tanner, NYT, 12/10/64; WSJ, 12/10/64)
Eighteen top business leaders accompanied by NASA officials toured NASA Michoud Operations as part of a Life magazine-sponsored visit of space facilities across the country. They were briefed by Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, and Dr. G. N. Constan, Michoud manager. (N.O. Times-Picayune, 12/4/64)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center officials successfully made the first of two final corrections in the orbit of syncom hi communications satellite, raising the satellite’s perigee closer to perfect circle 22,289 mi. above the earth. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/10/64)
William G. Gisel, President of Bell Aerosystems Co., said before N.Y. Society of Newspaper Editors, Niagara Falls: “I cannot contemplate the space exploration project , . . without a tremendous surge of pride in the human race. We are going to the stars, gentlemen. The human race will travel to the planets and, in time, to other solar systems and in doing so will fern the spark of greatness which in spite of ourselves has carried us from the cave to the threshhold of space. Man can go to the moon in this decade. The important question is, will it be an American?” (nasa r&sc Div.)
NASA announced Saturn contract modifications totaling $16,448,169 had been awarded to Chrysler Corp. Space Div., which was assembling two Saturn I first stages and 12 Saturn IB first stages at NASA Michoud Operations. One award was for expansion of Chrysler’s Saturn booster reliability testing program at Michoud. Other two awards were for increased engineering support at Marshall Space Flight Center and John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (nasa Release 64-48)
NASA engineers at the Goddard Space Flight Center were puzzled 'by the question of how a colony of fleas managed to infiltrate a special chamber which was supposedly protected against invasion even by bacteria. The chamber had been designed and installed to test, under conditions simulating those of space, optical equipment to be placed on board the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory. One possible explanation for the presence of the fleas suggested that they entered concealed in the fur-lined parkas worn by technicians adjusting equipment inside the low-temperature chamber. (Wash. Daily News, 6/2/64)
dod announced $1,245,601 contract award to B. B. McCormick and Sons, Inc., for road work at Merritt Island Launch Area, John F. Kennedy Space Center, nasa. The NASA-funded contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers, (dod Release 699-64)
It was announced that a new ultraviolet radiation spectrograph had been developed at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center in an effort to solve the mystery of “airglow.” The spectrograph would be carried aloft by a rocket and would be expected to reveal the constituents and mechanisms of the airglow. (nana, San Diego Union, 11/29/64)
House adopted by voice vote the conference report on NASA FY 1965 authorization bill (H.R. 10456) and sent bill to Senate. Senate adopted conference report, clearing bill for President’s signature. Bill provided nasa authorization of $5,227,506,000 of which $4,341,100,000 was for research and development, $622,880,500 was for construction of facilities and $623,525,500 was for administrative operations, (nasa LAR III/133)
usaf Titan III-A space booster was launched from Cape Kennedy and executed its first completely successful test flight. Midway in its first orbit, approximately 115 mi. above the earth, the 5,250-lb. “transtage” (a third stage with multiple start-stop-restart capability and ability to transfer a payload from one orbit to another) performed a 360° somersault to align the platform’s inertial guidance system gyroscopes. At the end of its first 100-min. orbit, explosive charges automatically kicked a 3,750-lb. cylinder-shaped dummy satellite into a separate orbit. After the Titan III-A firing, Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, project director, said: “The success confirmed our confidence in the system. We feel that the Air Force now has a real purpose in accomplishing space missions.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/11/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/11/64; AP, NYT, 12/11/64,20)
In a House debate over the patent policy for the proposed Water Resources Research Center, Rep. Chet Holifield (D.—Calif.) criticized current dod and NASA patent policies. He urged that the policy be revised to permit any industry to “use any kind of a device or any kind of a patent procedure which is paid for by federal funds.” (CR, 6/2/64, 12045)
Experimental hot-electron propulsion system had completed 1,000 hrs. of testing at RCA David Samoff Research Center without degradation of components or performance, RCA announced. (NYT, 2/11/64, 53; M&R, 2/17/64,21)
U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS xlv into orbit, carrying scientific equipment to continue the space research program begun in March 1962. Initial parameters reported for the satellite’s orbits: apogee, 327 km. (203.067 mi.); perigee, 206 km. (127.926 mi.); period, 89.69 min.; inclination, 64°54'. (AP, NYT, 9/14/64; FonF, XXIV, 313)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced two firms would negotiate to provide three Satellite Telemetry Automatic Reduction Systems (stars) : Beckman Instruments, Inc., and Electro Mechanical Research, Inc. Negotiations with the two firms would lead to final selection of single contractor for 82.5-million award, (gsfc Release G—30-64)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences voted (10-4) to approve NASA’s report on the electronics research center. (House Science and Astronautics Committee had approved the report Feb. 24.) (nasa lar III/43)
Astronaut Russell L. Schweikart began week-long test of continuous living in a Gemini spacesuit. Before donning the spacesuit at Edwards afb, he had biosensors attached to his body. Among his activities for the test: experiencing weightlessness in F-104B aircraft, going through reproduction of a Gemini space flight in Manned Spacecraft Center mission simulator, and spinning in Ames Research Center centrifuge. (Maloney, Houston Post, 10/20/64)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed Project Apollo before the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space: “The overall time phasing ... is quite conservative. The Apollo spacecraft is being developed on a schedule four years longer than was needed for the Mercury spacecraft, and two years longer than was taken to produce the B-58 bomber. The Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles are being developed on a schedule two years longer than that of the Atlas missile, and a year longer than was required for the Titan. The total duration scheduled for the Apollo program is longer than that of any previous United States research and development effort. “The Apollo job, of course, is a big one and we will need all of the time allotted. . . . We found . . . that if the remaining six years of work [in Project Apollo] were stretched out over 12 years the total cost of the presently approved manned space (light program would increase by about 30 percent, or about six billion dollars. The economic considerations, therefore, support the maintenance of the present schedule. It is six billion dollars cheaper to continue on the course we are now following than to set out on a new course at this late date. . . . Among the benefits from Project Apollo is “the rapid advancement of United States capability in space—the ability to undertake whatever space activities the national interest may require. “There are seven major elements in this capability—people, industrial base, ground facilities, launch vehicles, spacecraft, operational know-how, and the ability to manage research and development. Together, they add up to space power, which provides this country with freedom of action in this new medium. . . .” (Text)
Neutron star, detected by x-ray instruments aboard sounding rocket launched last year from White Sands Missile Range, was discussed in paper delivered to National Academy of Sciences by nrl astrophysicist Dr. Herbert Friedman. The invisible star, located in constellation Scorpio, emits about 10 billion times more x-ray intensity than visible light, he said, and density of the star was probably about one billion tons to the cubic inch. Star’s surface was “so hot that practically all its luminosity is in the form of X-ray.” Another experiment to detect a suspected neutron star in the Crab Nebula was being planned for July 7. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/64; Haseltine, Wash. Post, 4/28/64; Sullivan, NYT, 4/28/64,19)	_	_
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director of NASA’s newly created Electronics Research Center, said in an interview with Missiles and Rockets that erc would issue between 35 and 40 contracts, averaging about 850,000 each for a total of 82 million, within the next four months. Most of the contracts were expected to run for one year. (M&R, 11/16/64, 10-11)
Thomas Jefferson Wong, 40, internationally known research scientist and head of manned Mars mission studies at nasa Ames Research Center, died after apparent heart attack. Mr. Wong had been with Ames for 13 years. [Palo Alto Times, 3/2/64)
Two NASA sounding' rockets were launched from Kronog&rd, Sweden, in early morning coordinated launchings. Nike-Apache with micrometeoroid-particle-collector payload reached 77-mi. altitude in conditions of moderate noctilucent cloud display. The payload impacted in a lake and was recovered safely, usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories and Stockholm Univ.’s Meteorological Institute cooperated in the experiment. Twenty minutes later, Nike-Cajun was launched with grenade payload to 80-mi. altitude, providing good data on atmospheric temperature, wind, air density, and pressure. Stockholm Univ.’s Meteorological Institute cooperated with NASA Goddard Space Flight Center in this experiment. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced at Hq. press conference that U.S.—U.S.S.R. communications experiments with echo II balloon satellite would begin after Feb. 21. In response to question, Mr. Webb said failure of attempts to acquire lunar photographs had not adversely affected Apollo schedule: “. . . up to this time we have not had to make any changes in the program due to this, nor do I think we will.” Asked whether 1969 date for manned lunar landing was a “deadline” or a “planning date”, Mr. Webb said: “The view President Kennedy had . .. was that he was setting a deadline by which he wanted this nation to get the job done, and he was providing resources for us to plan the flight in 1967, or early 1968, giving some leeway for intractable technical problems, for unknown and unforeseeable things, and also to avoid having to put into parallel development systems that would be more expensive if done that way. . . . “Now, the 1967, early 1968 target date that we were setting was to mobilize the effort, to press forward with it, but not to do so in such a way as to run this cost up from $20 billion to something much higher. “So we were thinking of it as pretty much of a deadline that it was in the interests of this nation to meet. “Now, with the cuts last year of $600 million and the reorganization of the effort to all-up systems testing, the cancellation of a number of Saturn flights, things of this kind, I think you’ve got to think of it somewhat differently. I think the target date for the flights, which is a tight date but still attainable, is mighty close to the January 1, 1970 period. “. . . I believe we can do it within the latter six months of 1969 if we proceed vigorously under the plan we have presented to the Congress. But again we don’t have any leeway. . . . We have lost that, and we’ve got no more than what I’d call a fighting chance to do this by January 1,1970.” Mr. Webb discussed NASA relationship with Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, manager of NASA’s lunar and planetary exploration programs. The current three-year contract “expires next June and we have now for some months been examining together with the California Institute of Technology ways and means to make a better relationship from their standpoint and from NASA’s standpoint.” Mr. Webb said NASA was seeking a reorganization of JPL to achieve a “hardheaded type of industrial management.” (Finney,- NYT, 2/12/64; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/12/64; Simons, Wash, Post, 2/12/64; M&R, 2/17/64, 16)	_	_
Douglas Aircraft Co. was awarded follow-on study contract for Manned Orbital Research Laboratory by NASA Langley Research Center, to refine the NASA concept and examine the feasibility of cylindrical six-man space station using equipment providing intermittent artificial gravity. Selection of Douglas for contract negotiation was announced last December. (larc Release)
Aerobee 300A vehicle launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 95-lb. instrumented payload to 192-mi. altitude in experiment to measure simultaneously electron and neutral particle temperatures in the upper atmosphere. Secondary objectives were to obtain data on ion and neutral particle densities. After 10%-min. flight, payload impacted 156 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Experiment was fourth in series of ionosphere studies, joint project of Univ. of Michigan and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-10)
Project Amos, arpa project to develop and operate full-scale infrared astronomical observatory, was described by Howard Simons in the Washington Post. To be installed on 10,000-ft.-high Mt. Haleakala on Hawaiian Island of Maui, the observatory would be used in twofold program: research in locating and identifying missile nose cones and satellites; and study of infrared characteristics of missiles and satellites as well as earth’s atmosphere, the sun, stars, moon, and planets. (Simons, Wash. Post, 2/9/64, E3)
Nicolai P. Erpilev, scientific secretary of the Astronomical Council of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, announced in Havana that the first Soviet satellite tracking station in Cuba would be installed in Havana in a special observatory and another one would probably be established later at Santa Clara. {NYT, 3/31/64,26) 766-698 O—65—■—9
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $9.2 million increase to contract with North American Aviation, Inc., calling for construction at Downey, Calif., of seven new buildings and modifications to existing structures to permit expansion of naa’s research and development. Naa is prime contractor for Apollo command and service module under contract signed with msc Aug. 14, 1963. (AP, Tulsa Daily World, 1/24/64)	_
Dr. Evelyn Anderson, research scientist at NASA Ames Research Center, was among the six distinguished' career women to receive Federal Women’s Award at banquet in Washington, (nasa Notice)
Albert J. Evans, NASA Acting Director of Aeronautics, said before Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “The Aeronautical Research effort of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has one specific goal: to provide technical information for use by the aircraft manufacturers of the United States, information which is sufficiently far advanced to permit the design and production of military and civil air vehicles which are superior to those of any other nation. “Our aeronautical program is classified in four broad disciplinary categories . . Aerodynamics, Structures, Air-Breathing Propulsion, [and] Operating Problems. “The resources utilized in accomplishing the NASA Aeronautical Research program are found primarily in the highly-competent technical staffs of the four Research Centers of the NASA. The in-house effort is supported, as required, by a certain amount of out-of-house contract research performed by universities, non-profit organizations, and private industry. The funds requested for the NASA Aeronautics program support these in-house and out-of-house research efforts. The program, however, is predominantly an in-house effort, conducted in the established framework of the theoretical and experimental research activity of the NASA Research Centers. . . .” (Testimony)
A Delta rocket’s third-stage motor (X—248) inexplicably ignited in checkout building at Cape Kennedy, burning 11 engineers and technicians, three critically. The rocket stage had just been mated with Orbiting Solar Observatory (Oso) in preparation for prelaunch spin testing, when the motor suddenly ignited, rose from the alignment stand, hit the ceiling knocking off the Oso, and landed in a far corner. NASA and usaf immediately began investigating the cause of the ignition, usaf said this was the “first serious incident of its kind in 14 years of operations and over 1,400 missile launchings” at the Cape. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star 4/14/64; AP, Wash. Post, 4/15/64; Goddard News, 4/20/64, 3; Marshall Star, 4/29/64,1,3)
Langley Research Center announced three key management appointments: Mr. Eugene C. Draley was appointed Assistant Director for Flight Projects; Dr. John E. Duberg was named an Assistant Director in charge of the research activities of the Dynamic Loads Div. and the Structures Research Div., and Mr. Francis B. Smith was appointed Assistant Director responsible for the Analysis and Computation Div., the Instrument Research Div., and the Space Mechanics Div. (larc Release)
Sen. Stephen M. Young (D.-Ohio) spoke in Senate of NASA’s selecting Boston as site for new electronics research center, charging that “there is little to indicate that thorough evaluation was given to potential locations distant from the Boston area” and pointing out that “in all respects, Cleveland eminently qualifies for this important new facility. . . Each time a new facility is proposed, we hear the same well-worn argument that it should go to an area which already has institutions with experience in this field. As a result a vicious cycle has formed, and it can almost be predicted that any new important space facility will go to Boston, Houston, or to California. . . . “Frankly, I am tired of the argument. I rise today to speak briefly in protest of what has been going on. . . .” (CR, 3/2/64, 3943-44)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of Reeves Instrument Co. for negotiations of $2.5 million contract for three 30-ft. Unified S-Band Antenna Systems. The antenna systems would be installed in tracking ships for Project Apollo, (gsfc Release G-64-29)
NASA awarded $158, 466,800 contract to North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. for production of 76 F-l rocket engines for the Saturn V launch vehicle. The action defined and detailed the procurement action initiated with letter contract in June 1962. Delivery of static-test engines to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had already begun, and the first flight F-l would arrive at msfc in November, (nasa Release 6448; Marshall Star, 4/1/64,1)
FAA Administrator N. E. Halaby announced National Academy of Sciences had assumed advisory capacity in connection with sonic-boom research program, at invitation of faa. First step in nas program would be review of sonic boom study now being conducted at Oklahoma City. (faa Release 64-50)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics was planning to hold further hearings on the NASA proposed electronics research center, although Committee Chairman George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) had described NASA Administrator Webb’s report to the Congress as “very comprehensive.” (M&R, 2/17/64,17)
Federation of Italian-American Democratic Organizations of New York presented to NASA a plaque honoring the late President Kennedy and Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci. The plaque, which commemorated Vespucci’s sighting the area now called Cape Kennedy, was accepted by NASA Administrator Webb in ceremonies at NASA Hq. (nasa Announcement 64-47. It was subsequently hung in the Hq. building of Kennedy Space Center, NASA; KSC Release 61-64)
NASA announced that space scientists had adopted a new analytical method— neutron activation analysis—to help them determine the presence and quantity of oxygen in alkali metals. General Atomics Div. of General Dynamics Corp. undertook this oxygen-identification problem under a contract from Lewis Research Center. ( lrc Release 64-102)
During annual meeting of international Committee on Space Research (cospar), which ended today, U.S. and Soviet scientists said manned space flights had raised the question of whether a man could tolerate more than five days in space, with present equipment. Scientists said astronauts showed effects of space flights, and last year’s five-day manned space flight by Soviet cosmonaut was about the longest that could be attempted safely now. (Levin, AP, 5/20/64)
Reported that John Stack of Republic Aviation believed U.S.S.R. probably would beat the West with supersonic transport. Stack revealed Soviets had developed 1,200-mph delta-wing bomber, “the Bounder,” which could quickly be converted into transport “because the Soviets have lower performance standards than the U.S. for their aircraft and are not worried about the effects of sonic booms on their cities.” (Parade, 5/31/64) During May: Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., recommended to NASA that a data collection satellite system could be provided by a single satellite in polar orbit between 500 and 700 n. mi. altitudes. Satellite would collect meteorological and oceanographic data from about 1,200 sensors per day, store the information on magnetic tape, then relay it upon command to ground station. Sylvania’s study was performed under $97,000 contract awarded last year by NASA. (M&R, 6/1/64, 11; SBD, 5/13/64, 68) . During May: Sert I (space electric rocket test) payload began final series of tests in large vacuum tank at NASA Lewis Research Center, in preparation for space flight later this summer. (Lewis News, 6/5/64, 2)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said the Florida Times-Union: “Any statement of what space exploration will be like 100 years from now is ... in the same league as crystal ball gazing. . . . Any specific projects which we may describe . . . will fall far short of activities that will be routine a century from now. “One hundred years ago the ‘iron horse’ was the fastest means of travel available. . . . Airplanes were unknown. In this atmosphere Jules Verne sat down and wrote . . . ‘From the Earth to the Moon’ published in 1865. . . . His spacecraft carried three men (and two dogs), was launched from the east coast of Florida, circled the Moon, and returned to Earth during a round trip that took 11 days. . . . Jules Verne used a huge cannon buried in the sand to boost his capsule to escape velocity. . . . Today we are using Saturn chemical rockets to propel our Apollo spacecraft outward for its first trip to the Moon. And by the year 2064 altogether new means of propulsion will make our present-day launch vehicles and spacecraft appropriate relics for the Smithsonian Institution. . . .” (Fla. Times-Union, 12/27/64)
First industry-produced Saturn booster (S-I) arrived at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center after nine-day barge journey from Michoud Operations. To be used on SA-8, the booster was undergoing static firings and other tests at MSFC before being sent to Cape Kennedy where it would be launched. {Marshall Star, 4/29/64,1)
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) spoke in the House of recent report By Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development which was a preliminary investigation of how existing Congressional resources of scientific and technical information can be made more effective. “. . . The critical need for Congress to study and evaluate its uses of scientific information cannot be minimized. It is imperative that we be prepared to assemble the necessary information for Congress to make complex policy decisions in order to meet national goals. As I have indicated we are more concerned with the policy of the decision than its technical aspects. In making these decisions the translation and conversion of scientific and technical information into policy terms is essential. . . .” (CR, 8/13/64,18753)
Titan II rocket booster for first manned Gemini space flight (GT-3) was turned over to the Government in ceremonies at Martin Co.’s Baltimore plant. Charles W. Mathews, Gemini project manager of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said parachute landing system and spacecraft’s ejection seats were all that remained to 'be flight-qualified, and GT-3 was still planned for first quarter of 1965. Mathews disclosed msc had been experimenting for more than a year with braking rockets to enable manned Gemini spacecraft to land on land instead of water. Para-sail also would be used in such a landing. Among other officials present were GT-3 crewmen, Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John Young. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/29/64; Witkin, NYT, 10/29/64)
General Curtis E. LeMay, Air Force Chief of Staff, testified before House Committee on Armed Services: “The Air Force program of research and development seeks to assure that this Nation is first in the development of military capabilities in space. We have some cause for optimism in this area. Our Titan III program is proceeding satisfactorily. In addition, we are undertaking the development of a medium altitude communications satellite program. . . . “The next major step toward the achievement of future space capabilities is the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) which was approved for development under Air Force management. The MOL will provide a means to fulfill the compelling requirement to acquire information essential to determining accurately the threat from space, the usefulness and the capabilities of man-in-space, and the unique advantages which may accrue from military space operations. It will also serve as a platform to support testing of equipment and procedures in the environment in which they will be used. . “Although the Dyna-Soar program has been terminated, a need still exists for development of a maneuverable aerospacecraft capable of controlled reentry and precision recovery, ferrying missions to and from a space laboratory, transfer of men and equipment in space, and a wide range of other roles. . . (Text, AF Info. Pol. Ltr., 2/64)
Appointment of Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control Div. of NASA OART, as Deputy Director of the new NASA Electronics Research Center, was announced by NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff. Appointment was effective Sept. 1. Dr. Kelley formed NASA research program in electronics and control when he was assigned to his position in November 1961; he joined NASA in March 1960 to establish development program for Agena launch vehicle, (nasa Release 64-199)
NASA Technology Utilization Report (SP-5005) on the retrometer, a new system of voice communications transmitted on a beam of light, was published. Invented at NASA Langley Research Center by Numa E. Thomas, the retrometer differed from previous light beam-communications systems in that the originating station required no power other them the human voice. The T—U Report described the system, gave instructions for building experimental retrometers, and suggested many possible applications of the system.	(NASA T—U Rpt. SP-5005; NASA Release 64-82)
Quasars (quasi-stellar objects) were subject of discussion at American Physical Society meeting in Washington. Too large to be stars, too small to be galaxies, quasars emanate tremendously strong radio waves even though they are billions of light-years away. Dr. Peter Bergmann of Yesbiva Univ. said pulsing quasar 3C-273 must have been shining for at least a million years, because it must have taken at least that long for the jet of luminous gas protruding from one side to reach its presently observed length. Dr. Bergmann presented his theory that quasars shine because of gravitational collapse—transformation of mass to energy by gravitation rather than stellar fusion. Dr. Louis Gold and Dr. John W. Moffatt of Martin Co.’s Research Institute for Advanced Studies rejected theories that quasars operate on stellar fusion principle, theorized that “ordered oscillation” was operating inside the vast gaseous envelopes rimming quasars. Laser effect, or coherence of particles, occurred in the gaseous envelope, which was about 1 to 10 light years thick. Dense core of quasar must act as fusion furnace, providing particles which acquire coherence on their way to the outside. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/29/64,15; Haseltine, Wtish. Post, 4/29/64; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/29/64)
C. A. Syvertson and David H. Dennis of NASA Ames Research Center, in paper for AIAA first annual meeting, reviewed problems of atmospheric entry, atmospheric exit, and atmospheric cruise, suggesting that “future vehicles in each of these areas will differ significantly from their current-day counterparts. For example, entry vehicles for use in the interplanetary missions which may follow the lunar mission will enter the Earth’s atmosphere at speeds up to twice that of Apollo. At these speeds, radiative heating predominates and dictates the use of more slender configurations than the very blunt Apollo. The interplanetary entry vehicles will also require very precise guidance and control both when approaching the Earth and when flying within the atmosphere. ... “For cruise aircraft that follow the supersonic transports, the most characteristic feature will be the probable use of hydrogen fuel. This high-energy fuel provides excellent payload and range capabilities for transports flying up to about twice the speed of the supersonic transport. The low density of the fuel results in aircraft with very large fuselages which may be twice the size of current-day subsonic jet transports.” (Text)
Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Apollo program deputy director in NASA Hq. since last January, was appointed director of the Apollo program. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller had been acting Apollo director for the past year. / (nasa Release 64-267)
NASA Langley Research Center announced that a foam generator developed for possible use in recovery at sea of instrument packages returned from space had been patented. Attached to instrument packages, generator mixes chemicals to produce almost instant plastic foam as it parachutes to water landing, filling a bag which keeps the payload floating on the surface awaiting recovery. (LaRC Release, 10/16/64)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed Young Presidents’ Organization Eastern Area Conference in White Sulphur Springs, W. Va.: “As the national space program moves into its seventh year, the United States has reached the halfway point in the broad-based accelerated program for the present decade, a program that was planned and has been carried forward by the three Administrations. “The National Space Program is creating for the United States new resources for whatever use the national interest may require, whether that interest is in maintaining national security, international relations, stimulating education, or implementing scientific and technological progress. . . . “In writing the Space Act of 1958, Congress stressed that the scientific and technical knowledge acquired as the national program moved ahead should be shared promptly with all who could use it. . . . “To be of most use this information must be identified and repackaged to meet the special needs of nonaerospace industries. This is the purpose of the NASA’s Technology Utilization Program, the first national undertaking of its scope. . . He detailed how the program works and enumerated outstanding examples, then concluded: “NASA’s major contribution here has been to provide a vital communications link between activities where information is developing and areas where it may be utilized. “We are convinced that NASA’s Technology Utilization Program will be of increasing benefit to the American economy. It is the mechanism through which the discoveries made in space science and technology can pay substantial dividends to American business and industry.” (Text)
NASA and Dept, of Health, Education and Welfare announced cooperative one-year research project to study anti-cancer, carcinogenic, and anti-radiation potential of certain chemical compounds closely related to plant growth regulators. Project would extend studies made at North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. in NASA research program to protect man in space. To be conducted at s&ro under $198,185 contract with HEw’s Public Health Service, project would be directed by phs National Cancer Institute and financed through a transfer of funds by NASA as part of its Technology Utilization program. (NASA Release 64-190)
Democratic Party Platform completed, containing space plank which stated: “In four vigorous years we have moved to the forefront of space exploration. The United States must never again settle for second place in the race for tomorrow’s frontiers. “1. We will continue the rapid development of space technology for peaceful uses. “2. We will encourage private industry to increase its efforts in space research. “3. We will continue to ensure that any race in space is won for freedom and for peace.” (Text, AP, Balt. Sun, 8/24/64)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics, meeting in executive session, approved the NASA Electronics Research Center report selecting the Boston area for the center. (NASA LARIII/32)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb stated Boston still appeared to 'be the most suitable site for NASA electronics research center. NASA’s Electronics Site Selection Committee had reviewed presentations by 50 groups representing 19 geographical areas, in accordance with P.L. 88113 (NASA Authorization Act for FY 1964). Mr. Webb still had not officially notified Congress of NASA’s site selection. (SBD, 1/24/64, 1.29)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va., in coordination with Nike-Apache launch at Ascension Island, third set in current NASA series to obtain data on high-altitude winds and atmospheric temperatures. A correlated launch from Ft. Churchill, Canada, was postponed due to sound interference problems. The Wallops experiment was timed to coincide with the annual east-to-west “warming trend”, was to measure its effects on the upper atmosphere. The experiments were designed to obtain measurements at altitudes ranging up to 55 mi. The Wallops experiment used grenade payload; for the Ascension experiment, the grenade payload was replaced with pitot-static probe to measure densities, pressures, and temperatures. The series was being conducted for NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-12; nasa Rpt. srl)
Lewis Research Center conducted drop tests down a main elevator shaft at Cleveland’s Terminal Tower, dropping model experimental packages from heights of up to 400 ft. to gather data for design of decelerator for lrc’s new zero-gravity facility, (lrc Release 64-40)
NASA ordered a third Oao (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory) and took an option on two more, from Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., prime contractor for the current Oao program. If only one satellite were purchased the contract would be more than $20 million, and if all three were purchased the contract would total more than $50 million. (nasa Release 64-142)
relay I began its third year in orbit and could still send clear, high-resolution television and audio signals across oceans and continents. The communications satellite had circled the globe 5,685 times and accomplished 186 demonstrations and 2,139 experiments, with a transponder-on time of 334 hours. The relay i project was directed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 64-213)
Seven noctilucent clouds visible in southwest U.S. in past six months probably were caused by pmr rocket launchings, according to Dr. Aden B. Meinel and Carolyn P. Meinel in Science magazine. The Meinels, astronomers at Univ. of Arizona’s Stewart Observatory (Tucson), described cloud appearing Nov. 2 at mean altitude of 35 mi. By measuring speed and direction of cloud’s drift, Meinels traced it back to vicinity of pmr, j ust as they had traced 44-mi. altitude cloud of June 15. Dr. Meinel and colleagues had described the clouds in Science last September, tentatively linking the June 15 cloud to Scout launching at pmr. Now, despite fact that no firing was announced for Nov. 2, Meinels concluded that “the coincidence of the clouds of June 15 and 2 November 1963 with a drift vector indicating origin from the Pacific Missile Range would appear to remove the probability of a fortuitous occurrence that could be argued from one cloud alone.” (Science, 1/3/64, CSM, 1/6/64)	_
Dr. Smith J. DeFrance, Director of NASA Ames Research Center, was one of 10 recipients of the 1964 Career Service Award of the National Civil Service League. Director of Ames since 1940, Dr. DeFrance was recommended for the award on the basis of his 43-year career as an outstanding administrator and leader of aeronautical and space research. (NASA Release 64-75)
European Space Research Organization (esro) announced plans to build research center at Noordwijk, the Netherlands. Center would employ 800-man international staff, would include laboratories, proving grounds, and other facilities. (NYT, 10/27/64, 5)
Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, Director of Lunar and Planetary Observatory at Univ. of Arizona and chief experimenter on ranger vn lunar-photographing probe, said at mit conference that much of the moon’s surface is naked lava, ranger vii photographs showed that dark regions of the moon, particularly its seas, were of volcanic origin. Dr. Kuiper said other recent photographs of the lunar seas in various wavelengths, including infrared, showed sharp relief features in the lunar seas that were lava flows. “There cannot ever be one millimeter” of cosmic dust on the surface, he stated. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/1/64)
Kenneth C. McCracken, head of cosmic ray research of the Earth and Planetary .Sciences Laboratory at the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest said that the Imps (Interplanetary Monitoring Platforms) scheduled to be shot into earth orbit in 1966 would be the best tool for studying cosmic rays during the years of the quiet sun. Besides lasting much longer than either the “deep” space probes or the balloons, they would have one other tremendous advantage, McCracken said. “The imps will have very eccentric orbits, skimming 200 miles over the surface of the earth at the closest points of their orbits, or ‘perigees,’ and soaring 185,000	miles out in space at their ‘apogees,’ or farthest points of orbit. . . . That means that in counting and analyzing cosmic rays we shall for the first time be able actually to compare the virgin, or primary, rays with the secondary particles that have had all the wear and tear of passing through the earth’s atmosphere and magnetosphere.” (Getze, L.A. Times, 12/17/64)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced award of $797,200 contract for construction of concrete-lined shaft for the 500-ft. gravity facility, to Patrick Harrison, Inc. The underground shaft would be first phase of construction of largest zero-gravity facility in the U.S. Completion of the facility was expected this year, (lrc Release 64-30)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory released figures on mariner iv, valid as of 12:01 pm: total miles to travel—325,000,000; total miles traveled—44,000,000; miles remaining to travel—281,000,000; miles from earth—4,306,180; speed in relation to earth—7,023 mph; speed in relation to sun—72,532 mph; total days required for trip—228; days already in space—26; days remaining to travel—202. (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/24/64)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center named Capt. James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Capt. Edward H. White II (usaf) as pilot and copilot for the second manned space flight of Project Gemini (GT—4), a four-day earth-orbital mission in early 1965. Astronauts named as backup crew for the flight were Maj. Frank Borman (usaf) and Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn) . All four were “second generation’’ astronauts selected for the NASA program in Sept. 1962. (msc Roundup, 8/5/64,1)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in Space Business Daily interview that the “major problem” in Project Apollo “is not technical or environmental,” but, rather, “proper funding.” Attainment of lunar landing goal before 1970 depended “more on funding than anything else,” he said. The hiring freeze imposed on Apollo contractors had been eased on a “selected basis,” with the only companies not receiving the easement being Pratt & Whitney and General Dynamics. (SBD, 2/24/64,289)
usaf Athena missile misfired in its first overland test flight from Green River, Utah, and pieces of the vehicle and instrumented payload landed in sparsely populated southwest Colorado. No person or property was damaged, and usaf officials apologized immediately to Colorado Governor John A. Love. The 8-ton, 50-ft. missile was supposed to have made 450-mi. flight from Green River to White Sands Missile Range, N.	Mex. usaf sources later indicated that the missile’s nosecone was released when pyrotechnic charges were actuated by a short circuit in second-stage junction box. As result of damage to forward wires, signals for first-stage jettison were lost and second stage ignited with first stage still attached. Pressure forced off the stage fairing as well as second-stage fins, but the vehicle continued to travel—20° off course. (AP, Balt. Sun., 2/11/64; upi, NYT, 2/11/64, 26; M&R, 2/24/64,11; Av. Wk., 3/2/64,36)
A hingeless Lockheed XH—51N rotor helicopter for advanced research in rotary wing aircraft had been delivered to NASA Langley Research Center. Studies would be made of the loads and flying qualities problems that might be encountered by operational aircraft of this type and of the extent to which their potential advantages of simplicity and improved flying qualities could be realized in practice. Rotor blades on the XH-51N were held firmly to the hub, which was attached rigidly to the engine drive shaft. On other helicopters, the blades were either hinged at the side of the rotor hub or were gimbaled atop the mast. (LaRC Release 12/16/64)
Air Force Systems Command reported that Rome Air Development Center (radc), sponsoring approximately $1 million annually in computer research and development, was major Air Force agency performing research in the computer field. According to Alan R. Bamum, Chief of radc’s Data Processing Section, “radc’s primary responsibility in computer research is development of high speed computer devices and special computers to meet peculiar Air Force problems. Also, methods of programming computer instructions, development of larger and faster computer memories and research in a new area called artificial intelligence.” (afsc Release 11-64)
The faa awarded contracts totaling $6 million each to the Boeing Company and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for the design of a supersonic transport. In addition, contracts totaling $5 million each were awarded to the General Electric Co. and the Pratt & Whitney Division of United Aircraft Corp. for designs for the engines of the transport. Boeing and Lockheed would do extensive design work, wind tunnel testing, and structural studies aimed at refining designs to conform to the technical and economic requirements established by the FAA. The two engine contractors would develop detailed preliminary layout designs. (AP, NYT, 6J3/64!, 16; faa Release 64-55)
Clifford B. Harmon Trust announced that Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Jr. (Maj., usaf), would receive the Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1964 for his 34-hour orbital space flight (MA—9) in a Mercury spacecraft May 15-16, 1963. Others to receive Harmon Trophy would be Aviatrix Betty Miller for her solo transpacific flight and Lt. Col. Fitz-hugh Fulton (usaf) for 11,000-lb. payload of B-58 to 85,318-ft. altitude. The Harmon awards for 1963 and 1964 would be presented to recipients in White House ceremony September 14. (NYT, 8/2/64, 78)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) announced nomination of Richard E. Horner, Senior Vice President of Northrop Corp., as aiaa president for 1965. Mr. Homer served as the first Associate Administrator of NASA (June 1959-July 1960) and before that as Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development. (NYT, 10/8/64)
NASA announced FAA—NASA Memorandum of Understanding specifying NASA’s role in development of U.S. supersonic transport aircraft, under overall responsibility of faa. NASA would furnish facilities, background research, technical advice, and resources to faa and would conduct advanced flight research. In addition, NASA would conduct necessary background research to provide supporting technology and technical assistance and make available nasa’s facilities and technical resources. In flight testing phase, faa would be responsible for direction and acceptance testing, and certification trials; NASA would be responsible for flight research with its own funds, instrumentation, and resources. (NASA Release 64-28)
Results of experimental drop tests down elevator shaft of Cleveland’s Terminal Tower showed that styrofoam could be used successfully as a deceleration medium, according to NASA Lewis Research Center design engineer Terrence E. Russell. Purpose of the deceleration tests, conducted by LRC last May, was to verify use of styrofoam as filler in cart used to “catch” free-falling test packages at lrc’s new 500-ft. zero-gravity facility. ( lrc Release 64-64)
NASA Langley Research Center announced that power supply capability tests were being conducted on two huge magnet coils at the Space Radiation Effects Laboratory. In operation, the magnet coils would be capable of creating a pulling power greater than 3,500 tons. The magnet coils were part of the 600-million electron volt synchrocyclotron which NASA would operate to study the effect on spacecraft and their systems of the particle radiation streaming from the sun or trapped in the earth’s magnetic field. (LaRC Release)
nasa Administrator Webb submitted a report on long-range studies in space exploration to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking. Emphasizing that “all decisions on future missions must be national, not solely NASA, decisions,” the report outlined “the areas of space mastery that require serious attention by the Nation,” surveying all categories of space exploration—including scientific, weather, and navigational satellites, manned and unmanned flights to the moon and the planets. The report said that “development and operation of manned space stations in earth orbit will be a necessary preliminary to extension of manned operations in space,” described feasibility and design studies being made for manned lunar bases. (Text, 1965 NASA Auth. Hearings, Part 4, 27292804)
NASA awarded $16,975,000 contract to Blount Brothers Corp. for construction of three major elements of space environment facility known as Space Propulsion Facility, to be built at Plum Brook Station of NASA Lewis Research Center. The facility would simulate temperatures and pressure conditions at altitudes up to 100 mi. from earth, permitting evaluation and development testing of spacecraft, chemical propulsion systems, and nuclear electric power generation and propulsion systems. (lrc Release 64-61)
Aerospace industry sales for second quarter of 1964 rose to $4,006 billion from $3,808 billion in preceding quarter, Securities and Exchange Commission-Federal Trade Commission reported. (Av. Wk., 9/21/64, 34)
NASA Director of Personnel Robert J. Lacklen said in Aviation Week he had ordered a “complete re-write” of NASA Management Manual section dealing with employees’ acceptance of gifts and gratuities from aerospace industry representatives. “The same thing has jumped us off on a re-write that caused the Defense Dept, to issue its new orders. That is the continuing appearance of NASA names on contractor entertainment lists.” (Av. Wk., 10/5/64, 18)
NASA’s astronomy program was topic of background briefing for the press at NASA Hq., by astronomy program chief Dr. Nancy Roman. Dr. Roman disclosed at the briefing that NASA was studying concept of a manned orbiting telscope. The 100-in. telescope would operate in space automatically, but man would have to make final adjustments in its focus, change auxiliary instruments from time to time for varying the experiments, collect photographic film, and make repairs. NASA had invited members of the astronomical community to propose studies basic to the Mot concept. Several NASA centers and Hq. offices were supporting related engineering studies. Dr. Roman said design studies for a Radio Astronomy Observatory were “pretty well completed.” Not yet an approved program, Rao would have four 750-ft. antennas extended in two V’s to receive radio emissions from space. (nasa Transcript; ATPh)
