Evidence of the impact on education of achievements in space technology was cited by James V. Bernardo, Director of NASA Educational Programs Div., at the Michigan Education Association Meeting in Detroit: (1) greater demand for scientists, engineers, and technicians; (2) examination and revision of the science and mathematics courses in high schools and colleges to include new concepts and to provide enrichment of basic principles through space-related materials; (3) recognition of the need for better teacher training to meet the increasing needs of science and technology in our society; (4) recognition that science should be a basic part of general education for all students and that we must develop a science-literate public; (5) effort to develop a well-balanced national effort in science, technology, the social sciences, and the humanities; (6) need for advancing scientific research activities related to space exploration problems, including the development of training programs for scientists, engineers, and technicians. (Text)
USn’s f-111b fighter aircraft, originally designated tfx, was given its first test flight over Long Island at 2,000-mph for an hour and 18 min., during which the variable wing-sweep of the craft was tested. (Wash. Post, 5/19/65, 11; upi, Wash. Post, 5/20/65, 2)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said in address before American Nuclear Society-Atomic Industrial Forum in Washington, D.C.: “If anyone doubts the impact that science and technology have had on society, in just the past 20 years, he need look only at the new industries employing many thousands of people which have come into existence during that time—industries based solely on the evolution of new products and services. These include—and i mention only a few —television, the computer, the jet engine and nuclear energy. “Some of these industries have sprung from the application of a single invention or chain of scientific thoughts. “During these past 20 years, too, we have seen in the United States the creation of a constructive partnership unknown in our previous history—a partnership of government, university, management, labor, science and citizen—a partnership devoted to maximum development of science and technology not for the narrow interest of any single group, but for the common good. “To witness the space launchings at Cape Kennedy, as I have, is to see this partnership in action. . . .” Turning to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, he said; “As chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, I am particularly concerned with the atom’s work in space. “In 1961 our first operating space radioisotopic power source was orbited. And in 1965 our first space reactor was operated in orbit. “The atom will soon become a major power source for our space program—an auxiliary source for spacecraft and life support systems and a necessary source of propulsion for extended space exploration. “I can, in fact, foresee the time when our space efforts will be able to continue only through use of rocket and nuclear power units transported and assembled in space. . . .” (Text)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded $1,059,000 contract to Aetron, a division of Aerojet-General Corp., for installation of equipment on a Saturn V second-stage test stand at Mississippi Test Operations. Equipment would include consoles to check out systems on the flight stages being tested as well as in the area’s test control center, (msfc Release 65—53)
XB-70a research bomber, leaving Edwards afb, flew 1,700 mph at 65,000-ft. alt. on its 13th test flight. It landed three minutes earlier than planned because of a possible leak in a hydraulic system, (ap, Balt. Sun, 6/17/65)
A wage dispute involving the International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees caused a shutdown of much of the construction under way at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, as about 3,000 of some 5,700	construction workers stayed off the job because of the picket lines. (upi, NYT, 6/25/65, 28)
usaf xb-70a research bomber reached a speed of 1,850 mph at 66,000	ft. in a test flight at Edwards afb. (afftc Release 65-7-18)
New York’s Mayor-elect John V. Lindsay announced formation of a Science and Technology Advisory Council composed of representatives of universities, foundations, and corporations. Council would attempt to attract science-oriented industries into New York City and assist those already there. It would meet monthly with the Mayor and conduct studies into the scientific and technological advances that might affect industries in the city. {NYT, 12/22/65, 12)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., went to peak altitude of 113 mi. (180 km.). Preliminary experimental objective was to obtain clear spectrograms of ultraviolet light from stars. Experimentation was provided by Princeton Univ. Observatory. (nasa Rpt. srl; ap, NYT, 6/28/65, 2)
Dr. Richard Shorthill of Boeing Scientific Research Laboratories reported that from 400 to 800 “hot spots” were observed on the moon during the eclipse of December 18, 1964. The lunar face had been scanned at infrared wavelengths from the Helwan Observatory near Cairo, Egypt. Recent impacts from meteors, which would create rocky craters slower to cool after the sunlight was obscured, might account for the “hot spots.” It was already known that prominent craters from which rays radiated in all directions, such as Tycho, were slow to cool, compared to the normal surface, which was thought to be carpeted with dust. While the total number of slow-cooling locations would remain uncertain until the tape-recorded results had been plotted by computer, Dr. Shorthill felt that if the technique produced an inventory of young craters, it would help in spotting new ones when they occurred and in estimating the rate at which the moon and the earth were bombarded by debris from space. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/9/65)
DOD announced that U.S. would sell United Kingdom: (1) F^l (Phantom II) fighter/close-support aircraft and (2) c—130e combat assault transport aircraft. It had also been agreed that the two countries would expand existing program of cooperation in defense research and development. Serious consideration would be given to joint development of advanced life engine for vertical- and short-takeoff aircraft. (dod Release 80-65)
Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo program director in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, said that 1965 would be a year of “heavy ground testing” in NASA’s lunar program. Among the major events he anticipated were completion of testing of the Apollo spacecraft for the first manned flight; qualification of all elements of the Saturn IB launch vehicle and delivery of first flight stages to Cape Kennedy; and initial testing of Saturn V elements, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 1/22/65, 4)
. . . The last two Gemini missions have shown clearly that the U.S. manned space flight program has come of age technically. They also demonstrated the operational flexibility that can be achieved in long-duration manned missions,” wrote Robert Hotz in Aviation Week. “With each new manned mission, the Gemini program is forging a record that insures its place in space history as the great leap forward in space flight that transformed the role of man himself from that of a surviving passenger to a useful performer of vital functions in the space environment. . . . “It was really the conclusive demonstration that adding a long-term manned capability would improve satellite reconnaissance by orders of magnitude that finally forced the decision to proceed with mol after nearly two years of delay under the guise of ‘further study.’ ” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 9/6/65,17)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island with NASA Lewis Research Center experiment to study three wavelengths of light in the airglow: one in the red part of the spectrum, another in the yellow, and a third in the green. Altitude of the air-glow was measured with phototubes mounted on the rocket. A 26-in.-dia. mylar balloon helped scientists correlate measured light intensity and altitude with density of the atmosphere. (Wallops Release 65-19; lrc Release 65-26)
Speaking on the Senate floor, Sen. Richard B. Russell (D-Ga.) said: “I am greatly disturbed that funds for the continuation of the large solid rocket engine program have been eliminated from the 1966 budget for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. “. . . I am concerned about the effect that the proposed termination of this program will have over our long-range space effort and upon the security of the country. For it will cut off, at a particularly inappropriate time, a crucial research and development program that already has shown significant potential for fulfilling future space booster needs—for both defense and nondefense purposes. This is particularly true for launching large payloads and missions into deep space that are contemplated in the not-so-distant future. “The booster technology and capability that we are developing under the large solid rocket engine program could become a vital factor in preventing the Russians from achieving a position of dominance in space. . . . “Indeed, the decision to terminate this program appears to be a direct contradiction of Mr. Webb’s own views, as expressed as recently as Tuesday of this week to the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He said unequivocally that space missions contemplated for the next decade and beyond will require ‘new launch vehicles and new space vehicle developments.’ He said our experience with the Apollo moon program has shown that ‘a policy of support for the development of carefully selected advanced propulsion systems must be followed if we are to assure they will be available when needed.’ “It is highly inconsistent—to say the least—to speak boldly of exploring the moon, reaching and charting the planets, establishing manned stations in space, and extending our national strength into the space dimensions, while at the same time killing off one of the most promising programs for the achievement of these very goals. . . .” (CR, 1/29/65, 1535)
The Jodrell Bank Observatory, British tracking station, was visited by a group of six Soviet scientists led by M. V. Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, (ap, Boston Globe, 2/17/65)
In an editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, editor Robert Hotz said: “The trail-blazing mission of the Soviet Voskhod 2 still is continuing as these lines are written, but it has already opened a new chapter in the history of man’s conquest of space. It also has emphasized again that, unless some drastic changes are made, this history will be written primarily in the Russian Cyrillic alphabet with only an occasional U.S. footnote technically necessary. . . . “All of this Soviet progress again emphasizes strongly the ultra-conservatism of the U.S. manned space flight program and the utter inadequacy of the tiny step-by-step approach that sounds so convincing when defending under-funded programs. This approach is sounding more and more idiotic in the face of Soviet space achievements. . . . “Each Soviet manned space flight makes it clearer that the Russians are widening their lead over the U.S. in this vital area. It also makes it clear that the many billions the American people have poured willingly into our national space program for the purpose of wresting this leadership from the Soviets are not going to achieve that goal under the present management. . . .”	( Hotz, Av. Wk., 3/22/65, 11)
NASA Ames Research Center had let a $1,382,000 contract to the American Machine and Foundry Co. for fabrication of an advanced flight simulator which could simulate nearly all flight situations for aircraft and spacecraft except cases involving either high acceleration forces on the pilot or aerobatics. Designed by the Research Facilities and Equipment Div. at Ames, the simulator would have “six degrees of freedom,” the capability to move in all possible axes of motion: fore and aft, vertical, and side-to-side; also pitch, roll, and yaw. It would be unique in having 100 ft. of lateral motion. This would be needed to simulate supersonic transport (Sst) flight since the crew would be far forward of the center of rotation of the aircraft, (arc Release 65-12)
S. Walter Hixon, Jr., Supervisory Employee Development Officer at the NASA Langley Research Center, was selected for his educational activities as the Federal Civil Service Employee of the Year in the Hampton Roads area. Hixon had conducted four major programs at Langley including graduate study, advanced in-house training, a cooperative college education plan, and an apprenticeship training system. (LaRC Release)
Summary report of NASA’s Future Programs Task Group, directed by Francis B. Smith of LaRC, was sent by NASA Administrator James E. Webb to the chairmen of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Report presented “the results of studies made during 1964 to answer inquiries made by President Johnson as to criteria and priorities for space missions to follow those now approved for the decade of the 1960’s. . . It examined (1) conditions and constraints for future planning, (2) major capabilities existing and under development, (3) intermediate missions, and (4) long-range aeronautical and space developments. Report concluded: “. . . The details of these new missions such as specific spacecraft designs and exact mission plans will, of course, be the subject of continued study. . . . Continued space exploration will be an evolutionary process in which the next step is based largely on what was learned from the experience of preceding research and flight missions. The pace at which these new programs will be carried out will necessarily depend upon many other factors, such as the allocation of budgetary and manpower resources and the changing National needs of the future. “This study has not revealed any single area of space development which appears to require an overriding emphasis or a crash effort. Rather, it appears that a continued balanced program, steadily pursuing continued advancement in aeronautics, space sciences, manned space flight, and lunar and planetary exploration, adequately supported by a broad basic research and technology development program, still represents the wisest course. Further, it is believed that such a balanced program will not impose unreasonably large demands upon the Nation’s resources and that such a program will lead to a preeminent role in aeronautics and space.” (Text; NASA Auth. Hearings [Part 3], Senate Comm, on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, 1015-1102)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator since 1958, died of cancer at age 67. He was a former Director of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, a former Associate Director of the National Bureau of Standards, and—for forty-five years—an ordained minister in the Methodist Church. An internationally renowned scientist-engineer who once said he and the airplane grew up together, he was recognized for his leadership in the development of aeronautics and astronautics. He generally was regarded as the man who guided the United States into the space age. Dr. Dryden served the U.S. Government with distinction since 1918 in science and technology, as an administrator, and more recently as a skilled diplomat in negotiating international agreements for cooperative efforts in the peaceful exploration of space. The recipient of many awards and honors, Dr. Dryden was especially known for his scientific contributions to fluid mechanics and boundary-layer phenomena. At Johnson City, Tex., President Johnson said that the death of Dr. Dryden “is a deep personal loss and a reason for national sorrow. . . . No soldier ever performed his duty with more bravery and no statesman ever charted new courses with more dedication than Hugh Dryden. Whenever the first American space man sets foot on the moon or finds a new trail to a new star, he will know that Hugh Dryden was one of those who gave him knowledge and illumination.” From Great Falls, Mont., Vice President Humphrey, Chairman of the nasc, said: “The death of Dr. Hugh Dryden is a sad loss to all of us, and especially to those of us who have been guided by his wisdom, experience, and great common sense in planning the nation’s space program. “We shall miss him sorely as we plot our course for the decade ahead. So much of what this nation has been able to do in aeronautics and space over the past 40 years we owe to the creative science and the confident, skillful leadership of this great public servant. I know of no finer example of modern man in all his versatility than Dr. Hugh Dryden, whose vision, courage, and lifetime of service have helped to lead the way into the Space Age. . . .” nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “Dr. Hugh L. Dryden was a man of his time—of the air age, of the nuclear age, of the space age, with all the implications of modern science and technology for the accomplishments of his time. He was also a man for all times because his courage in undertaking the conquest of air and space, his scientific, engineering, and administrative competence and his qualities of humanity and leadership mark him as one of the truly great men who have contributed over the years to these fields. He will be sorely missed in nasa, in the nation and, indeed, in many nations.” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “The country has lost one of its greatest scientists and one of its most dedicated citizens. The country will have to continue with its space and aeronautics programs without him —but will not be able to carry on as well without his inspiring leadership and ability.” (Texts)
The launch of Oso-C was postponed from Aug. 24 to Aug. 25 because NASA’s Fort Myers tracking station might be acquiring data from EXPLORER XXVI satellite about the same time it was scheduled to conduct Oso-C’s critical first-orbit interrogation. Recent calculations at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center indicated the conflict was expected to last for only two minutes, but project officials decided to avoid jeopardizing Oso-C’s first orbital data, (nasa Release 65-227)
Vincent R. Lalli of NASA Lewis Research Center described to the 11th National Symposium on Reliability and Quality Control in Miami Beach the R&QA procedure applied at Lewis to engine subsystems of the Sert-I (Space Electric Rocket Test) spacecraft to establish reliability standards for equipment never flown in space before. He said an experimental assembly of components, or “electrical breadboard,” was built for electrical stress measurements; once the analysis of stresses during operation was complete, safety factor could be defined. “Stress” did not refer to mechanical stress but to all physical factors—fatigue, corrosion, current, temperature, etc.—that could degrade or destroy equipment. Lalli pointed out: “The real uniqueness of this process is revealed in the stress analysis area where the role of the reliability engineer is extended beyond the analytical approach into obtaining transient experimental stress data.” (lrc Release 65—4)
Project Luster, managed by NASA Ames Research Center, successfully recovered samples of matter from interplanetary space with an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., during the annual Leonid meteor shower. The sampling instrument comprising the payload consisted of three deployable arms, each containing four flat pans holding special collection surfaces. The arms deployed as programed at 47-mi. altitude on the way up, closing again at that altitude on the way down. Payload reached 89-mi. altitude, traveled 44 mi. downrange, and landed by parachute in soft sand. Vacuum seal of the 12 collection pans was found to be perfect on recovery. Unopened collectors would be distributed by ARC to 12 guest experimenters in the U.S. and Europe for study of the nature of comets and of extraterrestrial material in general, (arc Release 65-26; nasa Rpt. srl)
Dr. Cyril Pomiamperuma, chief of the chemical evolution branch at NASA Ames Research Center, reported to the American Chemical Society meeting in Atlantic City that he had joined together in a laboratory two subunits (nucleotide molecules) of RNA (ribonucleic acid) under conditions simulating earth as it might have been 3 billion yrs. ago. His successful experiments offered further scientific support that life on earth might have evolved chemically. (Haseltine, Wash. Post, 9/13/65, A6)
Reports by U.S. astronauts of seeing details on the earth’s surface while orbiting the earth at altitudes of over 100 mi. did not surprise physicists at the U.S. Bureau of Standards’ Central Radio Propagation Laboratory in Indianapolis, reported the Indianapolis Star. Wind tunnel experiments there had proven that the closer a viewer is to turbulent air, the more it distorts an image: the image wavers in brightness, changes position, and shifts in and out of focus. All these effects diminish contrast—an essential factor in identifying objects in aerial reconnaissance. The effects are reduced and seeing improves as the viewer moves away from the turbulence. (Lewis, Sci. Serv., Indianapolis Star, 7/11/65)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., went to a peak altitude of 155.5 km. (96.6 mi.) The primary experimental objective was to obtain ultraviolet spectra of Mars and Orion by the use of four spectrographs, provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Because of an attitude control system failure no experimental results were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
President Johnson, on the advice of Defense Secretary McNamara, and contrary to the opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had decided to postpone the production order for the Nike-X missile defense system, Neal Stanford of the Christian Science Monitor asserted. $2 billion had already been spent on the R&D phase of the Nike-X and an additional $20 billion would be required to produce and deploy it. The fy 1966 budget provided approximately $400 million for continued research and development on the Nike-X system pending the decision on whether to put Nike-X into production. (Stanford, CSM, 1/28/65)
U.S.S.R. was building a spaceship designed not for space flight, but for exhibition in a new space museum to be built at the site of Moscow’s Space Monument. Inside the model cabin, which would have a seating capacity of 100, a movie showing the earth as it appeared from space would he shown to visitors, (ap, San Diego Eve. Trib., 4/9/65, 22)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, announced change of primary control of manned flight missions from Cape Kennedy to Manned Spacecraft Center Mission Control Center. Christopher Kraft, mission flight director for GT—3 flight, completed Mar. 28, would serve as mission director for GT-^4 flight scheduled for later this year, msc Mission Control Center would provide centralized control of manned spaceflight programs from launch through recovery; computer-driven time and data displays would report instantly the status of astronauts, spacecraft, and supporting operations to mission/flight director. Most information would travel over land lines. (Transcript; NASA Release 65—119)
Dr. John J. Brennan, Jr., Chairman of the Committee for the Preservation of Cambridge Industries, said he would take to Washington the committee’s fight to keep the NASA Electronic Research Center out of Cambridge. Dr. Brennan said the City of Cambridge’s claim that the renewal project would cost the Federal government $15 million was way off. He said costs would be between $40 million and $50 million. In a letter to the House and Senate Appropriations Committees and the House and Senate space committees, Brennan stated: “We are taking every proper course of action, legal and otherwise, to stop this senseless destruction. . . .We do not believe that the overall destruction will bear judicial scrutiny.” Paul Frank, director of the Cambridge Urban Redevelopment Authority, said Brennan’s figures were inaccurate and that the $40-$50 million figure was wrong. He claimed the overall cost would bring it down to $14,500,000. Of this figure, the Federal government cost would be $9,600,000 with the remaining $4,900,000 paid by the City of Cambridge, he asserted. (Boston Globe, 1/11/65) During the week of January 11: Titan ill program director Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf) said at a meeting of the New York Academy of Sciences that the launch of the Titan iii-a, on Dec. 10, 1964, may have gained the most accurate orbit ever achieved in the U.S. space program. The vehicle achieved an orbit with 102-n. mi. apogee and a 99-n. mi. perigee against a planned 100-n. mi. nominal orbital altitude. Deviation from a true circle was 0.00075 against a predicted value of 0.00050. Time for a single orbit was 88.2 min., within 0.04 min. of the time predicted. (M&R, 1/18/65, 10)
Fourth Chrysler-assembled Saturn ib first stage left NASA Michoud Assembly Facility aboard the nasa barge Palaemon for static-firing tests at Marshall Space Flight Center. Trip would take about seven days, (msfc Release 65-295)
Reported that Dr. William I. Donn of Columbia Univ.’s Lamont Geological Observatory, Dr. Wilbur G. Valentine of Brooklyn College, and Dr. Bertram D. Donn of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had challenged presently accepted ages of the earth (4.5 billion yrs.) and the sun (5 billion yrs.). They had asserted that the oldest of continental rocks were so very ancient that the sun’s and the earth’s ages allowed too little time for continent formation by earthly processes and from earthly materials. Two alternative explanations were proposed:	(1) either the sun and the earth must be much older, perhaps by a half-billion years or more; or, (2) the original continents were thrown down upon the planet’s surface when objects from space— hundreds of miles across in size—crashed into the earth. Research results had been published in the Bulletin of the Geological Society of America. (Abraham, Phil. Eve. Bull., 4/13/65)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center had issued 11 new contracts and modified one other to provide for further studies and component development on the Apollo Extension Systems (Aes). (msfc Release 65-186)
Dr. Fred Whipple, director of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, had suggested landing on a comet. Dr. Whipple also speculated that if a space vehicle were sent near a comet scientists could use a low-velocity probe that could be put into an orbit in the comet’s vicinity for a week or more to study the velocities of gas and dust particles boiled off the comet by solar radiation. The probe would also be able to take core samples of the comet to give direct measurement of one of the oldest physical processes in the solar system, Dr. Whipple said. (NYT, 2/14/65, 50)
First Saturn IB booster, the S-ib-1, was placed into a static test stand at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for scheduled static firings. Built by Chrysler Corp., the 1.6 million-lb.-thrust, 90,000-lb. booster contained eight engines, was 21 ft. in dia. and 80 ft. long. The stage would be shipped to NASA Michoud Operations for post-firing checks. (Marshall Star, 3/17/65, 1, 2)
Successful 41-sec. test firing of the Saturn V booster (s-ic-t) at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center concluded a test series underway since April. 15 tests of the booster were held, 14 of them at full thrust of 7.5-million lbs. The 14 full-power tests accumulated a running time of 862 sec. First test was of only one engine for 17 sec. (msfc Release 65-306; Marshall Star, 12/15/65, 2)
Nearly 390,000 visitors toured NASA Kennedy Space Center and Cape Kennedy. The Space Center’s doors were first opened to visitors Jan. 3, 1965. In its first year, the Center was host to visitors from all 50 states and 57 countries.	(NASA Space Sheet, 3/31/66)
Lights flashing earthward from 1,000 mi. in space were giving scientists their first operational workout with geodetic satellite explorer xxix launched by nasa Nov. 6 from Eastern Test Range. From a site about 100 mi. south of Cape Kennedy, five different types of camera systems were set to record on each clear night the one millisecond bursts of light from explorer xxix’s four lamps. In this first programed exercise, the Jupiter Calibration Experiment, the cameras were positioned side-by-side at the Jupiter, Fla., Baker-Nunn Camera Station of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Simultaneous use of the different camera systems would permit validation of data and procedures required for later phases of the NASA explorer xxix project that called for mutal visibility by ground stations equipped with optical and electronic tracking equipment. Calibration of the camera systems would be an important step in realizing maximum utilization of the NASA satellite and participating ground stations in the National Geodetic Satellite Program, (nasa Release 65-365)
osc—C was launched from Eastern Test Range, with a Delta booster, fell into the south Atlantic Ocean after failing to achieve orbit. First two stages of the launch vehicle performed perfectly: following second stage cutoff and an approximate 7-min. coast period, small rockets mounted on a table between the second and third stage ignited and spun the table up to 120 rpm; second stage separated, but the third stage ignited about 5/4 sec. prematurely, was not properly aimed, and did not attain orbital speed. oso-c was third in a series of eight orbiting solar observatories planned by NASA. First two satellites were launched from Kennedy Space Center, nasa, March 7, 1962, and February 3, 1965. oso-c I had provided more than 2,000 hrs. of scientific information during its lifetime; oso II was still operating. The Orbiting Solar Observatory program was designed to advance understanding of the sun’s structure and behavior and to determine the physical processes by which the sun influences the earth. Next Oso launch would occur in mid-1966. (NASA Release 65-261; Wash. Post, 8/26/65, A 4; N.Y. Her. Trib., 8/26/65)
Sealed brushless DC motor, originally developed to power instrumentation on unmanned spacecraft, was selected for use in the Apollo two-man Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) and the Gemini two-man spacecraft. The new motor utilized photo-optical detectors and transistorized switching elements which duplicated the functions of conventional brushes and commutator without physical contact of the rotating parts. Environmental tests had shown the brushless motor had a predicted operational life of one year. A barrier to DC motors had been the short life of conventional brushes in the space vacuum because of the lack of lubricating moisture necessary to prevent excessive friction. Motor was developed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center under contract with Sperry Farragut. (gsfc Release G—2—65)
Joseph Campbell, Comptroller General, reported to Congress that the decision of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center to lease rather than buy two electric substations from the Potomac Electric Power Co. had resulted in $174,000 of unnecessary costs thus far. Campbell explained, “We believe that the Center failed to make this determination because of the Administration’s failure to provide guidelines to its employees, setting forth pertinent factors necessary for consideration in making decisions whether to lease or purchase property.” He added, however, that NASA had agreed with GAO findings and would purchase substations as provided for in contract. The matter was nevertheless reported to Congress because it “further illustrates that significant unnecessary costs can be and are being incurred,” when agencies do not make complete lease-versus -purchase studies. (Wash. Post, 2/28/65)
G. Mervin Ault, Associate Chief of Material and Structures Div., nasa Lewis Research Center, discussed refractory metals in an honors lecture before American Society for Testing and Materials (astm) meeting at Purdue Univ. Refractory metals—such as tungsten, tantalum, molybdenum, columbium—have strength at high temperatures and corrosion resistance to alkali metals. “The past decade has resulted in greater progress in refractory metals than ever before achieved for any one class of structural materials,” Ault said. The lecture commemorated metallurgist Horace W. Gillett and was sponsored jointly by astm and Battelle Memorial Institute, (lrc Release 65-44)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director of NASA Electronics Research Center, retired as a U.S. naval commander. He had been assigned to detached duty with NASA by USN in 1960 and would continue with erc as a civilian. (Boston Globe, 7/1/65)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (LCdr., usn) would undergo intensive debriefing and medical tests for 11 days following their spaceflight, NASA announced. Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said: “Producing scientific and technical information is the purpose of the flight. This information is vital in determining the effects of long-duration flight on the human system and in proving out flight systems for future flights.” (NASA Release 65-273)
Six out of ten Minnesotans said in a recent survey conducted by the Minneapolis Tribune's Minnesota Poll that the U.S. should at least maintain its $5 billion a year budget for space exploration. 59% felt the U.S. had outdistanced the U.S.S.R. 10% considered the “space race” about even. {Minn. Trib., 7/4/65)
Gerald L. Smith, NASA Ames Research Center, had been awarded $1,000 special service award for his computer analysis which resulted in decision to give ground-based navigation a primary role during Apollo lunar missions. Smith explained that, although radar tracking from earth and visual tracking onboard spacecraft were almost equally reliable, earth-based system could be maintained more easily and was not restricted by weight and size considerations, (arc Release 65-8)
NASA had compromised the scientific value of the interplanetary research program by spending too little on the Deep Space Net communications system, according to Frank Drake, prof, at Cornell Univ., in Saturday Review article. Drake noted that mariner IV would only be able to relay 22 photos of Mars back to earth and that these would be of lesser quality—all because of communications limitations: “. . . one concludes that the space program could well use an array containing a hundred or more 85-ft. antennas. One array might cost $40,000,000, still only a few per cent of what will almost certainly be spent on planetary exploration in the next ten years.” (SR, 1/2/65)
A new computer technique had been designed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center to make repeated rapid checks of effects of a man-made radiation belt of high-energy “Starfish” electrons formed from a U.S. hydrogen bomb test over the Pacific Ocean in 1962, and subsequent tests conducted for Project Fish Bowl, a high-altitude weapon test. Starfish electrons were estimated to have a possible life of up to 20 yrs., during which time electrons in the belt would slowly decay to the energy level of ordinary electrons. E. G. Stassinopoulos, designer of the program, warned that increased solar activity in years ahead would greatly affect the lifetimes of the Starfish electrons, making the computer relatively useless after 1966. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 7/18/ 65, 27)
NASA would negotiate with the Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., for 22 h-1 rocket engines with 200,000-lb. thrust for use on the 12 Saturn ib launch vehicles presently planned, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Engines, with supporting services, would cost more than $6 million, (msfc Release 65-155; Marshall Star, 6/23/65, 1)
Philip E. Culbertson became Director of Lunar Mission Studies, Advanced Manned Missions Program Office, Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA Hq. Culbertson would direct studies concerning manned exploration of the moon in the time period following Project Apollo. Before joining NASA, he had been associated with General Dynamics/Astronautics since 1958, where he was Chief Project Engineer for Atlas launch vehicle systems, manager of the Atlas launch vehicle systems engineering and reliability program, manager and director of manned space studies, and director of advanced development. (nasa Release 65-308)
Addressing the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “I would like to acknowledge the debt that NASA owes to the armed forces for early and continuing work that has contributed to some of our most successful space projects. As you know, NASA works closely with the Air Force in the development of launch vehicles and in the general technology of space flight. . . . “As an example—among many—of cooperative nasa-dod activities: on January 1, NASA transferred control of its operating SYNCOM II and syncom in communications satellites to the Department of Defense. . . . “When the great dod missile site construction program—which ran at one time to $2.8 billion a year—subsided, the Corps of Engineers brought its tremendous engineering capability to the construction of NASA facilities. As the Corps moved toward completion of its work for NASA, its abilities will have been enhanced by the experience of building these great new national resources. The Corps, with new skills, will be able to move to new national requirements with assurance that it has performed extraordinarily well in engineering fields never before attempted. “Today there are detailed to NASA 254 active duty military personnel. Five of our astronauts are graduates of this great Academy. Nothing could be more fitting. For the debt modern American science and technology owes to West Point is too large to be repaid. It can visibly be traced back to Sylvanus Thayer who not only is the father of this Academy but who had a tremendous influence for half a century in the field of technical and scientific education throughout the United States.” (Text)
M/Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), director of the Apollo program in the NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, addressed the American Bar Association’s Seminar of the Committee on the Law of Outer Space in Miami Beach: “In many respects, the Gemini iv flight of Jim Mc-Divitt and Ed White could well be viewed as a turning point in the American manned space program. The success of this mission has given us greatly increased confidence that we will be able to carry out our national goal of a manned landing on the moon in this decade. “It is a pleasure to report that the Apollo Program is also moving ahead very rapidly, and we are meeting our key milestones on schedule. The progress on Apollo is especially rewarding since it is the largest and most complex single research and development project ever undertaken. This is a crucial year for Apollo, but our prospects look good and we are becoming increasingly confident that the lunar landings will take place before the end of 1969.” (Text)
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, George Friedl, Jr., NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, said: “NASA spends about 93 percent of its dollars on contracts with industry, universities and private research organizations. These procurements during fiscal year 1964 amounted to $4.6 billion. Approximately 96 percent of this amount or $4.4 billion was awarded by our field installations in accordance with program and project research and development requirements. NASA contracts support our in-house research and development activities and establish our coupling with industry and the private scientific community. . . Reporting on contract administration, Mr. Friedl testified:	“The cost reimbursement contract has been the basic instrument for procuring research and development because the Government has had to risk the uncertainties and assume the high cost involved. No other type of contract provides the Government and the contractor the latitude and flexibility needed to relate scientific and technical requirements, schedules and use of resources to mission objectives. By adding incentive provisions pertaining to time, quality and cost to this type of contract, it is our intention to offset some of its deficiencies and strengthen the purpose of the Government-contractor relationship. “nasa has made a concerted effort to introduce suitable incentive arrangements in our cost reimbursement type contracts whenever practicable. In each case, the objective is to encourage the contractor to manage better and improve his performance; adhere to schedules; and hold down costs. “As a consequence of our incentive contracting drive, there has been a marked increase in this activity in the past 4 Vi years. In fiscal year 1961 we had one contract worth about $100,000. By December 31, 1964, we had awarded 75 contracts with a target value of over $751 million, 7 of these have been completed leaving 68 contracts totalling over $724 million currently being administered. . . . “In view of the undesirable features of letter contracts, NASA Headquarters began a concerted effort, early in 1963, to curtail the issuance of new letter contracts and to assure the timely definitization of all outstanding letter contracts. Headquarters issued instructions to all centers directing program and project managers to plan ahead and allow adequate lead time for the initial negotiation of definitive contracts. ... At the end of January only 3 letter contracts having a total value of $4 million were outstanding. We expect that these contracts will be definitized in March 1965.” Mr. Friedl said that NASA had “structured a sound practicable managerial technique to direct the planning, approval and execution of . . . future programs. We believe that adoption of what we have termed ‘phased project planning’ will materially assist us in achieving this goal. “Phased project planning represents an orderly sequential progression in the execution of NASA major projects. It provides for formulating proposed work goals and missions, and allows for decisions, reappraisal points for management consideration to advance or replan such proposals, as well as the resources to implement them. “Specifically, phased project planning provides for four distinct phases as follows: “Phase A Conceptual/Feasibility Phase . . . “Phase B Preliminary Definition Phase . . . “Phase C Final Definition . . . and Phase ^ Development/Operation. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 269-88)
A $1,366,511 contract for construction of a high temperature heat load testing facility at nasa Flight Research Center was awarded to Santa Fe Engineers, Inc. The facility would be capable of producing temperatures up to 3,000°F on small isolated areas of aircraft; larger areas could be heated up to about 600°. Contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers, which was administering it for NASA, (frc Release 9-65)
The first close-up picture of Mars transmitted by NASA’s mariner IV in an eight-hour broadcast over a distance of 134 million mi. clearly showed the edge of the planet. Transmitted to earth as a series of 5 million radio signals representing zeroes and ones, the picture was received at the Madrid and Johannesburg tracking stations and relayed to jpl. A jpl computer reconstructed the digits to produce images consisting of a series of dots of varying darkness. With transmission at 8.3 dots a second, 8/4 hrs. were required to receive the photograph. The photo sequence began when the bright edge, or limb, of Mars was seen by a light sensor which triggered MARINER iv’s magnetic tape recorder. Initial information came from an experimental device called a “cluge” which built up a rough pattern of the photo on a monitor screen as it was relayed from the tracking stations to jpl. Taken at a low angle with an oblique view, the first photograph did not show the detail expected in later photographs. At a news conference at jpl, Dr. J. A. Van Allen, Univ. of Iowa, said that during its Mars flyby, mariner iv had discovered with a variety of detectors that Mars had little or no magnetic field and, therefore, no radiation belts. This would indicate that the planet lacks a liquid core and thus differs basically from earth. Lack of a metallic core, liquid or solid, would be evidence that the planet never went through the churning internal processes that gave the earth its layered structure. Mars would not have continents formed of lightweight rocks and ocean basins underlain with basaltic rock as found on earth. W. M. Alexander, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, explained that there was no evidence of a belt or unusual concentration of cosmic dust around the planet, nor, pointed out Dr. H. S. Bridge, mit, was there any evidence of a shock wave caused by solar wind flowing across the planet. The solar wind was the steady outflow of thin, hot, high-velocity gas from the sun. Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, when questioned by newsmen on the possibility of higher life existing on Mars, pointed out that the absence of a magnetic field indicated the planet’s atmosphere was hit with all types of radiation and the existence of life would depend on how deep the atmosphere was and the extent of radiation that reached the surface. Asked if he were discouraged about the possibility of finding life on the planet, Dr. Pickering replied: “No, I have always felt we will find some sort of life on Mars.” Dr. Pickering pointed out that one explanation for the reddish hue of Mars might be the presence of limonite, an iron oxide. This would suggest that iron was uniformly spread through the planet rather than being largely concentrated in the core, as on earth. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 1/16/65, 1, 10; Miles, Wash. Post, 7/16/65, A1,A3; Sullivan, NYT, 7/17/65,1, 6)
NASA engineers Harry Carlson and Francis E. McLean believed the sonic boom problem in the operation of the supersonic transport could be solved by fattening the fuselage just forward of the wing, thereby altering the air flow in such a way as to cut the boom to an acceptable level, reported Richard P. Cooke in the Wall Street Journal. Fattening the Sst fuselage forward of the wings, said the NASA engineers, would also help the lift and might permit room for more seats. (Cooke, WSJ, 5/20/65)
Stanley R. Reinartz, previously deputy manager of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s Saturn i/ib Program Office, had been named program manager of the newly established Saturn IB/Centaur office, MSFC announced. The office would manage the program definition and design phase of the three-stage Saturn IB/Centaur space vehicle system, (msfc Release 65-124; Marshall Star, 5/26/65,1)
A turbocompressor, first flight-weight hardware for an eight-kilowatt space power generating system, arrived at NASA Lewis Research Center for testing. It would use a 30-ft. solar mirror to gather the sun’s rays and operate on a Brayton cycle with an unreactive gas as its working fuel. In space, heat source could be a reactor, a radio-isotope, or a solar heat receiver supplied by concentrated sunlight reflected from a mirror. Turbocompressor was built for NASA by Air Research Manufacturing Co. as part of NASA’s Advanced Technology Program, (lrc Release 65-64)
Describing the growing space role of Woomera, Australia’s equivalent to Kennedy Space Center, nasa, R. N. Hughes-Jones said is Missile Space Daily: “Cooperation between Australia and the United States in the field of space research began [in 1957] when installations were set up at Woomera for the International Geophysical Year. They occupied a couple of caravans. “In 1960, in a formal exchange of notes, the governments of the two countries affirmed their intention to extend the cooperative program to space flight operations. “Under it, the Australian Department of Supply establishes and operates stations on behalf of NASA, for tracking, communicating with and obtaining telemetered information from U.S. space vehicles. “Establishment of the station at Carnarvon . . . consolidated at one site nasa’s ground support facilities for the Gemini project. “Tidbinbilla was officially opened on March 19 of this year, and is the first of three NASA facilities programed for the Australian Capital Territory. “The second of the three is at Orroral Valley and is currently under construction. It will track the larger and the more complex of the U.S. scientific satellites, while the third, at Honeysuckle Creek, will support the U.S. Lunar Manned Space-flight Project.” (Hughes-Jones, M/S Daily, 7/27/65)
NASA and the U.S. Army had entered into an agreement which would establish a joint effort in the area of low-speed aeronautical research to be accomplished in facilities at NASA Ames Research Center, Ames reported. The program would be conducted in cooperation with personnel of the U.S. Army Materiel Command, (arc Astrogram, 6/24/65, 1)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, speaking in Minneapolis, Minn., before the Twin Cities Section of aiaa, said: “We believe that activities in the exploration of space, a modern social need recognizable from the passage of the National Aeronautics and Space Act and the appropriation of large sums of money by the Congress, provide the essential environment to accelerate greatly the growth of theoretical and experimental science in many areas. It is true that this accelerated growth in science and technology is essential to the on-going development of space capability, but of deeper significance is the complex dynamic interaction between science, technology, and space exploration, which is essential to the growth of science, technology, and space exploration. In this case, as in the cases previously cited, to use an analogy from bacteriology, there has to be a nutrient solution (money and employment opportunities) to feed the scientific and technological effort, and as soon as this environment is provided, many latent efforts in science and technology begin to assert themselves and move forward. “I believe that this interpretation of certain aspects of the space program is more significant and meaningful than the current concepts of technology utilization and technological spinoff as incidental or serendipitous benefits of space exploration.” (Text)
NASA announced closing of its Santa Monica and Dallas Area Professional Staffing Offices and moving of its New York office to Boston to assist in recruitment program for new Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, (nasa Release 65-156)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala., received an honorary doctorate of laws from Iona College. (NYT, 3/17/65, 38)
Tass reported that the Soviet Union was making extensive use of RANGER vii photographs presented to the Pulkovo Observatory: “Prof. Alexander Markov, who supervised the study of the photos, told a Tass correspondent that the materials received from the United States would be used to study the size and distribution of moon craters, to ascertain the origin and development of the entire lunary relief. He emphasized the particular topicality of these problems ‘in view of the landing of spacecraft on the lunar surface planned for near future.’ ” (Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/26/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the Harvard Business School Club of New York:	“The impact of the space program cannot be described just by a recital of the flow of technology to industry. The NASA system of management, for example, has efficiently mobilized for research and development in aeronautics and space some 400,000 men and women and is utilizing some 20,000 industrial companies under prime and subcontract arrangements. We are handling about 250,000 procurement actions a year, and over 150 universities are involved in the scientific, engineering, and training programs required for the rapid solutions and high standards the program requires.” He continued:	“It should be emphasized that our space program is not a crash effort. It is a planned, deliberate development over a ten-year period. “Through our programs at NASA, we are proving out important new mechanisms through which investments made in science and technology can pay substantial dividends. The social, economic, and political forces at work in our society today are dependent, as never before, on developments in science and technology.” (Text)
Soviet cosmonaut commander Air Force Lt. Gen. Nikolai Kaminin denied foreign newspaper reports that some of his men had died in unannounced space shots. Kaminin, writing in Krasnaya Zvezda, said:	“The names of people who have allegedly died listed in foreign papers are mostly names of nonexistent cosmonauts.” He said the aim of the reports “is to weaken the tremendous impressions made by the achievements of Soviet science and technology in space.” ( ap, Huntsville Times, 4/7/65)
. . . The Biosatellite Program is a second-generation series of carefully planned and selected experiments, including some highly sophisticated experiments which have required several years of baseline study and development. These orbiting recoverable Biosatellites provide an opportunity to test critically major biological hypotheses in the areas of genetics, evolution, and physiology. The Biosatellite studies will help delineate hazards to astronauts and assist in determining and defining effects on degradation of human performance. Prolonged manned flights may involve, for example, physiological changes such as decalcification of bones (particularly the vertebrae), loss of muscle tone and physical capability, and certain cardiovascular changes. Also, the effect of continued sensory deprivation on behavior and performance is unknown. “Twenty experiments have been selected for flight to study the effects of weightlessness and decreased gravity during 3- to 30-day orbital periods. The experiments include a wide variety of plants and animals from single-cell organisms to higher plants and animals. The effects of weightlessness will be studied on the primate, especially the central nervous, the cardiovascular, and the skeletal systems during orbits of 30 days’ duration. “Experiments have been selected to study the effects of weightlessness combined with a known source of radiation to determine if there are any antagonistic or synergistic genetic or somatic effects on various organisms. “Experiments are included to study the effects of the unique environment of the Earth-orbiting satellite and removal from the Earth’s rotation in relation to biological rhythms of plants and animals. . . (Text) Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, outlining progress made toward the objective of solar system exploration, said:	“ ... It would appear . . . that enough experience and know-how has been accumulated to make the move to a five-ton Voyager spacecraft on the Saturn IB Centaur launch vehicle a reasonable next step in the unmanned exploration of the solar system. There is no question but that the size and weight of Voyager, plus the increased demands that will be placed upon it, will make the development of the Voyager a complex and difficult undertaking. But certainly, the Orbiting Geophysical Observatory and Mariner have shown us that we can deal successfully with complexity. As a matter of fact, the increased weight and size may afford considerable relief from the need to tailor every last function to a gnat’s eyebrow in order to achieve the intended mission, as has been the case hitherto. . . .” Dr. Newell said that reliability was probably the most difficult problem for deep-space long-duration missions and that “. . . the development of adequate spacecraft systems will not be the problem. The most serious threat to long life operation will lie in the potential random failure of one or more [spacecraft] components.” He added that this would probably be an ever-decreasing problem as we gained experience with launch vehicles and that “. . . launch vehicle reliability is far less a difficult program than that of long spacecraft lifetime for very deep-space missions.” In conclusion, Dr. Newell said:	"... Nevertheless, the time has arrived when many thoughtful people urge a vigorous program of solar system exploration. The President has in his Fiscal Year 1966 budget request included funds to support initial conceptual and design studies of a Voyager spacecraft. Funds are also included for the development of a launch vehicle consisting of the Saturn IB plus the Centaur. Final decision as to whether to move ahead with the development of the Voyager spacecraft would come a little over a year from now.” (Text) Missiles and Rockets reported that scientists at the Symposium had differing opinions on Mars goals. Gilbert V. Levin of Hazleton Laboratories opposed the 1971 scheduled landing of the Voyager:	“. . . although we insist that Mars should not be contaminated by terrestrial life before we search for Martian life, we fail to recognize that this is tantamount to saying that the U.S. must get there first, because the U.S. appears to be the only nation willing and able to sterilize its spacecraft. “I’m all for Voyager, but an initial step in the Voyager program should be some early landers at the earliest opportunities. We should go ahead and devote efforts to develop a program to land on Mars in 1969.” Temple Neumann, Automated Biological Laboratory program engineer with Philco’s Aeronutronic Div., agreed with Levin:	“If the planetary biological exploration task is to be performed in a sound scientific manner, the U.S. must do it—first.” Lawrence B. Hall, NASA Special Assistant for Planetary Quarantine, re-emphasized “the disastrous effects that an unsterilized spacecraft could have on Mars. ... If a single micro-organism should land on Mars and have a replication time of 30 days, it could grow to the bacterial population of Earth in eight years. This could not only compete with Martian life but could result in drastic changes in the geochemical and atmospheric characteristics of the planet.” JPL’s Gerald A. Soffen said that “since the decision between Mariner landers and Voyager missions has not been made yet, scientific experimenters have to think in terms both of small payloads and large ones. Numerous small missions would provide a good opportunity to perform experiments in different locations and during different planetary seasons.” Bruce C. Murray, of Cal Tech, said:	“. . . finding the right location, getting there, and interpreting the biological experiment results in a way that would indicate definitively whether life was or was not present would call for at least 100 times more photography than was currently assumed.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, late NASA Deputy Administrator, was among the 11 recipients of the 1965 National Medal of Science announced by President Johnson. Established by Congress in 1959 for scientists who had made outstanding contributions in their fields, the award never before had been made posthumously. President Johnson said: “Hugh Dryden’s recent death ended nearly 50 years of singleminded devotion and effort by one of the most distinguished civil servants this country has ever known. Beloved by all his associates and respected throughout the world, Dr. Dryden more than any other man led us into the age of jet aircraft and space exploration.” (Pres. Doc., 12/20/65, 585; Wask. Post, 12/12/65, A5; Pomfret, NYT, 12/12/65, 78)
Dr. Winston E. Kock, Director of NASA Electronics Research Center, was guest of Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, on a tour of MSC facilities. While in Houston, Dr. Kock addressed the annual banquet of the Institute of Navigation. In his speech he revealed ERC would investigate possibilities of new guidance techniques for future ion-propelled (or other low-thrust) spacecraft, employing Mossbauer radiation as an accelerometer to monitor systems performance on the spacecraft. He termed Mossbauer radiation “the most precise electromagnetic frequency yet known” in guidance applications, (msc Roundup, 5/14/65, 7)
Ground test version of the Saturn V booster (s-IC-t) was fired by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for 41 sec., msfc announced. It was the third and longest firing of the five engines, which developed 7.5 million lbs. thrust. The firing seemed entirely satisfactory, based on preliminary evaluation of data, (msfc Release 65-131)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Douglas Aircraft Co1, for nine additional s-ivb flight stages to be used as the third stage of the Saturn V launch vehicle being developed at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Work would also include related spares and launch support services. Value of the S-IVB contract presently totaled some $312 million. The new work was expected to exceed $150 million. (nasa Release 65-209; msfc Release 65-162; Marshall Star, 6/30/65, 1)
Several U.S. and foreign scientists would be guests on the 11th Antarctic expedition of the Soviet Union, Tass announced. Leonid Balakshin of the Arctic and Antarctic Institute in Leningrad said that 50 foreign scientists had already spent winters at the Mirny Observatory and other Russian stations near the South Pole. “The exchange of polar scientists is striking evidence of the constructive cooperation between Soviet and foreign explorers on the sixth continent,” Balakshin said. (Reuters, NYT, 8/21/65, 21)
nasa had awarded $300,000 grant to the Dept, of Interior’s Bureau of Mines for a three-year research program on the potential use of lunar materials to support manned exploration of the moon. The research team, utilizing data from nasa’s unmanned lunar programs, would study the possible production, processing, and uses of materials on the moon for the construction, supply, and operation of manned lunar bases. Faculty consultants and graduate students from Univ. of Minnesota would assist as part of the Bureau’s program to develop future capabilities at educational institutions, (nasa Release 65-144)
Cost and performance comparability of large solid-propellant rocket motors was topic of article by G.W.G. Van Winkle, Boeing Co., in Astronautics & Aeronautics. The information was based on research obtained in study made by Boeing for msfc. In the same issue, Dr. Walter G. Berl of Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physic Laboratory discussed combustion instability in solid-propellant rocket motors. Four types of instability were listed, and the status of solutions to these problems was discussed. Dr. Berl concluded that it was “too much to expect that the always latent instability problem has been banished from the new propellants of the future. It is more likely that the most obvious troubles can be eliminated, partly through analysis, partly through recognition and exploitation of past trends. . . .”	(A&A, 2/65, 48-61) During February: In a report titled “Federal Funds for Research, Development, and other Scientific Activities,” National Science Foundation said DOD obligations for r&d increased each year from $2.3 billion in 1956 to an estimated $7.5 billion in 1964. Although survey predicted a small decrease to $7.2 hillion for 1965, the 10-yr. period showed a 200% gain. Support to applied research accounted for about 22% of 1965 r&d Defense funds, with 2 or 3% used for basic research; about 75% went for development. Profit-making organizations had done most of dod’s r&d during the 10 yrs., increasing from about 50% in 1956 to 65% in 1965. The report added: “On the other hand, the relative share of Defense research and development performed intramurally decreased each year from ahout 40% in 1956 to 21% in 1963, but an increase to 25% was expected in 1965. . . (nsf Rpt. 65-13) • Experimental model isotopic thruster was tested at AEC Mound Laboratory, using heat from radioactive decay of polonium 210. Mound Laboratory was continuing development of polonium 210 fuel forms and fuel encapsulating techniques for specific space applications. The isotopic small rocket engine, or thruster, concept envisions use of a radioiso tope to heat hydrogen, which is expelled through a nozzle to produce low thrust. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1965, 149)
NASA announced appointment of Bernard Moritz, NASA Assistant General Counsel for Procurement, as Assistant Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs. S. Neil Hosenball, Chief Counsel at NASA Lewis Research Center, would succeed Moritz, (nasa Release 65-387)
NASA, at DOD’s request, had halted syncom Il’s westward drift at 68° east longitude over the Indian Ocean. Under the direction of project managers at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, the command signals had been sent from the Syncom station in Salisbury, Australia, beginning Feb. 20 and ending Feb. 24. No future major locational corrections were anticipated; SYNCOM II should remain in same general area indefinitely, (nasa Release 65-72)
U.S. Chamber of Commerce released a report entitled “Criteria for Federal Support of Research and Development,” which proposed the establishment of a forum for debating scientific and technical issues (such as space exploration and desalting of the oceans) before they became national policy. The council, to be composed of representatives of industry, labor, the Government, and the academic industry, would investigate the inherent worth of proposed programs and their value to society to increase public understanding of issues that were usually decided by the Government alone and debated afterward. (Clark, NYT, 1/11/65, 46)
Article in Soviet Life by Academician Anatoli Blagonravov described the “three-directions of modern astronautics”: “The first is the study of the earth’s upper atmosphere and the portion of space adjoining our planet. . . . “The second is the study and exploration of . . . the moon. “The third is the study of solar space, including the nearest planets, Mars and Venus. “Soviet scientists are working in all three directions. “The first to be launched, always, are the automatic scouts, followed by men. “. . . The final stage in the solution of the first problem—exploration of near space—will probably be to set up a permanent manned space observatory-town, with bilateral contact maintained through rockets. Of course, long before this, reliable systems of meteorological sputniks, worldwide television sputniks, navigation sputniks, etc., will have been established. . . . “Several interesting moves have been taken in the second direction [lunar exploration]. . . . The automatic devices have not yet explored the moon’s surface in detail, have not yet determined the conditions prevailing there. Presumably, they will be followed by animals. Only after the safe return of the ship to earth has been assured will man go to the moon. “Manned landing will be preceded by numerous earth-moon flights. In the course of these flights the conditions along the entire route will be studied, detailed maps of the lunar surface made, and lunar space investigated. Need I add that all these flights will be made by teams of scientists only ? “The first stage in the exploration of the moon will be to set up a permanent research station on its surface. . . . “In the third direction—the exploration of near solar space and near planets—only the first steps have been taken, the first flights of automatic scouts. . . . The interplanetary routes will be explored again and again by automatic stations that will bring back much needed information on space and the nature of the planets to which they are sent. Only then will the first interplanetary expeditions take off. They will carry even larger teams than the lunar reconnaissance expeditions.” (Soviet Life, 5/65, 48) During May: Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, President of Cal Tech, discussed objectives of the space program and what men hoped to learn through the space program about the moon, the planets, the sun, interplanetary space, and the earth itself. He concluded: “Man’s growing understanding of the nature and constitution of the universe had led to new advances in our knowledge of physics and of chemistry; and these in turn have led to applications of this knowledge to the development of things which men have found useful. We have never been able to predict in advance what the usefulness would be of new knowledge about the nature of the physical universe. All we know is that, by and large, new knowledge always has proved useful— and often it has proved useful in the most unexpected and unforeseeable ways. No one would have predicted that Newton’s enunciation of the laws of motion would lead to the age of machinery; that Faraday’s experiments would lead to the age of electricity; or that Einstein’s theory of relativity and Bohr’s theory of the atom would lead to the atomic bomb and atomic power. “We do know one thing: that scientific research which has been aimed at purely practical problems though it often has been of great value, has over a long run been of less value in producing wholly new things than has the research aimed solely at the extension of knowledge. The extension of man’s knowledge is the basic and the overriding purpose of the space exploration program.” (Text, JPL Lab-Oratory, 5/65, 10-12)
President Johnson told Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young during a telephone call: “Your mission . . . confirms once again the vital role that man has to play in space exploration, and particularly in the peaceful use of the frontier of space. I am sure you would be the first to say that on this flight, as well as on our other manned flights in space, there were heroes on the ground as well as in space, and the record made by men like Jim Webb, Dr. Dryden, and Dr. Seamans, as well as all of those at the Cape, Cape Kennedy, and around the world, is a very proud record under Project Mercury and now on Project Gemini. And to all of those who have helped to make our space flights safe and successful, I want to . . . say ‘Well done’.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/24/65)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn) were briefly united with their families at Ellington afb near Houston. The astronauts had flown to Ellington from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, where they had been undergoing medical debriefing. After a short visit at Manned Spacecraft Center, the astronauts left their families for more debriefing sessions and tests, (upi, NYT, 9/3/65, 10)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said at msc that nasa’s fy 1967 budget would be limited to about the same level as the fy 1966 budget ($5.3 billion) because of military expenses in Viet Nam. He said nasa would like “$200 million or $300 million more” for fy 1967. “With the war in Viet Nam, I doubt there’ll be more money for NASA. And NASA needs more money than it is getting now to use its team with top efficiency.” (Houston Post, 8/30/65)
100 university, research laboratory, and government scientists met in Falmouth, Mass., to recommend modifications or additions to NASA’s Apollo Program and Apollo Extension Systems lunar science program. Participants included three astronauts—R. Walter Cunningham and two of the six scientist-astronauts selected on June 28, 1965: Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt of the U.S. Geological Survey and Dr. Frank C. Michel of Rice Univ. This meeting resulted in recommendation of a 10-year post-Apollo lunar exploration program of mainly manned missions, with wide variety of scientific experiments in geology, geochemistry, geophysics, and bioscience. Top priority recommended for early Apollo landing missions was collection of greatest possible number and variety of lunar material samples. Conference was sponsored by the Manned Space Science Program of NASA’s office of Space Science and Applications. Report of the conference (nasa sp-88) was later published in January 1966. (nasa Release 66-4; NASA sp-88; nasa Release 65-239)
Studies on flight handling qualities of a manned lifting body reentry vehicle during the later stages of reentry and during the landing approach were being jointly conducted by NASA and Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory at nasa’s Flight Research Center using a t-33 jet aircraft specifically modified for af Systems Command by Cornell. Cornell was working under a NASA-funded $231,000 contract which also included human transfer-function studies and ground simulation of the lifting body, (fro Release 12-65)
Soviet Union had asked the Federation Aeronautique Internationale to officially confirm two spacecraft world records established by the crew of VOSKHOD II on March 18, 1965, reported Interavia Air Letter. Applications were for first extravehicular activity of a man from a spacecraft in orbit and a new altitude record of 497.7 km. (309 mi.). {Interavia Air Letter, 9/22/65, 6)
afsc had selected nine graduates of its Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb, Calif., to participate in crew performance studies for manned space flight to be conducted by NASA at the Martin Co. Three seven-day lunar landing simulations would be made using a simulated Apollo lunar landing mission. Each would utilize a three-man crew, (afsc Release)
Dr. George B. Kistiakowsky, professor of chemistry at Harvard Univ. and former special assistant to President Eisenhower for science and technology, was selected Vice President of the National Academy of Sciences for four-year term beginning July 1, 1965. nas also elected 35 new members in recognition of their distinguished and continuing achievements in original research. National Academy of Engineering, holding its first annual meeting in coordination with NAS, elected 19 new members including Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, (nas Releases; nas-nrc News Report, 4/65)
In a speech to the Interact Conference of First Rotary District 696 in Orlando, Fla., ksc’s Richard E. Dutton, said: “. . . NASA’s major launch facility for space vehicles and unmanned and manned spacecraft [is] the John E. Kennedy Space Center and its new Merritt Island Spaceport. I hope you noticed that I used the term Spaceport, instead of Moonport, as it is often referred to in the news media. We call it a Spaceport because its basic concept is not to exist as a research and development facility for any one mission only; it is being created to function as an actual port, with a space vehicle launch rate that may be some day as high as one manned launch per month. “However, just as important to consider is the spaceport’s capacity for growth. It can accommodate launch vehicles with up to 40 million pounds of thrust, 32.5 million pounds more than the Saturn V here can deliver. Because of this, the United States has not invested three quarters of a billion dollars in a facility which will serve only to launch a manned lunar mission. It has acquired a permanent installation which will serve the requirements of the National Space Program for years to come. “But these facilities, like the lunar landing mission, are themselves only a manifestation of a greater entity—people. At present, 2,500 NASA and 6,300 contractor employees work at the Center. By 1967, when the spaceport becomes operational, 3,000 government employees and 10,000 contractor employees will be employed.” (Text)
Decision to proceed with the Mol received comment in Science: “Some proponents of MOL believe that, as insurance against ‘technological surprise’ and as a test of improved methods of intelligence gathering, the project will lead to greater stability in relations between the United States and the Communist world. But skeptics fear that MOL will carry the arms race into space. Despite a long hunger, the Air Force has never before been permitted a role in manned space flight, a function heretofore reserved exclusively for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.” (Science, 9/17/65, 1357)
U.S. would withdraw in six months from the Warsaw Convention limiting the liability of international airlines to $8,300 for each passenger killed or injured in air accidents, unless a new agreement was reached substantially increasing carrier liability, the State Department reported. U.S. had refused to ratify a 1955 amendment to the Convention raising the limit to $16,000, was arguing for a $100,000-limit liability. (U.S. State Dept. Release 268) “. . . advancing our competence in nuclear technology is of critical importance to the future of the national space program. Nuclear power and nuclear propulsion are musts for the more complex and long duration missions of the future. . . . “We all know that the nuclear going in space won’t be easy. . . . Yet I am confident that the technical problems are resolvable and the investments warranted. . . .” Dr. Welsh delivered a warning to “space planners” to stop sitting on nuclear propulsion concepts and to expedite development programs. “We must not wait for clear-cut space requirements for these nuclear systems before moving forthrightly with their development. If we wait for precise mission definitions the technology will not be available when it’s needed. Moreover, we can be sure that our Soviet competitors will take positive actions, whether we do or not. For this country to sit back on its technological haunches and let someone else, bolder and more imaginative, show us the way is unthinkable to me.” (Text) and procedures. We hope that by 1971 ... we will have made three significant improvements in the international system. First, we hope to improve the ability of the system to observe the global atmosphere and to provide fuller data for weather forecasting. In part this improvement will rest on the Tiros Operational Satellite System . . . which the United States will launch into orbit next year. Second, we hope to extend the benefits of modern computer technology throughout the world—by utilizing the computer to prepare weather analyses and forecasts routinely for the entire globe. And third, we hope to develop an international communications network for the timely exchange of raw data and for the rapid dissemination of analyses and forecasts.” (Text) Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa LaRC, delivered a keynote address on “Advances in Aircraft Technology.” He discussed the importance of scientific research to the continued leadership of the U.S. in the field of air transportation with particular reference to the next decade. Representing NASA Flight Research Center at the technical sessions was Joseph Walker, Chief of Research Pilots, who spoke on the X-15 research airplane as a tool for progress in hypersonic flight. (LaRC Release)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, predicted in a luncheon address to participants in the National Youth Science Camp “a revolution in aeronautics within the next 15 years” as a result of advances being made now. Breakthroughs being made in development of more powerful rockets, heat resistant metals, and more sophisticated engines would soon lead to vertical takeoff craft capable of undergoing sustained flight at speeds up to 12 times the speed of sound, General Schriever postulated. (Text; Wash. Eve. Star, 7/9/65)
Address by James G. Allen of the Univ. of Colorado before the American Astronautical Society on the impact of space exploration was inserted in the Congressional Record by Sen. Peter H. Dominick (R-Colo.) : “The space revolution of the mid-20th century must be regarded as the most significant of all those great revolutions of history which have affected the fate of man. By definition, a revolution does produce a series of pyramiding effects, one building up on another. But, in the last analysis, these effects focus upon, and culminate in, truly significant changes in the social and economic relationships which shape one society. “The space revolution of the mid-twentieth century thus is unique, as its course and direction will affect every individual on each of the five continents. Moreover, its effects will lie in an entirely new dimension—beyond the physical realm of man’s earthly existence and into the boundless areas of space itself. The space revolution of our day has resulted from the theories, hypotheses and observations of the scientists as their conclusions were tested and applied by the eingineers and technicians.” {CR, 10/22/65, 27886-88)
NASA and U.S. Army Materiel Command adopted an agreement for joint participation in low-speed and Vtol aeronautical research. The research program was centered at NASA Ames Research Center, (nmi
NASA and India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy (dae) signed a memorandum of understanding for a joint space research program to be conducted in India by NASA and the Indian National Commission for Space Research. Program would include two sounding rocket launchings to investigate upper atmosphere wind shears, turbulence, and diffusion by chemical release payloads; six launchings to investigate relationship between wind shears and sporadic E; two launchings to investigate the equatorial electrojet; and two launchings to measure electron and ion densities and other phenomena in the D region. DAE would make available the scientific payloads; range and range support facilities; and personnel for conducting the scientific experiments, for range support, and launching operations. NASA would furnish the sounding rockets, two test payloads, cameras, and nose cones as well as necessary training for DAE personnel at NASA centers. No exchange of funds was provided for. All scientific results of experiments would be made freely available to the world scientific community. (nasa Release 65-259)
Six of eight oso II experiments had been turned on and gave “excellent” data, NASA reported. The two experiments not yet operating were the ultraviolet scanning spectrometer provided by Harvard Univ. and the ultraviolet spectrophotometer provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Both had been turned on but were turned off to prevent damage to themselves or to the satellite when irregularities in the data received were noted. All other functions of the satellite— such as solar power supply, telemetry system, tape recorder, temperature control, and command system—were normal. (NASA Release 65-37)
NASA Lewis Research Center scientist Charles A. Low, Jr., was corecipient (with William R. Mickelsen) of a patent for a radio-isotope generator with attached propulsion system. Low and Mickelsen would use a colloidal particle thrustor to provide the propellant. Research was underway at lrc on use of colloidal particles as propellant in various thrustor designs. The system could cut interplanetary flight durations by as much as one-half or increase interplanetary payloads by substantial amounts, (lrc Release 65-39)
Japan launched Lambda III—2, the largest rocket that country had yet developed. The 62-ft., three-stage rocket attained an altitude of 620 mi. and impacted northwest of the Mariana Islands, some 1,130 mi. from the launch site at Tokyo University’s space center on Kyushu. (M&R, 2/8/65, 8)
Formation of a Voyager Landing-Capsule Task Team at Ames and Langley Research Centers to assist JPL during early phases of the design was announced by NASA. This would include research and analytical support, (arc Release)
Theo E. Sims, Manager of NASA Langley Research Center’s Project Ram, reported results of reentry communications blackout research before the IEEE national convention in New York. Sims said significant progress had been made toward understanding the fundamental nature of the blackout problem and suggested that vehicle shape selection, signal frequency choice, use of static magnetic fields, and material addition to the flow field were all possible solutions. Flight experiments, he indicated, had shown the materials addition technique to be useful at speeds up to 12,000 mph, and an experiment to be flown on the first manned Gemini spacecraft would attempt to demonstrate the effectiveness of water addition at even higher speeds. (LaRC Release)
Dr. Winston E. Kock, Director of NASA Electronics Research Center, announced that NASA had authorized architects to proceed with detailed designs for a 26-story tower building, a three-story microwave laboratory, and an auditorium-cafeteria building at ERC. Construction would begin next spring, provided approval were given for urban renewal proceedings in the Kendall Square-Cambridge site. The buildings would be built with $15 million already approved by Congress, (erc Release 65-31)
Two Presidential citations were among 12 awards presented to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center employees recently, msfc announced. Ralph Butler of the Aero-Astrodynamics Laboratory had suggested an improved method of measuring local atmospheric conditions by using radio-controlled model airplanes. Franklin Williams of the Saturn V Program Office had made two cost-reduction proposals, one concerning x-ray radiation protection and the other recommending an inexpensive covering for clean room insulation. Butler and Williams saved the Government an estimated $306,000. (msfc Release 65-182)
mariner tv approached within 5.500 mi. of Mars and took the first close-up pictures in history of that planet. At 10:28 a.m, edt, a signal from the tracking station at Johannesburg, South Africa, had commanded mariner iv to turn on the encounter equipment. Obeying the command 12 min. later—the time it took the signal to reach the spacecraft across 134,000,000 mi.— mariner iv’s scan platform with TV cameras and two Mars sensors began searching for the planet; the tape recorder began a 10-hr. warmup. By 1:10 p.m., the spacecraft’s sensors had found the proper angle from which to photograph Mars. On orders from JPL, the Johannesburg tracking station ordered the camera and its light sensor to stop the scan at 7/10 of a degree of the optimum aiming point. Throughout the day, the spacecraft continued transmitting scientific and engineering information via the telemetry system. At 7:50 p.m., the Mars probe made its first “sighting” contact with the planet. The telemetry system then shifted and began sending only information from the scientific experiments. At 8:20 p.m. edt, the first light from Mars struck the light sensor aligned with the camera and the 25-min. picture-taking sequence began. 21 frames were exposed and recorded on magnetic tape to be telemetered to earth over a 10-day period. Transmission of each picture would require 8 hrs. 25 min. Near the end of the fly-by, signals received at Goldstone tracking station had indicated a malfunction in the tape system. Telemetry received after the pass, however, showed no indication that trouble had occurred. At 10:12, mariner iv flew behind Mars, remained obscured for 53 min., and re-emerged beyond the planet, its transmitter beaming radio signals through the Martian atmosphere. From this occultation experiment, scientists might be able to gauge the depth, thickness, and component gases of Mars’ atmosphere by measuring how much these signals were bent and their speeds changed. Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, told a news conference that signals indicated all instruments on the spacecraft had performed properly during the flyby, (nasa Release 65-227; Sullivan, NYT, 7/15/65; Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/15/65; AP, Balt. Sun, 7/15/65) July 14: A 44-day test of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Space Environment Simulator (Ses) had just ended, gsfc announced. In this project, the early performance of a scientific spacecraft in orbit around the earth was compared to the performance of a sister craft “orbited” inside the Ses: the uk-d scientific spacecraft—backup model for ARIEL II (uk-ii) launched successfully into earth orbit by U.K. March 27, 1964—was “flown” inside the Ses; flight plan for UK-D followed general flight plan of initial flight days of ARIEL n. Preliminary data indicated operation of the Ses was good throughout the test period. The spacecraft inside the simulator even experienced the same minor malfunction its sister spacecraft had experienced in orbit, (gsfc Release G-17-65)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a one-year $1.6-million contract to Aero Spacelines, Inc., for flying large rocket cargoes in its Super Guppy aircraft—the only aircraft in existence which could fulfill the size and weight requirement for the S-IVB stage of the Saturn vehicle, the Saturn IB and Saturn V instrument units, and the Lunar Excursion Module adapter. The agreement also provided for an extension of a previous NASA-Aero Spacelines contract for use of the Pregnant Guppy aircraft, (msfc Release 65-311)
The U.S. should take the lead in establishing an international patent system, Dept, of Commerce Deputy Assistant Secretary for Science and Technology William W. Eaton said at a patent conference in Washington, D.C. At present, an inventor must take out separate patents in each of several foreign countries or run the risk of his idea being exploited. The new system would eliminate this problem by having one international patent cover each invention, Mr. Eaton said. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 6/27/65, 53)
A prototype experimental life-support system enclosed in a simulated space cabin was placed on a ship in San Diego for delivery to NASA Langley Research Center. Designed and constructed by the Convair Div. of General Dynamics Corp., the system was intended for use in a research program to enlarge the scope of life-support technology. Within the device were subsystems to:	(1) extract oxygen from the carbon dioxide exhaled by the occupants; (2) convert waste liquids and humidity condensates to drinking water; (3) provide control of internal temperature and humidity; (4) allow storage and handling of a freeze-dried food supply for four test subjects for 90 days at a time; (5) remove from the cabin atmosphere all contaminating vapors which might be generated; and (6) provide personal hygiene facilities. (LaRC Release)
President Johnson sent to the House and Senate his message transmitting annual report on the U.S. space activities. In his letter, President Johnson said: “The advances of 1964 were gratifying and heartening omens of the gains and good to come from our determined national undertaking in exploring the frontiers of space. While this great enterprise is still young, we began during the year past to realize its potential in our life on earth. As this report notes, practical uses of the benefits of space technology were almost commonplace around the globe—warning us of gathering storms, guiding our ships at sea, assisting our mapmakers and serving, most valuably of all, to bring the peoples of many nations closer together in joint peaceful endeavors. “Substantial strides have been made in a very brief span of time— and more are to come. We expect to explore the moon, not just visit it or photograph it. We plan to explore and chart planets as well. We shall expand our earth laboratories into space laboratories and extend our national strength into the space dimension.” A hypersonic aircraft—one that could fly the Atlantic in less than an hour—had reached the stage where models were being constructed for wind tunnel tests. President Johnson’s report disclosed: “Two structural models embodying design concepts applicable to the fuselage of a hydrogen-fueled hypersonic aircraft were being constructed for testing at 1,500-2,500° F—temperatures likely to be encountered in hypersonic flight. Equipment was developed for inducing angular oscillations in the test section flow of a large transonic wind tunnel and will be used to obtain the dynamic response of wind tunnel models.” (CR, 1/27/65, 1366; U.S. News, 2/2/65)
Hopper,” a versatile rocket-propelled Lunar Flying Vehicle (Lfv) to transport Apollo astronauts on exploration flights of the moon’s surface, had been designed by Bell Aerosystems Co. as a result of a 12-month study conducted for NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Bell announced. The 400-lb., four-legged, rectangular Lfv would be desk size and propelled by a cluster of five 100-lb-thrust rocket engines; it could fly 50 mi. nonstop. Bell also disclosed receipt of a $489,898 follow-on nasa contract to design a Manned Flying System (Mfs) capable of carrying one astronaut-scientist and 300 lbs. of equipment or two astronauts. Intended primarily as an exploratory device, the Mfs would be able to fly 15 mi. round trip without fueling. (Bell Aerosystems Co. Release)
Dr. Eric Ogden, Chief of the Environmental Biology Division at NASA Ames Research Center, was recipient of a Research Committee Citation presented by the American Heart Association in New York. His work for the Heart Association had been primarily in planning and evaluating heart research projects, (arc Release 65-1)
Detection of the existence of life on Mars could be accomplished by a manned Mars-orbit mission without the necessity of a Mars landing, according to two NASA Ames Research Center officials in a Copley News Service interview'. Alvin Seiff, Chief of Ames’ Vehicle Environment Div., and David E. Reese, Jr., Assistant Chief of that division, said life on Mars could be detected from as far away as “several hundred thousand feet” from the planet’s surface. “We think we could get good accuracy during even hypersonic flight around Mars. . . . We don’t need to land men on Mars to find out what goes on there. We can find out about its atmosphere and whether life exists there through the use of a variety of instruments we now have at hand,” Seiff said. Seiff and Reese were in Denver attending aas Symposium on Unmanned Exploration of the Solar System. (Macomber, CNS, San Diego Union, 2/10/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at the dedication of the Space Science Laboratory at Univ. of Chicago, said: “The space effort is really a research and development competition—a competition for technological pre-eminence, which demands and creates the quest for excellence. . . . Should we fall behind in the area of space technology, we would jeopardize our ability to progress, on earth as well as in space. At stake is the technological balance of power in the world. . . . “The influence of our technological progress and prowess is and has been the deciding factor in keeping the peace; technological and scientific capabilities constitute a basic source of national power. Preeminence in the field is an instrument in international relations, and influences our dealings with other nations involving peace and freedom in the world. . . . “By mastering the restrained but decisive use of the power that modern science and technology give us, we are providing the Nation with the capability to achieve greater cooperation toward a world consistent with the ideals we seek for others as well as ourselves. . . .” (Text) nasa still assumed that life on Mars was possible, Dr. Norman H. Horowitz, JPL, said at the dedication. Although photographs relayed by MARINER IV had indicated Mars was extremely cold and lacked oxygen and water vapor, some terrestrial organisms might live comfortably in this environment, he said. Horowitz felt that the unexplained seasonal color changes in the dark regions of Mars might indicate plant growth. (Kotulak, Chic. Trib., 10/14/65)
A bolt of lightning struck and killed Albert J. Treib, a construction superintendent at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, as he and his crew poured concrete during a misty rain. The bolt slightly injured five other workmen. (Schreiber, Miami Her., 8/4/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced at a press conference during the 23rd annual Hampton County (S.C.) Watermelon Festival that the Gemini V manned space flight would be an eight-day mission—the time required to fly to the moon, explore its surface, and return to earth. Webb also disclosed that NASA would announce next week the selection of six scientist astronauts. Speaking at “Mendel Rivers Day” ceremony, Webb pointed out that Congressman Mendel Rivers, Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, “has steadily supported the Nation’s effort to build strength in space.” Webb also said: “Thoughtful students of national power and its uses are increasingly aware that America’s security as well as her leadership of the Free World, depends directly upon our progress in mastering and using space. “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration cooperates closely with the Department of Defense, to ensure that the technological progress we make in developing the peaceful uses of space will be drawn upon as needed to help keep the peace—in space and on earth. “As you can readily understand, the development of military space systems follows those basic research fields which provide the scientific understanding and technological capability to make such systems possible. It is NASA’s job, as the space research and development agency, to provide this basic knowledge and know-how.” Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young accompanied Webb to this festival, (nasa Release; Text; Aerospace Historian, 10/65, 111-14)
Gemini 5 spacecraft was flown by cargo carrier to Kennedy Space Center, nasa, for the seven-day flight scheduled for Aug. 9. (upi, NYT, 6/20/65)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began a two-day seminar with a panel discussion on science and technology, with specific reference to aeronautics. Speaker of the House John W. McCormack opened the seminar. Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences began executive hearings on the subject of launch vehicles. (NASA LAR iv/17)
Max Quatinetz of nasa Lewis Research Center addressed International Powder Metallurgy Conference in New York. He discussed LRC research in adding fibered metals to tungsten to strengthen that metal, which has a high melting point but is brittle and difficult to work. Quatinetz described a new method of producing the fibered compounds —extrusion of powdered metals. Researchers had formed tungsten composites containing high-temperature additives such as oxides, borides, nitrides, and carbides; they had noted increases in the metal’s stress-rupture life of up to 50 times. Quatinetz observed that the new method of fibering would have wide potential application in materials research, (lrc Release 65—45)
At the request of Labor Secretary W. Willard Wirtz and chief Federal mediator William Simkin, the International Association of Machinists authorized 200 strikers to resume work on the Gemini spacecraft at Kennedy Space Center. The machinists struck McDonnell Aircraft Corp., Gemini’s builder, on Nov. 18 in a dispute over wages and working conditions. Not only had the strike threatened to ground Gemini vn, scheduled for launch December 4, it had also halted, and continued to halt, work on the f-4 Phantom jet fighter at the McDonnell St. Louis plant, (ap, Wash. Post, 11/23/65, A8; Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 11/23/65)
Twenty Llrv Program personnel at nasa Flight Research Center were honored at an informal ceremony. Six employees received plaques for special and outstanding contributions to the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle project. ( frc X-Press, 2/19/65, 1)
Two groups of youths were apprehended by a security patrol at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, for trespassing near Gemini 5 on Launch Complex 37. Unauthorized entry to the site is a Federal offense. (Wash. Post, 8/20/65)	_
The growing debate about what the next step in manned spaceflight should be was roughly divided into three schools, according to Howard Simons in the Washington Post: (1) a negative “Let’s do nothing at all after landing men on the moon” school; (2) a “wild-space-yonder” school wanting to try everything; and (3) a “school of thought that would make do with what we are now developing through modification and imagination before taking expensive new steps into the heavens.” He said the latter view would mean using Saturn IBs and Vs to launch modified Apollo spacecraft on largely scientific space ventures, possibly as early as 1968. (Simons, Wash. Post, 11/28/65) November 28-December 1: The Committee on Space of the National Citizens’ Commission on International Cooperation recommended nine possible areas of international space cooperation at the White House Conference on International Cooperation: (1) new launching sites for satellites; (2) multipurpose navigation satellite systems; (3) experimental data-gathering satellite system; (4) synoptic sounding rocket investigations; (5) applications of communications satellites; (6) mutual assistance between national and international tracking and data acquisition networks; (7) exploration of the distant planets; (8) remote sensing; and (9) international convention to govern human activity on the moon. (Text) Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, in opening remarks at the session on international space cooperation, said: “I want to support what I understand to be the central argument of the report. “We have done well so far in pursuing our objective of international cooperation. “Our cooperative projects have borne witness to our peaceful aims in space . . . involved foreign intellectual and material resources in our programs . . . and established patterns of cooperation that further our goal of a stable world. “But the future demands a new level of effort.” (Text) The Honorable Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, speaking at the White House Conference, said: “We live at a time when the whole world is being made over socially, economically, scientifically and even intellectually. Our era has witnessed such dramatic achievements as flight faster than sound, the splitting of the atom, miracle drugs, and manned satellites hurling through space. Rapid and turbulent changes in the scientific, economic, and social fields, almost too numerous to name, daily defy evaluation on the basis of prior standards and experience. Vistas of endless space have opened as man’s horizons have widened to encompass the universe. At a pace beyond dreaming the whole pattern of our existence is being reshaped. To ensure that these changes work for the benefit of mankind, law must be developed rapidly enough in the world community to cope with the problems they raise and to harness their potential for peaceful and productive ends.” (Text) The Committee on Science and Technology of the National Citizens’ Commission on International Cooperation said at the Conference that cooperation in science already “is an extensive and integral part of life” but that the same thing was not true in the development qnd application of technology. The Committee urged an international earthquake prediction program, a world oceanography organization, and a “greatly accelerated” program to disseminate technology “for improving the basic needs of man—such as nutrition, sanitation, health, shelter, and communications.” (Text) An Inter-American Skyway, linking cities in Latin America with each other and to North American centers, was suggested by the Committee on Aviation. The Skyway was needed, the Committee said, because airports, controlled airways, navigation aids, safety rules, and other services “lag behind the speed, number and variety” of aircraft on Latin American routes, as they do throughout the world. (Text) November 29: Second Orbiting Solar Observatory (oso ii), after exceeding its operational life expectancy by 50 per cent, had been placed in coasting mode by NASA. Gas supply for the pitch-control in the stabilization system had been depleted, allowing the spacecraft to exceed acceptable tolerances in pointing at the sun. Data would be collected from time to time when the spacecraft did properly observe the sun. oso II, launched Feb. 3, 1965, had completed more than 4,100 orbits and returned some 2,200,000 bits of scientific data each orbit. The nine advanced oso ii experiments were designed to further the work of oso I as well as to extend measurements of the study of solar x-rays, gamma rays, and ultraviolet radiation, (nasa Release 65-367; GSFC Historian)
The first major Saturn V flight component, a 33-ft.-dia., 60,000-lb. corrugated tail section which would support the booster’s five 1.5-million-lb.-thrust engines, arrived at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center from NASA Michoud Operations, near New Orleans. The section was one of five major structural units comprising Saturn V’s first stage. (Marshall Star, 1/27/65, 1)
Aerospace industry would probably increase its employment of scientists and engineers by more than seven percent this year, announced Karl G.	Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Association. He made public a study which indicated that employment of scientists and engineers in aircraft, missile, and space fields would increase by about 13,000	from March to December, reaching a total of 190,000 by the end of the year. He said total aerospace employment would increase by 9,000 from 1,123,000 in March to 1,132,000 in December. This forecast contradicted other recent surveys which had predicted a decline. (Text; ap, NYT, 9/5/65, 5)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center hosted group of 61 Navy, Air Force, and civilian personnel from Navy Field Office for Manned Orbiting Laboratory at Los Angeles. The group received briefings on Apollo and Saturn programs and saw facilities at Marshall. They had previously visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and were scheduled to tour NASA Kennedy Space Center, (msfc Release 65-52)
The communications blackout problem was discussed by Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg, NASA Director of Research, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology: “One of the phenomena that occurs in gases at high temperatures is ionization, that is, electrons are torn away by the highspeed collisions of the gas atoms and molecules. . . . The free electrons, produced by the high temperatures in the shock layer around a reentry vehicle, interfere with and block the propagation of radio signals. . . . This effect produces the communications-blackout problem. To understand what is going on and to eliminate, or at least minimize this communication difficulty, one must be able to calculate the distribution of free electrons about the body in order to predict when the plasma sheath will become opaque for certain radio frequencies. This calculation cannot be made until the flow field (temperature, density, pressure and velocity) about the body is known. A significant part of the fluid physics program is concerned with the investigations of flow fields. The results of these studies also give us better information on the heat transfer to reentry bodies. “As a possible remedy for the communications blackout, we are studying the characteristics of various gases, called electrophylic gases, which have the unique property of capturing free electrons. Such a gas, which effectively reduces the electron concentration when injected into the flow, might solve the problem. . . . This work is tied closely with the work on radio attenuation going on at the Langley Research Center and the technique is being adapted to test a variety of fluids suggested by the work at Langley.” (Testimony; 1966 NASA Auth. Hearings, 447-62)
Fuel cells used in the Gemini v mission August 21-29 were being developed by General Electric Co. for commercial use, Dr. Arthur M. Bueche, ge vice president for research and development, told a news conference in New York City. The first models, expected to be ready next year, would provide only 12 watts [gemini v cells provided 2,000 watts] but could power remote television cameras and other communications equipment. Larger units might soon provide emergency power to homes, Dr. Bueche said. (NYT, 9/2/65, 38C)
In an article in the Indianapolis Star discussing Soviet medical practices observed during his visit to Russia at the invitation of the Soviet Academy of Science, Dr. John M. Keshishian, associate in surgery on the George Washington University School of Medicine faculty, said: “It is not generally known that just before Voskhod was ordered into reentry, the pulse rate of one cosmonaut dropped to 40. “When your pulse rate drops below 40 heartbeats a minute, you’re in trouble. “The Russians haven’t said anything about this . . . but it could be another one of the problems their space medicine is encountering for which there seems to be no ready solutions. “For example, some Russian cosmonauts have suffered severe, hallucinations, both in flight and afterwards. Others have suffered equally severe and, thus far, inexplicable vertigo during which they can’t be certain whether the floor’s coming up to meet them or vice versa, or whether they’re spinning, or the room is. And Russian physicians have found that . . . space flight environment—possibly weightlessness—draws calcium from the blood and expels it in the urine.” (World Book Encyclopedia Science Service, Inc., Keshishian, Indianapolis Star)
Saturn V launch vehicle Is-ic stage) was static-fired for the first time, at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The five F—1 engines were ignited in a test which lasted 6V(> sec. during which they generated a thrust of 7.5 million lbs. (160,000.000 hp.). This was the first full cluster test and was made on a recently completed 400-ft.-tall test stand. The S—ic was the first stage of 364-ft.-tall Saturn V-Apollo combination that would ultimately take astronauts and equipment to the moon. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller congratulated MSFC personnel on the successful test: “. . . As this was one of the key milestones in the whole lunar landing program, its successful performance. 12 weeks ahead of schedule, has a great bearing on our program.” (mfsc Release 65-92; Marshall Star, 5/5/65, 5)
The S-ib-1, Chrysler-built first stage of NASA’s Saturn IB, arrived at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center from Michoud Operations in New Orleans for static-firing tests. The stage was 21 ft. in diameter, 80 ft. in length, and weighed 90,000 lbs. For Saturn IB program, its eight engines had been uprated to 200,000 lbs. thrust each and weight had been reduced by some 16,000 lbs. It would be returned to Michoud Operations in about six weeks for post-firing checks. Saturn IB vehicles would be used for earth-orbital missions of Apollo spacecraft. ( msfc Release 65-60)
Technical Systems Office had been newly established by MSFC to handle launch vehicle technical systems problems, MSFC announced. Dr. J. C. McCall, deputy director of Research and Development Operations, would serve as acting director of the office until Oct. 1, when L. G. Richard, assistant director of the Astrionics Laboratory, would become director, (msfc Release 65-193)
In its 11th test flight, the XB-70 aircraft reached a speed of 1,630 mph and an altitude of 62,000 ft.—both records for the XB-70. The aircraft’s total time in the air was 14 hrs. 41 min. Flight was made from Edwards afb with naa pilots Alvin S. White and Van Shepard. (Clark, NYT, 4/29/65)
Dr. Clyde W. Tombaugh of the New Mexico State Univ. Research Center was quoted in an editorial in the Kansas City Times as saying that the “canals” seen on Mars through telescopes were fractures of the planet’s crust. He said: “The origin may be due to asteroids impacting on the surface, much as what happens when a stone hits the windshield of a car. I think I have the right answer. . . .” (McCoy, Kansas City Times, 3/5/65)
USNS Croatan, which had left Balboa, Panama Canal Zone, on Mar. 6, arrived at Fima, Peru. During the interval, ten two-stage sounding rockets had been launched from the deck of the ship, carrying upper atmosphere and ionosphere experiments for the Univ. of Michigan, the Univ. of New Hampshire, and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Three single-stage Areas meteorological rockets, two of which carried experiments to measure ozone in the atmosphere, were also launched. (NASA Release 65-13)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that NASA had an obligation to make information gained from space exploration available to the public. He continued: “To help achieve this, a National Space Science Data Center was established at GSFC in April 1964. . . . “The Data Center is responsible for the collection, organization, indexing, storage, retrieval, and dissemination of all scientific data resulting from experiments in space and the upper atmosphere. Since its establishment the Data Center has begun: (1) to maintain a continuing inventory of data from sounding rockets and spacecraft; (2) to acquire data generated by spacecraft previously launched; (3) to collect selected ground correlative data; and (4) to produce the announcement publications which support its functions. “In anticipation of the need for this facility, NASA has established a line item in the Physics and Astronomy budget, Data Analysis, of three million dollars in FY 1966. Of this, 600 thousand dollars is for the operation of the Data Center and 2.4 million dollars is for analysis of data from a flight experiment under the flight project. After the initial results have been published by the Principal Investigator and the data are placed in the data center, the additional analyses of these data will be funded from Data Analysis funds on the basis of proposals from competent scientists throughout the Nation . . . This approach is expected to . . . encourage them to use all of the available information in their theoretical research.” Dr. Newell discussed NASA’s orbiting observatory program: “The primary reason for . . . solar studies is to meet the overall NASA objective to expand human knowledge of space phenomena. . . . “oso-c [Orbiting Solar Observatory-C] is the next spacecraft to be launched and it is undergoing final testing at this time. On 30 May a solar eclipse of unusually long duration will occur. Every effort is being made to launch oso-c prior to this event so that two oso’s, with complementary payloads, can be operating and transmitting unique data on the solar radiation at the time of the eclipse.” He said that the Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo) program would make a major contribution to our understanding of earth-sun-environment relationships and that although OGO I had not functioned as planned “it has proven that the basic spacecraft design is adequate and that large numbers of experiments can be integrated and operated from a single satellite. Furthermore, should OGO I continue to transmit data for a reasonable period, it is expected that the results will contribute substantially to studies of the Earth-Sun relationships. “Investigation of the OGO i failure indicated there was no common cause for failure, but as a result of the investigation, design modifications and additional tests are planned for future OGO spacecraft. The modifications include: (1) relocation of the horizon scanner and certain boom appendages to assure a clear field of view for the horizon scanners; (2) the use of a new type development spring and the addition of separate appendage ‘kick-off’ springs; and (3) the relocation of the omnidirectional antenna.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 461-580)
Planning Research Corp. of Los Angeles received a one-year, $48,229 contract from NASA Goddard Space Flight Center to conduct an independent reliability assessment of the Radio Astronomy Explorer satellite. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/26/65, D6)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced it would negotiate with Radiation, Inc., of Melbourne, Florida, for a contract to develop a new weather measuring system to be tested aboard the Nimbus B meteorological satellite. The new equipment, Interrogation Recording and Location System (IRLS), would tie together weather observations made on the ground and in space as well as oceanographic measurements. (gsfc Release G-l-65)
A ground firing of the Saturn s—II battleship stage was conducted for 25 sec. at the Santa Susana test site of North American Aviation, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The firing—longest to date in the s—II program—was one of a series leading to full flight duration runs of nearly 400 sec. Next test, expected within a week, was planned for about two minutes, (msfc Release 65-183)
A Cairo newspaper revealed that the United Arab Republic was training men for space flight. No date for a possible launching was given. (upi, Milwaukee ]., 4/16/65) Noting areas of disagreement among scientists, theoretical astrophysicist Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ. tried to explain why the Ranger pictures resolved so little: “The Ranger pictures are like a mirror. Everyone sees his own theories reflected in them.” Prof. Gold saw a moon covered with dust; young craters composed of solid rock while older craters had somehow gone soft; and vast sheets of ice locked under compacted sediment beneath much of the lunar surface. Dr. Harold C. Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist from the Univ. of California, referred to evidence of widespread collapse of the lunar surface, probably due to underground movement: “The ranger ix’s pictures scared me more than anything. There’s all sorts of evidence that some of these craters are sinking.” Dr. Eugene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geological Survey said that chances that the moon’s surface was too soft for the 15-ton Lem were “almost vanishingly remote.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/16/65; Clark, NYT, 4/16/65) Dr. Ewan A. Whitaker agreed with findings in the paper he presented for his colleague, Dr. Gerald P. Kuiper of the Univ. of Arizona’s Lunar and Planetary Laboratory. Dr. Kuiper concluded that the lunar surface had a bearing strength of between one and two tons per square foot. His calculations, made from data extracted from RANGER IX photographs, was based on the size of rocks ejected from a given impact crater and the distance they traveled. Other tentative findings were that the dark portions of the maria were due to some unknown fluid flows and not lava or ash flows; that the maria were not completely covered with lunar dust; and that the moon’s surface exhibited a remarkable series of fracture patterns which could be due to polar contraction, tidal effects, or some other force. (Clark, NYT, 4/16/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 4/16/65; Av. Wk., 4/26/65, 34) Boris J. Levin, section chief of the Institute of Earth Physics, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, said studies based on radioactive emissions from meteorites and on lunar data indicated that the interior of the moon partially melted some two million years after the formation of that body began: “If you assume the moon is of the same material as meteorites, it is necessary to assume that the interior at one time was partly molten.” Prof. Levin said the moon was formed simultaneously with the earth and was not originally part of it. It was about 10 earth-radii distant and later shifted to the present position. He added: “We believe that there is a lava flow not covered by dust.” (Wash. Post, 4/17/65: Milwaukee /.. 4/17/65: CSM, 4/26/65; Av. Wk., 4/26/65, 34) Dr. John Clark, NASA Director of Space Sciences, said that a year ago nasa officials had hoped that Ranger would tell something about the topography of the moon: “That in turn would tell something about the geometry needed for the landing vehicle. Ranger has done this and now we look to the Surveyor spacecraft to tell us the bearing strength of the moon’s surface.” (ap, Houston Post, 4/17/65; Clark, NYT, 4/17/65) Dr. Fred Whipple of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory said the moon’s surface might be lower than had been calculated: “The data indicates that ranger vii and vih, and maybe ranger ix, landed one second late because the moon was one mile small. The moon’s surface at the point of landing was lower by two kilometers fa mile and a quarter) than the average lunar radius.” ( ap, Houston Post, 4/17/65; Milwaukee /., 4 17 65)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, speaking at the Annual Convention of the American Trial Lawyers Association in Miami Beach, said: “I would like first to comment on what appears to be a general misconception about the overall purposes of the Apollo program. Many people seem to believe that a landing on the moon, ahead of the Soviets, is the paramount objective. This is not so. The principal goal is to make the United States first in space by the end of this decade, and to make this pre-eminence unmistakably clear to the world. “Why ... is it so vital that the United States be pre-eminent in space? There are many reasons that can be cited, and they fall generally into two major categories—the imperative reasons and the ancillary, or spin-off benefits. It is imperative, in the Cold War arena, that the United States be first for reasons of national security, national pride of achievement, and the international prestige. The ancillary . . . reasons include the benefits of scientific discovery; the stimulation of economic and social progress; technological advancement, including the civilian application and utilization of the products of space-oriented research; and the compelling urge of man to explore and to discover.” (Text)
nasa Electronics Research Center had accomplished a promising advance in microwave research by generating higher frequency microwaves by interaction of hot electrons in solid-state component material. Technique applied low voltage across a bulk gallium arsenide semi-conductor crystal less than one-thousandth of an inch thick and might improve microwave signal transmission efficiency in space, (nasa Release 65-373)
Two hrs. and 20 min. of radio signals from Jupiter were received around midnight New Year’s Eve as predicted by George A. Dulk of the Univ. of Colorado. The signals were received at the Altitude Observatory of the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, which had kept its radiotelescope operating for the event. (Osmundsen, NYT, 1/2/65, 1)
mariner iv spacecraft was functioning well on its mission to Mars, but the public should not “expect too much” from the photographs of Mars it was scheduled to take July 14, NASA scientists said during a press briefing. It was conjectural whether the 21 photographs the Mars probe, would take would be clear enough to disprove or verify the theories held by some scientists that there are canals and some form of life on Mars. Scientists who would study the photographs pointed out that 21 pictures would only enable them to see 1% of Mars. Nevertheless, any pictures of the surface would be far superior to the best observations now obtainable with earth-based telescopes. The first few photographs might be made public immediately after being received, but the others probably would not be released until they had been studied for weeks or months. (Transcript, Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/23/65; Hill, NYT, 6/23/65, 7)
President Chung Hee Park of the Republic of Korea, his wife, and members of his official party visited Kennedy Space Center where they were briefed on NASA programs and toured facilities at Cape Kennedy and on Merritt Island. In a luncheon statement, President Park said: “You are now engaged in a breath-taking race with Moscow for the conquest of space. ... I should like to invite your attention to the stark reality that there are some fools engaged in utilizing space power politically, psychologically and militarily for sinister and dangerous purposes. “They are absorbed in developing space power not for the true purpose envisaged by mankind but for making it an instrument with which to conquer the world. “Needless to say, they are Communists. I believe you [Americans] have the responsibility of causing the Communists to desist from this dangerous play and of well preparing yourselves to douse a fire if it breaks out of that play. . . .” (nasa Off. Int. Aff.; Ksc Spaceport News, 5/20/65, 1, 5; ap, Miami Her., 5/23/65)
NASA selected Philco Corp.’s Aeronutronic Div. for negotiations leading to a nine-month, $1 million contract for research, development, and preliminary design of a lunar penetrometer system applicable to the Apollo program. The penetrometer, an instrumented package capable of assessing the hardness, penetrability, and bearing strength of a surface upon which it is ejected, could furnish lunar surface information to an orbiting Apollo spacecraft for scientific assessment of remote sites inaccessible to manned spacecraft or unmanned earth-launch probes. NASA Langley Research Center would negotiate and manager the contract, (nasa Release 65-59; LaRC Release)
More than 900 representatives of news media had been accredited, making the GT-3 mission of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young the most intensely covered event in the history of space exploration. Nearly 1,200 newsmen had requested credentials from NASA. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/65)
Astronomers of the Pulkovo Observatory, Leningrad, had completed installation of a more powerful telescope, Tass announced. Diameter of the instrument’s main mirror was 440 mm. (17.3 in.) ; its focal length, 17.5	m. (57.33 ft.). The new telescope would be able to produce spectrograms from any sector of the sun and simultaneously measure the magnetic field. (Tass, 7/21/65)
NASA plan for use of syncom ii in the communications link between the Gemini 3 spacecraft and Cape Kennedy was successfully tested in a GT-3 mission simulation. Telemetry signals and voice messages would come from the spacecraft to a surface ship, the USNS Coastal Sentry, in the Indian Ocean. The Coastal Sentry would transmit the signals to the Syncom surface station, USNS Kingsport, which would then be a few miles away. From there the signals would be transmitted to syncom ii, 22,300 mi. above the Indian Ocean, down to a ground station at Clark afb in the Philippines, and by cable to a Nascom (nasa Communications Network) station near Honolulu. From Honolulu the transmission w ould go by cable to the U.S. and then by landline to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and on down to Cape Kennedy. Simultaneously the signals would be transmitted from the Coastal Sentry via high frequency radio to a Nascom station near Perth, Australia. Cable would carry it to the Nascom station at Honolulu. There, the better reception of the two transmissions would be sent to the Cape. ( nasa Release 65-93)
AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever said in the keynote address at the Air Force/Industry Planning Seminar in Dayton that “we need a broader perspective and greater vision in our conceptual planning ... we need to be more farsighted.” He continued: “The Soviet Union is making a major effort to surpass us in science and technology. The Soviets now have approximately the same number of scientists and engineers that we have. But every year they graduate an average of 200,000 scientific and technical students as compared with about 120,000 a year in this country. It is also worth noting that the number of scientific institutions in Russia has grown from about 3000 in 1957 to about 5000 in 1965. “Both of these facts indicate that the Soviets are deadly serious when they talk about the importance of science and technology to their global ambitions. We must more than match their effort, not only too maintain our national security but also to keep our world markets.” (Text)
Application for patents on a recoverable single-stage spacecraft booster was filed with the U.S. Patent Office by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Invented by Philip Bono, a space engineer at Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div., the booster was called Rombus (Reusable Orbital Module—Booster and Utility Shuttle) and would have the capability of placing approximately 1 million lb. in circular orbit 175 mi. high and could be reused 20 times. Rombus would have its own propulsion for orbiting, deorbiting, and landing retrothrust, would employ eight strap-on, jettisonable liquid hydrogen fuel tanks. The vehicle resulted from a NASA—funded study but was not presently being developed. (Marshall Star, 1/13/65, 1-2; Seattle Post-Intelligence, 1/8/65)
usaf Chief of Staff General John P. McConnell, speaking at a meeting of the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., said: “. . . As airmen, all of us in the Air Force look at space with real concern. Will it someday become an area of military operation? If so, what will be the U.S. posture? In military language, what is our readiness? . . . “Space exploration is the responsibility of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. . . . The act which created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration gave NASA broad responsibilities for meeting many of the broad needs of the nation. It also stated that the Department of Defense should be responsible for and direct those space activities peculiar to or primarily associated with the development of weapon systems, military operations or the defense of the United States. “So we have both NASA and Air Force assigned specific responsibilities. We have the basis of a partnership. And a partnership it is in carrying out the national program as recommended by the President and authorized and funded by Congress. The intent of Congress is very clear. The members wanted the broad space capabilities of the nation to be built up as rapidly as possible without unnecessary duplication of effort or of waste. This we are attempting to do. And while I would not ordinarily try to speak for Jim Webb, the NASA Administrator, I think I can speak for him today on this subject, in saying, that it is a very well understood mutual objective between the Air Force and NASA.” Asked his opinion about spending of $20 billion to reach the moon, McConnell said: “I think it is necessary for us to get everything we can out of space. And I think we should get it as rapidly as we can at as reasonable cost as we can. But you can’t get it rapidly and at the same time cheaply . . . going to the moon is just the end product of what we are getting out of it. If we were just going to the moon, I wouldn’t think it would be worth 20 billion dollars to go to the moon. But I don’t hesitate to say that all of the other things which we have to do, the preliminaries, and the things that we’re going to learn in the process of achieving that goal is well worth the expenditure of whatever money is required to attain the knowledge which we will attain as a result of this project.” (Text)
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory announced the discovery in England of a new comet. Discovered Sept. 26 by astronomer G. E. D. Alcock (and named after him), the lOth-magnitude comet appeared as part of the constellation Hercules, (ap, Wash. Post, 9/28/65, Al)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced it had selected four companies for feasibility studies for experiments in applications satellite technology. Contracts awarded were: Control Data Corp., $45,000 to examine a technique for determining a satellite’s orbit by using only spacecraft observation; Philco Corp., $50,000 to study a device capable of determining attitude of a spin-stabilized spacecraft from star measurements; Bell Aerospace Corp., $47,000 to study an electrostatic accelerometer which could provide information about the relative motion of a gravity gradient stabilized spacecraft; and Electro Optical Systems, Inc., $37,000 to study measuring of degradation of optical characteristics of materials in space. Studies should be completed in eight weeks, (csfc Release G-20-65)
New sunspots heralding the start of a new 11-yr. cycle were discussed at sessions on the International Years of the Quiet Sun held in Washington, D.C., under auspices of the American Geophysical Union and the International Scientific Radio Union. Scientists said the asymmetrical birth of the new cycle suggested it might not reach as intense a maximum as usual. The cycle was of vital interest to planners of a manned moon landing since it had been discovered that some solar eruptions shoot out protons at so close to the speed of light they could kill an astronaut. While astronauts were on the moon, or inside the Lem, they would be poorly protected against such a proton shower. Dr. Herbert Friedman, of the Naval Research Laboratory, said during the symposium they would be comparatively safe if they could return to their orbiting command capsule. The goal, therefore, he said, was to learn enough about these events so that astronauts could have sufficient warning to take refuge in their spacecraft. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/23/65)
In a 6,087-to-2,84I vote, machinists at the McDonnell Aircraft Corp. approved a new three-year contract with McDonnell Aircraft which had been worked out by McDonnell, IAM, and the Federal Mediation Board to end the six-day walkout of 17,000 workers. The strike had only lasted four days for the 200 iam members at Kennedy Space Center who had been allowed to return to work Nov. 22 on preparations for the Gemini 7-6 launch, (ap, NYT, 11/25/65, 56)
Second XB-70a research bomber underwent a 10-min. heat-friction test from Edwards afb withstanding 530°C heat at 1,900 mph at 70,000 ft. The air inlets control system was also tested at twice the speed of sound at 63,000 ft. in the 145-min. flight, (ap, NYT, 12/23/65, 43) December 22: NASA deferred the first unmanned Voyager planetary exploration mission until 1973 and scheduled one 1967 Mariner flight to Venus and two 1969 Mariner flights to Mars. First Voyager mission had been planned to orbit Mars in 1971 and a second to orbit and land instrumented capsules in 1973; no further Mariner missions had been scheduled. Changes in the planetary exploration program were being made to obtain the greatest possible return from funds available for FY 1966, those anticipated for fy 1967, and from information available from previous missions, (nasa Release 65-389)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center, NASA, said in an address at the First World Exhibition of Transport and Communications in Munich: “It is my personal opinion, shared by some colleagues, that space flight will logically follow the pattern of historical development which has characterized the transportation industry. That is, the exploitation of the system is an outgrowth of its invention. “This pattern is vividly demonstrated by the popular American legend that Henry Ford invented the automobile, when in fact the automobile is not really an American invention at all. For one thing, it was not invented by any one man, but by a host of inventors—most of them Europeans. “However, Henry Ford did initiate the exploitation of this invention as a means of transportation for almost every family in America. Ford was a man of great inventive genius who strove to mass produce a highly reliable automobile at low unit cost. So Ford took advantage of this once-novel invention, the automobile, by developing to a high degree the arts of mass production with interchangeable parts, line assembly, and finally conveyor assembly; and thus he ushered in a new age of public transportation. “The automobile also serves as an excellent example that even the farsighted and visionary inventor often cannot visualize the ultimate utilization of his invention by the public. For the modern automobile is a combination of many inventions—the wheel, the pneumatic tire which in turn depended upon the discovery of vulcanized rubber, the internal combustion engine and gasoline—to name a few. To illustrate an extreme case, I seriously doubt if the inventor of the wheel could visualize its use in such a supernatural machine as the automobile! In the more recent past, Benjamin Silliman, Jr., a brilliant American petrochemist of the late-nineteenth century, considered gasoline a useless and dangerous byproduct of his process for refining lamp kerosene. “The thing to remember is that the automotive industry did not spring from public demand. It came about because there were inventors who braved ridicule and worse and because others were quick to seize upon their creations. There was no expressed requirement for the airplane, nor for the trans-Atlantic air travel opened up by Charles Lindbergh. The novel products of inventive minds become the everyday products of our society. The full impact of these products is unpredictable at the time of their invention. “The American scientist, Robert Goddard, who created the first liquid-fueled rockets in the United States, remarked that ‘Every vision is a joke until the first man accomplishes it.’ “The men who dreamed up and worked out methods of efficient transportation unwittingly opened up broad new vistas, and touched off the growth of tremendous production and service industries. They showed the way to expedite the movement of people and goods, and they also accelerated the exchange of ideas and customs and thus promoted understanding and cooperation. “Robert Goddard in America, like Hermann Oberth in Europe, were scorned and laughed at in their time. But while we are meeting here, men are preparing more journeys into the limitless areas beyond Earth’s atmosphere, working with much the same theories and techniques proposed by Oberth and Goddard.” (Text)
President’s message sending budget for Fiscal Year 1966 included the following remarks: “Space research and technology: This Nation has embarked on a bold program of space exploration and research which holds promise of rich rewards in many fields of American life. Our boldness is clearly indicated by the broad scope of our program and by our intent to send men to the moon within this decade. “The costs are high—as we knew they would be when we launched this effort. We have seen a rise in annual expenditures for the space program from less than one-half billion dollars in 1960 to over $4 billion in 1964. “Expenditures are continuing to increase. However, we have built up momentum and are concentrating on our highest priority goals. Therefore, we will no longer need to increase space out-lays by huge sums each year in order to meet our present objectives. “This budget proposes that expenditures increase by $22 million in 1966 over 1965. This is the smallest annual increase since 1959. The new obligational authority requested is about the same as enacted for 1965.” (nasa lar iv/16)
Telecomputing Services, Inc., was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to two-year, cost-plus-award-fee contract for computer operations and data processing services at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The contract, expected to exceed $4 million, would include an option for an additional year increasing the value by $2 million, (nasa Release 65-324)
m/g 0. J. Ritland (usaf), retiring Nov. 30, was awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal by NASA Administrator James E. Webb. General Ritland who, as Deputy Commander for Space of the Air Force Systems Command, had been closely associated since 1962 with NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, was cited for his contributions to the Mercury and Gemini manned space flight programs, (nasa Release 65-369)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced selection of Maj. L. Gordon Cooper (usaf) and Lt. Cdr. Charles Conrad, Jr. (usn), to make the seven-day Gemini v space flight. Gemini v would be the third manned Gemini space flight and would be made in 1965. Backup crewmen were two civilians, Neil A. Armstrong and Elliot M. See, Jr. (msc Roundup, 2/17/65, 1; ap, Wash. Post, 2/8/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 2/8/65; Witkin, NYT, 2/9/65)
Dr. George Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at a news conference in Cocoa Beach, Fla., that Astronauts McDivitt and White would attempt to steer the Gemini 4 spacecraft to a rendezvous with the spent second stage of its booster rocket. This plan was outlined for the flight: When the Gemini 4 spacecraft separated from the second stage six minutes after launching, Maj. James A. McDivitt, as command pilot, would fire jet thrusters to hold a tight formation with the spent stage, which would trail the astronauts by about 300 ft. Throughout the first orbit, the astronauts would make a complete check of all their systems. At the start of the second orbit they would begin preparing for Maj. White’s emergence by unpacking life support packs, the maneuvering unit, and the 25-ft. lifeline. Sweeping over the Indian Ocean during this orbit, they would begin to depressurize the spacecraft cabin and pressurize their spacesuits. Over Hawaii, Maj. McDivitt would maneuver the spacecraft to within 25 ft. of the second stage. Maj. White would open his hatch and at a point west of Guaymas, Mexico, he would leave the vehicle. That would be about three hours after launching. Using the hand-gun maneuvering unit, Maj. White would slowly rotate toward the second stage, which is 27 ft. long and 10 ft. in dia. and would be equipped with two flashing lights. The astronaut would carry a 35-mm movie camera to take pictures of the earth, star background, the booster, and the spacecraft. After 10 min., over Florida, Maj. White would begin returning to the spacecraft. The cabin would be repressurized and the suits depressurized. Then Maj. McDivitt would fire thrusters so that the spacecraft would move about 16 mi. away from the booster. During the fifth orbit, about three hours later, the Gemini again would be maneuvered so that it would approach the second stage high over Africa. The craft would close to within 10 ft. this time to determine how well they can approach an orbiting craft, sighting on the flashing lights. (Transcript; Appel, NYT, 5/29/65, 1)
Dr. Smith J. DeFrance, Director of nasa Ames Research Center, would retire Oct. 15 after 45 yrs. of service, announced NASA Administrator James E. Webb. “Dr. DeFrance’s leadership at Ames has brought about many engineering and scientific achievements in our country’s aviation and space programs,” Webb said, “and we all owe him a great debt of gratitude.” Following distinguished service as a combat pilot in France during World War I, DeFrance served for 18 yrs. at Langley Research Center. He became director of arc, when it was created in 1940. In 1947 he received the Presidential Medal of Merit for designing and building the Center. H. Julian Allen, present Assistant Director at ARC, would succeed Dr. DeFrance. Allen was recognized as an international authority on reentry physics, having conceived a solution to the reentry heating problem. In 1957, he received naca’s Distinguished Service Medal for this work. Allen received the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award in 1955 from the Institute of Aerospace Sciences “for contributions and leadership in solving problems in the design of supersonic airplanes and missiles, especially thermal problems at hypersonic speeds.” John F. Parsons, Associate Director of Ames, would remain in this post, (nasa Release 65-298)
explorer xxx (iqsy Solar Explorer) was successfully launched by NASA from Wallops Station, Va., by a four-stage Scout booster. Orbital data: apogee, 548 mi. (883 km.) ; perigee, 440 mi. (709 km.); period, 100.8 min.; inclination, 59.7°. Ninth Solrad Satellite developed by Naval Research Laboratory, explorer xxx would monitor and measure x-ray emissions from the sun as part of the U.S. contribution to the International Quiet Sun Year project. (NASA Release 65—352; gsfc)
Environmental Science Services Administration (essa) asked that NASA temporarily assign Dr. Joachim P. Kuettner, deputy director of the Technical Staff (Saturn/Apollo Systems Office) of the Research and Development Operations, nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, as Chief Space Scientist of the National Weather Satellite Center. Dr. Kuettner, expected to leave for Washington, D.C., about Sept. 1, would administer ESSA’s space program, specifically, manned and unmanned advanced systems, (mfsc Release 65-207)
Photographs of Mars by mariner IV did not contradict his theory that life may exist on that planet, according to Dr. Joshua Lederberg, prof, of genetics at Stanford Univ. School of Medicine. His views were supported by Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Dr. Lederberg said important point was that “we still do not know the abundance and distribution of water on Mars. However much there is, almost all of it must be frozen.” Presence of water on Mars could be confined to frost covering the polar regions or could even be locked within the Martian crust. Pockets of water could be warmed by volcanic activity, forming pools where life could exist. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/8/65)
NASA announced that Gemini v would be launched from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, Aug. 21, at 10:00 a.m., edt. Problems which had collectively postponed the launch on August 19, had been resolved: (1) the malfunctioning telemetry programer had been replaced; (2) the underground communications cable had been repaired; (3) the technique for loading the fuel cells with liquid hydrogen had been perfected; (4) security police would take extra precautions to prevent trespassing onto the launch area; and (5) the Gemini 5 computer, which officials feared had been damaged by the lightning-induced power surge, was functioning normally. (Clark, NYT, 8/21/65; Wash. Post., 8/21/65, Al; WSJ, 8/16/65, 1)
Univ. of Miami, Coral Gables, Fla., bestowed an honorary dectorate upon NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Mr. Webb said in a speech there: “. . . space science and technology are not remote and esoteric pursuits but rather are deeply woven into the fabric of our society. The space scientist does not practice a new art. He is an astronomer, a physicist, a chemist, a geologist, rooted in our university system of vigorous effort to expand our knowledge of the universe in which we live. The space technologist is an engineer of materials, structures, fuels, power sources, electronics, rooted in our industrial and government laboratory systems. Both, however, are directing their interests and talents to the newest and most exciting frontiers—where the most rapid progress is made and the breakthroughs scored. The knowledge they gain feeds back into our scientific and technical communities and into our industrial laboratories. . . . Thus, the talents, the skills, and the funds for space exploration are all drawn broadly from our society and continue to feed back into it, in the forefront of scientific and technical progress—the unique hallmark of the American way.” (Text)
Charles A. Wilson, an expert in management and development of space and other advanced systems, had been named Project Manager for NASA’s Project Biosatellite at the Ames Research Center. He succeeded Carlton Bioletti, who had retired, (arc Release 65-9)
nasa announced the appointment of Robert F. Thompson as Mission Director for the future Gemini missions and Col. C. H. Rolender (usaf) as Mission Director for the first and second Apollo/Saturn IB flights. Thompson and Bolender were assigned to the Mission Operations Organization in the Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA Hq., and would have overall responsibility for directing assigned missions. Christopher Kraft would continue in his regular assignment as Flight Director for Gemini missions. Thompson was Chief, Landing and Recovery Div., NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, before receiving this assignment. Col. Rolender had directed a studies group in the office of the usaf Chief of Staff and had engaged in extensive guided missiles and aeronautical systems work, (nasa Release 65-211)
A. J. Hayes, president of the International Association of Machinists, said at a Dallas briefing of industry sponsored by dod and the National Security Industrial Association that Federal procurement officers were meddling in negotiations of labor and the aerospace industry to the extent that free collective bargaining was being eroded away. He said the affected unions would not settle this year for less than the 57-cent package in wage increases and fringe benefits recently worked out for the United Auto Workers, (ap, Denver Post, 4/15/65)
West German satellite tracking station at Bochum monitored radio signals from a new Soviet space probe. The observatory said it had received the signals since 11:26 a.m. edt. (Reuters, 6/21/65)
gemini v astronauts Cooper and Conrad flew to Kennedy Space Center, NASA, following a night onboard the aircraft carrier Lake Champlain. Upon their arrival, Florida Governor Haydon Burns presented them with plaques in recognition of the record-setting, eight-day mission. Intensive medical examinations begun on the carrier were continued on Merritt Island. (Toth, Wash. Post, 8/31/65; Clark, NYT, 8/31/65)
NASA Lewis Research Center planned to buy enough Vg-in.-dia. pingpong balls to fill a bucket-like device 12 ft. in dia. and 19 ft. deep. The miniature pingpong balls would be used to cushion experiments in lrc’s 500-ft.-deep zero-gravity shaft. Experiments would be recovered intact for evaluation and later reuse. The pingpong balls, it was hoped, could cushion up to 6,000 lbs. (lrc Release 65-34)
The U.S. GEMINI v mission established eight new world records: (1) longest manned space flight—190 hrs., 55 min.; former record, 119 hrs., six min. held by U.S.S.R.; (2) national man hours in space—641 hrs., 24 min.; former record, 507 hrs., 16 min. held by U.S.S.R.; (3) longest multi-manned space flight—190 hrs., 56 min.; former record, 97 hrs., 48 min. set by U.S.; (4) most revolutions for a manned space flight—120; former record, 81, set by U.S.S.R.; (5) most manned flights—9; former record held by U.S.S.R., 8; (6) first man to make a second orbital flight—L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) ; (7) individual with most space flight time—Col. Cooper; (8) individuals making the longest single space flight—Cooper and Conrad (Lcdr., usn) ; former record held by U.S.S.R. (ap, NYT, 8/30/65, 17)
Full-scale Saturn V booster (s-ic stage) weight simulator was shipped from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to Kennedy Space Center on NASA barge Poseidon. Trip would require five days. Simulator would be used in checking equipment and handling procedures at KSC’s Launch Complex 39 in preparation for arrival of the Saturn V facility vehicle early in 1966. (msfc Release 65-295)
Editorializing in the Washington Evening Star about “lean years” beginning for the aerospace industry, William Hines said: “. . . Since the ’50s, aerospace companies have become accustomed to a diet of caviar, filet and champagne. The government has poured something like 100 billion into rockets, missiles and spacecraft since the Soviet Union’s Sputnik went up in October, 1957. The torrent of funds is now being reduced, if not precisely to a trickle, certainly to a more moderate flow. . . . “The aerospace crisis is serious enough that the management-consultant firm of Arthur D. Little, Inc., has just published a study, ‘Strategies for Survival in the Aerospace Industry.’ It makes the following revealing point:
PEGASUS ill meteoroid detection satellite was launched into orbit from Eastern Test Range, with a Saturn I booster—last(sA-lO) in a series of ten launch vehicle test flights. Initial orbital data: apogee, 336 mi. (541.9 km.); perigee, 324 mi. (522.6 km.); period, 95.5 min.; inclination, 28.9°. Main assignment of the 3,200-lb. spacecraft with wing-like panels was to add information on the frequency of meteoroids in near-earth environment, for use in the design of future manned and unmanned spacecraft. Eight of its detachable panels carried 352 thermal surface samples collected from the aerospace industry. If NASA should program an astronaut-PEGASUS III rendezvous, the astronaut would detach as many panels as possible and return them to earth for study. Also orbited was Apollo command and service module boilerplate (bp-9), which served as shroud for PEGASUS III. Apollo launch escape system was jettisoned during launch vehicle’s ascent. PEGASUS ill—expected to return meteoroid data to ground stations for at least one year—was identical to PEGASUS II, in orbit since May 25, 1965. pegasus I was sent into orbit Feb. 16, 1965. (nasa Release 65-232; msfc Release 65-185; msfc Release 65-190)
A low-temperature, primal), non-rechargeable battery had been successfully tested over a range from —100° C to 68° C, NASA Lewis Research Center engineers reported. Designed by the Livingston Electronic Co., the battery delivered constant power and, when fully developed, could be used on Mars where the nighttime temperatures were —100° C and the average daytime temperature —30° C. (lrc Release 65-20)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., went to a peak altitude of 188.5 km. (117 mi.). Primary experimental objective was to study the group of stars of Orion in the ultraviolet. Because of a failure with the attitude control system the experiment had no chance to operate. Experiment instrumentation was provided by Princeton Univ. Observatory. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
Two Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched two sodium vapor trail experiments from Wallops Station, Va., as part of NASA’s upper atmosphere meteorological research program. Vapor trails were ejected through a region 40 to 124 mi. above earth. One rocket was fired on an azimuth of 90° (due east) and the other on a 130° azimuth (southeast) so1 that the sodium trails were in the same altitude region at about the same time but several miles apart to provide data on wind behavior variations over a lateral distance as well as at various altitudes. (Wallops Release 65-38)
Two teams of scientists collecting dust from Greenland and Antarctic icecaps presented their findings to the American Geophysical Union, meeting in Washington. The scientists were collecting particles by “core sampling”—boring through the ice with a thermal drill and analyzing particles to determine their origin. Team studying Greenland samples—E. L. Fireman, J. Defelice, and C. C. Langway, Jr., of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and the U.S. Army—believed their dust samples to be nonterrestrial in origin. Team studying Antarctic samples—M. B. Giovinetto of the Univ. of Wisconsin and R. A. Schmidt of NASA—was not certain of the origin of these particles. They reported a high concentration of spherucles in the core samplings; the amount of these particles, which closely matched those found in volcanic eruptions, made identification of dust origin more difficult. They had collected dust from 165-ft. core of ice, representing 400 yrs. accumulation. Greenland team had drilled to depth of 1,800 ft. and expected to continue to 5,000 ft. National Science Foundation would use the same thermal drill—beginning in summer of 1967 or 1968—to drill to 8,000-ft. depth through the south polar ice. (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/20/65, 1) Week of April 19: Cryogenic propellants were loaded for the first time into a ground test model of the NASA Saturn S-IVB upper stage to verify the design of the stage and fabrication techniques, and to demonstrate operational procedures. The S-ivb, 58 ft. long and 21.5 ft. in diameter, was being built for Saturn IB and Saturn V by Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div. for nasa msfc. (msfc Release 65—98)
Personnel of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center would be augmented to meet the increasing tempo of Gemini and Apollo manned space flight operations, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Over the next ten months, approximately 200 persons would be transferred from msfc to MSC. Total number of personnel to be provided from other NASA activities had not been determined, (msfc Release 65—199)
A new extraterrestrial mineral, previously unknown in nature and christened sinoite (silicon oxynitride, Si2N20), had been discovered, NASA Ames Research Center announced. Discovered in a meteorite which had fallen near the village of Jajh deh Kot Lalu in Pakistan in 1926, the mineral was grey in color and occurred in rough rectangular crystals. Scientists who made the discovery were Dr. Klaus Keil of NASA Ames Research Center; C. A. Anderson, Hasler Research Center, Goleta, Calif.; and Dr. B. H. Mason, American Museum of Natural History, New York. The meteorite had been made available for study by New York’s Museum of Natural History, (arc Release 65-5)
David N. Buell of Chrysler Corp. told the Aviation-Space Writers’ Association Conference that an unmanned spacecraft could be launched to the sun by 1975 or 1980 with a modified Saturn IB/Centaur booster and that it could obtain information vital to space exploration and a better understanding of the universe. Buell envisioned the solar spacecraft as a bi-conal structure with the forward cone pointing toward the sun and acting as a sunshade, bolstered by refrigerants inside the craft, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/23/65)
AEC granted a full-term, ten-year operating license to NASA’s Plum Brook Reactor Facility, NASA announced. The Plum Brook reactor, which produced 60,000 kw. of thermal power at peak operation, was being used in basic research relating to development of a nuclear rocket and of systems and components for space nuclear auxiliary power. The Facility is part of nasa Lewis Research Center, (lrc Release 65-27)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in a statement to Pat Houtz of the Huntsville Times: “. . . it is extremely important that both the Legislature and the Governor fully understand the importance of the George C. Marshall Space Flight Center operation to the success of the current United States effort in space and, also, the importance of our ability to work in that state in an environment conducive to the most effective utilization of our ablest scientists, engineers, technicians, and industrial contractors.” (Text; Huntsville Times, 5/28/65)
Transmissions from MARINER IV were received by the nine-month-old Tidbinbilla tracking station at Canberra, Australia—one of three primary stations in the worldwide network of space tracking stations built for the Mars probe. Since February, a movable reflector antenna had maintained daily contact with MARINER IV, picking up signals from Goldstone, Calif., station in the morning and relaying them to the Johannesburg station nine hours later. As the signals were received from mariner IV, they were retransmitted over the Pacific cable teletype to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. After completion of mariner iv mission, Tidbinbilla would be used to track Surveyor vehicles.	(NYT, 7/18/65)
A strike by 86 members of the International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees carried work stoppage at Kennedy Space Center into the fifth day. They had walked out in a wage dispute with a firm providing printing and reproduction services for NASA; about half the 5,300	construction workers at ksc had honored their picket lines, halting work on $178 million worth of projects. (Wash. Post, 6/29/65)
NASA Langley Research Center scientists Arthur L. Newcomb, Jr., Nelson J.	Groom, and Norman M. Hatcher reported their work on an infrared sensing instrument to help a spacecraft determine which way was up, at the IEEE national convention. The device described was sensitive to the difference between infrared radiation in space and that emitted by a planetary or lunar body; it employed a mechanically-driven system of mirrors to scan the region of space in which it was operating. Radiation gathered by the mirrors was focused into four germanium lenses, each containing a thermistor sensitive to infrared. When the scanning mirror crossed the horizon of a planet, the increase or decrease registered on the thermistor and generated an electronic signal that could be processed through a series of special circuits to provide a stabilizing or control command to the spacecraft. The new sensor concept was expected to be useful for weather and communications satellites, as well as for space probes and other types of spacecraft. (LaRC Release)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief physician for the astronauts, said in an interview with the New York Times that spaceflights had caused subtle, temporary changes in the human body that must be watched with care for possible importance to longer future flights. Measurements of the apparent density of heel and finger bones of the GEMINI IV astronauts, who flew for four days, and the GEMINI v astronauts, after an eight-day flight, had indicated that calcium was being lost, or at least shifted to some other part of the body. “We have really found no gross changes,” he said. “In my opinion, we are going to see the body adapt to space flight. You are never going to have the guy’s bones turn to jelly so that when he stands on his leg it just goes ‘pfft.’ ” (Clark, NYT, 10/23/65, 58)
Successful completion of formal flight qualification tests of the uprated II—1 rocket engine for use in the Saturn tr space vehicle was announced jointly by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, under whose technical direction the engine was being developed, and by Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., its manufacturer. Two engines were used for the qualification program. In 51 firings they operated successfully for 4,581 seconds—more than 75 min.—and produced 200,000 lbs. of thrust (188,000 lbs. was previous power rating). i msfc: Release 65-96)
Charles W. Harper, Director of NASA Hq. Aeronautics Div., discussed aeronautical research at a luncheon of the Aviation/Space Writers Association. He said: “ . . . aviation has a tremendous potential in the short-haul ‘aerial bus.’ Both vtol (vertical take-off and landing) and stol (short take-off and landing) are being considered for this job. . . . On the basis of our current knowledge I would conclude the vtol commercial transport offers tremendous potential but requires additional research . . . before it is ready for detailed feasibility study as a commercial transport. On the other hand the STOL machine is ready for a careful examination since the major problems seem to be in hand. “A 20 to 50 passenger stol machine should, or could, have a top speed of 300 to 400 knots, a steep approach with a touch down at 45 knots and an operational field length of some 1200 to 1500 feet. Allweather operation is required and, with the aid of space technology advances, this appears quite possible. We think we can display electronically to the pilot the important features of the airport so that he can approach it and land using the same information that he does in clear weather. “We see two large markets for vehicles of this type. In a smaller simple version, perhaps bearing a little sacrifice in performance, an air transport well suited for use in underdeveloped areas. Rugged, easy to fly and simple to maintain, it could enable these countries to jump from jungle or desert trails to modern transport system without building enormously expensive railways and highways. This would be a good market for U.S. industry. In a larger sophisticated version it could be the vehicle to make the present short haul feeder lines self sufficient, not depending on connecting traffic from the trunk lines. This too would be a desirable situation for American industry. NASA plans to pursue both of these potentials actively until the air industry has enough confidence in success to proceed on its own. . . .” (Text) Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, addressed the Science Teachers’ Association of Santa Clara County, Calif., at NASA Ames Research Center. He said: “The question then is, w'hat has man done in space to date? According to the eminent archaeologist, V. Gordon Childe, whatever man has done in the relatively short evolutionary history documented by his fossil remains, he has done without significantly improving his inherited equipment by bodily changes detectable in his skeleton. Moreover, this equipment is inadequately adapted for survival in any particular environment, and indeed it is inferior to that of most animals for coping with any special set of conditions. Yet in spite of his physical inferiority, man has been able to adjust himself to a greater range of environment than any other creature, to multiply much faster than any near relative amongst the higher mammals, and indeed to beat them all at their special tricks. Thus he learned to control fire, and he developed the skills to make clothes and houses, with the result that he lives and thrives from pole to pole on earth, and already he is concerned with a population explosion. He has developed trains and cars that can outstrip the fleetest cheetah, and he has developed the airplane so that he can mount higher than the eagle. Moreover, he developed telescopes to see further than the hawk, and firearms to lay low the elephant or any other animal, including himself. But whatever their use, the important point is that fire, clothes, houses, trains, airplanes, telescopes, and guns are not part of man’s body. He can set them aside at will. They are not inherited in the biological sense, but rather the skill needed for their conception, production, and use is part of our intellectual heritage, the result of a tradition built up over many generations and transmitted not in the blood but through speech and writing. “The true stepping stones to the moon are ourselves and our forefathers. The stepping stones beyond are our children, and much of what they will be and where they will lead the human race, is up to you and your kind. If you succeed in your work, you will have made an invaluable contribution to the betterment of man’s ability to make himself, to master himself, and finally to understand himself in his environment. Indeed, if you are especially successful, you may, in the words of V. R. Potter, ‘develop a new breed of scholars, men who combine a knowledge of new science and old wisdom, men who have the courage of the men of the Renaissance who thought truth was absolute and attainable,’ and who may yet be right. I submit we can do no less than find out.” (Text)
A Centaur rocket similar to the vehicle launched successfully into a simulated lunaT-transfer trajectory Aug. 11 from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, and a model of mariner iv photographic Mars probe were being exhibited in the NASA display at Cleveland’s Natural Science Museum. NASA had contributed displays to the museum for about 10 yrs. (lrc Release 65-60)
NASA Ames Research Center was conducting tests on a Douglas f5d aircraft with a specially designed planform wing that might minimize landing speeds for the proposed supersonic transport. A tornado-like flow, called “vortex airflow,” and resulting from the sharp difference between the low pressure on the top of the wing and the high pressure on the underside, was generated along the leading edges of the “S”-shaped wing. Engineers said use of the sharply angled wings with tornado effect on top had these advantages: (1) the tornadoes affected air flow over the entire aircraft and eliminated turbulence that would make other aircraft directionally unstable when coming in nose high for a landing; (2) the tornadoes made it almost impossible for the wings to lose their lift completely. Also, it was felt this wing shape took maximum advantage of the cushioning effect produced in compressing air between the underside of the wings and the ground which would make it necessary to level off sharply at the last moment before touching down. Existence of this tornado-like flow along the leading edges of the wing encouraged the belief that a supersonic airliner might be built without resorting to variable-sweep wings. In current design competition for supersonic transport under Government auspices, the Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had taken the first approach. The Boeing Co. had a design with movable wings, (arc Release 65-3; Witkin, NYT, 1/30/65)
NASA established an Office of Industry Affairs at the Pentagon by arrangement with the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Installations and Logistics), to coordinate dod-nasa mutual interest procurement and contract management matters, including quality assurance. Clyde Bothmer, who formerly directed management operations in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, became Director, (nasa Release 65— 55; NASA Ann. 65-35)
Dr. P. H. Fang, a researcher at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, had discovered that silicon solar cells damaged by electron radiation could be completely recovered any number of times when exposed to high temperatures. Report was given at a Photovoltaic Specialists Conference at gsfc Oct. 18-20. (gsfc Release G-28-65)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center awarded ibm a 5-yr. 8175,125,000 contract for integration and checkout of instrument units for Saturn IB and Saturn V programs. Initially announced in 1964, the contract would give IBM the additional responsibility for structural and environmental control systems and integration of all systems, (msfc Release
U.S. Army’s Nixe-X Project Office at Redstone Arsenal announced appointment of Dr. Oswald H. Lange as Chief Scientist and Charles E. Richardson as Chief Engineer. Lange was returning to the Army after more than five years with NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, where he directed the Saturn vehicle project and for the past two years was assistant msfc director for scientific and technical analysis. Richardson was formerly chief of the Nike-X Project’s Test and Range Operations Div. (Marshall Star, 9/29/65, 1)
Dr. Willard F. Libby, chemist and Director of UCLA Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, advocated emphasis on manned scientific missions in the U.S. space program. “In my opinion, space is a great unknown from which we will obtain many new scientific discoveries.” He approved of the use of scientist-astronauts, “but they must be backed much more wholeheartedly by the entire scientific community, particularly the academic community, than is at present the case. Education will help to accomplish this eventually, but there is a particular urgency to determine the post-Apollo objectives in the near future.” A solution to the immediate problem, which had been proposed to and adopted by NASA: formation of a “Scientific Task Force,” made up of scientists about the same age as the astronauts, to work and live at msc and be closely connected with the astronauts, msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of the Office of Space Sciences Dr. Homer E. Newell, and the Advisory Committee for Science and Technology. The Scientific Task Force would educate the scientific community with the manned space flight program and thereby acquire its ideas on the subject, and acquaint the NASA directors with the ideas for scientific experiments suggested by the academic community. (A&A, 4/65, 70-75) During April: Martin Summerfield, Princeton Univ., said in aiaa editorial that most of the critics of the U.S. space program were erecting and knocking down “straw men.” Some of the attacks on the space program were designed to divert space funds “to other, supposedly more important purposes,” and these viewpoints are “pushed too hard and can lead the nation in dangerous directions.” The more significant criticism on scientific grounds was that ground-based instruments (supplemented by unmanned probes) can gather data about space, the moon and other celestial bodies more effectively than rocket-launched exploration. This criticism, he said, “misses the mark completely because it takes for granted that the national space program—or at least the NASA part of it—was conceived simply as a scientific venture. . . .” He recalled the words of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, which provided “clearly . . . the overriding intent to develop the technology of space flight as an extension of the former naca’s commitment to aeronautical flight. . . . “The real issue is whether the nation should continue to develop the technology for flight in space, capitalizing on such useful applications as seem practical from time to time. The answer can only be ‘yes,’ and nothing less than a vigorous program will do. It makes no sense to insist that so broad a program be evaluated in competition with telescopes or unmanned scientific probes. Advances in space science will not substitute for flying capability. Each of these efforts is important in its own right. . . .”	(A&A, 4/65, 23)
NASA approved inclusion of three x-ray and gamma ray telescopes on the first Oao (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory) and rescheduled the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s celescope experiment for the third Oao. The three x-ray and gamma ray telescopes, already fabricated, contained experiments for surveying the sky proposed by: MIT, to detect high-energy gamma rays that did not originate from earth; Lockheed Missiles and Space Div., to seek new sources of low-energy (soft) x-rays and to study those recently developed; and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, to detect low-energy gamma rays. The celescope experiment was designed to map the stars and nebulae through observations in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum but had encountered development problems. Unaffected by the change and proceeding on schedule for a 1965 launch was the Univ. of Wisconsin’s photometer-telescope system to measure the energy distribution and emission intensities of stars. (nasa Release 65-49)
William B. Rieke, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator (Management) for Manned Space Flight, was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, replacing George Friedl, Jr. Prior to his appointment to nasa in 1962, Rieke was president of Lockheed Aircraft International, Inc. Friedl would continue to serve nasa as a consultant. ( nasa Ann.)
The Christian Science Monitor asked Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of the Geophysical Laboratory of the Carnegie Institution of Washington and editor of Science magazine, to present elements of the debate on the question “Man in space: is it worth $40 billion?” Dr. Newell presented the case for manned space flight: “The manned space flight effort serves to round out the total program. Its primary aim is to develop a broad space capability that will secure to this nation strength, security, flexibility, and freedom of choice in space. Landing men on the moon and returning them to earth has been chosen as the means to this broader, more substantive end, and it is not to be considered as the only justification for our manned space effort.” Dr. Abelson, speaking for the critics, said: “The unmanned program has been a substantial contributor to our international prestige. Moreover, prestige based on science and technology tends to be enduring. ... “Our Apollo program was launched for reasons of international prestige. The yield has not been very good or very lasting. How many citizens can now recall the names of the astronauts and of their capsules? We can expect much the same reaction when we finally accomplish a moon landing.” (CSM, 4/9/65)
Absence of proper space laws may lead to dangerous conflicts and complications not only in this sphere of man’s activities but also1 in purely terrestrial affairs,” said Genadii Zhukov, scientific secretary of the Soviet Space Law Commission in an interview with Krasnaya Zvezda. The resolution adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on Dec. 13, 1963, had confirmed that outer space was open to all states. However, he stressed, the resolution made special reservations about the impermissibility of using sputniks for war propaganda and for inciting enmity between peoples: “All states must refrain from potentially harmful experiments in outer space or any other steps liable to interfere with the peaceful use of such space by other countries.” Zhukov noted that in connection with the prospects of creating permanent orbital stations, the need would arise to determine their legal status, as well as conditions of their use by other countries. As human beings made further inroads into outer space, the problem of determining the legal status of stations and settlements on the moon and on other celestial bodies, the conditions for tapping their natural resources, would become important. He added: “Space law must also guarantee protection of other living worlds if such are discovered on distant planets.” (Tass, 8/4/65) August 4^-5: Some 300 representatives of industry, NASA, and other agencies attended a conference on design of leak-tight fluid connectors at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Sponsored by MSFC and the Society of Automotive Engineers, the conference was planned to promote direct exchange of technical information on separable, semipermanent, and permanent fluid connectors, (msfc Release 65-196)
A 160-ft.-tall Saturn I rocket had been erected in display of missiles and space vehicles at the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Orientation Center, (msfc Release 65-305)
Dr. John C. Evvard, Deputy Associate Director for Research at NASA Lewis Research Center, discussed possible propulsion systems for future space-flight beyond the moon before the Conference on Civilian and Military Uses of Aerospace sponsored by the New York Academy of Sciences. He cited a manned Mars project as a prime example of a mission that could be performed by a number of different propulsion concepts. For example, manned trips by chemical rockets would be weight-restricted, but chemical rocket systems would have the advantage of having been extensively flight-tested on many other missions. Although the reactor for planned nuclear propulsion systems had only been ground tested, evaluations of complete nuclear rocket engine systems were expected within the next few years. Electric propulsion systems for manned spaceflight were even further in the future and might not be ready by 1980; but by then the mission capability of the nuclear rocket would have been so thoroughly demonstrated that it would be more attractive than chemical engines for those missions requiring increased propulsion capability. Even further into the future were nuclear systems such as the gaseous-corecavity reactor which would yield higher performance, (lrc Release 65-5)
Four were honored with aiaa awards for achievements in manned flight at the aiaa 4th Manned Space Flight Meeting in St. Louis: the 1965 Astronautics Award to b/g Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), Commander of the Western Test Range, for “exceptional direction to Titan III space booster R&D program”; the Octave Chanute Award to Alvin S. White, Chief Engineering Test Pilot/xB-70 Project Pilot, North American Aviation, for “continued significant contributions to the aerospace sciences in the development of flying skills and techniques necessary to flight of an advanced aircraft at unprecedented speeds, altitudes, and weights”; the John Jeffries Award to Col. William K. Douglas (usaf), Director of Bioastronautics, usaf National Range Div., for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of aeronautics and astronautics, his writings, lectures, and research, and his continued dedication to the study of medical problems relating to the aeronaut and astronaut”; and the Robert M. Losey Award to George P. Cressman, Director of the Office of National Meteorological Services, Weather Bureau, for “his rapid and effective application of numerical weather analysis and forecasting techniques to aeronautical operations.” (A&A, 11/65)
NASA successfully conducted an Apollo boilerplate pad abort test at White Sands Missile Range to check the launch escape system. The test simulated an abort from ground level, using the Apollo launch escape system for propulsion. This type of abort would be necessary in an actual mission if serious trouble developed with the Saturn launch vehicle just before or during ignition of the Saturn engines. Boilerplate 23A, the command module used for this test, powered by the launch escape rocket’s 155,000 lbs. of th rust, traveled 5,000 ft. above the range. Eleven sec. after ignition was signaled from the blockhouse, canards deployed near the top of the escape motor, causing the spacecraft to pitch aerodynamically to a blunt-end-forward position. Three seconds later, the tower jettison motor ignited, removing the tower and boost protective cover from the spacecraft. The forward (apex) heat shield was jettisoned .4 sec. later to uncover the parachute containers. Dual drogue parachutes were deployed by mortars from the upper deck two seconds after the LES was jettisoned. They slowed the spacecraft’s descent, then disreefed to stabilize the module in a blunt-end-forward position. When the drogue parachutes were jettisoned, three pilot chutes were deployed to extract the three main chutes from their containers. The main parachutes were deployed in reefed condition, then disreefed to lower the spacecraft to a gentle landing about one mile from the launch site. The flight sequence took about one minute. This was the first Apollo boilerplate to be reused, (nasa Release 65-202; upi, Chic. Trib., 6/30/65; msc Roundup, 6/25/65, 1) President Johnson signed the bill authorizing $5,190,396,200 for NASA during fy 1966. (ap, Wash. Post, 6/30/65) At Kennedy Space Center, NASA problems with radio frequencies forced at two-day postponement of an attempt to launch Tiros 10 weather satellite, designed to study hurricanes and typhoons. (Wash. Post, 6/29/65)	_
Six rhesus monkeys exposed to a total radiation of 500 rads during a 10-day simulated space flight experienced no performance decrement, reported Heather M. Davis in Missiles and Rockets. Radiation was administered at rate of 2 rads per hour from an 80-curie gamma radiation source at the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Thirty-day physical examinations just conducted showed the animals were still in good health. (David, M&R, 9/27/65, 38)
A gas turbine-powered tugboat, the first ever built, was delivered to NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility for use in the canal system there. The 69-ft.-long Clermont would perform a variety of chores in connection with future space rocket static firings at the Hancock County, Miss., facility, an element of Marshall Space Flight Center. Main duties would be to berth and tow space vehicle and cryogenic tanker barges in the inland canal system, (msfc Release 65-264; Marshall Star, 10/20/65,1)
Blount Brothers Corp. had been awarded a $6,745,000 fixed-price contract for modification of Saturn IB Launch Complex 37 at NASA Kennedy Space Center, DOD announced, (dod Release 444^-65)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of six firms for contract negotiations to provide nonpersonal scientific and engineering support services for GSFC. Final negotiations were expected to result in cost-plus-award-fee contracts for two years at a total cost of about $16 million. Contracts would cover requirements for ten divisions at GSFC; although requirements of a single division would be fulfilled through a single contract, one contractor might service more than one division in several cases. Firms selected: Fairchild Hiller Corp.; Vitro Corp. of America; Electro-Mechanical Research, Inc.; Consultants and Designers, Inc.; Lockheed Electronics Co.; and Melpar, Inc. (nasa Release 65-216; gsfc Release 15-65)
NASA Flight Research Center issued requests for proposals for two preliminary feasibility studies of a manned lifting reentry vehicle to 16 industrial firms. Primary objective of the proposed studies would be to determine problem areas and their influence on design and to provide accurate estimates of the weight, cost, and developmental schedule involved with such a research craft, (frc Release 5^65)
Cosmic x-ray detection experiment carried aloft by an Aerobee sounding rocket discovered the first two extragalactic x-ray sources and identified a variable x-ray source within the Milky Way galaxy. The two extragalactic sources—Sygnus A and M-87—were found to emit x-radiation 10 to 100 times their radio and light energy. The variable x-ray source was Casiopeia A. Details of the experimental results were announced March 2, 1966, by Dr. Herbert Friedman, Naval Research Laboratory physicist. Project was conducted by Dr. Friedman, E. T. Byram, and T. A. Chubb of NRL under sponsorship of nrl and National Science Foundation. (Clark, NYT, 3/3/66; A&A, 4/66, 98, 100)
Reporting on public reactions to the two-man Gemini flight scheduled for Mar. 23, Samuel Lubell said in an editorial in the Washington Daily News: “In recent weeks more than half of the persons interviewed said funds for moon trips would be the part of the Federal budget they would cut first. Another third named space exploration in general. This interviewing took place before Russia’s space exploit of last Thursday.” (Lubell, Wash. Daily News, 3/22/65)
The first photographs taken at the Yale-Columbia Observatory in the Andes in western Argentina had fulfilled the “best optimistic expectations,” reported Professor Dirk Brouwer, director of the Yale Observatory. Brouwer said three test photographs of Orion, nebulae, and Omega Centauri had indicated the lenses apparently were the best of their kind. Principal mission of the Ford Foundation-financed observatory was to make two-hour exposures of the Southern Hemisphere sky to obtain positions of the stars in our galaxy against a background of distant galaxies, (upi, NYT, 9/6/65, 31C)
First flight model of s-ivb, second stage of NASA’s Saturn ib booster, was en route via water from Douglas Aircraft Co., Sacramento, to Kennedy Space Center, NASA, where it might be flown as early as December in the first launch of an Apollo flight-type spacecraft. (Marshall Star, 9/22/65, 10)
Opening the annual meeting of the National Research Council, Harvey Brooks, professor of applied physics at Harvard Univ., discussed recent trends in Federal support of research and development. Of the $14.5 billion r&d budget for fy 1966. he observed, nearly half was for space activities—expended principally through dod and NASA. Scientific satellite programs accounted for 36r/r of all basic research expenditures. He noted the steady trend toward greater diversity in sources of Federal support for academic research. One indication is the fact that in 1954 dod accounted for 70r/< of academic research but in fy 1966 for only 27r/c. (nas-nrc News Report, 3/65, 1)
3C-9, a quasar (quasi-stellar radio source) receding from the earth at 149,000	mps or 80% of the speed of light, had been discovered with the 200-in. telescope at Mt. Palomar Observatory, Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times. It was the most distant of a new generation of five quasars which included cta-102, the object Soviet astronomers had suggested might be transmitting signals under intelligent control. All appeared to be so distant that their life had probably ended during the billions of years required for their light to reach earth. Dr. Allan R. Sandage of Mt. Palomar Observatory said his studies of brightness and velocities of these five quasars and four others previously calculated resulted in evidence supporting the “oscillating universe” theory. Data on the nine quasars’ velocities largely was the work of Dr. Maarten Schmidt, Mt. Palomar Observatory. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/18/65, 1, 2; 5/23/65, 6E)
The Bochum Observatory in West Germany reported it had received signals from Soviet satellite proton i which indicated it would “not remain for a long period in a stable orbit.” (ap, Wash. Sun. Star, 7/18/65, A2)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Rose Polytechnic Institute, Terre Haute, Ind.: “Indeed, the success of the national space program depends to a very large degree on the quality and the extent of involvement by the universities. Their most important contribution would naturally be in doing the jobs they are uniquely qualified to do, that is, in research and in educating and training at both the undergraduate and graduate levels the scientists, engineers, and other professional personnel required by the space program. . . . “With its university program, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is approaching a goal established early in its history. That goal, when achieved, will provide a substantial increment to those trained men who are capable of guiding this country’s undertakings in science and technology confidently toward future needs that are only partially visible to us now. That goal is being pursued in institutions of higher learning where men teach and practice their specialties in the context of other highly refined fields of interest. Surely, this concept is broader than the space program itself.” (Text) * n—i^A, Usaf s twin-jet, delta-winged interceptor prototype, established four speed and altitude records at Edwards afb: (1) 2,062 mph straight-away speed record, breaking the 1,655.9 mph previous record held by the Soviet Union’s e-166; (2 ) 80,000-ft. record for sustained altitude in horizontal flight, exceeding the E—166’s 74,376-ft. record; (3) 1,688 mph record for 1,000-km. closed-course event with 2000-kg. (4,409-lb.) cargo, surpassing the 1,441 mph record set by the e-166 in April 1965; and (4) 1,642 mph record for 500-km. closed-course event, topping Soviet performance of 1,452 mph. usaf pilots Col. Robert L. Stephens and Lt. Col. Daniel Andre set the first two records; Maj. Walter F. Daniel and Capt. James Cooney, the others. yf-12a performed under requirements of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale, world authority for verification of flight records, (dod Release 281-65; NYT, 5/9/65, 88)
Firefly, a new life detection instrument containing an extract of common firefly’s lamp, had been developed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center to help determine how far out and how much life existed in earth’s atmosphere. This information would be essential to prevent contamination of sterilized probes enroute through earth’s atmosphere. Firefly, containing luciferin, luciferase, and oxygen, would glow whenever it encountered adenosine triphosphate, a chemical essential to all life known on earth. Report of any encounter with live microorganisms would be immediate, precluding need for recovering detector, (gsfc Release G-5-65)
Dr. John A. O’Keefe, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said previous Russian efforts to land a vehicle on the moon had failed because they could not slow it up enough at the point of contact. Dr. O’Keefe also advanced the view that the moon originally broke off from the earth and eventually assumed its present position in the universe. He spoke at the monthly meeting of the Catholic Laymen’s First Friday Club in Washington, D.C. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/4/65, A3)
tiros x meteorological satellite was launched from Eastern Test range by a Thrust-Augmented Delta booster into a near-perfect sun-synchronous orbit from which it would photograph tropical storm breeding areas. Orbital parameters: apogee, 517 mi. (832 km.) ; perigee, 458 mi. (737 km.); period, 100.6 min.; inclination to the equator, 81.4°. The spacecraft at first was spinning too fast for picture-taking because of inability to command activation of an automatic slowdown device. A more intense ground signal sent during the second orbit activated the device, slowing the satellite’s spin rate from 138 rpm to about 13 rpm. tiros x would photograph the hurricane-breeding area between 70° north and 30° south latitude, about 60 to 80 percent of the earth. Its two vidicon cameras would take more than 400 pictures daily, tiros ix in its “cartwheel” movement in orbit had been able to provide about 100 percent coverage of the earth daily. The weather observation spacecraft was the 10th successful Tiros (Television Infrared Observation Satellite) to be launched by NASA in as many attempts, tiros x was funded by the Weather Bureau, while the previous nine were NASA research and development spacecraft. It was one of three satellites purchased by Weather Bureau in 1963 “to be used to assure continuity of satellite observations for operational purposes.” (nasa Release 65-229; NASA Release 65-197; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/65, A3; ksc Spaceport News, 7/8/65, 4)
President Johnson watched the GEMINI V launching on color television for seven minutes at the White House in a direct broadcast from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (ap, NYT, 8/22/65, 72)
In a Washington Evening Star article, “Costs Soar in Lagging TFX Project,” Richard Wilson wrote: “Here’s the latest word on that $8 billion miracle airplane program, the tfx. It is costing about $5 million per plane instead of the estimated $2.2 million. It is too heavy for the Navy to use. It could have been ready now but it isn’t because the Kennedy administration lagged a year while evaluating and reevaluating the aircraft so that General Dynamics Corp. could get the contract. . . . “Nobody knows for sure that the Boeing plane would have worked out any better but the top military men all thought so. . . . So far as realizing any billion dollars savings as was at first advertised, this doesn’t appear very likely if the Navy has to have a lighter version. In view of the nearly doubling of cost per plane, it does not seem likely in any case. . . .” (Wilson, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/65) September 13-18: International Astronautical Federation’s 16th Congress was held in Athens. Participants were greeted by King Constantine of Greece. Introductory speeches were made by the president of the IAF, Dr. William H. Pickering; chairman of the International Academy of Astronautics, Dr. Charles S. Draper; and president of the International Institute of Space Law, Dr. I. Pepin. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/12/65; Izvestia, 9/14/65, 5, atss-t Trans.) Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, reported at a plenary meeting of the Congress that the Apollo program had now passed the half-way point and was moving forward at full momentum. He listed three primary commitments: “—the first Saturn V carrying an unmanned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1967. “—the first Saturn V carrying a manned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1968. “—the manned lunar landing is scheduled to be accomplished prior to 1970.” Following his presentation, von Braun told a news conference that “many Soviet and American scientists will participate to lay the foundation for extensive cooperation on the moon.” He said there were indications that the moon’s surface was solid enough to bear the weight of the spacecraft. Soft spots had been identified and would be avoided. He estimated that a landing on Mars would occur 15 yrs. after a successful lunar landing. (Text; NYT, 9/15/65, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, outlined broad objectives of the Saturn-Apollo applications missions, earth-orbital and lunar: “(1) Evaluate and extend man’s capabilities to operate in space effectively as an astronaut and as a scientist. “(2) Conduct observations of the Earth, extra-terrestrial phenomena, and experiments dependent on the space environment. “(3) Qualify systems and crews for subsequent long-duration space missions.
NASA Kennedy Space Center had extended for the second year two of the major contracts under which the NASA Merritt Island Launch Area was being operated. Extensions were negotiated with TransWorld Airlines, for base support services, and Ling-Temco-Vought, information services, (ksc Release 58-65)
Lt. Gen. Frank A. Bogart (usaf, Ret.) was appointed Director of Manned Space Flight Management Operations. Since joining NASA on December 1, 1964, General Bogart had served as Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, (nasa Announcement 65-30)
James C. Elms and L/Gen. Frank A. Bogart (USAF-Ret.) had been appointed NASA Deputy Associate Administrators for Manned Space Flight effective Sept. 1, Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, announced. Elms had served as Deputy Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center before assuming his present position as vice president of Raytheon Co. General Bogart, former usaf comptroller, had served as Director for Management Operations, omsf, since February. Paul E. Cotton, who had been assistant to Dr. Mueller since November 1963, would become Director of Manned Space Flight Management Operations, succeeding General Bogart. B/Gen. Julian H. Bowman (USAF, Ret.) would succeed Cotton. General Bowman had been a special assistant to Dr. Mueller, (nasa Release 65-264)
At the Honors Convocation of the aiaa meeting in San Francisco the following presentations were made: Rodney C. Wingrove, Research Scientist at nasa Ames Research Center, received the Lawrence Sperry Award for his contribution to controlled reentry and precise landings of U.S. manned spacecraft; Dinsmore Alter, Director Emeritus of Griffith Observatory, received the G. Edward Pendray Award for an “outstanding contribution to aeronautical and astronautical literature”; Lloyd L. Kelly, President, Link Group, General Precision, Inc., received the DeFlorez Training Award for “an outstanding improvement in aerospace training”; and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, received the premier Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award “for significant contributions indicative of American enterprise and ingenuity in the art and science of space flight.” This award included a $5,000 honorarium, (arc Release 65-15; msfc Release 65-151; aiaa Honors Convocation Program)
Federal Urban Renewal Administration would approve location of the NASA Electronics Research Center in the Kendall Sq. area of Cambridge by declaring the area eligible for an urban renewal project, the Boston Globe reported. According to an unidentified Federal official, an eligibility report prepared by the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority had been approved by the New York regional office and approval from Washington, D.C., was expected soon. (Boston Globe, 4/15/65)
Washington Post contended in an editorial that long-range achievements of oceanographic research might have a greater impact than the space program on the lives of Americans: The reactions of the aquanauts “to prolonged periods in Sealab’s artificial environment and in the ocean depths will provide vital information on man’s ability to explore and work on the world’s continental shelves. Difficulties that have already occurred indicate that undersea exploration, heretofore granted only limited funds for research and development, is not likely to advance as spectacularly as the space program . . .” (Wash. Post, 9/12/65)
NASA Kennedy Space Center announced it had awarded three contracts for equipment used on launch complexes at both Cape Kennedy and Merritt Island Launch Area (mila). American Machine and Foundry Co. received $1,198,923 for umbilical devices that would provide fuel, liquid oxygen, and air conditioning to the fin section of Saturn V’s first stage. $745,601.15 was awarded Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Sales for the fabrication of bulk electrical cable for Complex 39. Spaco Inc. received $596,356 to fabricate interconnect cables for joining terminal boards in the umbilical towers of Complexes 34, 37, and 39. (ksc Release 35-65)
One of TIROS ix’s two cameras had stopped returning useful photographs, NASA announced, possibly because of malfunction of a diode. Second camera was taking about 250 pictures daily of the earth’s cover. Project engineers at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center had begun a “turnabout” maneuver to prevent the meteorological satellite from overheating and to ensure continued solar power. Maneuver would not affect satellite’s picture-taking ability. Launched into polar orbit Jan. 22, 1965, tiros ix had apogee of 1,605 mi. and perigee of 435 mi. The “cartwheel satellite,” so called because it was moving through space like a rolling wheel with the cameras mounted opposite each other on the perimeter, had taken more than 32,000 pictures, 92% of them useful to weather forecasters. (nasa Release 65-120)
Jack G. Webb was named director of the Federal Aviation Agency’s National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center near Atlantic City, N.J., headquarters for FAA’s research and development activities. (faa Release 65-97)
Over 500 contractors shared the work in NASA’s SI.35 billion Gemini manned space flight project, it was reported. The biggest contractors were aircraft companies, but computer manufacturers, major airlines, telephone companies, and small businesses, manufacturing highly specialized items were included. (Hines. Wash. Sun. Star, 3/21/65 )
Commenting on blockade to prevent Negroes from using North Merritt Island ocean beach—federally-owned property released for public use by NASA—Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, said:	“If difficulty should continue to arise in implementing a basic public policy of non-discrimination, the Kennedy Space Center would be obligated to withdraw the beach from public use.” (Miami Her., 4/13/65)
U.S. Army Engineer Geodesy, Intelligence and Mapping Research and Development Agency (gimrada) awarded $557,000 contract to Cubic Corp. for four additional Secor (Sequential Collation of Range) satellites for use in gathering information on the exact location of land bodies. Although similar to the Secor satellites presently in orbit, the four new satellites would have a transponder capable of operating at higher altitudes. Delivery of the first of the four was scheduled for next February, (gimrada Release)
The aiaa Unmanned Spacecraft Meeting was held in Los Angeles. Maj. Gen. 0. J. Ritland, afsc’s Deputy Commander for Space, said in address that focus on manned space events often caused us to lose sight of the numerous space missions adequately performed by unmanned spacecraft. Although much of unmanned spacecraft activity had directly supported manned missions, “unmanned space technology has benefitted only indirectly from manned space effort.” He predicted that future manned missions might reverse this relationship and cited the objectives of the USAF Mol program as an effort to strengthen and expand technology for all space programs. Mol program would develop technology to improve manned space capability; demonstrate servicing by man of large structures in space; conduct basic scientific and general technological manned experimentation; determine biological response of man in space for extended periods. General Ritland said: “With a laboratory in space, astronaut-scientists or engineers can assemble, test, and observe the operation of many subsystems or components in the actual space environment. They can observe equipment failures on the spot and will be able to make necessary replacements or repairs. I have spent many hours . . . looking over space flight data—attempting to determine exactly what failed and why it failed. The time is near when we can overcome many of these frustrations and uncertainties by use of the astronaut to answer such questions or to relay data to the ground for detailed analysis.” (afsc Release) Discussing future requirements for military satellite communications systems, Samuel P. Brown, Technical Director, U.S. Army Satellite Communications Agency, said: “The feasibility of gaining significant improvements in this area appears very good based on the lessons learned from the SYNCOM spin stabilized satellite and the approaches planned for the DOD’s Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project and NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite Program. From these and other programs is expected to evolve techniques for spacecraft stabilization which will permit the increase of satellite antenna gains by an order of magnitude.” (Text) NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications Edgar M. Cortright said the reason for a civilian and a military space program lay in fundamental differences in the respective roles of NASA and dod: “nasa’s role is to explore and exploit space for peaceful purposes. The DOD’s role is to.stay prepared to defend the United States and its allies, operating in any medium that furthers this end. The present space program with its great breadth would never have evolved under the DOD, which must necessarily devote its full attention to its awesome military responsibilities. . . . “Fortunately, the two space programs are mutually supporting and blend together quite well. They use common equipment . , . and draw on the same scientific and industrial base . . . numerous projects are of great mutual interest. Top management in both agencies devotes substantial effort to insure close cooperation and to minimize duplication.” (Text) JPl’s Dan Schneiderman, project manager for NASA’s Mariner program, told aiaa delegates that data from MARINER iv’s solar plasma probe, which ceased normal functioning ten days after the Nov. 28, 1964, launching, had become understandable to scientists through analysis of a component failure in the plasma probe. Telemetry from a second instrument indicated that a portion of the ionization chamber experiment, which measured radiation in space, was not operating properly. Schneiderman said the new failure was in the Geiger-Mueller tube. Schneiderman estimated that based on nitrogen consumption to date, there was enough gas available to keep mariner IV stablized for about six years. He said there had been no loss of lock with Canopus since a special command was transmitted to the probe Dec. 17,1964. (nasa Release 65-73)
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn. ) disclosed in speech before Washington Section, National Association of Science Writers, that the House Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development (of which he was chairman) was planning an investigation of the National Science Foundation. He said: “For some years, there has been the need to review its work and to determine if it were, in fact, thoroughly successful in promoting the progress of science, the national health, prosperity and welfare and for other purposes.” ( Wash. Post, 4/28/65, C9)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, reviewing overall manned space flight objectives and reporting on the Gemini and Apollo programs in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “Chronologically, the first objective of manned space flight is to establish man’s capabilities in space. Next is the establishment of a national competence for manned space flight, including the industrial base, trained personnel, ground facilities, flight hardware, and operational experience. Next, we use this capability for further space explorations and for other purposes. Finally, accomplishment of all these objectives brings about United States leadership in space. “. . . In 1964, we concentrated our efforts on Gemini ground tests and accomplished the first flight test. Filling the pipeline with hardware and carrying out development testing of subsystems were the major Apollo activities. Now in 1965, we have entered a year that will be devoted to Gemini flight test operations and the conduct of Apollo system development tests. “Looking at the remainder of the decade, 1966 will be the year when we learn new' space flight techniques in the Gemini Program, and conduct unmanned earth-orbital flight tests of the Apollo/Saturn IB space vehicle. In 1967, Gemini will be available as an operational system and we will carry out manned earth-orbital flights of the Apollo/ Saturn V space vehicle. Manned flights of the Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle are scheduled for 1968, leading to the beginning of manned lunar missions before the end of the decade. “. . . I want to emphasize again that Apollo is an orderly program. The buildup of the Apollo effort has proceeded over more than three and a half years to its full strength. It is not a crash program. “The duration of Apollo, as we reported to the Congress last year, is one of the longer United States research and development programs, resulting in a schedule that permits rapid, orderly progress. The Apollo priority is high but not overriding. Parallel and backup development efforts are limited. Flight testing is being carried out on a logical basis, and only after all possible tests are conducted on the ground. “Efficient use of available resources is a major consideration in the conduct of the Apollo program, whereas a crash program follows the most expeditious course regardless of cost. “Finally, crash programs typically have goals beyond the existing state of technology and pursue these goals under the pressure of having to achieve a technological breakthrough. Apollo, on the other hand, harnesses current technology in the development of launch vehicles, spacecraft and facilities to permit effective space exploration. The greatest challenges in Apollo, in fact, are in the integration of those systems and the men who must fly them as well as the provision of ground operational support, and the overall management of this enterprise.” Dr. Mueller said that data received and analysis continued in 1964 regarding radiation and the lunar surface indicated that these matters were of less importance than had been previously deduced:	“. . . First, the chance of a significant solar event occurring during a mission is very low. Second, if the worst solar flare previously observed had occurred during an Apollo mission, the maximum dose that could have been received at the bloodforming organs by astronauts in the command module would have been about 10 per cent of the allowable safe dose, rather than 15 per cent as estimated last year. “Regarding the lunar surface, the data from ranger vii have been very helpful. The large area photography has indicated the probability that there are many areas of the moon’s surface where the design of the lunar excursion module is adequate with respect to surface slope and roughness. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 53-134)
U.S.S.R.’s cosmos Lxx artificial earth satellite was successfully launched containing scientific equipment “for continuing the outer space research in conformity with the program announced by Tass on March 16th, 1962,” a radio system for precise measurement of the orbital elements, and a radio telemetry system for sending data to earth. Orbital parameters: apogee, 1,154 km. (716.7 mi.); perigee, 229 km. (142 mi.); period, 98.3 min.; inclination to the equator, 48.8°. Equipment was functioning normally. Bochum Observatory (W. Germany) had reported picking up signals different from those of the Cosmos series. Heinz Kaminski, head of the Institute for Satellite and Space Research at Bochum, West Germany, said he tracked two Soviet space satellites in orbit although the U.S.S.R. announced the launching of only one: “Apparently'the Russians are preparing for a space rendezvous—perhaps between these two satellites or between a manned space ship and a satellite in parking orbit.” No confirmation of the Bochum report was available from other sources. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/3/65, 1, atss-t Trans.; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/65, 1; upi, Cocoa Trib., 7/2/65)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., discussing the management of NASA’s aeronautics and space effort before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said: “. . . our performance in terms of data returned is perhaps the most succinct evidence of success. The volume of information brought back from space in 1964 averaged 57 million data points per day in comparison with a previous high of some 6 million data points per day. This indicates not only more advanced instrumentation but also more reliable functioning of flight experiments. We averaged 54 working experiments throughout 1964, which represents an improvement of 35/7 over the 1963 average. “We have achieved significant results in ground based experimentation, testing, aeronautical flights, and sounding rocket launchings. Work conducted in our wind tunnels continues to refine aircraft configurations for vertical takeoff and landing, supersonic transportation, and hypersonic flight. We are continuing to experiment with materials, fuels, turbines, injectors, and nozzles in order to improve the efficiency of air-breathing and rocket propulsion systems. The 3 successful power tests of the kiwi reactor demonstrated the applicability of nuclear energy to rocket propulsion. In 1964 we conducted 27 more flights of the x-15 aircraft, 19 of them over Mach 5, amassing data important to supersonic and hypersonic flight. In addition, we launched 131 successful sounding rockets from stations around the world to test new instrumentation and to obtain important scientific data in geophysics, astronomy, and meteorology. In the areas of manned space flight, the Apollo escape system has been successfully tested, and a boilerplate spacecraft checked out and flown on the Saturn I. A mock-up of the lunar excursion module has been approved. The Saturn IB and Saturn V ‘battleship’ upper stages have been successfully fired. The F-l engine has passed its flight rating test. This record was established by the hard work and careful attention to detail of the government-industry-university team charged with aeronautic and space exploration. This total team, numbering 380,000 people, is managed by the relatively small hard core NASA organization of less than 34,000.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 76-114)
Soviet Union launched cosmos xciv artificial earth satellite carrying scientific instrumentation to continue the space exploration program. Orbital parameters: apogee, 293 km. (181.9 mi.); perigee, 211 km. (131 mi.); period, 89.3 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was operating normally. (Tass, 10/28/65)
Pictures of Mars taken by mariner iv during the July 14 flyby received editorial comment in the Washington Post: “. . . If some people are disappointed because Mariner 4 did not produce any conclusive documentation on the existence of the long-suspected life on Mars, it should be remembered that this was not one of Mariner 4’s objectives. Even the Tiros, circling earth at far less distance from its surface than Mariner 4 was from Mars, has indicated only once in the thousands of pictures taken that the life we know exists here actually can be spotted from far out in space.” (Wash. Post, 7/31/65) During July: The support of science in the U.S. was discussed by Dael Wolfle in the Scientific American: “From 1953 until 1960 about 8 percent of the Nation’s research and development budget was devoted to basic research. The percentage has been rising since 1960, reaching almost 12 percent in 1965. As for the Federal Government’s funds, in 1953, less than 7 percent went for basic research. The figure has been rising since 1960, to about 11 percent in 1965. The universities are relatively much more prominent in basic research than in the total research and development effort, being responsible for almost half of all basic research. In contrast the industrial laboratories, which dominate in development activity, conduct only about a fourth of the basic research.” (CR, 7/14/65, A3760-61)
Brazil successfully launched the first Nike-Apache sounding rocket from its Natal Range in a joint program with NASA to investigate the lower regions of the ionosphere with emphasis on the effects of cosmic rays. Launching was conducted by the Brazilian Space Activities Commission (cnae). Instrumentation for the rocket payload and the telemetry ground support equipment was constructed by Brazilian technicians at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 6580; nasa Release 65-328)
A new F—1 engine test stand was used for the first time at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s West Test Area. The 10-sec. initial firing of the 1.5 million-lb.-thrust engine was primarily for checking out the new facility. On another test stand at msfc, Chrysler Corp. fired the second Saturn ib booster, manufactured by Chrysler at MSFc’s Michoud Assembly Facility. The test, scheduled to run for 30 sec., was terminated automatically after three seconds because of a faulty signal from an engine pressure switch, (msfc Release 65-178; Marshall Star, 7/14/65,1)	_
U.S. Senate passed a bill (H.R. 7717) authorizing appropriations to nasa for fy 1966 totaling $5,196,826,350, as follows:	$4,533,350,000 for research and development; $67,376,350 for construction of facilities; and $596,100,000 for administrative expenses. (CR, 6/2/ 65, 11816)
Venus’ surface was dry, radio astronomers at Cal Tech reported, probably consisted of sand or porous rock, and was much too hot for any known form of life—up to 675° F. The planet’s cloudy atmosphere was at least 40-mi. thick consisting mostly of carbon dioxide with some nitrogen and a trace of water vapor. Observations were made at Cal Tech’s Owens Valley Radio Observatory by Dr. Barry Clark of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., and Dr. Arkady Kuzmin of the Lebedev Institute of Physics in Moscow. (ap, NYT, 8/7/65, 10)
Karl G. Harr, president of the Aerospace Industries Assn., told the Aviation-Space Writers Assn, in Washington, D.C., that the aerospace industry would “jump at the chance” to attack social problems such as urban congestion and water pollution. He said this was so even though space companies had lost money in the first experiment in applying their techniques to urgent public problems. (Clark, NYT, 12/26/65, 43)
General Dynamics/Convair was being awarded a $2,198,000 firm fixedprice contract by U.S. Army for designing, furnishing, and installing an operational tv system for Launch Complex 39 at Kennedy Space Center, nasa. (dod Release 664^-65)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey visited nasa Flight Research Center. (frc X-Press, 4/9/65, 1, 2)
North American Aviation President J. L. Atwood discussed “dramatic strides” made in civil aviation, at the dedication of the Albuquerque Sunport, N. Mex.: “In just 35 years—from 1929 to 1964—the number of passenger-miles traveled annually on the world’s civil airlines increased from 105 million to 105 billion—almost a thousandfold. . . . In only 15 years, between 1949 and 1964, the annual number of passengers on world civil airlines increased from 27 million to 154 million —nearly sixfold ... A Stanford Research Institute study predicts that passenger-miles on the free world’s scheduled airlines—which were 105 billion in 1964—will reach approximately 229 billion in 1975. . . (Text)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center awarded a $500,000 contract to itt to develop a lower-altitude space weather camera for NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite (Ats). (ap, NYT, 12/15/65, 2)
s-ib-2, the first stage of the second Saturn IB booster, left NASA Marshall Space Flight Center aboard nasa’s barge Palaemon for Michoud Assembly Facility, where it would undergo post-static-firing checkout. The 80-ft.-long launch vehicle had been fired for 30 sec. at msfc on July 8, and for 2x/> min. on July 21. (msfc Release 65195)
VENUS H 2,123-lb. unmanned space probe was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. into a heliocentric orbit on a three-and-one-half month journey toward Venus. Tass announced that the trajectory was “close to the prescribed one” and that all onboard equipment was functioning normally. During its flight, VENUS II “would carry out an extensive space research program using onboard scientific instruments.” (Tass, 11/12/65; NYT, 11/13/65, 10)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced that 48 additional 3—2 liquid-hydrogen rocket engines would be purchased from Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., under an amendment which converted the engine production contract to a cost-plus-incentive-award-fee agreement. The initial contract was a cost-plus-fixed-fee agreement. Cost of amendment was $75.8 million which brought the total value of the contract to approximately $206 million. A total of 103 J-2 engines was now on order for the Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicle program, (msfc Release 65—289)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a $4,514,295 modification to its existing contract with Boeing Co. to provide services in Saturn V ground support. Tasks included analysis of ground support equipment, monitoring equipment qualification testing, acceptance testing, conducting design verification, and interface and installation control documentation, (msfc Release 65-234)
NASA terminated its contract with the Thiokol Chemical Corp., and its subcontractor, Newport News Shipbuilding and Drydock Co., for development of a 260-in.-dia. solid rocket motor. Reason for the decision was the difficulty encountered by the contractors in processing and welding special steel required for the rocket case and the time which would be required to develop an alternate method. During a hydrostatic pressure test April 11 of the first rocket case produced under the Thiokol contract, failure had occurred at a pressure considerably below the normal operating firing pressure with the consequent destruction of the case. A second case, presently about 60% complete, had been constructed by the same method and was subject to the kinds of faults that resulted in destruction of the first case. Aerojet-General Corp., a second contractor undertaking development of a 260-in. solid rocket motor, was not affected by termination of Thiokol contract, (nasa Release 65-187; Marshall Star, 6/16/65, 6) June 6: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, told the graduating class of Clark University: “Your country has wisely although belatedly made a firm decision to conduct a vigorous national space program. It is a clear responsibility of each of us to learn what he can about that program, find out what it means to the country as a whole and to the individuals who live here.” He continued: “As we attempt to carry out our responsibilities in educating the general public about space, there are a few concepts which need particular emphasis: “1. Education. The space program has been a catalyst, a stimulus to education at all levels, with particular attention to science and engineering. . . . “2. National Security. . . . How much more secure are we, due to improved communications, more accurate navigation, and more complete weather information? How much is it worth to be better informed about potential sources of danger? How can we assess the advantage of developing competence to detect and offset possible aggression from space? How important is it to know that we intend to keep peace and freedom in space so that all who would go there with peaceful intentions are free to do so? I cannot judge the worth of this national security. . . . “3. Innovations. The space program stimulates the development of new materials, new products, new productive processes, and new managerial techniques. . . . “4. International Status. A substantial difference in influence in world affairs evolves from whether a country is in a first position or a second position in power. In many respects, a nation’s relative position depends on how it stands in advanced technology. Power and influence in world affairs depend to a great degree upon the technological capability of a nation. . . . The ideal picture is that of a nation strong in ideas, in technology, in freedom, in standard of living, and in military power to protect the viability of the other prestige ingredients. The space program, effectively and imaginatively conducted, contributes positively to all of those ingredients. Of even greater importance is the potential impact the space program can have on world peace through substituting competence in space exploration for competence in building implements of aggression. ... “5. Economics. Combining the best talents in management, in engineering, and in science, with the most modern facilities available, the net result of the space program is the production of progress. . . .” (Text)
King Constantine of Greece invited Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), their wives, and other U.S. officials in Athens for the 16th International Astronautical Congress, to a royal palace banquet, nasa Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wernher von Braun and JPL Director Dr. William H.	Pickering were among the guests, (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 9/17/65)
Ball and roller bearings assembled according to the Lewis Hardness Differential Guide could be expected to have four to five times greater fatigue life, NASA announced. The Guide was developed by a NASA Lewis Research Center team of engineers whose tests showed that bearing load capacity and fatigue life were greatest when the rolling elements of the bearing were between one and two points harder (measured on the Rockwell C Scale) than the races. Manufacturers usually made bearings with balls and races of the same hardness. (NASA Release 65-246; lrc Release 65-51)
Two Russian airmen had set a world altitude record by flying mI^I helicopter with a load of nearly two tons to 20,894 ft., Tass reported. (Reuters, N.Y. News, 3/14/65)
A brightly illuminated object in the sky near Langley afb, Va., was widely reported as a Ufo but identified by usaf as a weather balloon with the sun reflecting off its surface. (Newport News Daily Press, 2/3/65) February 3; oso li I Oso R2), nasa*s Orbiting Solar Observatory, was successfully launched into orbit from Cape Kennedy by a three-stage Delta rocket. Preliminary orbital elements: apogee, 393 mi.; perigee, 343 mi.; period, 97 min.; inclination, 33°. The 545-lh. spacecraft included parts salvaged from the Oso B. damaged last April prior to launch, and components of a spacecraft built for prototype testing. The second of eight spacecraft planned by NASA for direct observation of the sun, oso II carried eight scientific experiments and had two main sections: the wheel (lower) section provided stability by gyroscopic spinning and housed the telemetry, command, batteries, control electronics and gas spin-control arms, and live experiment packages; the sail (upper) section was oriented toward the sun and contained solar cells and solar-pointing experiments. For the first rime, the instruments, controlled by ground command, would scan the entire solar surface. Each scan required four minutes. February 3; NASA’s Orbiting Solar Observatory, OSO 11, was launched from Cape Kennedy, Fla. oso li experiments were intended to map the frequency and energy of solar emissions and represented a joint Govern meat-university-industry effort. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center managed the project. (NASA Press Kit Release 65-11: NASA Release 65-32; Goddard News. 2/3/65. 1-2)
In a report presented at the 55th national meeting of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers in Houston, NASA Lewis Research Center engineer E. W. Ott said that moisture in an astronaut’s breath could escape into his space capsule, accumulate and float at zero gravity, and short out electrical systems it might come into contact with. He said something like this was believed to have happened when Astronaut Gordon Cooper had had to bring his space capsule in under manual control in May 1963. “There is good evidence that water found its way into automatic control equipment and caused malfunctioning.” (Justice, Houston Post, 2/10/65)
Clarence A. Syvertson had been named Director of NASA’s new Mission Analysis Division of the Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Technology. NASA announced. He would be responsible for study of future missions for research and technology programs. The Mission Analysis Division, to be located at NASA Ames Research Center, would be staffed by outstanding scientists drawn from all NASA Centers and would be organized along aeronautical and space mission lines. (NASA Release 65-46; NASA Ann. 65-341
Referring to a French rocket launching site, comparable to Kennedy Space Center, that would be operating in French Guiana by 1968, Pierre J. Huss said in the New York Journal American: “French experts claim the Guiana location makes it possible to fire toward the east at an angle that makes use of the earth’s rotation speed. They say it also offers optimal conditions for launching vehicles to the moon or Mars.” (Huss, N. Y. J/Amer., 7/8/65, 9)
First sounding rocket launching undertaken jointly by the U.S. and Brazil under a memorandum of understanding signed April 21, 1965, was conducted successfully at nasa Wallops Station. The Nike-Apache rocket carried a 60-lb. payload to peak altitude of about 101 mi. (162.6 km.) during the seven-minute flight. Instrumentation for payload and telemetry ground support equipment were constructed jointly by Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) and nasa engineers at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, nasa furnished the rocket and use of Wallops Station facilities. The Brazilian launch team, presently in training at Wallops Station, directed the launch operations and acquired telemetry data during the flight. (Wallops Release 65-51)
Dr. Michel Bader, nasa Ames Research Center scientist, reported that comet Ikeya-Seki had apparently suffered no structural deformation as a result of its close passage to the sun October 20. The tail of the comet now appeared to be about 12° (25 million miles) in length, (arc Astrogram, 10/28/65, 1)
usaf’s Titan m-c rocket could match the Soviet Union’s most powerful booster pound for pound in launching heavy-weight satellites into orbit, according to William G. Purdy, General Manager, Launch Vehicles, Martin Co. “Engineering analysis of Titan III—c’s performance on its maiden flight of June [18] shows that a payload of nearly 27.000	pounds could have been orbited. In the past, Titan in—c’s maximum payload has been computed at 25,000 lbs.” Mr. Purdy said that the Soviet Union’s best was the 26,840-lb. proton i satellite launched July 16 by powerful new rocket. (Martin Co. Release) NASA Science Advisory Committee was considering a proposal by radio astronomers to create a lO-mi.-dia. antenna array to permit a “look” into the past with radio energy, disclosed Bernard M. Oliver, Vice President of a Palo Alto electronics firm. He estimated that 1.000	antennas, each perhaps 10-ft.-dia., spread out over the area of a 10-mi. circle, would provide the resolution of signal intake necessary for the kind of radio observation he was suggesting. Intake of all the antennas would be focused at a single laboratory. There the radio energy would be converted to sound energy and then into light to provide photographic images equivalent to optical images now taken of the moon. Oliver said: “We quite strongly believe that such an exploration tool can provide the maximum amount of information relating to the origins of the universe, to the life cycle, and to the destiny of the universe, and, in a sense, to the destiny of the human race as a whole.” (Chic. Trib., 7/28/65) Missions to Jupiter could be conducted by 1969, suggested Eugene Lally, Space-General Corp. engineer, in a paper presented to the AIAA outlining a program of six missions to the planet Jupiter, beginning with a fly-by in 1969 and culminating with a Jovian orbit in the mid-1980’s. A Jupiter mission would take about two years. Lally postulated that payload weights ranging from a 650-lb. payload to a 12,400-lb. orbiter payload could be easily handled by boosters ranging from Atlas-Centaur with an added kick stage, through the Saturn V which would be used to place a man on the moon. Lally speculated that an instrumented probe would be able to obtain information on the constitution of the core and surface layers, the atmosphere, nature of the largest of the planet’s spots, topography, constitution of meteoroids in its vicinity and the presence of small satellites not yet discovered with telescopes. Lally’s probe would contain experiments to measure the atmosphere, magnetic fields, and gravitational fields; to conduct infrared and microwave examinations of the surface; and to provide pictures similar to those taken of Mars by mariner iv. (Space-General Corp. Release) An Electro-Optical Systems (eos) bombardment ion engine had successfully operated for more than 2,610 hrs. in vacuum chamber conditions and, as a result of that extended run, “lifetimes in excess of 10.000	hours can now be calculated for the tiny engine under conditions of space flight,” Gordon Sohl, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., told the aiaa meeting in San Francisco. Fueled with cesium, the EOS engine was less than two feet long and weighed 10 lbs. fully loaded with a five-pound fuel supply. It provided a power-to-thrust ratio of 182 kw. per pound. Financed by NASA Lewis Research Center, the EOS research program recently received a follow-on funding from LRC to determine “if the ion engine with 100 pounds of cesium fuel is equivalent in thrust to a conventional chemical rocket carrying a ton of propellant.” (eos Release) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, presented the third annual Theodore von Karman lecture. Dr. Bisplinghoff discussed advances in air transport, such as V/Stol aircraft and the hypersonic transport. He pointed out that within 20 yrs. an estimated 130 million persons (about 50% of the U.S. population) would be living in three main metropolitan areas and that there would be an increasing demand for “air buses.” Dr. Bisplinghoff suggested that the hydrogen-fueled hypersonic transport could be used as a cheap transport, or as an earth-to-orbit aircraft. He said that the hypersonic transport would carry passengers halfway around the earth nonstop at speeds up to 8,000 mph, but there was one problem area: . . . “Where the airplane threatens to overpower the pilot with characteristics which make the airplane unflyable by human systems.” Dr. Bisplinghoff called for increased research for operational experience with the scram jet (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine as a prelude to developing the hypersonic transports. In a press conference preceding his lecture, Dr. Bisplinghoff predicted “another revolution” for personal aircraft in the form of highly simplified controls similar to those in automobiles. He also urged quick Government action to begin the acquisition of a follow-on hypersonic research aircraft to succeed the X-15 and run the flight profile out to mach 10 to 12. (nasa Release 65-247; Text, M/S Daily, 7/28/65; eph) nasa Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock discussed erc in address. During fy 1965, he said, erc “awarded 33 contracts totaling almost $2 million. The organizations to whom these contracts were awarded are spread widely throughout the country. . . . “The average value of the 33 contracts was $59,000, the largest being $285,000. These contracts were almost all in fairly basic research fields, ranging from integrated circuits and thin film space-charge limited triodes, through research in millimeter and submillimeter waves, optical wave-guides and optical components, to space-borne memory organizations, laser gyros and fluid storage and control devices. . . .” He discussed erc personnel: “We have grown from a group of 65 at our inception last year [Sept. 1] to a total of 244. As we are still in the formative stages, our scientific and engineering personnel now total only 92 out of the 244, but when we have reached our full strength of 2100, we expect that our staff will be about equally divided between scientific and engineering, technical support and administrative. . . .” (Text) Thomas Bilhorn, Manager, Mechanics Section, Scientific Balloon Facility at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (ncar), revealed that facilities for launching balloons capable of carrying 16,000-lb. payloads were expected to be completed by next summer at NCAR’s Scientific Balloon Flight Facility in Texas. The device under construction, called an inflation shelter, would have a ceiling height of 140 ft. and interior diameter of 120 ft. It would reduce handling problems during inflation and would give the capability of periods of hold, recall, and post-inflation inspection and repair. (Text) “There is nothing hostile or aggressive in the military space program we foresee. It is entirely within the context of a national program expressly devoted to peaceful purposes,” said Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director (Space) of Defense Research and Engineering. He continued: “It is likely that military interest will remain focused primarily on near-earth missions, out to synchronous orbit, certainly through 1975. We expect to continue our very large and vigorous unmanned military space program which is performing very important functions. The need for these programs will not diminish since they are by far the most efficient and cheapest way of performing specified tasks. With a steadily increasing experience and know-how in manned space flight, we may expect that spacecraft will acquire characteristics permitting rendezvous, station-keeping, docking, and transfer of man and material. We will likely acquire the means of sustaining military men in space for the periods of time we require. Booster capacities are not likely to limit the applications, but the booster and payload costs will continue to do so.” (Text) In aiaa session on the “History of Rocket Research Airplanes,” John Stack, former naca-nasa designer, pointed out how little was known about transonic and supersonic flight in 1943, when X-l was conceived. Walter C. Williams, Dr. Raymond Bisplinghoff, and Walter T. Bonney, among other speakers, also stressed the key role of engineer test pilots in the success of the X-l, d-558, x-2, and X-15 programs. Session was chaired by Robert Perry of rand Corporation, who traced the history of rocket-powered aircraft,	(eph; rand DeMarquis D. Wyatt, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programing, told the meeting: “Any discussion of the NASA space program for the next 10 years must be given and received with a grain of salt. Reconstruct in your minds the situation 10 years ago and evaluate the validity of any discussion at that time of the NACA program for the period 1955-1965. Such a discussion would not have even mentioned space in any serious fashion. A paper delivered in 1960 that attempted to outline the NASA program for 1960-1970 would have widely missed the mark in the prediction of today’s realities. One can, therefore, conclude that one of the major management problems of the national space program is the lack of an adequate crystal ball for forecasting the future. “In the 6% years of its existence NASA has carried out a vigorous program of space activities designed to yield: “(a) a description and scientific understanding of the space environment; (b) the development of a broadly based national capability and capacity for manned and unmanned operations in space, and (c) the development of practical uses of space. “Decisions will have to be made with an appreciation of, and indeed the shaping of, our whole national attitude toward space in relation to our other national requirements and interests. Far too many future studies within and without the government are predicated on the assumption that the national investment in space research and technology will at least grow at the rate of the Gross National Product. This has not been true for the past several years and does not afford a necessarily sound planning assumption for the future. Our total federal budget has leveled off in spite of the great increase in the national product in recent years. If this trend holds, then marked increases in space expenditures can only come about through decreases in other federal spending. Such an assumption would indeed be a slender reed upon which to prognosticate the future.” (Text) Dr. Vincent P. Rock, Director of George Washington Univ.’s Program of Policy Studies in Science and Technology, said: “People are shaped by their environment. Technology is creating a new environment. In these circumstances power flows to those with access to technology—all technology, not simply military weapons. The exercise of power brings with it responsibility. The ultimate responsibility of those who exercise technological power is the achievement of a hospitable environment for mankind.” “Text)
S—IVB second stage for the first Saturn IB launch vehicle to be launched arrived at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, aboard the cargo vessel Steel Executive. (Orl. Sent., 9/20/65)
The successful use in modern surgery of plasma probes developed for the U.S. program by High Temperature Instruments Corp. under contract to NASA Lewis Research Center was reported by Dr. Walter T. Olson, Assistant Director for Public Affairs at lrc. The temperature-sensing elements of these tiny probes were used in a cryogenic cannula for treating Parkinson’s Disease, a malady involving control centers in the brain. The surgical probe, through which low-temperature liquid nitrogen flows, is used to destroy parts of the brain by freezing without affecting adjacent tissue. It also permits the neurosurgeon to probe at an intermediate temperature; once located, the selected brain tissues can be frozen by using the thermocouple to monitor the temperature. (lrc Release 65-50)
A Saturn,/Apollo Applications Directorate had been established in the Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA announced. The new directorate would plan and direct programs utilizing technology developed in Project Apollo. M/Gen. David M. Jones (usaf) would be Acting Director of Saturn/ Apollo Applications in addition to his duties as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Programs). Deputy Director would be John H. Disher, formerly Test Director in the Apollo Program Office. Melvyn Savage, who had served under Disher as Chief of Test Planning, would become Apollo Test Director, (nasa Release 65-265)
An editorial discussing space weapons appeared in the Washington Evening Star: “Secretary of State Rusk ... is on record as having warned that the ocean of space might support ‘huge nuclear-propel led dread-naughts armed with thermonuclear weapons. The moon might be turned into a military base. Ways might be found to cascade radioactive waves upon an enemy’ and there might be other equally' deadly spatial advances. The same opinion is held by highly placed military officers. “As General Ferguson of the Air Force put it a couple of years ago, in urging the swiftest possible development of an American ‘military patrol’ in space, no one even dimly foresaw the nuclear bomber when the airplane began to operate a half-century ago. “. . . if we ignore General Ferguson, we could lose everything. As a matter of prudence, our country should at least maintain a program of research and development designed to insure it against the danger of becoming second best in the military uses of space.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/5/65)
The s-ib— 1 stage of the Saturn IB booster was successfully static-fired by Chrysler for the first time at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center; the test lasted about 30 sec. Powered by 8 Rocketdyne uprated H—1 engines, each developing 200,000 lbs. of thrust, S-IB—1 stage would be fired at least one more time before being returned to Michoud Operations in New Orleans for checkout. It would then be shipped to Cape Kennedy for launch early next year, (msfc Release 65-75)
s—IC-T, 138-ft.-tall test version of Saturn V’s first stage, was static-fired for 2% min. at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center in first full-duration test-firing. The five F—1 engines, each consuming liquid oxygen and kerosene at the rate of three tons a second, generated 7.5	million lbs. thrust. Ability of the engines to steer the rocket was also successfully demonstrated. The five-engine cluster was mounted so that only the one in the middle of the cross-shaped array was stationary. The others could gimbal slightly in pairs, (msfc Release 65197; Marshall Star, 8/11/65, 1)
Urban Renewal Div. of Massachusetts Department of Commerce and Development approved Cambridge’s Kendall Square urban renewal project, thereby opening the way for construction of NASA Electronics Research Center there. (Boston Sun. Globe, 10/10/65)
usaf announced that first firing of an operationally configured Minuteman II icbm from an operational silo was “100 percent successful with all research and development objectives achieved” and that Min-uteman II performed with “accuracy and reliability,” impacting more than 5,000 mi. downrange from the launch site at Vandenberg afb. (afsc Release)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever predicted at a Retired Officers’ Luncheon in Washington, D.C., that “the next major breakthrough in international commerce will be low cost, long haul air transportation, which could be derived in large part from prior military experience.” Gen. Schriever said he recognized “that there are problems involved in translating military systems into commercial systems . . . but these problems can be successfully attacked and solved if there is adequate long range planning now.” (Text) White’s extravehicular activity, planned for the second orbit, but delayed until the third to allow astronauts more preparation time, began at 3:45 p.m. edt. The cabin was depressurized; White, equipped with tether carrying oxygen and communication and with chest pack for emergency oxygen supply, emerged from the spacecraft just past Hawaii. Carrying a modified 35 mm. single-lens reflex camera loaded with color film and propelled by a hand-held, oxygen-jet gun, he went three times to the full length of his 25-ft. tether and then returned, using the gun to halt his motion and prevent his hitting the spaceship. When the gas supply in the gun was depleted, he returned to the spacecraft by gently tugging on the tether line. At one point, McDivitt exclaimed:	“You smeared my windshield, you dirty dog.” Flight plans had called for a ten-minute walk in space but White remained outside the spacecraft for 22 min. He experienced no disorientation during his “walk.” When he finally heeded commands to return to the capsule, he had difficulty closing the hatch and decided not to reopen it to jettison excess equipment. “It’s the saddest moment of my life,” White said as he reentered the spacecraft. On June 5 during the 17th orbit, the astronauts spoke to their wives at msc. During the 20th orbit, McDivitt spotted a satellite with “big arms sticking out.” He was unable to identify it positively. On June 6 during the 48th orbit, trouble developed with the spacecraft’s computer and attempts to repair it with the aid of ground instructions failed. The malfunctioning computer made it necessary for GEMINI IV to reenter on a ballistic trajectory. Throughout the flight the daily routine of the astronauts included eating, exercise, and performance of medical and scientific experiments. They alternated rest periods. During 12 of the 62 orbits, when gemini iv passed through a heavy radiation area called the South Atlantic anomaly, Astronauts McDivitt and White switched on radiation and magnetic field measuring devices to take readings inside and outside the spacecraft and near their bodies. They also attempted to improve the knowledge of the earth’s terrain through high-quality color photographs; to measure with instruments the electrostatic June 3; Space walk o{ gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White. charge that accumulates in space and on objects in space; to better define the magnitude and direction of the earth’s geomagnetic field; to test the accuracy of part of a prototype navigational system for future space capsules; to measure heartbeats to try to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness on functioning of the heart; to determine the effects of limited exercise in space through use of a tension cord; to take high-resolution photographs of cloud formations over the earth to aid weathermen in improved forecasting from weather satellites; to determine more exactly the elevation of the earth’s atmosphere and its layers through use of filtered film; and to determine if long periods of weightlessness might make the bones brittle. On June 7, to begin reentry, McDivitt fired a 100-lb. thrusting rocket for two minutes, 41 sec.—one second too long—to guide the capsule into an orbit with 156.2-mi (252-km.J apogee and 100-mi. (161-km. perigee. Twelve minutes later, McDivitt fired the retro-rockets; 2% min. later he placed the spacecraft into slow rotation to reduce reentry dispersion. Communications with the spacecraft then ceased for about 4 min. as ion-sheath blackout phase of reentry began. GEMINI iv entered the final stage of reentry at 1:07 p.m. edt when the stabilizing chute emerged and damped the oscillations of the descending craft. The main parachute opened shortly afterward and slowed the spacecraft for its final landing at 1:13 p.m. EDT, about 450 mi. east of Cape Kennedy. The landing was 40 mi. off target because of the one-second error in the firing of the thrusting rockets and one-second delay in the firing of the retrorockets. Fifteen minutes after splashdown, Navy frogmen, lowered into the water by helicopter, placed a flotation collar around the capsule. Before egressing from the spacecraft to be hoisted to helicopter, astronauts took biomedical data on themselves. About 40 min. later, Majors McDivitt and White were landed by helicopter on the flight deck of the'carrier Wasp. They were taken immediately to the ship’s sick bay for postflight examinations. Dr. Charles Berry, Chief Flight Surgeon for the astronauts, said after the examinations:	“We have knocked down an awful lot of straw men. We had been told that we would have an unconscious astronaut after four days of weightlessness. Well, they’re not. We were told that the astronaut would experience vertigo, disorientation when he stepped out of that spaceship. We hit that one over the head.” The most serious problem was fatigue. “Both men were bushed,” said Dr. Berry. Maj. McDivitt had a few flecks of caked blood in his nostrils, caused by the dryness of the mucous membranes from inhaling pure oxygen for so long. X-rays taken of the astronauts’ little fingers and heel bones both before and after the flight to determine if long exposure to weightlessness would cause a substantial loss of calcium were being studied. Commenting on the historical significance of the Gemini flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, said the flight had included “at least two world firsts”: a record length for two-man flights and the first time a pilot had maneuvered outside a ship with a propulsion gun, which gave him control over his movements. American astronauts had flown a total of 259 hrs. 34 min. in space; Soviet astronauts had accumulated 507 hrs. and 16 min. (NASA Release 65-158; nasa Proj. Off.; NYT, 6/4/65, 1,15; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/65, A1,A6,A10; Wash. Post, 6/4/65, A1,A7,A8; WSJ, 6/4/65, 4; Clark, NYT, 6/5/65, 1,12; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/5/65, A3; Wash. Post, 6/5/65, A1.A7; NYT, 6/6/65, 1,70; NYT, 6/7/65, 22C; Wash. Post, 6/7/65, A1,A4,A6; Balt. Sun, 6/7/65; Justice, Wash. Post, 6/ 8/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/8/65; Time, 6/8/65, 20,25,25A; NYT, 6/8/65, 22C; NYT, 6/9/65, 1,22; Lee, Houston Post, 6/9/65; Wash. Post, 6/11/65, Al; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/13/65, Al; Wash. Post, 6/15/ 65, Al.)
NASA announced it had extended the Scout Reentry Heating Project to include one more ballistic flight and had invited industry to submit proposals for the design of the spacecraft. Sub-orbital reentry experiment was scheduled for 1967 and would be sixth in the Langley Research Center project. It would require launching of a 13-ft.-long, pointed cone from Wallops Island, Va., using a modified three-stage Scout launch vehicle with no heat shield. Reentry would take place near Bermuda at a velocity between 12,000 and 13,000 mph. (NASA Release 65-384)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced $40 million modification to contract held by General Electric Co. for the design of electrical equipment for Saturn vehicle launch support. Modification would cover the design portion of the work involved in providing electrical support equipment for Saturn IB and Saturn V launches, (msfc Release 65-100)
An ionospheric sounding probe launched by nasa on a Nike-Apache vehicle from Wallops Station, Va., reached peak altitude of 116 mi. in an experiment to measure electron density in the E region of the ionosphere. Electron profile data were obtained during both the ascent and descent portions of the flight trajectory and were telemetered to ground receiving stations during the flight. Experiment was conducted for National Bureau of Standards’ Central Radio Propagation Lab. and nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 65-36)
First successful flight test of a miniature mass spectrometer specifically for biomedical and environmental use was made at NASA’s Flight Research Center. The system weighed 46 lbs., measured 10 x 10 x 20 in. with vacuum system, and could monitor and chemically analyze samples of gases that might be encountered in either the cockpit environment of the spacecraft or in the pilot’s respiratory system. It could detect buildup of harmful gas or absence of necessary life support gas. The mass spectrometer was built by the Consolidated Systems Corporation, Monrovia, California, (frc Release 6-65)
The appearance is deceptive. Actually, we are in a critically important germination period of research and development of future missile systems.’ ” Rutter noted that the shift in the missile program “does not mean . . . that its wings have permanently been clipped or that the scores of companies with a stake in the missile field face a bleak future. The missile era, in fact is still aborning.” (Rutter, NYT, 10/15/65, 65, 69)
U.S.S.R.’s voskhod II, manned by pilot Col. Pavel Belyayev and co-pilot Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov, was launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, Tass reported. The spacecraft set an altitude record, reaching an apogee of 495 km. (309 mi.)—higher than any manned spacecraft had flown. Other orbital data: perigee, 173 km. (108 mi.); inclination, 65°; period, 91 min. During the second orbit, Lt. Col. Leonov, clad in a spacesuit with “autonomous life support system,” stepped into space, moved about five meters from the spacecraft (tethered by a cable), and successfully carried out prescribed studies and observations: he examined the outer surface of the spacecraft; turned on a film camera; carried out visual observations of the earth and outer space: took horizontal, vertical, and somersaulting positions; and returned safely to the spacecraft. Tass said: “Outside the ship and after returning, Leonov feels well.” He spent about 20 min. in conditions of outer space, including 10 min. free-floating in space. Entire procedure was carried out under control of Col. Belyayev, with whom continuous communication was maintained. A television camera fixed to the side of voskhod ii relayed pictures of the maneuver to Soviet ground stations. Biotelemetric data indicated that both cosmonauts had satisfactorily withstood the orbiting and the transition to weightlessness: the pulse rate of Belyayev and Leonov was 70—72 beats a minute and the respiration rate 18-20 a minute. All spacecraft systems were functioning normally. Tass said voskhod ii would complete at least 13 orbits of the earth. (Tass, ap, ALT’, 3/19/65; Komsomolskaya Pravda, 3/19/ 65, 1, atss-t Trans.; Haseltine, Wash. Post, 3/19/65)
First S—IB flight model stage for the Saturn IB booster which left NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s Michoud Assembly Facility for Kennedy Space Center, NASA, aboard the barge Promise, was scheduled to arrive at KSC August 14. The 80-ft.-long S-IB stage would be joined with S—IVB second stage to make up the first Saturn ib launch vehicle. NASA planned to launch the 225-ft.-long booster in 1966. (msfc Release 65-206)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, addressed symposium on universities and Federal science policies held during meeting of National Academy of Sciences, in Seattle. He discussed the role of universities in space exploration and specified NASA-univer-sity relationships: (1) direct project support by means of research contracts to universities; (2) provision of new facilities, including those to encourage interdisciplinary groups for research in the interest of both the university and NASA; and (3) training support, including program to turn out 1,000 Ph.D.’s annually. He then turned to evolution of the university’s future role: “It is not expected that the university will become the primary action agency for solving the economic and social problems of our society or for setting basic social objectives, but it must have a prominent voice and influence. The university should, I think, aspire to intellectual leadership, to observe and analyze, to apply the power of the human mind—that faculty which distinguishes man from animal, to establish a rational basis for policy and action. The direct attack must be undertaken by other institutions, mainly by political agencies. We are now witnessing the evolution of government agencies, particularly those of the Federal government^ to meet social needs by direct action in all fields from economics and public health to science and technology. A beginning is being made in the mobilization and integration of the total available resources to attack the most complex social problems. “. . i. I believe that . . . the traditional values of pursuit of excellence, freedom of inquiry, preservation of creativity, and the support of the unconventional new ideas, particularly those of young scientists, . . . may not only be preserved but may even be strengthened within the larger framework of increased scope which can provide a sounder human motivation, bring allocation of increased resources, provide a satisfaction of great accomplishment in terms of human goals, and a sense of a community of interest with all mankind. If you will take the time to discover what is now going on in the exploration of space, you will find a free association of individuals, each with complete freedom of individual choice, in the largest and most challenging venture of man, the search for knowledge of his environment, and the application of this knowledge to his benefit. In this group of several hundred thousand people you will find innumerable examples of the pursuit of excellence from the renewed pride of the workman in his handicraft, to the intellectual effort of the scientist to analyze and observe. You will find mainly young men, unafraid of large problems or rapid change. You will find the unconventional idea being given attention. The university and the university scientist must and will adapt to the age of space exploration. . . .” (Text; Science, 11/26/65, 1129-33)
NASA canceled for budgetary reasons further development of the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory (Aoso). From its 1963 start through the fiscal year ending June 30, 1966, a total of $39 million had been budgeted for Aoso development; NASA said some of the $24.9 million appropriated for fy 1966 would be recoverable. Aoso was to have been a 1,250-lb. satellite that would accurately point 250 lbs. of scientific instruments at the sun to measure solar radiation. A prototype spacecraft was being developed and the first Aoso flight had been scheduled for sometime in 1969. (nasa Release 65-380)
AEC reported it had decided not to build a new type of breeder nuclear power reactor that had been considered as a source of electricity for pumps for California’s water project. The reason given was that technical problems had been encountered in research and development. The reactor would have used thorium as the key fuel. It would have been designed to breed more fuel than it consumed and run about nine years on one fuel charge, (aec Release H288; AP, NYT, 12/28/ 65, 4)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said at a press conference held in conjunction with the NASA University Program Review Conference in Kansas City, Mo., that the space research program would cost $35 billion over a ten-year period. At the end of that time, NASA expected to have accomplished (1) 12 to 15 flights of the Saturn V, (2) 5,000 hrs. of astronaut flight time, and (3) the capability of lifting 240,000 lbs. from the earth and orbiting 90,000 lbs. (Kansas City Times, 3/3/65)
NASA launched a scientific payload for the Univ. of Michigan from Wallops Station using a two-stage Nike-Tomahawk. The 122-lb. payload, consisting primarily of a thermosphere probe in the form of a 32-in. ejectable cylinder, was boosted to a peak altitude of 315 km. (196 mi.). Purpose of the experiment, a joint project of the Univ. of Michigan and Goddard Space Flight Center, was to measure density and temperature of electrons and neutral particles at 75-200 mi. altitude and to test a solar aspect sensor. This was the first firing of Nike-Tomahawk configuration from Wallops Island, (nasa Rpt. SRL; Wallops Release 65—16)
Three basic capsule designs for the Project Voyager Mars lander vehicle were being studied by a special planetary missions technology steering committee at NASA Langley Research Center, reported Aviation Week and Space Technology. Low atmosphere density values for Mars determined by the mariner iv occultation experiment would have to be taken into consideration before final capsule design specifications could be prepared. (Av. Wk., 9/20/65, 28)
Weapons and Ammunition Div. of the Italian Air Force had formed a Missiles and Space Research Center at an airport outside Rome, Missiles and Rockets reported. Its establishment marked the separation of Air Force missiles and space R&D from that of the Italian National Committee on Space Research, headed by Prof. Luigi Broglio. (M&R, 7/19/65,9)	_
NASA’s increased use of real-time planning in the Gemini program, in contrast to the “cast-in-concrete” planning of the Mercury program and the first Gemini flight, was praised by William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. He said this new elasticity had made possible the “revolutionary reprogramming” of the Gemini VI and Gemini VII missions where “quick and drastic re-thinking of almost every aspect of space flight operations was required. Also required was the junking of a great many shibboleths, not the least important being the fixed opinion long weeks of launching-pad checkout must precede liftoff of a mancarrying rocket. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/4/65, A12)
About 500 employees of the Manned Spacecraft Center’s Florida Operations were transferred to the Kennedy Space Center, effective today, under a realignment announced Dec. 24, 1964, by NASA Hq. Elements of the manned space flight organization were regrouped to meet the requirements imposed by concurrent Gemini and Apollo launch schedules. (msc Roundup, 1/6/65, 1)
LUNA VII moon probe probably was destroyed in impact on the moon because the firing of the retrorockets was “only partially successful,” speculated Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Observatory. Sir Bernard said variations in the signals heard at Jodrell Bank showed luna vii’s retrorockets were fired at 4:58 p.m. EDT for six minutes. He estimated that LUNA VII, traveling about 2 mps., was slowed down by five-eighths of a mile a second during this firing. Signals began again at 5:20 p.m. and then stopped at 6:08 p.m.—the precise time when Russia had said luna vn would reach the moon. There was no official word on the /ate of the ton-and-a-half space probe, but Western experts believed the Soviets had failed in their third attempt to softland on the moon. (upi. Wash. Post, 10/9/65, A6; ap. Wash. Eve. Star, 10/8/65, A5)
W. C. Fortune, manager of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Mississippi Test Facility since November 1962, had been selected to evaluate the cooperative efforts of the Government-industry Saturn rocket team and “to ascertain that maximum utilization is obtained from the giant new super rocket family now under development,” announced MSFC. (msfc Release 65—146)
In a report of shareholders for fall 1965, ComSatCorp said it had realized revenues of $966,000 from the operation of EARLY BIRD I covering a period from June 28, when the satellite began commercial service between North America and Europe, through Sept. 30. As of Sept. 30, the Corporation’s total cash and temporary cash investments amounted to $187,767,000. (ComSatCorp Release) During December: NASA Flight Research Center had completed analysis of flight handling characteristics of six representative light private aircraft currently manufactured in the U.S. Aircraft flown in the study were considered a good cross-section of this type of aircraft and included high- and low-wing and single- and twin-engine configurations. Report would be published as a technical note in spring 1966. (Av. Wk„ 12/27/65, 13)
U.S. Justice Dept, opposed “at this time” the enactment of measures involving the Government’s rights to inventions discovered by private research and development contractors working with Government funds. The Department set forth its view in a letter from Deputy Attorney General Ramsey Clark to Sen. John L. McClellan (D-Ark.), Chairman of the Senate Judiciary Patents Subcommittee. (Mintz, Wash. Post, 7/30/65, A12)
A new theory stating that molecules adsorb on the surfaces of ionic (electrically-charged) surfaces by unbalanced electrical fields of force had been developed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory under sponsorship of the NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, NASA announced. Knowledge of the exact mechanics of gas adsorption would be vitally important in innumerable scientific, industrial, and medical fields. (NASA Release 65-340) During October: jpl Director William H. Pickering, describing mariner iv’s Mars mission in Astronautics and Aeronautics, wrote: “This mission has proven to be of immense scientific and engineering importance. New scientific information is now available on regions of the solar system never before penetrated with instruments. Observations from the vicinity of Mars suggest entirely new concepts about the nature of that planet. Spacecraft performance has shown our ability to design and construct a remotely operated device of astonishing complexity. Its continued operation establishes a standard of reliability seldom, if ever, attained. Even maintaining two-way communications over distances exceeding 100-million mi. remarkably demonstrates advances in communication technology which were not thought possible a decade ago. “The design concepts underlying Mariner date back to 1959 when the Jet Propulsion Laboratory began the Vega program. In 1960, Vega was modified to become Ranger. The Mariner series took its present form in 1961, when a mission to Venus was planned for the planetary opportunity in August 1962. . . .” (Pickering, A&A, 10/1965,20-21)
Panel on Science and Technology of the House Committee on Science and Technology reported on its sixth meeting (aeronautics), Jan. 26-27. Report was a comprehensive summary of views by the Committee and Panel members and the more than 150 scientists and engineers attending as representatives of Government, industry, and the scientific and academic communities. In its general conclusion, report stated three objectives for future improvement of U.S. civil aeronautics: “Insure that our economy continued to have the best air transportation system to give it a continuing advantage in world competition”; “Insure that U.S. aeronautical development is immediately responsive to the demand, and sufficiently great to continue leadership in the domestic and world markets”; and “Maintain recognized world leadership in technical matters to insure a favorable image and stature of the U.S. technological competence in aeronautical development.” Some of its general observations on the future of aeronautics: “There is a need for more centralized direction, control, and procedure . . . [of the] widely dispersed . . . technical competence and expertise behind aeronautical development in the United States. . . . “The aircraft industry in general is willing to contribute to any program designed to further aviation advancement, but the degree of their contribution will depend upon the extent of Government support, and the availability of a market. The extent is also dictated by the extent of their earnings on marketable products for which the Government is usually the principal customer. “There are indications that an insufficient amount of research effort is being put forth in the hypersonic regime of the flight spectrum, particularly in the field of propulsion. “The aeronautical research and development capability of NASA is not being used to its maximum capacity.” (House Rpt. 227, 32-34)
M. V. Keldysh, President of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, commented on the voskhod ii flight in an article in Izvesda: “One of the most significant accomplishments in the conquest of space was the experiment dealing with man’s emergence into space. New', grandiose perspectives are now open for the construction of orbital stations, the docking of spacecraft in orbit and the carrying out of astronomical and geophysical investigations in space. In the near future it will be possible to create, in orbit around the earth, a Space Scientific Research Institute in which scientists representing the most diversified fields will be able to work. The results obtained as a result of the flight of ‘Voskhod-2’ are most important steps on the way toward carrying out flights to the moon and on to other celestial bodies.” (Izvestia, 3/27/65, 5, atss-t Trans.)
Special NASA awards ceremony was held at MSC, with NASA Administrator James E. Webb making the presentations. Rep. Olin Teague, Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, also was present for the occasion. NASA Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest honor, was presented to Donald K. Slayton, Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, MSC, and to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Command Pilot for GEMINI VI mission. Slayton’s award was for “his outstanding performance in directing NASA flight operations and for his leadership of the continuous and rapid adaptation of NASA’s astronaut training activities to the experience gained from Mercury and Gemini flights. . . .” Schirra’s dsm cited “his courage and judgment in the face of great personal danger, his calm, precise and immediate perception of the situation that confronted him and his accurate and critical decisions that made possible the successful execution of the Gemini VI mission.” This ceremony marked the first time the top NASA medal was presented away from Washington. (With these two presentations, all seven original Mercury astronauts had received the Distinguished Service Medal.) nasa Exceptional Service Medal was presented to the crews of gemini VII (Astronauts Borman and Lovell) and VI (Astronauts Schirra and Stafford); William C. Schneider, Deputy Director of the Gemini Program for Mission Operations, omsf; and John T. Mengel, Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Systems Directorate, gsfc. Group Achievement Awards were presented to the following groups from the Cape: ksc Launch Operations; ksc Spacecraft Operations; Martin Co. Gemini program group; McDonnell Aircraft Corp. Gemini program group; Gemini Launch Vehicle Div., afsc 6555th Aerospace Test Wing: and afetr Test Operations Div. (msc Gemini VII/ Gemini VI Fact Sheet; Exec. Secy., msc Awards Committee; nasa Proj. Off.)
William Hines commented on the economy of low bidding in an article in the Washington Evening Star: “The lowest bidder still produces hardware for Uncle Sam’s space effort, and this arrangement does not always prove the most economical in either time or money. A glaring example has developed at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, where America’s moonport is rapidly nearing completion. “The lowest bidder has built two huge tank-like vehicles called ‘crawler-transporters’ there, at a saving of almost $3 million below a competitive bidder’s price. The only trouble is that the crawlers will not do the job they were designed for, which is to carry a Saturn V moon rocket on a mobile launching tower some three miles from an assembly building to where the rocket will actually blast. “Trouble has been traced to some tapered roller bearings. . . . “There seems to be nothing wrong with the bearings, which are produced by the biggest and best known manufacturer of such items. The fault apparently lies in incorrect design assumptions which result in overloads sometimes being imposed on the bearings, causing them to fail. “Since the design—offered by the contractor, Marion Power Shovel Co.—was approved by NASA technical experts, the government will probably have to pay for the redesign necessary to make the crawler work. These redesign costs could well wipe out the difference between Marion’s bid and the higher proposal of Bucyrus-Erie, another large builder of heavy mobile equipment. . . . “As it turns out, the false economy of low bidding in this instance may cause the United States to miss its stated goal in space: men on the moon in the ’60s. Entirely aside from whether this is a worthwhile goal, it is a national objective and the national prestige is riding on it. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/9/65)
The large “crawler-transporter” scheduled to move the 500,000-Ib. Saturn V booster and an 11-million-Ib. launching tower from the assembly area at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, to the launching site tnree and a half miles away, had been crippled by repeated failure of roller bearings. Eight tractor trucks equipped with treads and rollers like those of a bulldozer would propel the crawler. It was the bearings in 88 rollers that had caused the problem. Tests of the $6-million vehicle, manufactured by Marion Power Shovel Co., had been suspended until a solution could be found. A NASA spokesman stated that neither tests nor launchings of the Saturn V boosters should be delayed. (Clark, NYT, 8/18/65, C13)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (LCdr., usn) finished the last day of their general debriefing at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (upi, NYT, 9/2/65, 15; Wash. Post, 9/2/65, A14)
U.S. Bureau of Mines said its scientists and engineers had begun research on how to tap the mineral resources of the solar system. This attempt to develop “extraterrestrial mining techniques” was being made at the Bureau’s research center in Minneapolis for NASA. The idea was not to mine the moon and planets for materials usable on earth but rather to develop means of exploiting celestial bodies for resources explorers could use to build bases or travel farther into space. The Bureau said that, because of its nearness, the moon “is likely to be the site of the first extraterrestrial mine.” (Bur. Mines Release, 7/4/65; upi, NYT, 7/4/65, 27)
NASA had awarded one-year, cost-plus-incentive-award fee contracts to nine firms for engineering, fabrication, and institutional support services to six laboratories and three offices of Marshall Space Flight Center. Cost of work was estimated at $58.5 million for one year and was primarily in support of the Saturn/Apollo launch vehicle program. The firms were Sperry Rand Corp., Brown Engineering Corp., Vitro Corp., Hayes International Corp., Northrop Corp., Spaco, Rust Engineering Co., RCA Service Co., and Management Services, Inc. (nasa Release 65-77; msfc Release)
mariner iv, 78,277,013 mi. from earth at 9 a.m. est, had covered 251,691,170 mi. along its orbit. The Mars probe was travelling 46,214 mph relative to earth and was returning data and scientific information continuously, (nasa Release 65-159) President Johnson transmitted to Congress a plan to merge the Weather Bureau, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, and the Central Radio Propagation Laboratory of the National Bureau of Standards into an Environmental Science Services Administration. “The new administration will then provide a single national focus for our efforts to describe, understand, and predict the state of the oceans, the state of the lower and upper atmospheres and the size and shape of the earth ... as well as enhance our ability to develop an adequate warning system for the severe hazards of nature . . . which have proved so disastrous to the Nation in recent years.” He added that Federal agencies “concerned with the national defense [and the] exploration of outer space” would receive improved services and that combining of offices and technical facilities would save money, (White House Release) Gemini GT—4 countdown rehearsal at KSC with Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White ii (Maj., usaf) was delayed because of a minor fueling problem. Launch of the GT—4 mission was scheduled for June 3. (ap, Galveston News-Tribune, 5/14/65) An Emeraude rocket was successfully fired by France from the Hamma-guir range, Algerian Sahara, to a planned altitude of 112 mi. It was topped by a mockup of the Topaze rocket which was to be the second stage of the Diamant launcher that France was developing. (Reuters, NYT, 5/18/65; Root, Wash. Post, 5/18/65; M&R, 5/31/65, 11) NASA Goddard Space Flight Center researchers Dr. John B. Schutt and Charles M. Shai announced development of a new series of inorganic spacecraft paints with promise of commercial application; report given at a meeting of the Philadelphia Society for Paint Technology and the Philadelphia Section of the American Chemical Society. The paints would utilize an alkali-metal silicate as a binder and an inorganic phosphate as a wetting agent. They would adhere to most metals and non-metals; would not crack, peel, chalk, flake, or fade when subjected to temperatures between 1,800°F and —320°F; would be washable; could be made in any color; and would have a long shelf life, (gsfc Release G-13-65) American Broadcasting Co. notified the Fee it was preparing plans for a domestic communications satellite to relay network television programs to affiliated stations for rebroadcast, thereby raising for the first time the question of a company other than ComSatCorp owning and operating a comsat. (Gould, NYT, 5/14/65, 1) NBC announced it would televise the June 3 Gemini GT^l spaceflight in color. It would be the first live-color coverage of a space flight, (Doan, N.Y. Her. Trib., 5/14/65) Cornell Univ, astronomers at Arecibo radiotelescope facility revealed that their radar observations of the planet Mercury April 25 indicated that Mercury rotated on its axis once every 59 days, rotating in the same direction as its orbit. This new study confirmed clearly that Mercury did not have a retrograde rotation and laid to rest the classic view that Mercury did not rotate on its axis at all. The astronomers had reported their findings on Mercury’s rotation in Washington last
An editorial in the Baltimore Sun said: “Yesterday’s Gemini flight is described as ‘historic’ and so it was. So too is each successful new space exploration, launched by whatever country, manned or unmanned. . . . What is happening is that a body of knowledge is being accumulated through increasingly accurate photographs and increasingly sophisticated exercises and experiences on the part of the adventurers of our age, the astronauts. . . .” (Balt. Sun, 3/24/65)
(4) To explore, map and survey the Moon. Throughout these extended Apollo missions, the primary emphasis will be on science and applications experiments. “The foundation for any long-range and broad national space program is a strong manned Earth-orbital program. For example, the approach to future manned planetary missions will depend not only on what is learned from unmanned missions such as Mariner and Voyager, but also what we can learn in Earth orbit about the effects on crew members of long-term confinement and reduced and/or intermittent artificial-gravity fields, as well as on the Earth-orbital qualification of extended-duration life support and power systems. “Man’s greatest contributions in space will come when he can bring his intelligence to bear on the spot. . . .” (Text) Michael Stoiko, technical director of Martin Co.’s Gemini advance design section, suggested to the IAF congress that an international space rescue service to aid astronauts stranded in orbit be devised. The U.S. and Russia would organize the service with available equipment, and eventually rescue would be conducted on an international basis. Stoiko said the Martin Co. estimated 280 manned spaceflights would be flown by various nations in the next 20 yrs., with crews totaling 800 men. There was a “reasonable probability” that one or more U.S. crews would be stranded in orbit and a 62% probability that at least seven space ships with crews totaling 22 astronauts and cosmonauts would have to be rescued, (ap, N.Y. Her. Trib. 9/15/65) Paper on “Research and Systems Requirements for a Lunar Scientific Laboratory” was presented at the iaf congress by C. William Henderson, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, and Grady L. Mitcham of the Boeing Co.: “It is our obligation to define a meaningful lunar laboratory program which will extract the maximum scientific return for the investment of resources. Our scientific methods may have to change radically in order to achieve this goal of efficiency; perhaps by using the mantime on the moon only for the extraction of data, leaving the analysis of this information to the far less costly man power on earth. Most probably, leading scientists will not be, themselves, on the lunar surface, but rather will be at earth-based television consoles directing and guiding their counter-parts on the moon. . . .” (Text) Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev reported at the IAF congress that the exit of cosmonauts into space from orbital stations to relieve the crews and perform work in space would be made only through air locks,	making it	possible	to	avoid dehermetization of	the spacecraft. Belyayev said visual acuity of astronauts was lessened by from 20-30% during spaceflight. Sensitivity of the eye to color was also affected. Drop of 50% occurred in the case of green and purple. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov described in his report the functioning of the self-contained life-support system he wore in open space. He was able to regulate the atmosphere in his spacesuit, maintaining with- • in it	an excess	pressure	of	0.4 atmospheres or 0.27	atmospheres. When he stepped out of VOSKHOD II, Leonov said, the excess pressure in the spacesuit was 0.4 atmospheres and before reentry into the spacecraft, he said: “I once more set the pressure back to 0.27 atmospheres.” Data obtained, he summed up, permitted the conclusion that stepping out into open space does not cause serious specific changes in psychophysiological functions. Of the future of the Soviet space program, he said: “In time there will be many space laboratories, with crews being periodically exchanged. Then there will be a spaceship for the moon, and a landing on the moon, followed by shots to other planets.” (ap, Wash. Post 9/17/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 9/17/65; National Zeitung, 9/16/65, 3) A voyage in a seven-man spacecraft, past Venus to land on Mars, was proposed by Robert L. Sohn of the Space Technology Laboratories in a paper at the 16th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Athens. Sohn said the flight could be conducted in the 1980’s using launching equipment and spacecraft already in development, including Saturn launch vehicles and modified Apollo spacecraft. He further claimed that the billion-mile, 400-day trip would cost about $20 billion. A 400,000-lb. craft would be assembled in earth orbit after component parts were placed into orbit by four or five separate launches.	(NYT, 9/14/65) Soviet Professor Savenko reported to the congress about the study of primary cosmic rays by proton i, launched July 16, 1965. Volume of information radioed back to earth was 60 million units daily. Equipment was sensitive to particles of energy of “billions and more of electron volts which makes it possible for the station to explore the depth of matter.” Design of the ionization calorimeter in proton I permitted improved methods of research, Professor Savenko said. Information relayed from proton i processed so far showed that distribution of cosmic ray particles of very high energies differed from picture obtained by indirect measurements. (Tass, 9/17/65) Mstislav Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, received the International Academy of Astronautics’ 1965 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award. The congress elected the leadership of IAF and reelected Dr. William H. Pickering as president. (Hines, Wash. Sunday Star, 9/12/65; Tass, 9/18/65)
A contract for about $60 million would be signed by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center with Republic Aviation Corp. for Phase II development of the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory (Aoso), NASA announced. Republic would furnish two flight spacecraft and a prototype; work would also include final development and design, checkout, experiment integration, and launch support services. The Phase I portion of the project was completed in July 1965. Launching of the 1,250-lb. Aoso, planned for the late 1960’s, would be from Vandenberg afb by a thrust-augmented Thor-Agena rocket; the observatory would provide a constant search for isolated or unusual solar activity, (nasa Release 65-234)
44 of the 107 pages of “Opportunities for Participation in Space Flight Investigations”—NASA’s semi-annual publication inviting scientists to propose spaceflight experiments—were devoted to Apollo manned missions, some of which were under study. Detailed descriptions and timetables covering a wide range of NASA flight projects, manned and unmanned, were provided in the publication. Flight dates generally covered the period from 1966 through 1972. Proposals would be reviewed and evaluated for scientific merit and technological feasibility, the competence and experience of the investigator, assurance of institutional support, and the scientific adequacy of proposed apparatus. (nasa Release 65-284)
A $3,200,000 contract had been let to the E. A. Hathaway Co. for construction of the new 93,000-sq.-ft. Advanced Flight Simulation Laboratory at NASA Ames Research Center, ARC announced. It would contain the most advanced aircraft simulator known (for supersonic transport studies) ; the most powerful centrifuge yet built (up to 50 times the force of gravity); a mid-course navigation facility where stars and planets could be projected just as they would be seen by astronauts in spaceflight; and a “virtually frictionless” satellite attitude control facility. Total values of these facilities would be $10,068,000. (ARC Release 65-16)
Louis Walter, geochemist at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, reported that of the 400 specimens received from “Operation Moon Harvest” none analyzed was a meteor or other non-earth fragment. It had been theorized that because of the low gravity of the moon, meteoroids striking the moon might dislodge fragments which would be attracted by earth’s gravity, and that analysis of the fragments would provide important clues to composition of the moon.	(Des Moines Register,
Aerobee sounding rocket successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station, Va. carried 317-lb. payload to 90-mi. altitude and impacted about 54 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, the stellar spectroscopy experiment measured special radiation of two stars, Spica and Alkaid, utilizing an ultraviolet stellar spectrometer and an input telescope with a 13-in. aperture. Performance of a gimbaled star tracker and modified attitude control (Strap) was also tested. Data were telemetered to ground station during flight. (Wallops Release 65-26)
Saturn IB booster stage (s-Ib) was successfully static-fired for 145 sec. at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center—its second captive firing. In early August, the 1.6-million-lb.-thrust, 80-ft.-long stage would be taken by barge to New Orleans and transported from there to Kennedy Space Center, nasa, for launching, (msfc Release 65-187; Marshall Star, 7/28/65, 1)
Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev told a Moscow news conference that VOSKHOD ix had been scheduled to land after 16 orbits, but that there was an inaccuracy in “the solar system of orientation” that prevented use of the automatic landing system. He said he then had to obtain radioed permission from the Soviet space center to land by manual control after the 17th orbit. The landing site was overshot “by a certain distance” Belyayev said without disclosing how much. Belyayev said success of the gt-3 flight of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young “was a national achievement of the United States.” He congratulated “the courageous American cosmonauts,” and said: “May the flights of both ours and American cosmonauts be dedicated to unraveling the mysteries of the universe in the interests of science and for the good of all mankind.” Belyayev said voskhod ii was capable of maneuvering in space as did the U.S. Gemini iii but that this was not in the Soviet flight plan. Leonov described time outside the ship saying “it is too early to call it a pleasant walk. It could not have been done without hard training.” He reported his small push on voskhod ii to move away from it after going out of the hatch started the spacecraft into slow rotation. In pulling himself back to the voskhod ii by his cable, Leonov disclosed he had yanked rather vigorously and had to put his hand out to avoid collision with the spacecraft. Belyayev said he and Leonov were found by a helicopter 21/2 hrs. after a soft landing in snowy woods near Perm. He said voskhod ii was airlifted back to the launch site at Baikonur in Soviet Central Asia and could be used again if necessary, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/26/65; Shabad, NYT, 3/27/65; Flight International, 4/8/65,542—44)
At Purdue Univ., Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed in a speech nasa’s emphasis on man’s part in future planned space experiments:	“The role of man in space is basic to any discussion of our planned space experiments. . . . We have always recognized his inherent characteristics as a sensor, manipulator, evaluator and investigator. “As a sensor, man adds little to automatic equipment in space— sometimes nothing at all. . . . instruments can measure . . . phenomena that man cannot perceive at all. “But instruments are limited by the knowledge we now have on earth; they cannot cope with the unexpected or the unknown. Man, on the other hand, can operate in any unprogrammed situation and reap full benefits of the true objective of manned operations. He can explore the unknown. “The second function of man in space is manipulation. Gus Grissom demonstrated superbly last month that a man can operate the spacecraft controls for delicate maneuvering. . . . “In the conduct of space research also, man as a manipulator can probe into his environment. He can make use of motor responses and verbal skills to carry out procedures and to assemble, operate and repair equipment. . . . “With the capacity to evaluate, man achieves a substantial degree of self-reliance in controlling what he perceives and how he reacts. When a man remembers, analyzes, compares, and induces—using a solid foundation of knowledge—he has improved the degree to which meaningful data can be translated into useful knowledge. . . . “The most advanced role of man in space is that of an investigator who responds creatively to unexpected situations. He is able to postulate theories and hypotheses, and to devise and use systematic measurements. In this role, the astronaut is a full-fledged scientist.” (Text)
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)
Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Director of nasa Manned Space Flight Field Center Development, told Theodore von Karman Memorial Seminar in Los Angeles that solutions to air and water pollution “could very well develop out of the research now being undertaken to develop self-sustaining life support systems for astronauts on missions of long duration.” (West, L.A. Times, 5/13/65)
Four Nike-Apache sounding rockets would be launched from Chamical, Argentina, for the study of an ionospheric phenomenon called “Sporadic E” under an extension to a cooperative U.S.-Argentine agreement. The Argentine Comision Nacional de Investigaciones Espaciales ( cnie ) would provide the personnel for payload fabrication at nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center, procure the rockets, operate the range at Chamical, and be responsible for the reduction and analysis of data obtained. NASA would provide the equipment and facilities for construction of the payloads and a Nike-Apache launcher on loan. No exchange of funds between CNIE and NASA was contemplated. (nasa Release 65-350)
Month-long experiment for NASA to test man’s ability to withstand rotational stress ended at U.S. Navy School of Aviation Medicine. Capt. Ashton Graybiel, Research Director, expressed satisfaction with results of the test which confined four U.S. Navy men in a windowless, circular room, equipped with all necessary living accommodations. The room began rotating at 2 rpm’s and in 16 days built up to 10 rpm’s, stopping three times daily for meals. This pattern of speed build-up had no adverse affect on the men and produced no nausea or significant discomfort. This test, one of a series conducted by Naval School of Aviation Medicine, was to check new procedure for conditioning men for space flight. Since long space voyages could require rotating spacecraft to create artificial gravity, scientists wanted to determine spinning rate man could endure without discomfort. (NASA Release 65-84)
The Soviet Union’s apparent effort to penetrate the world commercial aircraft market was reported by Evert Clark in the New York Times. He said the U.S.S.R. had formed a new organization called Aviaexport to direct commercial sales. It was expected to pick satellite countries as its first target, then so-called “dependent” nations, and eventually the Western countries. Showing of the Antonov 22 700-passenger aircraft and a model of a supersonic airliner scheduled to begin test flights in 1968 had enabled the Soviet Union to dominate the Paris International Air Show (June 11-20) until the arrival of Vice President Humphrey and Astronauts White and McDivitt. (Clark, NYT, 7/5/65, 30)' During week of July 4: Ambassador Tran Thien Khiem, South Viet Nam, visited NASA Langley Research Center. (Langley Researcher, 7/16/65, 8)
Ground test version of the Saturn V launch vehicle’s first stage (s—ic—1T stage) was static fired for its full flight duration of about 2V2 min. at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. S-IC-T, designed by msfc and the Boeing Co., generated its full thrust of 7,5-million lbs., equivalent, at maximum flight velocity, to about 160 million hp. Firing was the second conducted by the Boeing Co., MSFc’s prime contractor for the s-ic. All early firings were conducted by the msfc Test Laboratory, which directed today’s test, (msfc Release 65-287)
Wall Street Journal space reporter wrote a “Memo on Space Semantics” to his editor: “I think you should be aware of some problems in semantics and etymology that are becoming acute as a result of the activities at Cape Kennedy. Unless we resolve some of these problems in the near future, I fear that a new space age neurosis may appear among our reporters and copy editors. “If you recall, since late 1957 there have been a number of hints that the advent of space exploration would create some new difficulties with our editorial style. First, there was the problem of deciding whether to italicize the Russian word ‘sputnik.’ Then we had to decide on the spelling and capitalization of ‘a-okay’ (or is it ‘A-OK’?). “Unfortunately, we are now encountering some difficulties which would tax the abilities of Clifton Fadiman, himself. . . . “Perhaps the most serious problem . . . stems apparently from an oversight on the part of our ancestors. In writing out the names of the nine planets of our solar system it became evident that we have neglected to formally name our own planet. At least this is the only conclusion one can come to when it’s noted that we capitalize the names of all the planets except our own. Webster, himself, insists on using a lower case ‘e’ for earth while dignifying tiny Mercury with a capital. Even the minor planets such as Eros carry formal names. “The neglect is even more conspicuous in the instance of our own natural satellite. While the moons of other planets have exotic names such as Phobos we refer to ours in the generic and, consequently, with a lower case ‘m\ “I suggest we either start capitalizing Earth and Moon or else ask the American Society of Newspaper Editors to convene an international conference to pick a name for our planet. While they’re at it, they might decide whether ‘marsography’ is a word and straighten out the planetary adjectives.” (Bishop, WSJ, 9/9/65, 12) September IQ: NASA began recruiting to select additional pilot/astronauts for manned space flight missions. There were presently 28 pilot/astronauts and five scientist/astronauts participating in the NASA manned space flight program. To be eligible for selection, applicants had to: (1) be a U.S. citizen, no taller than six feet, bom on or after Dec. 1, 1929; (2) have a bachelor’s degree in engineering, physical or biological science; and (3) have acquired 1,000 hrs. jet pilot time or have been graduated from an armed forces test pilot school. (NASA Release 65-288)
A Gemini circumlunar flight had not been approved but the idea was receiving serious study, Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Deputy Manager of the Gemini Project Office at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, told reporters. The Gemini capsule could circle the far side of the moon—• 240,000	mi. from earth—and then return to its home planet, a round trip of about six days. Kleinknecht said if the proposal were accepted, a Titan m-C rocket equipped with two upper stages called “transtages” would place one of the transtages in orbit. A Titan II would send the Gemini craft after the transtage and the two would be docked in orbit. Gemini then would use the transtage propulsion system and its maneuverability for the lunar voyage. The feasibility was being studied by NASA; the Martin Co., systems manager for Titan Iir-c; and Aerojet-General, which builds the transtage. “We are always studying possible future missions for Gemini,” Kleinknecht added. (Benedict, N.O. Times-Picayune, 7/26/65) July 26: NASA announced the addition of two new pilots to the joint nasa-usaf x—15 research program: Capt. William J. Knight (usaf) and William H. Dana, civilian. They were expected to make their first flights this fall, (nasa Release 65-244; frc Release 16-65)
Statement by President Johnson on the delay of the Gemini VI flight: “We are all disappointed that Gemini 6 did not go off as expected. But our disappointment is exceeded by our pride in Astro-auts Walter Schirra and Thomas Stafford and the flight directors of NASA. With the world watching, they acted with remarkable courage in the face of danger and potential disaster. Their eager desire and determination to try again proves once more that men are the real heroes—and the essential factor—in space exploration.” {Pres. Doc., 12/20/65,587)	_
tsr-2, Britain’s tactical and reconnaissance bomber, broke the sound barrier for the first time. The aircraft was flown to more than 1,400 mph over the Irish Sea, to a landing at Wharton. This was the 14th test flight of tsr-2 by its manufacturer, British Aircraft Corp. (Reuters, NYT, 2/23/65, 53)
Dr. Jeanette Piccard’s 1934 balloon Bight, establishing the still current women’s world altitude record for a balloon, was celebrated in Dearborn, Mich., by a ceremony and placing of a marker near the takeoff site. The balloon had a 600,000 cu. ft. volume, reached 57,559 ft. altitude, and took Dr. Piccard from Dearborn, Mich., to Cadiz, Ohio. {CR, 5/18/65, A2465)
NASA Office of Technology Utilization issued a report on metal-forming techniques currently in use in the aerospace industry including those in the experimental stage; a survey, “Handling Hazardous Materials,” dealing with such oxidizers as liquid fluorine, chlorine trifluoride, nitrogen tetroxide, and ozone; a book containing 71 ideas for shop techniques and applications used successfully in space-related research at NASA centers; and a technical survey tracing significant recent progress in plasma jet technology, (nasa Releases)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xcv artificial earth satellite carrying scientific instrumentation to continue the space exploration program. Orbital parameters: apogee, 521 km. (323 mi.) ; perigee, 207 km. (128.3 mi.); period, 91.7 min.; inclination, 48°. Equipment was functioning normally. (Pravda, 11/5/65, 2)
John W. Findlay, Deputy Director at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va., had been named Director of Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory in Puerto Rico for a one-year term beginning in the fall. He would succeed William E. Gordon. (NYT, 3/7/65, 75)
Army Lockheed XH-51a, fastest helicopter in the world, demonstrated its rigid rotor system and auxiliary jet engine in a successful test flight. It had a top speed of 272 mph. Without thrust from the engine, the XH-51a could be operated as a helicopter. (Wash. Post, 5/27/65, A7)
At NASA Hq. Annual Honors Ceremony, Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, said: “Mine was the relatively easy task of putting together an organization. Yours has been the much more difficult task of making good the promises we held out, at times so naively, to the Congress and the people of this Nation and the world. But handling these heavy responsibilities cannot be the duty of just one man, or a small group of men at the top. “This Agency’s success attests to the skill with which NASA employees have been and are carrying out their jobs. ... To all of you and to the thousands of NASA people working at their tasks at whatever location throughout this nation and the world, I am proud to say— well done! And I am confident that the hard won leadership position you have attained will be maintained throughout the years ahead.” (Text) NASA Administrator Webb presented Exceptional Scientific Achievement Awards to H. Julian Allen, Ames Research Center; Leslie H. Meredith and William Nordberg, gsfc; Dan Schneiderman and Eber-hardt Rechtin, JPL. Smith J. DeFrance, Ames Research Center, and Bruce T. Lundin, lrc, received Outstanding Leadership Medals. Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented Exceptional Service Medals to John R. Cassani, jpl; Seymour C. Himmel, lrc; and William Lilly, Hq. He presented Group Achievement Awards to the Agena Project, lrc; Florida Operations Team, ksc; Launch Support Equipment Engineering Div., KSC; and Scout Project Office, LARC. Seventeen thirty-year service awards were presented by Earl D. Hil-burn, Deputy Associate Administrator, (nasa Release 65-315)
Soviet Union launched cosmos xci unmanned earth satellite, carrying instrumentation designed to continue the space exploration program begun March 16, 1962. Orbital parameters: apogee, 341 km. (212 mi.) ; perigee, 211 km. (131 mi.) ; period, 89.8 min.; inclination, 65°. Apparatus was functioning normally. (Komsomolskaya Prav-da, 9/24/65, 1)
ComSatCorp announced decision of DOD that continuation of its present program to secure satellite services, presumably' with Ford Motor Co.’s Philco Corp. Div., was superior to that proposed by ComSatCorp. Hie satellites involved would make up “initial” DOD system; ComSatCorp might bid to supply advanced satellites. ComSatCorp hoped its separate commercial system would he afforded some dod nonsecret traffic. Some military men had argued that, since the Government would build its own system for secret communications, it should also use these facilities for nonsecret transmissions. This had caused ComSatCorp to raise the question of the degree to which the Government should enter the communications business in competition with private enterprise. President Johnson had established policy in a report to Congress, “. . . a system tailored for the military’s exclusive use, does not alter the policy under which . . . the Government will use the commercial satellite system for the transmission of the bulk of its traffic between the United States and various overseas areas.” I WSI, 2/25/65)	_	_ *	NASA had granted an exclusive patent license, the second it ever issued, to Exactel Instrument Co. for a “line-following servo-system.” The device, which “remembers” a given graph curve, could measure one characteristic of a physical situation and read out resulting characteristics in specific quantities. President of Exactel, Eugene A. Glassey had invented the servo-system while an employee at NASA Ames Research Center. Issuance of the exclusive license on a Government-owned patent to a private individual was part of NASA’s continuing effort to make aeronautical and space inventions available for commercial development as rapidly as possible. The only previous exclusive licensing was to Union Carbide in 1963 for a nickel-based alloy invented by a NASA scientist, (arc Release 65-6)
Following the gt-3 space flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at a press conference: “This particular flight is noteworthy for many reasons. Perhaps most importantly it is the first manned flight of a Gemini vehicle and it represents, then, the first step in the remaining twelve Gemini flights. In this flight ... we did for the first time carry out an orbital maneuver in space. Another first was the first demonstration of reentry control. We did control reentry landing point on this mission. Another first was the use of Syncom for communications with the Coastal Sentry Quebec during the course of the flight.” (NASA Transcript)
Nucleus of comet Ikeya-Seki had split into three pieces, all of which were traveling together in parallel courses into deep space. The three-piece break, observed Nov. 4 and 5 by Howard Pohn at U.S. Geological Survey Observatory in Flagstaff, had been confirmed by Mt. Palomar Observatory and Boyden Station, South Africa. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 11/15/65, 74)
“Within a decade . . . space could be as vital to defense as nuclear weapons are today,” postulated an article in U.S. News and World Report. It continued:	“The deep conviction of top U.S. Air Force leaders is that Russia is directing its main energies and resources not to the moon, but to mastery of space nearer earth. Some are convinced that Russia, far behind in the missile race, is now striving to leapfrog the U.S. and move ahead with manned satellite weapons.” (U.S. News, 4/5/65) In answer to the question of what man could do in space to contribute to the military mission, Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of USAF Office of Aerospace Research, said at the Space Congress:	“I believe that the MOL will enable us to come up with some of the answers.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, speaking before the Space Congress, said:	“. . . extravehicular activity, as accomplished by the Soviets, and orbital changes, as accomplished by Gus Grissom and John Young . . . are essential to future progress in space exploration. Both are objectives of our Gemini Program and both are techniques that we must learn in order to carry out the Apollo Program. We have long assumed that both were objectives of the Soviet Program. “Given these assumptions, the difference between the scheduling of these experiments in the Soviet program and ours is a detail of relatively minor importance. It has been our judgment that maneuvering and changing orbits are more important than extravehicular activity for the progress of our program. For this reason, we scheduled the conduct of such maneuvers for the first manned flight in the Gemini Program. We must assume that the Soviets had their good reason for scheduling extravehicular activity on an earlier flight in their program.” (Text) E. Z. Gray, also of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, discussed future programs. He stressed that one of the cardinal rules guiding the planning was that maximum use must be made of hardware either already developed or currently in development. (M&R, 4/12/65, 16)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb appeared before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices, in support of the $5.26 billion NASA appropriation requested by President Johnson for fy 1966. He said:	“The budget submitted to the Congress by the President provides for activities that are essential to continuing the progress that we have made towards our goal of preeminence in space sciences, application satellites, manned space flight, and advanced research and technological development necessary for aircraft improvements and for future space activities. It does not provide for everything that we could do or would like to do. In fact, it has been necessary within the strict budget requirements imposed by the President that certain desirable project activities started in previous years be omitted from the 1966 budget. . . . “Within the confines of this limited budget, the President has provided the funds necessary to preserve the opportunity that we still believe we have to accomplish a manned lunar landing and exploration within this decade. The margin for insurance that had been built into our original program plan has largely disappeared. However, we now estimate this may be possible if we can maintain our current successful development efforts and make the all-up systems testing procedure work on the very large Saturn V-Apollo combination to launch men toward the Moon on earlier flights than we had originally planned. There is, therefore, still an opportunity to accomplish this national space objective within the time specified. Our work to date gives us somewhat more confidence than we had a year ago that we can still achieve the objectives that were planned in 1961 in spite of a limit on resources that will not fund all the flights planned at that time. It is important, however, to keep in mind that in Gemini we are just now in a position to find out by flight experiments how men can live, work, remain efficient, and make important contributions in space for extended periods. . . .” (Testimony; Incl. Off. Approp. Hearings [Part 2], 846-96)
NASA Langley Research Center announced it would negotiate with Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., an $8 million incentive contract to provide complete system management for the Scout launch vehicle. The contract would continue support services and materials LTV had provided under several contracts. It would include systems engineering, logistic support, operational support, test program support, payload coordination, preflight planning, data reduction and analysis, standardization and configuration control, reliability and quality assurance, vehicle modification, checkout, and delivery, (nasa Release 65-54)
Studies carried out under NASA contract by the Union Carbide Research Institute had demonstrated the ability of many life forms to adjust to at least partial Martian conditions. It had also been demonstrated that lack of oxygen produced surprising results: turtles with little or no blood; plants that could endure lower temperatures than plants raised in normal air. Such temperature resistance would be an advantage on a cold planet like Mars. Dr. Sanford M. Siegel disclosed these findings during a press tour of Union Carbide and said that if earth life could withstand Martian conditions so well, Martian life, if there ever had been any, must have been able to evolve to cope with the situation there. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/1/65)
The Washington Post editorialized: “Decision of the Gemini-5 space flight commanders to try for the scheduled eight-day voyage, despite the power shortages that threatened the exploit during the first two days is one that the whole country will greet with delight. The astronauts have accomplished no mean feat already, but the execution of the intended plan will prove the sophistication of the American space engineers. . . . “The power difficulties on Gemini-5 have, in a curious way, reminded us that these incredible penetrations of space are not yet so commonplace as to he devoid of risk and misadvanture. A succession of triumphant experiments by Americans and Russians have made it look easy. The powerpack troubles, like the dips and bobs and pauses of gifted high-wire performers, have succeeded in reminding the ‘audience’ that the whole act is indeed very difficult and dangerous. We may have forgotten it for a moment, but now we are convinced.” (Wash. Post, 8/24/65, A12)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics:	“I feel that our record over the past calendar year is evidence of the success we have had in building a team that is dedicated to effective management. The space flight record for 1964 is impressive by several standards:	number of flights, percent of success, and variety of missions. The graph (spaceflight mission record) shows that, in terms of percentage, our 1964 success record is nearly the same as the high achieved in 1963; 83 percent compared with 85 percent in 1963. However, we more than doubled the number of successful missions from 1963 to 1964, from 11 to 25. . . . “Other significant measures of the pace and rate of change in our space program have been our performance in terms of spacecraft operations and data return. These performance indicators are at the heart of a successful space program. “For example, in 1964 an average of 54 experiments were functioning in space throughout the year; this is an improvement of over 35 percent from 1963, when we averaged 40 working experiments. “The volume of information brought back from space, measured in millions of data points per day, shows a tenfold increase over previous years:	in 1964 we were collecting about 57 million bits of information each day from our flight missions. . . .” Dr. Seamans listed NASA management accomplishments during the past year “to find new techniques and new methods to carry out our jobs.” Among them:	establishment of Mission Analysis Div. from the Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Technology at Ames Research Center; conducting the joint dod-nasa Launch Vehicle Cost Study; growth of incentive contract program (“over $1 billion are under active incentive contracts”) ; and application of phased project planning. “The budget presented here has already undergone critical review by NASA’s management, the Bureau of the Budget, and the President. It does not provide any contingency funds for the approved missions; it is predicated on a cost reduction program that will require us to operate more efficiently; it represents a carefully pared program priority list. In summary: “First, NASA is dedicated to the accomplishment of the present approved missions and projects in terms of cost, schedule, and technical performance. “Second, new effort is needed to maintain a position of leadership in aeronautics and space. This includes the definition of a new program for exploration of the planets commencing with Mars in 1971; the research and design necessary for effective extension of present Apollo and Saturn capabilities for manned flight; integration of the Centaur stage with the Saturn launch vehicle for planetary and other unmanned payloads; initiation of an advanced solar observatory satellite; and utilization of a prototype xb-70 aircraft for aeronautical research. “Third, an aggressive research and advanced development effort must be maintained in many fields, including chemical and nuclear propulsion, to assure the nation meaningful options and alternatives in the selection of future aeronautical and space goals and the ability to react decisively to external pressures and opportunities. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 37-51)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center was readying its first Saturn V S-IC stage, designated S-ic-t, for static firing late this spring, NASA reported. The s-ic-t, a static test stage, would be hot-fired on a captive test stand in MSFc’s West Test Area and would be ground tested repeatedly over a period of many months to prove out the propulsion system, (nasa Release 65-27)
U.S.S.R.’s zond ii—launched Nov. 30, 1964—was believed still racing toward Mars, but with its radio power dead. Although zond ii’s specific mission was not disclosed, Tass had announced it was intended to “test the systems of the spacecraft in practical conditions of a prolonged space flight and to accumulate experience.” Tass had also said “unprecedented” plasma-jet engines were powering the Mars probe, (dpi, Houston Chron., 7/14/65)
Launch of Gemini VI from Eastern Test Range on a two-day mission no later than Oct. 25 was announced by NASA. It would be man’s first attempt to rendezvous and dock with an orbiting spacecraft. Pilots for Gemini VI were Astronauts Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn) and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf). Backup pilots were Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) and John W. Young (Cdr., USN). This would be Schirra’s second space flight. His first was Oct. 3, 1962, a six-orbit flight in Mercury spacecraft SIGMA vi (nasa Release 65-307)
nasa Langley Research Center scientist Windsor L. Sherman proposed conversion of Project Mercury spacecraft into unmanned, recoverable orbiting telescope platforms. Equipment would include a 76-cm. Cassegrainian telescope, a camera recording system, and an attitude control system. The system would weigh approximately 4,700	lb. and would be aimed for a 300-mi. orbit. The observatory would remain in orbit 100-200 days, exposing four frames of film on each orbit for a total of 6,000 frames. After all film was exposed, the system would be braked out of orbit and would descend into the Bermuda recovery area of the Eastern Test Range, using the same recovery techniques developed for the manned Mercury landings. In addition to its capacity to perform a variety of such astronomical observations as high resolution photography, photometry, and spectroscopy, Sherman said, the recoverable observatory would permit reuse of capsule, optical, and control systems. It would allow study of space effects on equipment, and the system could serve as a test bed for advanced orbiting telescopes. (Av. Wk., 1/11/65, 23)
NASA and dod announced a memorandum of agreement to establish a Delta launch capability at the Western Test Range (wtr). Costs would be shared, based on the estimated use of the vehicle by each agency. Existing USAF Thor-Able-Star launch sites would be adapted for Delta use wherever practicable. Launch pads and blockhouses would be used on a shared basis, with each agency responsible for its own missions. NASA would exercise launch vehicle control over all wtr Delta launches. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and USAF Space Systems Division would be responsible for carrying out the agreement. NASA would be responsible for developing an improved Delta launch vehicle to meet both agencies’ mission requirements for use at both wtr and etr. DOD was planning to phase out the Thor-Able-Star and use the improved Delta for payloads carried by this vehicle class. (nasa Release 65-51)
NASA consolidated its unmanned launch activities at both the Eastern and Western Test Ranges under Kennedy Space Center, nasa. At Cape Kennedy, the Launch Operations Div., GSFC, would become an integral element of KSC; at Western Test Range, Goddard personnel permanently assigned there and NASA Pacific Launch Operations Office which logistically supported them would also be placed under KSC. Robert Gray would be Assistant Director for Unmanned Launch Operations. Checkout and launch of all NASA launch vehicles, except the solid propellant Scout rockets developed and launched by LaRC at Wallops Station and Western Test Range, would be supervised by KSC. (NASA Release 65-313)
Figures compiled by nasa indicated that since Jan. 1, 1964, 75 work stoppages had cost more than 92,000 man days of work, mostly at Kennedy Space Center, Associated Press reported, (ap, NYT, 11/28/ 65, 4)	#
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center analysis showed that radiation shielding offered by the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) was negligible: a particle flux producing a 1-rem dose in the Apollo command module would produce a 17-rem dose in the Lem. The Apollo space radiation warning system would provide advance indication of need for astronauts to return from the Lem to the command-service modules. (.M&R, 3/22/65, 23) During March: usaf San Bernardino Air Materiel Area reported that Atlas and Titan icbm’s scheduled for phase-out by summer would be used in antimissile and space booster research and development assignments. Requests had been received to use the silos as civil defense shelters and for storage of petroleum, gas, and grain. (M&R, 3/22/65, 12)
Selection of Radiation, Inc., to negotiate a fixed-price contract for Pulse Code Modulation (Pern) Data Handling Equipment Systems was announced by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The proposed $1,700,000 contract would call for design, manufacture, and spare parts for 11 PCM systems, ( gsfc Release 6/14/65)
Second stage (s-iv) for the tenth and last Saturn I launch vehicle was delivered to Kennedy Space Center, nasa, aboard “Pregnant Guppy” aircraft. The stage was flown from Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Sacramento1, Calif., facility, (msfc Release 65-135)
In conversations with West German Chancellor Ludwig Erhard, President Johnson announced he would send a commission to Europe early in 1966 to consult with nations wishing to join the U.S. in “a major endeavor” in space exploration. The group would be headed by nasa Administrator James E. Webb. The President said: “. . . we would like to discuss with you—and others—an even more ambitious plan to permit us to do together what we cannot do so well alone. Examples would be two projects which stand high on the space agenda. Both are very demanding and complex. One would be a probe to the sun, and another a probe to Jupiter. To cooperate on such a major endeavor would contribute vastly to our mutual knowledge and our mutual skills.” (Marder, Wash. Post, 12/21/65, Al)
A New York Times editorial by Harry Schwartz concerning Soviet-American cooperation in space: “The real issues relate to the advantages and disadvantages in the moon race itself—including, of course, its propaganda aspects. “The argument that cooperation will not mean significant savings is strongest for the immediate future, but its force weakens rapidly as one extends the time horizon of both nations’ future space efforts. Even in the next year or two both countries could gain from a full pooling of space technology and knowledge because this would reduce the number of Gemini-type flights each would have to engage in. . . . “Major cost advantages can certainly be gained by agreement on a division of labor between the Soviet Union and the United States, if it is accompanied by a decision to send mixed crews on major missions. For example, a pooling of information and resources might permit one country to focus on the hardware needed for the moon trip, while the other concentrated on the equipment needed to send men to Mars. . . . “But the major savings from real Soviet-American cooperation in space might come from another direction entirely. In both countries influential voices are urging major military efforts looking to the creation of armed national space fleets . . . The time is past due for decision between space cooperation, or the extension of a rivalry that could cost both Soviet and American peoples dearly—and perhaps not solely in terms of vast sums wasted.” (Schwartz, NYT, 6/14/65, 31, 32) Dr. James H. Wakelin, Jr., president of the Scientific Engineering Institute of Boston, said in an address at the Conference: “We must look forward to undersea dwellings, laboratories and military installations in which men would live and work for the economic good and military defense of the United States.” Dr. Wakelin advised President Johnson to appoint a National Advisory Commission on the Ocean to develop a 10-yr. program for study, exploration, and use of the seas, (upi, NYT, 6/15/65, 6) Capt. Jacques-Yves Cousteau urged the organization to “preserve and protect the sea from pollution.” He also warned against conducting undersea explorations entirely with instruments and suggested: “Let us go down . . . and see for ourselves, with our eyes.” (Casey, Wash. Post, 6/16/65, A14) opening remarks, Maj. Gen. Don Ostrander, afosr Commander, said: “The purpose of these Cloudcroft meetings is to stimulate ideas—to act as an intellectual catalyst. . . . We all have a responsibility to try to understand the complex interrelationships between science and technology, and between technology and national defense; through understanding, to participate in the excitement and urgency of the creative turmoil which is such an inescapable part of the age in which we live!” Historian A. Hunter Dupree, professor of history at the Univ. of California (Berkeley) and a consultant to NASA, said that scientists with a negative attitude regarding the Nation’s manned space flight activities had a laboratory-limited view of scientific endeavor and had lost perspective of the contributions made to American and world science through exploration and survey expeditions in the field. He pointed out the relationship of the Pacific voyages of Capt. Cook to Darwin’s later theory of evolution and said: “One can as little predict the results of space exploration as Captain Cook could have predicted Darwin’s theory.” According to Dupree, it was the general expansion of knowledge that would lead to later fruitful developments. But to justify these developments immediately or to justify exploration in terms of predictable developments would be a mistake. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/16/65; afosr Release 5-65—2; Aerospace Historian, 10/65, 106110) An artificial frog’s eye which could be sent to the surface of Mars to detect living organisms was described by Warren McCullough and Louis Sutro. Research had revealed there were four varieties of ganglion cells in the eye of the frog—each processing different information. The MIT scientists had proposed the following scheme to nasa: the artificial eye would be coupled to a microscope in a tiny computer. Samples of Martian soil would be seen by the frog’s eye through the microscope. When movement was detected, the eye would inform the computer, which would decide whether a picture of the moving organism should be taken for relay back to earth. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/18/65, Al) Theories on biological rhythms were proposed by Colin Pittendrigh of Princeton Univ. at the AFOSR seminar. He suggested that oscillations or biological rhythms were serving a fundamental function that was not yet fully identified and that all organisms undergo oscillations with a periodicity that matches that of the external world—roughly 24 hrs. Light, even in negligible amounts, could alter these oscillations. In Pittendrigh’s view, once the true face of biological clocks—time measuring mechanisms innate in all living organisms—was seen, science would have vital clues to how life developed on earth and how biological rhythms determine what it is all living things do. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/22/65, A6) Star collisions were suggested by astrophysicist Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ. as one way that energy now associated with a host of new objects observed throughout the universe was released. He said a prime candidate for providing the right kind of environment for star collisions was elliptical galaxies. In their predeath condition, elliptical galaxies start to lose stars that comprise the galaxies. Star loss causes the galaxies to shrink and become denser. The remaining stars rush in and out through the heats of these galaxies at speeds possibly as high as 24 million mph—greatly enhancing the chance for star collisions. The effect of collisions at these speeds would be to release amounts of energy equivalent to that calculated to be stored in the quasi-stellar radio sources. Gold had not observed such star collisions, but dense regions on the “brink of destruction” had been detected. “We must inspect each in turn,” Gold said, adding, “maybe we will learn that something totally different is involved, a new type of energy source that physics doesn’t know about.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/23/65)
NASA announced selection of Documentation, Inc., Bethesda, Md., to operate its Scientific and Technical Information Ficility, the world’s' largest collection of aerospace literature, in a Government-provided building in College Park, Md. Contract negotiations were expected to result in a cost-plus-award fee contract for approximately $3.6 million. In Fiscal Year 1965, the contract figure was $4.9 million. Mission of the facility was to acquire and organize worldwide technical reports in the aerospace sciences, indexes, abstracts, and items on space exploration; prepare announcement journals; process selected items on microfilm; and provide a central reference service to nasa and its contractors. (nasa Release 65—263)
U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill authorizing appropriations to NASA for FY 1966 totaling $5,183,844,850, as follows: $4,537,121,000 for research and development; $60,675,000 for construction of facilities; and $586,048,850 for administrative operations. NASA had requested $5.26 billion. During the debate preceding passage of the bill, Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) said: “We have moved quickly. But we are not in a crash program. We are now conducting a reasonable program . . . it is a well-planned program. “It is impossible to believe that in the fiscal year 1959 only $48,354,000 was authorized for space [nasa]. In fiscal year 1960 it went up ten times to $485,550,000. It doubled again in fiscal year 1961 to $915 million. “In fiscal year 1962 it went to $1,361,900,000. “In fiscal year 1963, it went to $3,742,162,000 and in fiscal year 1964 to $5,238,119,400. “In fiscal year 1965 it went to $5,193,810,500. “For this fiscal year, the committee has recommended $5,183,844,850, which is down from last year’s level. “I want the House to know we have gone over these programs thoroughly. We have made cuts in the committee, and the cuts were worthwhile. They are responsible, and they are substantial. They are not small.” Regarding funds restored to the NASA budget, Rep. Fulton said: “The M—1 engine development, the 260-inch engine development, and the snap-8 development, were ongoing programs of research that were approved by the committee and authorized by the House over the past several years. However, for reasons of economy, the Administrator cut these three programs entirely from the NASA budget. The committee on the other hand, believed that such actions in the long run would be extremely wasteful and later result in very high costs when it would become necessary to reactivate these programs. “Consequently, the committee restored $15 million to the M-l program to continue it on a technological development level, $6.2 million to the 260-inch solid rocket program to carry it through the test firing of two full length rockets, and $6 million to the SNAP-8 to continue it at the scheduled level of effort.” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) discussed changes made by the Manned Space Flight Subcommittee: “The total request by NASA for manned space flight for fiscal year 1966 is $3,567,052,000. . . . The subcommittee is recommending a total reduction of $42,825,000. “NASA requested $3,249,485,000 for research and development in manned space flights. Total reduction in research and development amounts to $30 million. All of this reduction comes from the Apollo program. It is the view of the subcommittee that in the areas of Apollo mission support and engine development that program improvements could be made. However, the reduction was made in the total request to allow NASA to make program alterations with a broad management latitude of choice without adversely affecting the total program. It was recognized by the subcommittee that NASA, prior to coming before the committee, had made substantial reductions in their total research and development program. A further reduction was also made by the Bureau of the Budget. Based on this, the $30 million reduction is considered a maximum amount that could be taken without jeopardizing the pace and progress of the Apollo program.” (CR, 5/6/65, 9291, 9296, 9301)
Operational control of U.S. weapons to intercept and destroy armed satellites had been assigned to the Space Defense Center at Colorado Springs, Denver Post reported. The Space Defense Center included the Space Detection and Tracking Systems (Spadats), which recorded the launches of all space vehicles, foreign and domestic, and logged precise orbital data until they decayed in the earth’s atmosphere. (Partner, Denver Post, 4/30/65) During April: More than 100 delegates from Eurospace toured U.S. aerospace installations, including NASA Kennedy Space Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, and facilities of U.S. firms corresponding to Eurospace member companies. Purpose of the U.S. European Space Conference was to bring together top industrial leaders from European and American aerospace companies to review problems posed for the industry by evolution of space technology. (M&R, 4/26/65, 9)
Inventors of Lunar Landing Research Vehicle, lunar landing simulator referred to as “the belching spider,” in use at NASA Flight Research Center, were granted a patent. Built by Bell Aerosystems Co. under contract to NASA, the research craft had a jet engine that supported five-sixths of its weight; the pilot would manipulate lift rockets that would support the remaining one-sixth. The craft’s attitude would be controlled with jets of hydrogen peroxide. Inventors were Kenneth L. Levin and John G. Allen, Jr., of the Bell staff. (Jones, NYT, 7/3/65, 23)
We’ll be lucky if we have nuclear propulsion around 1980,” and electric propulsion is still further down the line for sometime after 1985, according to Dr. John C. Evvard, Deputy Associate Director for research at NASA Lewis Research Center. Evvard gave his views on advanced propulsion systems at the sixth annual Space Technology Series sponsored by the Canaveral Section, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, at Brevard Engineering College, Patrick afb, Fla. A pioneer in electric propulsion and advanced nuclear rocket studies, Evvard believed such concepts should not be considered for Mars missions of under 100 flights per year. Only frequent flights would increase the need for higher specific impulse and would justify the expense, he said. Meanwhile, he predicted, chemical rockets of less than 500 sec. specific impulse would lift men to Mars, not by direct ascent but through a succession of parking orbits and assembly of hardware in space. Evvard told the meeting that since May 13, 1964, at least nine tests on Kiwi, Nerva, and Phoebus nuclear reactors had proved out a thrust greater than 50,000 lbs., at a specific impulse in excess of 750 sec. (Text)
Pegasus C, third meteoroid detection satellite, arrived at NASA Kennedy Space Center aboard the aircraft “Pregnant Guppy.” Pegasus C was scheduled for launch during summer of 1965 by SA-10, the last Saturn I vehicle, (msfc Release 65-159; Marshall Star, 6/30/65, 2)
Seventh anniversary of the first U.S. satellite, explorer I.	In defiance of the original predicted lifespan that should have ended some two years ago, the satellite continued to pass overhead every 104 min., with perigee of 214 mi. and apogee of 983 mi. Trajectory plotters at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center believed explorer I would plunge into the atmosphere and burn in 1968. It had slowed down since launch but had logged 904 million mi. around the earth. (Marshall Star, 1/27/65, 1, 6)
Article in Science discussed “factors pressing France toward greater emphasis on international collaboration” in space exploration, then said: “Hence there was warm, if somewhat skeptical, interest in France when, in October, a Soviet scientific delegation brought up the idea of launching French payloads on Soviet rockets. It appeared, according to the one authoritative account of this proposal (Le Monde, 11 November), that the Soviet scientists did not envisage French requests for precise knowledge about acceleration and vibration from Soviet rockets so that the payload design could proceed, nor did they expect that French scientists would wish to be present in Soviet launch-bases and tracking stations ... it was expected that the negotiations would be long and delicate. . . .” (McElheny, Science, 12/24/65, 1700-01)
nasa Flight Research Center had received a flying laboratory that would be used to provide airborne simulation of advanced aircraft with particular emphasis on the proposed supersonic transport. Called the General Purpose Airborne Simulator (Gpas), the new system was a Lockheed JetStar capable of speeds greater than 550 mph and altitudes up to 40,000 ft. that had been modified by the Cornell Aeronautical Lab. under $1.3-million contract with NASA. It would enable NASA engineers and pilots to evaluate specific future aircraft designs in a wide variety of actual flight conditions, (frc Release 24-65)
Incorporation of a severely swept delta wing on X-15 No. 3 had been proposed by NASA Flight Research Center for hypersonic (mach 5+) flight tests beginning in late 1968, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Decision on the proposal, under study at NASA Hq., was not expected for six months, x-15 program is a joint usaf-nasa venture, with the three aircraft belonging to the Air Force and NASA operating the research flights program. {Av. Wk., 10/18/65, 22)
aec entered into 33 mo. contracts with Combustion Engineering, Windsor, Conn., and Atomics International, Canoga Park, Calif., for joint research and development work on the heavy water-moderated, organic-cooled reactor concept. This concept could lead to construction of large central station power plants and applications to large-scale water desalting operations, (aec Release H-12)
NASA Ames Research Center was spending over $20 million in an expansion program designed to provide the necessary research tools to stay ahead of the industry’s hardware designers, reported Robert Lindsey in Missile Space Daily. Major facets included a new advanced space flight guidance simulator costing more than $12 million, a $4.2 million life sciences building, and a $1.4 million supersonic transport flight simulator. Space-related research would account for about 75% of the center’s projects, but arc was continuing a broad-based program in atmospheric flight, ranging from V/Stol research to a current major study of hypersonic transports. (Lindsey, M/S Daily, 7/27/65, 1, 2)
NASA was negotiating with Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., prime contractor to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for Oao program, to convert prototype Oao into flight-ready spacecraft. The contract was expected to exceed $8 million. The converted prototype, to be designated Oao A-2, would be the third spacecraft scheduled for launch in Oao program. First planned launch in the series was scheduled for late this year or early next year at Cape Kennedy. (nasa Release 65-115)
Soviet Premier Aleksey Kosygin was asked in an interview at the Kremlin by New York Times associate editor James Reston if expenditures for space exploration were questioned by Soviet government officials. He replied : “I would say that man will always go on seeking a solution to the problems of the universe. There will always be funds that will be set aside to resolve the problems relating to the world and the universe; this is all to the good, if it’s purely scientific. . . . We. don’t have any contradiction in the Soviet Union between appropriations for space research and for the needs of the population. The funds appropriated are relatively small compared with the funds serving the needs of the population on education and such. They are negligible on the over-all expenditure. Space expenses do not detract from the needs of the population.” Asked if the U.S.S.R. wanted to go forward with peaceful space arrangements, Kosygin said: “We have expressed our view on this. We are in favor of peaceful, not military, uses of outer space. Now, to insure that peaceful research in space does not place too much of a burden on us, states might reduce military expenditures and channel the funds into peaceful space explorations.” Reston queried: “You have made great progress in space with the use of the most sophisticated and complicated computers and other modern science, yet your speech on Sept. 27 was highly critical of the lag in the use of modern science in Soviet industry. Why this discrepancy?” Kosygin replied: “I don’t understand your distinction between space and economic and industrial development. We judge our economy as a whole—we include all spheres. It is true that not everything is going satisfactorily in science and technology. Not everywhere are the most advanced methods being used. We are now taking all possible measures and we shall remedy this situation. For this it is necessary to utilize all the achievements of engineering thought. We are doing our utmost to insure the further rise of our economy and our technology. In four months I will make my report to the party congress on our forthcoming five-year development plan. In this plan our most advanced scientific and technical achievements will be mobilized.” (Text, NYT, 12/8/65, C20)
Reaction to the cancellation of the NASA Gemini VI mission October 25 indicated that the space program and its public acceptance had matured during the first eight years of the space age, wrote Robert Hotz in Aviation Week and Space Technology. He recalled the “abuse heaped on the Vanguard program, the demands for Ranger’s cancellation, and the timorous whimpering that tried to suppress the Mercury program and bury the Apollo plans,” and suggested that “the lesson we should learn as a nation from our space program is that no task is too difficult to achieve and no challenge too great ... to surmount if its top-level leadership points out the goals and sounds the charge.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 11/1/65, 11) During week of November 1: Two 16-in. guns welded-together end to end would serve as first stage of a three-stage launch device believed capable by its developers—USA Ballistic Research Laboratories and McGill Univ. Space Research Institute, Montreal—of orbiting a 50-lb. satellite. The gun had launched 185-lb. payloads to approximate 84-mi. altitudes last year. Components of the rocket assembly had been successfully tested separately, but not as a unit; test firing of the first stage would take place in Barbados within four months. Dr. Charles H. Murphy, Ballistic Research Laboratories, and Dr. Gerald V. Bull, McGill Univ., reported on the project at a meeting of the New York Academy of Sciences. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/9/65, 3)
Scientists at NASA Lewis Research Center had successfully operated a high-field-strength cryomagnet having a volume many times larger than any previously known, NASA announced. The cryogenic magnet would provide research facilities for magnetics, solid state physics, and plasma physics. Effects of' high-strength magnetic fields on life could also be examined, using plant life, fruit flies, and small animals placed in the field, (nasa Release 65-170; lrc Release 65-38)
Gemini gt-3 spacecraft arrived at NASA Kennedy Space Center for final flight preparations before the nation’s first two-man flight this spring, (ksc Release 3-65)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., carried instrumented payload to 125 mi. (200 km.) altitude. Payload was a spectroheliograph to obtain a monochromatic picture of the sun. Experiment was conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director of NASA Electronics Research Center, said in an article in Boston Sunday Globe: “The need for increased electronics research to develop devices which will meet the demands and rigors of long space flights will affect our industrial outlook and economy in many ways. By requiring a ‘new look’ at electronics, NASA, led by ERC, will provide a research emphasis such as we have not had since World War II when the golden age of electronics started. “We have been in the ‘rocket phase’ and are now entering the ‘electronic phase’ of space flight development, a phase which will affect us dramatically over many years.” (Boston Sun. Globe, 1/3/65)
Statement of Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Director of Tracking and Data Acquisition, was presented by Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Deputy Director of Tracking and Data Acquisition, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Since 1958, NASA has provided tracking and data acquisition support by means of the NASA Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network for approximately 50 dod earth satellites. During 1965 we expect to provide continuing telemetry support for as many as 10 DOD earth satellites, and limited tracking support for several more. Also, our station at Carnarvon, Australia, being in an excellent geographical relation to the launch facilities at Cape Kennedy, will be used to support a number of dod spacecraft, as well as NASA spacecraft, where data and flight control after one-half orbit is required. For example, the dod titan in launch vehicle development program is vitally dependent on support by this station. We anticipate support of approximately 15 titan ill operations per year for the next two years. “In a similar fashion, the tracking and data acquisition support which the dod provides for NASA is extensive. At Cape Kennedy, for example, DOD has supported the launch phase of each NASA space flight mission. The extensive support provided by DOD for the Mercury program is well known. The Gemini program requires continuation of this dod support.” Referring in his testimony to current trends affecting planning for support networks, Mr. Buckley said: “. . . equally significant requirement, is the increase in the number of spacecraft which will have highly elliptical or synchronous orbits. Spacecraft in highly elliptical orbits must be supported by a particular ground station, much in the same way as done for deep space missions, i.e., a particular station is required to provide as much as 8—10 hours per day of its available time for support of one satellite. Spacecraft in synchronous orbits require support of a particular station for 24 hours per day. As a result, tracking and data acquisition links are being committed to longer support periods which means not only that more equipment is required, but additional personnel, ground communications, and other operations expenditures are needed to meet this upcoming satellite support workload.” (Testimony; 1966 NASA Auth. Hearings, 187212)
NASA had awarded Brown Engineering Co. a $3,630,000 contract for building nine discrete control equipment systems for use with Saturn V	launch vehicle. Two of the systems would be installed in a Saturn V	systems development facility at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville. The other seven would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center, NASA, Launch Complex 39: three systems would be placed in launch control centers; four would be installed on Saturn V mobile launchers, (msfc Release 65-176)
nasa Langley Research Center requested G. T. Schjeldahl Co. to submit a bid for construction of six inflatable 100-ft., 130-lb. spherical satellites to be used in the national geodetic satellite program. They would be nearly identical to echo i and would be named Pageos (Passive Geodetic Satellite). Pageos would be launched in 1966 into a near-polar orbit at an altitude of about 2,300 mi. Ground camera stations would simultaneously photograph it against a star background to gather precise data for locating any point on Earth. The other two types of spacecraft to be used in the geodetic satellite program would be the 350-lb. Geos and the 120-lb. Beacon Explorer-B. (nasa Release 65-22; Beacon Explorer-B Press Kit)
Gemini 7 fuel cell system that would power the spacecraft during its 14-day mission was successfully turned on and was reportedly “working very well.” Original fuel cell system had suffered possible damage because of a testing error Nov. l5 and had been replaced Nov. 17. Checks of the new unit were delayed by the strike against McDonnell Aircraft Corp. by iam machinists at Kennedy Space Center. (NYT, 11/22/65, 40)
Discussing the missions and plans of NASA’s new Electronics Research Center, Dr. Winston E. Kock, erc Director, told the Harvard Engineers Club in Cambridge: “I believe that the recent strengthening of research in NASA can act to overcome any such braking of scientific enthusiasm which the recent changes in our defense program . . . may have instigated. I have seen at first hand true research enthusiasm at two NASA Research Centers, Lewis in Cleveland, and Ames in California, and, at Cambridge’s new NASA Research Center, the response we have had from inventive, research-minded individuals, expressing an interest in association with the Center has been phenomenal. I have always believed in the saying ‘necessity is the mother of invention,’ and I feel certain that it was the necessities of World War II that brought into bloom radar, the jet aircraft, nuclear power, the v-2 rocket (which led to our present missile and space rockets), and many other developments which have proved to be of vital importance to our way of life. So, I feel that a counterbalance to today’s reduced necessities of the broad, new opening field of space research . . . will help to keep our nation’s research talent active and enthusiastic, and maintain it in the strong virility it has exhibited since the start of World War n.” (Text)	_	_
In New York Times Richard Witkin said F-lll variable-sweep-wing plane, intended as the mainstay of U.S. fighter forces before 1970, had developed problems with engines and with the inlets that feed air to the engines. Officials maintained that problems were normal in any development, but conceded that fewer difficulties had been anticipated because of record number of wind tunnel tests. The two prototypes tested, one of which was supersonic, had continuously run into two main difficulties: (1) air flow through compressors of engines had become disturbed, causing erratic power output; and (2) combustion in afterburner section had been suddenly stopping. Otherwise, officials contended that flight tests, including tucking wings far back for high-speed runs, had been going better than anticipated. (Witkin, NYT, 3/14/65, 58; Chic. Trib., 3/15/65)
Western Electric Company had received a $90,644,200 modification to an existing cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for research and development of Nike-X missile system, dod announced, (dod Release 3-65)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a $358,808 contract to Bryson Construction Co., Inc., Ala., for building a non-destructive facility for testing rocket materials in simulated space environments. Four shielded “radiographic laboratories” would provide areas where rocket materials would be exposed to radiation and would have equipment for searchray, motion radiography, radioisotope, and radiography testing, (msfc Release 65—290)
Principal source of advanced technology in the U.S. had been and would remain the aerospace industry, postulated an article in Aerospace. Only in its programs were technical goals high enough and national requirements urgent enough to move forward in major steps. As these steps were completed and technical goals achieved, the entire economy fell heir to the new technology. Key goals in defense and space programs were listed as: (1) lowering costs; (2) improving the efficiency of motors, generators, and all other energy conversion devices and processes; (3) improving design, that is, reducing the weight and increasing the strength of all machines, by either improved knowledge of the machine or by using lighter, stronger materials; (4) improving the accuracies to which machines could be controlled; (5) improving reliability; (6) improving communications between men, between men and machines, and between machines. (Aerospace, Winter 1965) During 1965: In 1965, NASA attempted 28 missions with 23 successes, a score of 82% mission success. Two spacecraft were launched on a single booster. NASA attempted 30 launches of space boosters and had 26 successes, a score of 87% launch vehicle success. Of the 92 payloads orbited by the U.S., NASA orbited 25—five of which were two-manned spacecraft and four were escape-mission probes. U.S.S.R. orbited 64 payloads, of which one was a manned spacecraft and seven were escape-mission probes. France entered the space age with two satellites, one orbited by France herself (a—i) and one by the U.S. (fr-i ) . Most spectacular of NASA’s space missions were the real-time reception of close-up lunar photographs by ranger ix, first U.S. extravehicular activity by gemini iv Astronaut White, man’s first close look at Mars (including 21 photographs) by mariner iv, and manned rendezvous to within one foot by gemini vi and vn. The Gemini program began 1965 with GT-2 unmanned suborbital flight; this was followed by four two-man orbital flights which logged more than 1,300 manhours in space, gemini v and vn, long-duration missions (8 and 14 days respectively) proved man can withstand extended conditions of spaceflight and validated plans for manned Apollo lunar flights. At the year’s end Gemini spaceflights had set for the U.S. more than 10 records, among them the record for total manhours in space: 1,354 hrs., 38 min., vs. U.S.S.R.’s 507 hrs., 16 min. 1965 was a year of extensive ground tests of the Apollo spacecraft and the Saturn launch vehicles. There were static firings of engines for the various Saturn IB and Saturn V stages, highlighted by full-duration firing of all three Saturn V stages. Saturn I program ended with a record of 10 successes out of 10 attempts, its three 1965 launches orbiting Pegasus meteoroid detection satellites. Fire II provided valuable data for Apollo on reentry from simulated lunar trajectory. In lunar and planetary achievement, rangers viii and IX provided more than 13,000 lunar surface photographs and brought that project to a close. Atlas-Centaur ac-6 launched a dummy Surveyor on a simulated lunar transfer orbit and proved itself capable of operational Surveyor missions. NASA stepped up its interplanetary research with pioneer vi, first of four projected interplanetary satellites. tiros ix became the first weather satellite to provide close to 100% coverage of the earth daily, and tiros x was the first in a series of interim operational satellites for the. U.S. Weather Bureau. Five Explorer scientific satellites, oso n, Canada’s alouette ii, and France’s FR-I were orbited. NASA orbited secor v for the U.S. Army, SOLRAD ix (explorer xxx) for the U.S. Navy, and early bird i communications satellite for the Communications Satellite Corporation. NASA turned over syncoms II and III to dod for operational use at the completion of their r&d function. The five NASA mission failures: vehicle test of Atlas-Centaur ac-5; test of Apollo launch escape system on a Little Joe II booster; failure of OGO ii, which did return good (but incomplete) experiment data; failure to orbit a third Orbiting Solar Observatory; and failure of Gemini 6 because Agena Target Vehicle did not achieve orbit. In 39 successful launches, dod orbited 67 satellites. In addition, there were four unsuccessful DOD space launches, losing five payloads. Decision was made that DOD proceed with the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, and launches were begun of the powerful Titan iii-C which would eventually orbit the Mol. Highlighting the U.S.S.R.’s busy space year was man’s first extra-vehicular space activity, by voskhod ii’s Cosmonaut Leonov. Soviet lunar exploration intensified, with apparent soft-landing attempts by lunas v through viii, as well as photographs of the moon’s hidden side by interplanetary probe zond III. U.S.S.R. launched VENUS II and III on the long flight toward the planet Venus. (Western experts speculated that cosmos lx was an unsuccessful lunar soft-landing attempt and cosmos xcvi an unsuccessful Venus probe.) U.S.S.R. orbited 52 Cosmos satellites, two heavyweight Proton spacecraft, and her first communications satellites—two Molniyas I. (nasa Release 65-368; msfc Release 65-312; nasa hhr-8; nasc Staff; nasa A&A 1965; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/12/65) During 1965: Some nasa research highlights of 1965: NASA launched 191 scientific sounding rockets to obtain a variety of scientific data and about 10 for advanced research an d techno!-ogy. By the end of the year, the three x-15 research aircraft had made 156 flights, 32 of them in 1965. Tests proceeded of the modified x—15 (No. 2), expected to exceed 5,000-mph flight speed, nasa supported the National supersonic transport program and evaluated wind tunnel models of the two proposed Sst designs. NASA continued using usaf XB-70 aircraft for research in flight problems of Sst and large supersonic aircraft in general. Feasibility studies of adapting V/Stol concepts to commercial transportation and wind-tunnel studies of several V/Stol designs continued. As part of research toward efficient design of hypersonic aircraft, comparative performance and heat transfer measurements were obtained on a variety of aircraft wings, bodies, and wing-body combinations. Ramjet engine research was in the engine design concept phase. NASA developed and tested a new near-field theory useful in predicting sonic boom characteristics of Sst configurations during transonic climb-out. Flight research of M-l lifting body was advanced, and construction of HL-10 lifting body was being completed. Solid propulsion technology was advanced with static-firing of the 260-in. solid-fuel rocket motor. In nuclear rocket technology, three Nerva reactor experiments were completed and the new Phoebus advanced graphite reactor test program was begun. The success of a 2,600-hr. ion engine test provided evidence that life-times of 10,000 hrs. for electric rocket thrusters may be within reach. Among highlights in electronics and control was reentry communications experiment on GEMINI hi demonstrating feasibility of water injection to overcome communications blackout during reentry. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 25-38; ossa & oart S.Rkt. Proj. Off.; NASA Release 65-368) During 1965: About 90% of NASA’s budget was going to contractors to pay for work being done by nearly 400,000 people of about 20,000 prime and subcontractors. In the university program, NASA was doing business with about 200 universities in every state on space-related projects at the year’s end. NASA’s requirement to transfer its technology to other sectors of the economy had developed into an information system with more than 200,000 technical documents abstracted, indexed, and filed in a computer-based nationwide system. (NASA Release 65-368)
ComSatCorp had filed a contract with fcc for purchase of four satellites from Hughes Aircraft Co. to supply communication services for nasa’s Project Apollo and for other commercial services. Two spacecraft would be placed in synchronous orbits at about 22,300 mi.: one would be located over the Pacific between Hawaii and Midway Island; the other over the Atlantic near the west coast of Africa. Of the other two, one would be used as a reserve for replacement and one as a backup in case of a launch failure. Contract also provided an option for purchase of up to 15 of the satellites. Delivery date of the first satellite would be eight months after ComSatCorp would give Hughes notice to proceed, with one additional spacecraft of the four to be delivered every 21 days thereafter. (ComSatCorp Release) Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator of nasa for Manned Space Flight, introducing the symposium, noted three important general conclusions to be drawn from the results. First, data on man himself indicates that astronauts can adapt to the space environment, giving great confidence that manned space flight effort can move according to pian without the necessity of introducing special requirements such as artificial gravity. Second, further substantiation of the Mercury program evidences that man can see things from space which are not programmed on instruments to see. Third, the outstanding quality of photographs of earth from space demonstrates the feasibility of a number of significant applications of manned space flight for improvement of life here on earth, (nasa Release 65-321; nasa Rpt. of Symposium)
The four largest closed die forgings ever produced from maraging steel were delivered by the Wyman-Gordon Co. to Launch Complex 34 at Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Weighing 15,500 lbs. each and measuring 105 in. by 36 in., they would be used to anchor the mobile service tower for the Saturn ib rocket. (NYT, 7/4/65, 25)
NASA announced award of $15 million contract to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. to build an additional Orbiting Astronomical Observatory. Grumman already was building three Oao spacecraft under a previously awarded contract, (nasa Release 65—154)
Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, director of the Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona and principal scientific investigator on the Ranger project, replied to Robert C. Cowen’s article, “Was the Ranger Worth the Cost?”, which appeared in the Christian Science Monitor Nov. 18. Mr. Co wen had raised four principal questions: (1) Was the recent ranger vii mission scientifically justifiable? (2) Was it well planned and executed? (3) Were the results up to expectations? (4) Where do we go from here? Dr. Kuiper said in letter to CSM: “Ranger was the U.S. pioneering program of deep-space research and accomplished much more than getting the 4,300 lunar photographs. It established the worth and feasibility of the ‘parking orbit’ and other concepts of space ballistics, power supply, and communication, as well as preparation for Mars and Venus probes. . . . The cost of the 4,300 lunar records is therefore not the full $270 million (which moreover includes Rangers vm and ix, not yet flown) but, say, $50-$100 million. No ground-based effort, even with the 300-400-inch telescope costing over $100 million, would, even in the absence of our disturbing atmosphere, have yielded 100th of the magnification (resolution) obtained in Ranger vii. I definitely know of no better and cheaper way to get high-resolution photographs. . . .” In a reply to Dr. Kuiper, Mr. Cowen quoted from a letter by Dr. Andrew T. Young of Harvard College Observatory and published in Science:	. . It is clear that there are some things that can only be learned above the atmosphere, and it is important that we have a program directed at learning them. . . . [But] many things that can be learned from above the atmosphere can also be learned, much more cheaply, by ground-based techniques. For example, some of the most convincing evidence for life on Mars is based on a few hours of twilight observations with the 200-inch telescope. . . . But the 200-inch telescope has been available for planetary research only a few times, generally during daylight or twilight. . . . Rocket-borne research involves many costly failures, but a duplicate 200-inch telescope could easily be built and staffed for the $28 million that Ranger 7 alone cost. . . .”	(CSM, 1/4/65)
A lunar dust cloud produced by braking rockets of Soviet probe LUNA v as it attempted a soft landing on the moon May 12 was photographed by the observatory at Rodewisch, E. Germany, said the observatory’s director in an interview with adn, E. German press agency. The tracking station had made photographs of the lunar approach of the spacecraft at 15-sec. intervals. At the moment of best visibility—10:15 p.m. Moscow time—the dust cloud was 140 mi. long and 50 mi. wide. It had disappeared by 10:21 p.m. Moscow time. This was the first indication that braking rockets aboard the spacecraft had been operative. Soviet announcement had given landing time for LUNA v as 10:10 p.m. Pictures of the dust cloud were published in Izvestia. (NYT, 5/16/65, 6; ap, Wash. Sun. Star, 5/16/65)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, told a National Space Club luncheon that he had met with nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller and had reached a formal agreement on cooperation in R&D, including Mol experiments. Discussions were also underway, he said, for joint use of NASA and DOD global range facilities—tracking station, communications, and other supporting units—in the Apollo and Mol programs. “Now we are in the beginning stages of two new ventures, the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and the c-5a large transport aircraft. . . . “Both the mol and the c—5a have great potential significance for our continuing national security. They also promise to yield a number of ‘fallout benefits’ of a scientific or economic nature. The knowledge gained from the MOL program, in addition to its possible defense applications, should also prove very useful for future manned scientific ventures into space. The C-5a transport not only will greatly increase our ability to respond to military crisis situations and other emergencies such as earthquakes or floods in remote areas, but also may prove quite attractive to the commercial airlines. . . .” General Schriever said he felt a follow-on to the b-52 was needed; that an Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft (Amsa) would have considerably longer range than a contemplated B-lll and would be superior; and that a maneuverable ferry vehicle for supplying Mol could very well come out of the Start program. (Text; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/20/65, E8; M/S Daily, 10/20/65)
S-IVB stage of the first Saturn IB launch vehicle—first piece of flight hardware from Douglas Space Systems Center at Huntington Beach—had been shipped aboard nasa barge Orion to Douglas Sacramento Test Flight Center for flight readiness testing. The stage, 58 ft. long and 21.5 ft. in dia., had single Rocketdyne J-2 engine, developing 200,000 lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 65-104)
Faa released the first two volumes of a comprehensive five-part report on the sonic boom public-reaction study conducted in Oklahoma City in 1964. Their main conclusion: weather had a greater effect in determining the strength of booms than suspected, but the effect was within a corrective capability. The first volume, “Sonic Boom Exposures During faa Community-Response Studies Over a Six-Month Period in the Oklahoma City Area,” prepared by NASA Langley Research Center, said measurements taken directly under the flight path of the supersonic fighters showed that about 80% of the booms were lower in intensity than scientists expected. About 20% equalled or exceeded the anticipated levels. “Meteorological Aspects of the Sonic Boom,” prepared by the Boeing Co., revealed that: weather had a greater effect on booms generated by planes flying less than mach 1.3 than those produced by aircraft exceeding mach 1.3; overpressures were increased by headwinds but decreased by tailwinds and crosswinds, with variations as much as 20%, particularly in the mach 1.3 range; under some atmospheric conditions, including such factors as wind, temperature, and even the time of day, sonic booms may vary from a complete cut-off with no boom heard to heavy overpressures concentrated over a small area or spread almost unlimited over a wide lateral area; turbulence had the effect of distorting booms and increasing or decreasing intensity and distribution, (faa Release 65-15; UPI, Minn. Trib., 2/12/65)
NASA signed a one-year $70,000 contract with Flight Safety Foundation to report and evaluate research and development projects and events related to' rough air in the atmosphere. The study would be conducted from fsf Offices in New York City, Phoenix, Ariz., and Los Angeles, (nasa Release 65-10)
m2-f2 manned lifting body research vehicle was rolled out at Northrop Norair’s Hawthorne, Calif., plant and accepted for nasa by Paul Bikle, Director of nasa Flight Research Center. The craft would be dropped from beneath the wing of a b-52 bomber at high speeds in tests to determine how this configuration would perform in the critical period during reentry if it were carrying astronauts, (ap, Wash. Post, 6/17/65, A3; arc Astrogram, 6/24/65, 1)
The Agena target vehicle for Gemini 6 was delivered to Cape Kennedy by the Pregnant Guppy aircraft. (Orl. Sent., 7/27/65) President of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Daniel J. Haughton, speaking on “Your Role in the New Environment,” said: “American aircraft products have dominated world markets for decades. Today at least 90 percent of the airline jets flown in the free world are built in the United States. Aircraft exports, both military and civilian, are $1.2 billion a year. Imports, on the other hand, are almost negligible— $90 million last year. “But now something new has been added—and that is more thrust toward cooperative programs. . . . “Cooperative programs are increasing. Only last May Secretary of Defense McNamara proposed a common market for military hardware. If successful, it will help integrate the total NATO market, including the U.S., even more closely, and will also permit foreign firms to sell selectively in the American defense market. “The total effect of these developments means, for U.S. manufacturers, more competition, more cooperative programs, and a more flexible approach . . . but I do not believe this means we must abdicate our technological leadership. I think, on the contrary, that we must strengthen it. One of my colleagues suggests we should add a new item to our national goals—the goal of overwhelming technical strength. . . .” (Text) Brig. Gen. Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf), Director of the nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Industrial Operations, told the aiaa meeting: “The progress of the Saturn ib has been excellent. We are on schedule to begin flight tests next year, to be followed by manned flights in 1967. “In the Saturn V/Apollo program we are also on schedule. . . .” (Text)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center shipped the instrument unit for the first Saturn ib launch vehicle to Kennedy Space Center, NASA aboard the barge Palaemon. First Saturn ib was scheduled for launch from ksc early next year, (msfc Release)
W. A. Patterson, Chairman of the Board of United Air Lines, told the Aviation-Space Writers Assn, in Washington, D.C., that his company had refrained from ordering a supersonic transport “because it’s a phony deal. You don’t put a deposit on a plane that may cost $40 million, that you have never seen, and that you don’t know anything about.” Patterson said the deposit plan was designed to create in Congress an “atmosphere of enthusiasm” to obtain appropriations for Sst research and development, (ap, NYT, 12/9/65, 93)
nasa Flight Research Center awarded separate lifting body study contracts to McDonnell Aircraft Co. and Northrop Norair. The two separate six-month studies would investigate a vehicle concept whose sole mission would be the basic research involved with reentry of a manned lifting body from orbital flight. Preliminary objectives included determination of problem areas and their influence on design. Both contracts were fixed price; McDonnell received $152,496 and Norair $150,000. (frc Release 11-65)
President Johnson, asked during a press conference, “where does our space program stand in relation to the Soviets’ in the wake of their latest feat?” replied: “The Soviet accomplishment and our own scheduled efforts demonstrate, I think dramatically and convincingly, the important role that man himself will play in the exploration of the space frontier. The continuing efforts of both our program and the Russian program will steadily produce capability and new space activity. This capability, in my judgment, will help each nation achieve broader confidence to do what they consider they ought to do in space. “I have felt since the days when I introduced the Space Act and sat studying Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2 that it was really a mistake to regard space exploration as a contest which can be tallied on any box score. “Judgments can be made only by considering all the objectives of the two national programs, and they will vary and they will differ. Our own program is very broadly based. We believe very confidently in the United States that we will produce contributions that we need at the time we need them. For that reason, I gave Mr. Webb and his group every dollar in the Budget that they asked for a manned space flight. “Now the progress of our program is very satisfactory to me in every respect. We are committed to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind. We stressed that in our hearings and our legislation when we passed the bill, and while the Soviet is ahead of us in some aspects of space, U.S. leadership is clear and decisive and we are ahead of them in other realms on which we have particularly concentrated.” (Transcript; Wash. Post, 3/21/65)
NASA’s Flight Research Center engineers had made direct comparison of the noise levels generated by the xb-70 and a 707-120B commercial jet transport under the same atmospheric conditions. NASA made the measurements as part of its general study of runway noise conditions for use in the design of a supersonic transport, (frc Release 8-65)
NASA's Convair 990 airborne research laboratory photograph of solar eclipse. First indications were that the mission was a complete success; detailed analyses of data from 13 observation projects would be made. Most obvious phenomena were large prominences on the sun, Jupiter shining brightly in the sun’s corona, and long corona streamers flashing with surprising brightness. Scientists in the mission were from Belgium, The Netherlands. Italy, Switzerland, and the United States, (nasa Release 65-178; ap, NYT, 6/1/65, 20)
Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said in an article in Astronautics and Aeronautics for January: “. . . With Ranger 7, the prime factor was the expectation that the Apollo mission would choose a landing area on one of the smooth ‘maria.’ So it was of great value to this program to find out as much as possible about the mare topography. In particular, it was necessary to know if these areas were really lava flows and, if so, how much was exposed lava and how densely the small craters were scattered over the surface. “Ranger gave some of the answers. In some areas, at least, small craters were indeed strewn very thickly. Probably such areas lie along the rays which radiate from some of the more recent large craters. Between these ray regions the surface of the mare appears to be quite smooth. No large rocks or fissures are apparent, although the general roughness may be comparable to some terrestrial lava fields where the lava is of the ‘pahoehoe,’ or fluid variety. However, the absence of any significant number of features showing edges with a small radius of curvature, and the presence of small craters which have been filled with debris, point to erosion as a significant modifier of the primeval lunar surface. This erosion could arise from meteoric bombardment and the effects of solar radiations. Estimates of the depth of surface which has been eroded away range from 5 to 50 ft. . . .” (A&A, 1/65, 18-20) During January: GAO charged that mismanagement of the Nimbus meteorological satellite project resulted in unnecessary costs of $1.2 million. The report claimed that Nimbus’ project manager at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center “did not effectively carry out his responsibility” for flight planning when it became evident that the spacecraft had become overweight and that he allowed the contractor to continue working toward the original design goal “even though it was clear [the effort] would be futile” because of booster limitations. Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, rebutted the GAO allegations: “The costs which were incurred on the Nimbus project during the 5V2 months between May 1961 and November 20, 1961, were for the development of the fully redundant Nimbus system to satisfy the requirements of the Plan for a National Operational Meteorological Satellite System. . . . Our effort to achieve the redundant system in the first Nimbus flight was continued as long as possible. ... we did not want to take the step of dropping the redundant system, even for the first flight, until we were sure we had to.” (gao Nimbus Rpt., 1/65; M&R, 2/8/65,9)	_
A simple, two-door pneumatic tube device for garbage disposal during the two-week Gemini vi manned space flight scheduled for December was being considered by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center officials, the Houston Post reported. The astronauts would open the first door, stuff in the material to be disposed of, close the first door, and open the second door. Space being a nearly perfect vacuum, the material would be forced out of the tube. (Houston Post, 9/17/65)
The new Magnetic Field Components Test Facility at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center—which would create the precisely-controlled magnetic environment necessary for testing and calibrating spacecraft instruments intended to measure the low magnetic fields in outer space— became operational. The facility was also equipped to demagnetize the spacecraft carrying the magnetic measuring instruments, (gsfc Release G—16-651
Laser beams could be used to track satellites, a group of scientists reported at a news briefing at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. The briefing followed a two-day meeting discussing efforts to track explorer xxii and explorer xxvii satellites which were orbiting the earth at a height of about 700 mi. Dr. Henry Plotkin, Head of Gsfc’s Optical Systems Branch, said the experiments had indicated that: 1) a beam of laser light from the ground could be directed with sufficient accuracy to strike satellite reflectors; 2) turbulence in the atmosphere would not break the beam enough to interfere with its lighting up the satellite; 3) very short bursts of light from lasers could be used to measure the range of a satellite precisely by means of timing the flight and rebound of the pulse; 4) reflected light could be photographed against a stellar background to provide angles by which the satellite could be identified very accurately. (Transcript)
First flight model of the s-ivb, Saturn IB second stage and Saturn V third stage, was formally presented to NASA by California Governor Edmund Brown in ceremonies at Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Sacramento Test Center. A hydrogen-fueled vehicle powered by a 200,000-lb.-thrust Rocketdyne engine, the 58-ft.-long 211/2-ft.-dia. s-ivb would be shipped to Kennedy Space Center, nasa, aboard the Steel Executive. The stage had successfully undergone a 2V> min., full-power, preflight test-firing August 8. (msfc Release 65-215)
NASA had selected the Bendix Field Engineering Corp., Owings Mills, Md., to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for continued operation, maintenance, and support services of the NASA Manned Space Flight Network of tracking stations. Contract was valued at about $36 million over two years. (NASA Release 65—48)
NASA announced it would negotiate an approximate $12-million contract with Douglas Aircraft Corp. for Delta launch support services that would cover an anticipated 15 launchings from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, and the Eastern Test Range for a 12-month period beginning Jan. 1, 1966. The contract would provide for inspection and checkout in addition to actual launching operation, (nasa Release 65—237)
The recommendation to NASA by NAS-convened study group [see Apr. 26] that Mars receive “the highest priority among all objectives in space science,” evoked editorial comment from the New York T imes : “The biological exploration of Mars will not be cheap, and available funds for scientific research and development are limited. “The likely costs and returns of the search for Martian life must be compared with those from, say, programs for stepped-up research into cancer or for building giant accelerators that would permit physicists to peer more deeply into the recesses of the atomic nucleus. That broader consideration may well suggest a less concentrated program than the scientists had recommended. “Such a decision would have the added advantage of allowing more time for an effort to make the search for Martian life a cooperative international project and not, . . . merely one more arena for the wasteful duplication that is the essence of Soviet-American space competition.” (NYT, 5/2/65)
Lunar Landing Research Facility, a controlled laboratory for exploring and developing techniques for landing a rocket-powered vehicle on the moon, had been put into operation at NASA Langley Research Center. The $3.5 million facility included a rocket-powered flight test vehicle which would be operated while partially supported from a 250-ft. high, 400-ft.-long gantry structure to simulate the one-sixth earth gravity of the moon in research to obtain data on the problems of lunar landing. (LaRC Release 6/30/65)
Tass reported that astronomers at the Vladivostok Observatory had taken clear photographs of the Ikeya-Seki comet. Iupi, Wash. Post, 11/ 12/65, C4)
NASA selected three aerospace firms to develop a concept and prepare preliminary designs for hypersonic ramjet research engine:	Garrett Corp., General Electric Co., and Marquardt Corp. Total value of first phase of contract would be about $1.5 million. During 9-mo. parallel studies, opening phase of NASA’s Hypersonic Ramjet Experiment Project, the companies w'ould prepare engine development plans that would serve as technical proposals for the second phase of the program. The ramjet engine, because of its relative fuel economy at hypersonic speeds, was expected to be useful for hypersonic transport aircraft, boosters, and spacecraft flying within the atmosphere. Flight research with the engine mounted on the X-15 aircraft was planned. Hypersonic Ramjet Experiment Project would be under the technical direction of NASA Langley Research Center, with the assistance of NASA Ames, Lewis, and Flight Research Centers, (nasa Release 65-110)
Orville H. Daniel discussed small rockets—chiefly meteorological sounding rockets—in International Science and Technology. “Forty years ago, when Dr. Goddard was performing his first experiments, all rockets were small rockets. Today, with thrusts nearing 10 million pounds and rocket vehicles approaching the size of small skyscrapers, a 500-pound-thrust rocket seems like a relic of the past. Nevertheless, such small rockets remain as important to science and as challenging to technology as Dr. Goddard’s fledglings were in his day. About 1500 of them were fired last year for various scientific purposes. . . .” (Int. Sci. & Tech., 4/65, 32-37)
NASA successfully conducted the first tethered test firing of the Apollo 009 Service Module propulsion system at Kennedy Space Center. Test was marred by failure in the master countdown clock, which—a split second after ignition-—recycled to T minus 99 sec., throwing the count out of real time. The ground computer, which operated in plus time only, was thus unable to send the signal to shut off the engine. Instead of the two planned 15-sec. firings, the system was fired only once for a total of 20 sec. and shut off with a signal from the blockhouse. For the same reason, the ground computer was unable to send the signal to gimbal the engine and this apparatus was not tested, (upi, NYT, 11/20/65, 21; M&R, 11/29/65, 28)
Along with the development of a nuclear weapon, Communist China has also conducted a program to develop rockets,” wrote Cheng Chu-yuan in Military Review. He continued: “Since early 1956, when Peking mapped out the 12-year plan for the development of science and technology, jet propulsion has been listed as one of the 12 major tasks, exceeded only by the use of nuclear energy. The project is under the supervision of the Institute of Mechanics in the CAS. “In 1958 several new institutes were set up within the Academy—an Institute of Upper Atmosphere Physics in Wuhan; and an Institute of Automation and Remote Control and an Institute of Mechanics and Electronics both in Peking. All of these institutes participate in the rocket program. . . . “The Science and Technology University of the CAS, the Tsinghua University in Peking, and the Peking Aeronautical Engineering College are the three important centers for training engineers and technicians in rocketry. During the past ten years, more than 3,000 college students, specialists in aeronautical engineering, have been graduated. In 1963 the China Aeronautical Engineering Society was formally established, indicating the rapid growth of technical manpower in this field. “Since Communist China has several capable men with long years of experience in the rocket field, and since China began her rocket project almost in the same period with the nuclear weapons program, the development of a rocket booster might soon be anticipated. It is quite possible that China may launch her first rocket within the next two or three years.” (Military Review, 5/65, 10F)
At the Seventh International Conference on Phenomena in Ionized Gases in Belgrade, NASA Lewis Research Center scientist Charles M.	Goldstein outlined the effect of collisions on a monoenergetic elec-tronbeam current in the presence of a low-density neutral scattering gas. Research had been conducted in connection with electromagnetic propulsion studies, (lrc Release 65-56)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, Kennedy Space Center, NASA, received the Pioneer of the Wind-Rose Award, Order of the Diamond, in Munich, Germany. Dr. Debus, first recipient of the award, was cited for his historical contribution to rocket launch technology and for his contributions to science through his work in rocketry. Award was made at the First International Transport Exhibit. (Brevard Sent., 8/1/65)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a ten-month, $10,934,377, cost-plus-award fee contract to Mason-Rust Co. to continue support services at Michoud Operations, New Orleans, and at its Computer Operations Office in Slidell, La. (msfc Release 65-84)
The Aug. 19 launch of Gemini V and most of the day’s coverage would be televised in color by all three major networks—the American Broadcasting Co., the Columbia Broadcasting System, and the National Broadcasting Co. The only previous color broadcast of a space flight had been nbc’s telecast of the Gemini iv launch. (Adams, NYT, 8/18/65, 55M)
A $1,260,000 contract to build an addition to Central Computer Facility at Slidell, La., had been awarded by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to Quinn Construction Co., New Orleans, La. The computer facility was used to support the Michoud Operations in New Orleans and the Mississippi Test Operations, Hancock County, Miss, (msfc Release 65-48)
Thomas W. Thompson of Cornell Univ. said in a paper presented at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union that half the moon’s surface had been mapped in a lunar mapping program using the radioradar telescope at Cornell’s Arecibo Observatory, Puerto Rico. From the radar signal returns, the hardest areas of the moon were the rim and floor of the relatively new craters. The floors of the older craters and the surface of the maria were covered by a three-to-four-meter-thick layer of highly porous material often referred to as “lunar dust.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/22/65; NYT, 4/22/65)
Meteoroids probably would not be unduly hazardous to spacecraft flying for short periods in the near-earth environment, a NASA report indicated. Based on data from explorer’s xvi and xxm and pegasus i and II, report was presented by Charles T. D’Auitolo, NASA Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Technology; William H. Kinard, Langley Research Center; and Robert J. Naumann, Marshall Space Flight Center, at the Symposium on Meteor Orbits and Dust conducted in Cambridge, Mass., by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. EXPLORER XVI, launched Dec. 16, 1962, had registered 62 meteoroid penerations during its lifetime. explorer xxiii, launched Nov. 6, 1964,. had reported 103 penetrations, pegasus i, launched Feb. 16, 1965, carried three thicknesses of panels but mechanical malfunctions had destroyed the usefulness of data on the .008- and ,016-in.-thick panels; 104 penetrations had been reported from the .0015-in.-thick panels, pegasus ii, launched May 25, 1965, was returning useful data from all three thicknesses of panels and had registered 61 penetrations. The higher frequency of penetrations recorded by pegasus ii was thought to have been caused by a meteoroid shower, pegasus III, launched July 30, had not had time to return significant data, (nasa Release 65-205)
Walter R. Dornberger, vice president in charge of research for Rell Aerosystem Co., wrote in the company’s bimonthly magazine, Rendezvous, the United States was spending too much for space exploration. As a start to cutting costs, Dornberger proposed developing space boosters that could be recovered and reused, (ap, Milwaukee ].,
First Saturn V booster (S-ic-t) had been moved to static test stand at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to prove out its propulsion system. The 280,000-lb. stage, developed jointly by msfc and Boeing Co., had two tanks with total capacity of 4,400,000 lbs. of liquid oxygen and kerosene, and five F-l engines, each weighing ten tons, which provided total thrust of 7.5 million lbs. (msfc Release 65-47; Marshall Star, 3/3/65, 1, 6)
NASA announced its agreement with the Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) to cooperate in scientific sounding rocket program to investigate the lower regions of the ionosphere, emphasizing the effects of cosmic rays. NASA would provide and cnae would launch two sounding rockets from Natal, Brazil; scientific payloads would be constructed by Brazilian technicians at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. NASA and CNAE would combine to provide ground support equipment, to analyze data, and to publish the results of the experiment. In addition, NASA would launch one instrumented sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., in a complementary experiment. The project would contribute to observance of 1965 as International Cooperation Year, (nasa Release 65—149)
President Johnson announced he had approved dod development of a Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) at a cost of $1.5 billion. At a White House news conference, the President said: “This program will bring us new knowledge about what man is able to do in space. It will enable us to relate that ability to the defense of America. It will develop technology and equipment which will help advance manned and unmanned space flight and it will make it possible to perform very new and rewarding experiments with that technology and equipment. . . . “Unmanned flights to test launching, recovery and other basic parts of the system will begin late next year or early 1967. The initial unmanned launch of a fully equipped laboratory is scheduled for 1968. This will be followed later that year by the first of five flights with two-man crews. “The Air Force has selected the Douglas Aircraft Company to design and to build the spacecraft in which the crew of the laboratory will live and operate. The General Electric Company will plan and develop the space experiments. “The Titan 3C booster will launch the laboratory into space and a’ modified version of the NASA Gemini capsule will be the vehicle in which the astronauts return to earth.” President Johnson emphasized that the U.S. would “live up to our agreement not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and we will continue to hold to all nations, including the Soviet Union, the hand of cooperation in the exciting years of space exploration which lie ahead for all of us. . . .” He directed NASA Administrator James E. Webb “to' invite the Soviet Academy of Sciences to send a very high level representative next month here to observe the launching of Gemini 6.” (Transcript, Pres. Doc., 8/30/65, 142,- dod Release 551-65)
ogo n Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo-C) was launched by NASA from Vandenberg afb with Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D booster. Because of a slight malfunction in the launch vehicle’s primary guidance system, orbit achieved had the following parameters: apogee, 939 mi. (1,511 km.); perigee, 250 mi. (403.1 km.); period, one hour 45 min.; inclination, 87°. Planned orbit had been somewhat lower: 575-mi. (925-km.) apogee, 207-mi. (333.3-km.) perigee, one-hour 37-min. period, and 86° inclination. Most of the 20 onboard experiments were not expected to be affected by the malfunction; OGO n’s solar panels and instrumented booms deployed as planned and the spacecraft achieved three-axis stabilization. Second of the seven spacecraft programed for NASA’s Ogo program, OGO II weighed 1,150 lb. and contained more than 100,000 parts, including a communications system capable of transmitting 64,000 bits per second in real time and 128,000 bits of information per second from tape playback. Its mission was to concentrate on near-earth space phenomena with emphasis on global mapping of the geomagnetic field, measurements of the neutral, ionic, and electronic composition of the earth’s atmosphere. Data would be correlated with solar ultraviolet and x-ray emissions, and such events as particle dumping in the auroral zones and airglow. Although it returned good experiment data, OGO II was to be considered a failure (see Oct. 24). (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Releases 65-314, 65-368; ap; NYT, 10/15/65, 14; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/15/65, A8; ap, Wash. Post, 10/15/65, A4)
Second major Saturn V milestone this month: First five-engine ignition test of the Saturn V second stage, the S-II, was conducted at the Santa Susana, Calif., static test laboratory of North American Aviation, Inc., NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The five J—2 engines, built by naa’s Rocketdyne Div., would produce one million pounds thrust. Short-duration firings leading to full-duration tests of nearly 400 sec. would follow the ignition firing, (msfc Release 65-99)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded two parallel one-year contracts to two firms to study feasibility of developing a drill for probing some 100 ft. below the moon’s surface: Northrop Space Laboratories received $509,992; Westinghouse Electric Corp. Defense and Space Center, $570,624. Astronauts on post-Apollo lunar missions would use the drill as a geological research tool to bore holes for geophysical measurements, (msfc Release 65-194)
NASA Ames Research Center discussed for the press the major significant advances in aeronautics and space-oriented research accomplished by the Center during 1964. Accomplishments cited were: (1) establishing feasibility of manned control of large boosters; (2) problem definition for hypersonic transport; (3) design of new takeoff and landing aid to precisely locate aircraft position on the runway; (4) design of probe vehicle to define Mars atmosphere; (5) improvement of m-2 maneuverable atmosphere entry craft; (6) discovery that Mars contamination problem is probably not severe; (7) development of system for measuring stress in humans; (8) demonstration of need for special training for jet transport pilots to combat severe air turbulence; (9) discovery in meteorite of an extraterrestrial mineral unknown on earth; (10) feasibility demonstration of moon and planet mission navigation by hand-held sextant; (11) formulation of certification requirements for supersonic transport take-off; (12) design of ducted-fan to provide efficient airflow for flight from hover to high subsonic speeds; (13) formation of organic material under Martian conditions; (14) development of a new magnetic field chamber; (15) derivation of formula for simple calculation of convective (friction) heating of spacecraft in planet atmospheres; (16) tests of radiative heating in simulated planet atmospheres; (17) improvement of techniques for prediction of heat shield performance; (18) development of a low-power, high-performance magnetometer; (19) measurements of solar wind on imp-b and OGO n; (20) feasibility demonstration of new pod for vertical-lift engines for Vtol aircraft at flight speeds up to 170 mph. (arc Release)
An accelerated reservoir light-gas gun had set a world speed record of 25,300	mph for controlled flight of a visible object, of known mass and shape, and over a known distance in a ground facility in tests at nasa Ames Research Center, Ames announced. The shot was 3,200 mph faster than the previous record. In the light-gas gun used, an explosive charge was set off in a cylinder behind a plastic piston. The explosion pushed the piston into a chamber of hydrogen gas, compressing it, and the gas in turn pushed the projectile out of the firing tube. A light gas must be used because it has low mass and would expand at the highest speed after compression. With the ability to move objects this fast, researchers could extend their knowledge of space flight problems, (arc Release 65-13; ARC Astrogram, 4/29/65, 1, 2)
OGO I (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) spacecraft had completed its first year of operation in space Officially classified as a failure when a major objective—three axis stabilization—was not achieved, the 1,200-lb. satellite launched Sept. 4, 1964, had exceeded its one-year design lifetime and was still transmitting valuable data from 16 experiments. OGO i’s scientific objectives were to conduct time-correlated measurements of space phenomena to help in the understanding of earth-sun relationships. Although its scientific usefulness was lessened when the earth-run stabilized orientation was not achieved, 16 scientific papers had been presented by experimenters on findings of their instruments aboard OGO I. (nasa Release 65-294)
Rep. Westen E. Vivian (D-Mich.) told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that he intended to request adoption of a policy to award one half of all NASA Phase 1A contracts to companies in areas presently receiving less than one half of NASA business. Chairman Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) said that although fiscal expedience demanded that procurement contracts go to industralized areas, geographic distribution should be seriously considered in the allocation of research and development funds. He said the Subcommittee would consider Vivian’s proposal. (Transcript, 3/9/65)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, nasa Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics that “although space research, development, and operations have absorbed much of our resources within the past few years, the NASA has been and will continue to be dedicated to a strong program of aeronautical research keyed to the Nation’s needs.” He testified:	“. . . The [aeronautics] program embraces the entire spectrum of flight from lowspeed private and v/stol aircraft to hypersonic vehicles. I have already described . . . our part in the evolution of the xv-5a and F-lll aircraft, in the evaluation of supersonic transport proposals, and in the solution of jet transport rough air problems. Looking ahead to fy 1966, we are requesting $42.2 million in Research and Development for aeronautics. This figure can be separated into two categories:	one funds a broad and continuing effort in the scientific disciplines underlying advances in all areas of air transportation, civil and military; the other funds a more concentrated attack on specific advances in air transportation whose potential is identified by research in the various scientific disciplines. . . . “Throughout the aeronautics program budget, provision has been made to support the direct requests of the Department of Defense and the Federal Aviation Agency. It can be pointed out that although the Research and Development request in FY 1966 for aeronautics is $42.2 million, we expect to spend a total sum of $106.2 million in this field. The difference is accounted for by Administrative Operations and Construction of Facilities funds as well as supporting research and technology directly applicable to aeronautics in fields such as electronics, human factors, basic research, and others. Approximately 1600 direct personnel will be engaged in aeronautical research in FY 1966. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 213-269)
Soviet spaceships make their landings on terra firma, and practically everybody in the space flight business agrees that this is much more desirable than splashing down in the ocean,” wrote the Washington Evening Star. The article said that water landings by U.S. spacecraft proved that “U.S. manned spacecraft lack the capability to come back to land.” (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/7/65, A6)
NASA Kennedy Space Center awarded a $41 million cost-plus-award-fee supplement to the Chrysler Corp. for support services on the Saturn I and Saturn IB space programs. Chrysler would provide prelaunch, launch, and post-launch services at Complexes 34 and 37 through June 30, 1968. (ksc Release 43-650)
Donald E. Gault and William L. Quaide, NASA Ames Research Center scientists, believed the moon’s surface was a loose layer of fine sandlike material at least 10 ft. and possibly “tens of meters” deep, reported Associated Press. Their theory was based on laboratory experiments in which they closely matched the moon crater pictures transmitted to earth by the Ranger spacecraft. Laboratory results were confirmed in field tests, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65)
PEGASUS II meteoroid detection satellite, orbited May 25 from Kennedy Space Center, had reported “hits” on panels of all three thicknesses of aluminum target material, NASA reported. 14 penetrations had been recorded on the ,016-in.-thick detection panels; five on the .008-in. panels; and 34 on the .0015-in. panels. In the first month report on pegasus n, Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of NASA Space Vehicle Research and Technology, said that although the number of penetrations varied slightly from earlier predictions, “the figures follow closely our statistical computations based on results from pegasus I and explorers xvi and xxm. Continued successful operation of PEGASUS II will give us a good base for use by spacecraft designers in predicting the frequency and size of meteoroids which constitute a hazard to space flight.” Ames referred to a new capacitor fusing arrangement which would enable project engineers to disconnect a single malfunctioning capacitor while leaving other capacitors in the same group of panels working. If a malfunction serious enough to warrant disconnection of the entire panel group occurred, this could be done by ground command. 36 capacitors on PEGASUS II were working improperly during the first four weeks and had been disconnected by ground command to prevent a drain on the spacecraft’s power supply, (nasa Release 65-219; msfc Release 65-168)
Aviation Week reported theory of many U.S. officials that COSMOS LVII, launched by U.S.S.R. on Feb. 22, 1965, had strayed from its programed flight path and been deliberately destroyed the day after it was launched. The alleged reason was to prevent COSMOS LVII from falling into foreign hands. U.S. officials were said to have assumed that COSMOS LVII was a trial run for voskhod II flight because of similar orbits: voskhod ii had 308 mi. (496.7 km.) apogee, 108 mi. (174.4 km.) perigee, 65° inclination: cosmos lvii had 317 mi. (511.3 km.) apogee, 107 mi. (172.6 km.) perigee, and 65° inclination. According to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Satellite Situation Report, 51 pieces of cosmos lvii were in orbit Feb. 28, 1965; 39 pieces on March 15. 1965. The Report also listed cosmos l, launched by U.S.S.R. October 28. 1964. in 88 pieces, (gfsc SSR, 3/15/65, 33, 37; Av. Wk., 4/12 65, 34 )
Quasi-stellar radio sources (“quasars”), cosmic x-ray sources, and neutron stars were discussed at NAS meeting in Washington. Jesse L.	Greenstein of Mt. Wilson and Palomar Observatories suggested quasars were signs of galaxies forming—“the first condensation” of intergalactic gases. William A. Fowler of Cal Tech revived his earlier theory (proposed with Fred Hoyle) that these sources were huge energy masses created by explosive contractions of gigantic stars. Herbert Friedman of NRL presented new evidence that cosmic x-ray sources and neutron stars were not the same things. (Scientists at nrl had earlier suggested that some cosmic x-ray sources were the theoretical neutron stars.) Edwin E. Salpeter of Cornell Univ. reiterated the neutron star hypothesis. He suggested neutron stars could be oscillating stars which generate such great amounts of gravitational energy that the x-rays are produced. (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/29/65, A5)
Saturn V booster (s-ic—T stage) was successfully static-fired for 90 sec. at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. During the test, longest to date, the five F-l engines developed 7.5 million lbs. thrust and all four outer engines were gimbaled to simulate the motion required to control the vehicle in flight, (msfc Release 65-148; Marshall Star, 5/16/65, 1)
First Phoebus 1a nuclear reactor test was conducted at NRDS, the reactor operating successfully at full power for 10JA min. The reactor was damaged during shutdown when the facility liquid hydrogen supply was unexpectedly exhausted. Test was part of nasa-aec Phoebus program to extend graphite reactor technology developed under the Kiwi series to higher power and temperature, ultimately leading to high-thrust nuclear engine system for space exploration. (Rover Chron.; Atomic Energy Programs, 1965, 145)
NASA would negotiate with Ball Brothers Research Corp. an approximate $12-million contract for procurement of three additional Orbiting Solar Observatory (Oso) spacecraft, bringing to eight the number of satellites contracted for in the Oso series. (NASA Release 65-282)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos lxv from the Baikonur launch complex 200 mi. northeast of Tyuratam, Tass announced. The satellite carried scientific instruments for continuing the Soviet space exploration program. Orbital data: apogee, 342 km. (212.4 mi.); perigee, 210 km. (130.4 mi.) ; period, 89.8 min.; inclination, 65°. All systems were functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/18/65, 1, atss-t Trans.; SBD, 4/22/65, 290)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was named chairman of the International Sponsors Committee for Clark Univ.’s $5.4 million Robert Hutchings Goddard memorial library scheduled for completion by 1968. Several nuclear-powered, self-supporting lunar bases and a wide variety of space stations would be in operation by the year 2000, Dr. von Braun told the luncheon meeting of the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. He made his predictions during the question and answer period following his speech on Dr. Robert H. Goddard’s contributions to American rocketry. The greatest activity in space 35 yrs. hence would be in earth orbits, von Braun felt, and space would provide a “tremendous military field.” This field would not be the science fiction concept of orbiting hydrogen bombs, but rather a broad program of military reconnaissance. Photography and direct observation of foreign military developments were cited. Space stations would be in a variety of orbits and many would be manned by scientists and repairmen shuttling back and forth in reusable vehicles. Scientists would spend up to six weeks at a time in the stations to make their observations. The use of reusable boosters would cut the cost of delivering payloads to orbit down to some 10% of today’s costs, von Braun added, (nsc Newsletter, 5/65, 6/65)
Hundreds of construction workers returned to their jobs, following removal of Boeing pickets from four of the five entrances at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, ending the eighth major construction work stoppage at KSC within 20 mo. Confinement of the striking IAM members to the one gate used by Boeing personnel had been ordered September 18 by nasa and usaf, (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/21/65, 10)
In first Pacific Ocean sounding rocket experiment from nasa’s Mobile Range Facility, two two-stage Nike-Apaches were launched from USNS Croatan about one mile north of the equator at 84° west longitude. Conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, the mission of first tocket was to measure ionospheric currents and magnetic fields in “equatorial electrojet,” a system of electrical current circulating in ionosphere in the region of magnetic equator which could be responsible for intensifying equatorial magnetic field at about local noon. Second Nike-Apache, conducting an experiment for Univ. of Michigan, was launched about 2 hrs. later carrying Pitot-static probe to measure pressure, temperature, and density in the region of 20 to 75 mi. altitude. (NASA Release 65-82; Wallops Release 65-12; NASA Rpts. srl)
In an address to employees at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. Wernher von Braun expressed his appreciation for their efforts in the highly successful Saturn I program: “What you have done reflects the ability of our nation to move forward quickly. The Saturn I proved that we were correct in our heavy duty launch vehicle theories. One of the most important products of our Saturn I program is that we have built up confidence—both self confidence and the trust of the American people who are depending upon us for American progress in space exploration.” (Text)
Construction workers at NASA Kennedy Space Center returned to work, ending a two-day walkout which NASA spokesman said cost the government $200,000 a day. Pickets of United Association of Plumbers and Pipefitters were withdrawn when Assistant Secretary of Labor James Reynolds agreed to meet with union representatives Apr. 5. (upi, Cocoa Trib., 3/31/65)
Saturn V booster (s-ic stage) was static-fired for the second time at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. The five F-l engines were ignited in a 15-sec. test during which they generated 7.5 million lbs. thrust. Tests of this stage would gradually increase in duration until full-length firing of 2% min. was reached in late spring or early summer, (msfc Release 65-117)
Ground test version of Saturn V’s first stage, s-ic-t, was captive fired for the 14th time at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. This was a full-duration firing in which the unit developed 7.5-million lbs. thrust for 150 sec.; it was conducted by Boeing Co., s-ic prime contractor, (msfc Release 65-301)
A new alloy known as NASA Modified TaZ-8 had been developed by NASA Uewis Research Center scientists John C. Freche and William J. Waters for use in modified x-15 nose sensors. The new material, which contained tantalum and zirconium, was necessary because the increased speed of the modified aircraft (x—15 No. 2)—up to 5,000 mph— would cause greater dynamic heating. (Lewis News, 2/5/65, 1)
Gifford K. Johnson, former president of the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, Dallas, was sworn in hy NASA Administrator James E. Webb as a nasa consultant. He would provide advice and guidance in the areas of technology utilization and technology reporting programs. (NASA Release 65-268)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $8,774,000 research and development contract modification to North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. for continued uprating of the H—1 rocket engine from 188,000 to 200,000 lbs. Uprated engines would be used in clusters of eight to provide a total thrust of 1.6 million lbs. in first stage of Saturn ib launch vehicle. Modification brought H-l contract total to $20,648,500.	(Marshall Star, 2/24/65, 6)
Life Sciences Research Laboratory dedicated at NASA Ames Research Center. The laboratory was organized into divisions for exobiology, environmental biology, and biotechnology. In the dedication address, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) said that “the work done at Ames is a reaffirmation of the avowed goals and aspirations of a world that is painfully searching for peace and hope.” Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said during the ceremonies: “This new structure represents many things. It represents efficiency and economy for it brings together a staff and associates numbering almost 250 who formerly were scattered about in 22 separate quarters. It represents a grouping of new research tools which can be used for new advances in science and technology; but most important, I believe, this Life Sciences Laboratory, placed within the complex of physical laboratories, represents the interdisciplinary approach to solving new problems.” (nasa Release 65-394; Text; arc Astro gram, 1/6/66, 1)
First complete test model of the s—n stage of the Saturn V launch vehicle left North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div., Seal Beach, aboard the U.S.S. Point Barrow for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The 4,000-mi. trip via the Panama Canal would take about two weeks, (msfc Release 65-246)
President Johnson sent FY 1966 Budget Request to Congress, recommending a total space budget of $7,114 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $5.26 billion, DOD $1.6 billion, AEC $236 million, Weather Bureau $33 million, and National Science Foundation $3 million. The NASA request provided for initiation of a major new project— Project Voyager, budgeted at $43 million—and intensive study of Apollo-X, with funding of $50 million. Hardware development funds were requested for the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory ($25.1 million), and the Radio Astronomy Explorer Satellite. Advanced research was reduced by cancellation of development of the 260-in.-dia. solid-fuel rocket motor, the M-l liquid-hydrogen engine (1.2-million-lb.-thrust), and Snap-8 nuclear electric power unit. nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., labeled the budget an austere one, but said the chances of landing a man on the moon by 1970 were still good. In discussing the new programs, Dr. Seamans said the requested $43 million for Voyager would be spent on project definition of the spacecraft bus and landing capsule to explore Mars in the next decade. This funding would also enable NASA to make a Martian fly-by in 1969 to test the spacecraft and launch vehicle prior to the 1971 and 1973 missions. Major portions of the DOD space budget were alloted for the following: (1) pre-program definition phase of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) ; (2) accelerated research on reentry and recovery of spacecraft; (3) continued development of the Titan in space booster; (4) development of the Defense Communications Satellite System. Two thirds of aec’s budget request was earmarked for development of nuclear rocket propulsion and nuclear power sources for space applications. The nuclear propulsion program, Project Rover, was alloted $84.1 million; the nuclear power source program, Snap, $70.5 million; and advanced projects applicable to space, $12 million. The Pluto reactor program was not included in the budget request. The Weather Bureau would start its investment in an advanced weather satellite system in fy 66 with a $500,000 request for sensors and subsystem studies in conjunction with NASA studies. Funds for three Tiros Operational System (Tos) satellites and four Delta launch vehicles to be delivered in two years, $21.6 million, were included in the budget request. Most of the rest was requested for the National Weather Satellite Center (nwsc) and would be spent to convert the present Tiros command and data acquisition facilities to full-time, operational centers run solely by the Weather Bureau. President Johnson asked Congress for $650 million as a White House contingency fund to meet the possible need to accelerate supersonic transport development. (Text, M&R, 2/1/65, 10—17; Text, NYT, 1/26/65. 26-28; Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 16-17; nasa Budget Briefing FY 1966)
Excerpts from comments on management of research and development activity by Dr. L. R. Hafstad, director of General Motors Research and Defense Research Laboratories, appeared in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “In the modern laboratory the basic research activity is essentially an information-gathering intelligence operation. The operatives must be trained to speak, and allowed to speak, the language of the area on which they are expected to keep informed, and to interact with other researchers in the same area. It is this apparently excessive freedom of action on the part of employees which makes for the concern of students of administration about the management of research, or the lack thereof. My conclusion is that most of this problem evaporates once it is realized that a director of research directs the research program—but certainly not the individual researchers. “The partnership of science, engineering and industry is really a rather new concept developed since the turn of the century and only now reaching maturity. An even newer concept is the partnership of science, engineering, and government. A problem we must face up to —whether we represent industry, government or science—is the effective use of research in creating a better future for everyone. “There is never a dearth of projects—the difficulty is to pick worthwhile projects. It is here that I feel that the discipline of the profit and loss statement is essential. . . .” (Av Wk., 4/19/65, 21)
NASA Lewis Research Center project officials said tracking data from jpl’s Deep Space Network on Aug. ll’s successful Atlas-Centaur launch from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, had indicated precise guidance system accuracy for lunar and planetary trajectories. Less than one-tenth of the midcourse correction capability in the Surveyor model payload would have been needed to put the spacecraft on the final trajectory for a soft landing at a preselected site on the moon. With the success of this mission, Centaur was first U.S. launch vehicle to qualify operationally an all-inertial guidance system for deep space application. (NASA Release 65-271)
First full-duration static test of Saturn V first stage at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center.
Landing pads that might be used on unmanned or manned vehicles in NASA’s Project Apollo were patented for NASA. Bowl-shaped, the pads would be attached to the spacecraft’s struts by ball joints and would be braced inside by collapsible ribs to absorb lateral shock. The underside of the bowl would be covered by material similar to sheet aluminum designed to shear away if the pads should slide. The inventor, Josef F. Blumrich of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said the pads would support a vertical landing on level terrain and would not dig in or transmit undue shock if they should slip against rocks; they were designed to settle on rock or dust or a combination of the two. (Jones, NYT, 4/3/65, 34)
[Dr. Robert H.] Goddard’s dream was the object of derision 39 years ago. Who, we must wonder, is the dreamer today who is being ignored? Where is he? What is he working on that will change this world so vastly 39 years from now? . . .” These were queries in an editorial by William J. Coughlin in Missiles and Rockets. Coughlin lamented the fact that much of the U.S. technological progress in the missile'space field Mas directly keyed to a race with the Soviet Union* Ho said that "if we do not provide the atmosphere and support required for the acceptance of bold new challenges, the onward pace of U.S. science and technology will falter, then stop.” tM&R, 3/22/65, 46 i
nasa launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket with a 63-lb. payload from Wallops Station, Va., to peak altitude of 98 mi. The experiment was conducted for the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, Dallas, Tex., and was designed to measure ion composition and neutral composition of the upper atmosphere as functions of altitude. Impact occurred 89 mi. downrange in Atlantic Ocean; no recovery was attempted. (Wallops Release 65-14)
Employees of nasa Kennedy Space Center began moving into the new headquarters building on Merritt Island. The move of more than 1,700	employees would be completed by mid-August, (ksc Spaceport Neivs, 4/22/65, 1)
A spokesman for Britain’s Jodrell Bank Radio Telescope Observatory said concerning the Tass report that radio signals from cta-102 might come from intelligent beings in outer space:	“We have made measurements on these sources and confirmed that they are very weak and very small. But there is no observational evidence at Jodrell Bank to show any variation in the signal strength received. We would have to scrutinize carefully the Russian evidence before making any further statements.” (ap, Balt. Sun, 4/13/65)
In January, Dr. Donald F. Hornig began his second year as science adviser to President Johnson and director of the White House Office of Science and Technology. In interview he mentioned that his job was created to prevent a recurrence of the kind of official surprise that greeted Russia’s launching of the sputnik i on Oct. 4, 1957. Hornig said the policy questions that he encountered were not ones of “right or wrong, but wise or less wise.” (Av. Wk., 1/11/65, 16)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a $1,600,000 contract to Aero Spacelines, Inc., to transport Saturn upper stages and outsize rocket components in its modified Boeing Stratocruiser, Pregnant Guppy. The contract would run through June 1966. (msfc Release 65-123)
Creation of an Institute for Earth Sciences to conduct advanced and applied research in seismology, geomagnetism, and geodesy, was announced by Dr. Robert M. White, Administrator of the Environmental Science Services Administration (essa). Under the direction of Dr. Leroy R. Alldredge, the Institute would actively seek new knowledge of the properties of the earth’s interior and develop methods of using this knowledge to predict earthquakes, (essa Release 65-7) Week of November 21: msc remote site flight controller teams for the Gemini vil/vi mission began deploying to the seven locations around the world where they would exercise detailed real-time mission control during the upcoming flights of the two Gemini spacecraft, (msc Release 65-109)
Dr. Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Lunar and Planetary Mission Studies, told Twin Cities aiaa Chapter in Minneapolis that NASA was “investigating and planning manned missions and experiments beyond the presently approved Gemini and Apollo programs. . . . “A logical sequence for future NASA manned space flight programs . . . begins with the Gemini and Apollo program base. The next logical development is the Apollo F.xtension System ( aes ) which is a stepping stone to advanced Earth-orbital operations, to lunar-orbital surveys, and to lunar surface exploration. The AES Earth-orbital activities are a development phase for an orbital research laboratory or early space station as well as a lunar exploration station. Based on the Apollo Command and Service module technology, we can also develop advanced logistic systems for larger orbiting space stations of indefinite life or for greater expansion of lunar exploration if desired. The advanced orbiting space station can likewise lead to an orbiting launch complex for planetary missions such as Martian flyby and exploration shelters or a lunar base for potential exploitation of the lunar environment. ... In Earth orbit, the AES can provide for experimental operations in the three major fundamental areas . . . : (1) flights to conduct scientific research in space requiring man’s presence; (2) Earth-oriented applications to increase the nation’s strength, and (3) development of advanced technology for support of both manned and unmanned space operations. ... In the field of Earth-oriented applications of manned space operations, NASA has been conducting studies and investigations jointly with the Departments of Commerce, Agriculture, Interior and Defense to determine how we might apply Apollo’s unique capabilities to improve our ability to forecast weather, to communicate globally at high data rates, to make an up-to-date inventory of the world’s resources, to monitor air and sea traffic on a global scale, to support a world-wide air-sea rescue service, to make better forecasts of food production and to provide a data-gathering system on a global scale. Experiments are also being evaluated to enhance over-all development of space operations. Biomedical, behavioral and other medical studies would be conducted as well as the development of advanced subsystems and technology for spacecraft. . . .” (Text)
Telephone calls between two Moscow city exchanges would be routed soon over a three-mile-long laser beam, the newspaper Trud reported. The laser link, developed by the Soviet Central Scientific Research Institute of Communications, was already in experimental use. (NYT, 10/31/65, 26)
MARINER iv’s tape recorder was turned off at the end of its second playback of the 21 pictures it took of Mars on July 14. A spokesman for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory said the second run of pictures would be compared with the first as a check against possible errors in transmission and reception. No significant differences had been reported yet by scientists studying the photographs. (UPI, Chic. Trib., 8/3/65; NASA Proj. Off.)
Techniques for weather predictions reliable up to two weeks were discussed at Geophysics Corp. of America in Bedford, Mass., by Dr. D. Q. Wark of the U.S. Weather Bureau, Dr. William Nordberg of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and Dr. Jean I. F. King of gca. These scientists had successfully utilized radio waves to collect weather data and were planning to build a new weather satellite which could log greater amounts of data and provide constant coverage. They proposed placing weather buoys in the oceans and weather balloons in the atmosphere equipped to relay data to the orbiting satellite which, in turn, would relay data to ground stations. (Hughes, CSM, 5/6/65)
nasa bioscience programs were discussed in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications by nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell: “Results recently submitted by the U.S. and U.S.S.R. from flights up to five days in length indicate that long term space flight may have several important and serious physiological and behavior effects upon the performance and well being of man that need to be investigated further. There were changes in the circulation system, in the biochemical characteristics of the blood and urine, and in the electroencephalogram indices, all pointing to a need for more detailed investigations. The results from the Biosatellite studies will have broad application to long term, manned space flight, including manned space stations and lunar and planetary bases. “Prolonged manned flights may involve changes similar to those observed after 10 days of strict bed rest on the ground. These are moderate losses of bone minerals such as calcium, particularly in the vertebrae; loss of muscle tone and physical capability; certain cardiovascular changes; and metabolism in general. The effect of continued sensory deprivation on behavior and performance is unknown. “Biosatellite experiments are of both scientific and practical importance and extremely profitable to investigate. We do not presently have sound theoretical bases for making precise quantitative (and in some cases qualitative) predictions of what we expect to happen. It is, therefore, important to carry out Biosatellite studies of suitable duration to critically demonstrate and test the effects of weightlessness on living organisms.” Outlining approaches to the search for extra-terrestrial life in nasa’s bioscience programs, Dr. Newell testified: “(a) An attempt is being made to synthesize models of primitive single-celled organisms in the laboratory. . . . “(b) The physical environments of the planets are being studied and characterized by instruments from the Earth, from high altitude balloons and from planetary fly-bys. . . . “(c) Living Earth organisms are being grown under simulated planetary environmental conditions. . . . “(d) Plans are being made for both unmanned and manned direct exploration of planets. . . .” (Testimony; 1966 NASA Auth. Hearings, 806-41)
zond III automatic space station was launched into a heliocentric orbit by U.S.S.R. from a heavy artificial satellite placed in a parking orbit around the earth by a multistage carrier rocket, Tass announced. Tass said that the “trajectory of the automatic station is close to the expected one,” that communications were stable, and that all systems were functioning normally. The purpose of the launch was to “check the station’s systems in conditions of prolonged space flight and the holding of scientific studies in interplanetary space,” Tass said. Pictures of the farside of the moon taken by ZOND ill were later released on Aug. 20. (Tass, 7/18/65; Grose, NYT, 7/19/65, 1, 31; Loory, Wash. Post, 7/19/65)
DMS, Inc., aerospace market intelligence operation that published annual analysis of DOD and NASA budget requests submitted to Congress, forecast a $106.57 billion market for the aerospace industry from 1966-1970, an increase of 13% for the five-year period, dms preferred this “generally favorable market climate,” to the “glorified major growth period of fiscal 1962-1964, when Government spending skyrocketed, inevitably producing an influx of hopeful though unusually ill-equipped competitors, followed by over-capacity as the market tapered off, and finally a retrenchment still under way.”	(NYT,
Thiokol Chemical Corp. successfully static-fired its 156-in.-dia., lOO-ft.-long solid propellant rocket motor—the largest yet fired— for 64 sec. The 900,000-lb. motor developed over three million lbs. of thrust, consumed over 800,000 lbs. of propellant, and generated temperatures up to 6,000°F. The solid propellant was encased in a halfinch-thick steel and nickel casing which apparently escaped damage. Also left intact was the 10-ton, 20-ft.-tall nozzle which rested on top of the 12-stories-deep testing pit. The motor was fired below ground level. Primary objective of the test was to validate design of the nozzle for use later on the 260-in. motor. A secondary mission was to check out the propellant processing system which would be used in the larger motor. The test was part of the large-solid demonstration program currently managed by NASA’s Lewis Research Center. (Shipp, Atlanta J/Const., 2/28/65; M&R, 3/8/65, 16)
Representatives of 27 firms interested in providing computer services to support NASA Michoud Assembly Facility and NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s Mississippi Test Facility attended a pre-proposal conference at the New Orleans installation. The computer services contract, which would cover a one-year period with three one-year renewal options, would include operation or maintenance of about 20 digital and analog computers, a data transmission system, a data reduction system, and related electronic equipment, (msfc Release 65-211)
VOSKHOD iTs two-man crew, Col. Pavel Belyayev and Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov, rested under medical supervision at an undisclosed place in the northern Ural mountains, Tass reported. Soviet space flight headquarters at Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan reported that VOSKHOD n’s antennas had burned away as the spacecraft reentered the earth’s atmosphere. The descent had been tracked by radar units. Lt. Col. Andrian G. Nikolayev, Soviet Cosmonaut, said the order to use manual controls in landing voskhod ii was given by a Soviet ground station, Izvestia reported. It was not known whether the manual landing was part of the original program or was made necessary by a malfunction of the automatic controls. (Shabad, NYT, 3/21/65, 3) . . . . .
Dr. Mac C. Adams was sworn in at NASA Hq. as Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator. Dr. Adams came to NASA from Avco Corp., Wilmington, Mass., where he was vice president and assistant general manager for space systems. In 1949-51 he was an aeronautical research engineer with NASA Langley Research Center (then naca Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory). (NASA Release 65-317; nasa Ann.)
A five-week technical assessment of supersonic transport air-frame designs proposed by the Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. was begun by an 82-member Government technical team with representatives from NASA, faa, usaf, and usn. Formed under the FAA Director of Supersonic Transport Development b/g J. G. Maxwell (usaf), the group would emphasize operational performance of the proposed configurations in terms of program objectives for a safe, economical aircraft compatible with present airports, airline operating requirements, and engine noise and sonic boom criteria. Performance characteristics of each design would be examined in detail, both analytically and through wind tunnel tests at nasa Langley Research Center and NASA Ames Research Center. Results of the assessment would provide guidance for further contractor programing in the present detailed design and hardware test phase of the Sst development program which called for prototype construction to begin by the end of 1966. (faa Release 65-110)
Full-duration test firing of the second flight S-IVB stage of the Saturn IB launch vehicle was conducted at Sacramento by Douglas Aircraft Co. The 73/2-min. acceptance test was run to check engine performance, propellant tank pressurization systems, data acquisition systems, power and control systems, and structural reliability of the rocket stage. Following detailed post-test evaluation, the s-ivb would be shipped to Kennedy Space Center for launch as part of a complete Saturn ib vehicle in 1966. (Marshall Star, 12/8/65, 4)
The first industry-produced Saturn I first stage (s—I—8) arrived at Cape Kennedy aboard the NASA barge Promise after a six-day trip from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. The stage, which was 80 ft. long and 21.5 ft. in diameter, had been built by the Chrysler Corp. (msfc Release 65^16; ap, NYT, 3/1/65, 12)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, spoke at the dedication ceremonies for Martin Co.’s new Research Institute for Advanced Studies in Relay, Md., about some of the progress that had been made in space science: “Because of the space program, geophysics is experiencing a tremendous broadening of its horizons. . . . Moreover, geophysics is being carried forward to new domains, as instruments reach the moon and the planets, giving to the discipline a perspective it could never achieve as long as geophysics was confined to a single body of the solar system. “Similarly, the space program is giving a new dimension to astronomy. The ability to observe above the filtering distorting atmosphere in wavelengths not hitherto observable promises exciting new discoveries. . . . “The field of physics finds in the regions of outer space a laboratory of challenging opportunity. In interplanetary space, matter and fields exist under conditions unobtainable in the laboratory on the ground. . . . “It is, indeed, interesting to observe that one of the impacts of space efforts on physics, geophysics, and astronomy has been to draw the three disciplines together more closely than they have been drawn together in the past. In the investigation of sun-earth relationships, a most complex and challenging area of investigation, all three of these disciplines find themselves in partnership on problems of common interest. . . . “The impact of the space program on bioscience is still developing ... of particular importance is the area of exobiology. . . . “The satellite, space probe, and manned spacecraft give the scientist a new approach to the solution of many important problems. They serve to strengthen his hand—if used effectively. . . .” (Text)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced successful test of a large-scale facility to investigate the boiling of liquid sodium. Test was just one milestone in the complex and extensive research being conducted on the properties and engineering performance of liquid metals. Liquid alkali metals, having excellent heat-transfer capabilities and large liquid range, were being considered as working fluids in future advance electric power systems in spacecraft, (lrc Release 65-46)
NASA’s OSO II satellite, which completed its first month in orbit at 11:36 a.m. EST, had circled earth 419 times and daily returned about 7 mi. of tape-recorded data, NASA reported. Designed to provide detailed information on solar x-rays, gamma rays, and ultraviolet rays, OSO II was functioning normally except for failure of the Harvard College Observatory ultraviolet scanning spectrometer and for sporadic return of data from the spectroheliograph portion of Naval Research Laboratory coronagraph. Earlier problems with data transmissions from gsfc ultraviolet spectrometer bad been resolved. (NASA Release 65-74)
dod Advanced Research Projects Agency had selected three contractors for research programs in the materials field: Martin Co., awarded $1 million, subcontract with the Univ. of Denver and conduct a three-year program on the high energy rate of forming metals; Union Carbide Corp., with $2.5 million, would subcontract with Case Institute of Technology and the Bell Aerospace Corp. and conduct a three-year research program on carbon composite materials; Monsanto Research Corp., awarded approximately $2 million, would subcontract with Washington Univ. of St. Louis, Mo., and conduct a two-year research program on high-performance composites, (dod Release 193-65)
Robert J. Schwinghamer, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, received American Society of Tool and Manufacturing Engineers’ Research Medal. Schwinghamer was cited for his research “leading to a better understanding of materials, facilities, principles, and operations, and their application to better manufacturing.” ( msfc Release 65—58; Marshall Star, 3/17/65, 1, 6)
Three Univ. of California (Berkeley) scientists concluded on the basis of their laboratory studies that Dr. William M. Sinton’s spectroscopic evidence of organic matter on Mars was not valid. Dr. Sinton of Lowell Observatory had made spectroscopic studies of Mars in 1959 that suggested infrared radiation from dark portions of Mars was comparable to that produced by some terrestrial plant life. The California chemists—James S. Shirk, William A. Haseltine, and George C.	Pimentel—concluded Dr. Sinton had detected vaporized “deuterated water” (TLO plus heavy hydrogen—deuterium) rather than plant-produced molecules, (upi, S.F. Chron., 2/28/65)
A new alloy of hafnium and tantalum had been developed which could withstand temperatures as high as 4000° F. It would raise temperature limits formerly placed on such engine components as nozzles and throat inserts by the lack of reliable protective coatings. Application of the alloy was developed on a NASA contract by the IIT Research Institute, (nasa Release 65-365)
Brig. Gen. Julian H. Bowman (usaf, Ret.) was appointed Special Assistant to the NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. General Bowman would handle special management problems in areas such as program manpower and organization, career management, and industry relationships. (NASA Hq. Bull., 7/20/65)
A Group Achievement Award was presented at NASA Langley Research Center’s annual awards ceremony to Eugene Schult, Head of the Scout Project Office, in recognition of “the outstanding Scout vehicle success record during the past eighteen months.” (LaRC Release)
Evaluating the controversy on manned versus unmanned exploration of space, Robert Colburn said in International Science and Technology: “I see no meaningful issue between (unmanned) space science and (manned) space exploration. The real question is what sort of space science contributes best to the success of space exploration. More concretely, the question is not whether to investigate the moon with an unmanned Surveyor shot or a manned Apollo; it’s whether an extra Surveyor mission now would significantly reduce the cost or danger of the eventual Apollo mission and, if not, whether it may be wasteful to send a Surveyor now when the same information can be had more easily later, once there is a man on the moon to help.” Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.), member of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, inserted Colburn’s editorial in the Congressional Record. (CR, 9/14/65) During September: NASA’s Technology Utilization Div. published a 66-page illustrated book outlining potential uses of space telemetry techniques in the biological and medical fields. (NASA Release 65-309)
France’s first satellite, FR-1, arrived from Paris at Dulles International Airport and was taken to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for testing. The satellite, to be launched for France by NASA in a joint project to study very low frequency radio waves and the distribution of ionization in the earth’s magnetosphere, would be sent to Ling-Temco-Vought, Texas, where it would be modified to fit a Scout-type rocket. Launching was scheduled for late 1965. Memorandum of understanding for the FR-1 program was signed Feb. 18, 1963, between nasa and the French Space Agency, Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes). (nasa Release 65-59; Wash. Post, 9/16/65)
Ten firms had submitted proposals to the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for preliminary design study of the Optical Technology Satellite being considered as part of the Apollo Extension System (Aes). Two contracts would be awarded for parallel studies. Objective of the proposed Ots program was to advance NASA’s capability in space optics technology by performing several engineering and scientific experiments in space. Selected contractors would review existing conceptual designs for Ots and analyze the technical feasibility and justification for the performance in space of experiments being considered. The contractor would then create a conceptual design with onboard experiments. In Phase II, the contractor would perform a conceptual design study of the Ots subsystem to establish a sound base for overall preliminary design. The program would be under NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Release 65—213; msfc Release 65— 213)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on H.R. 2626, a bill to provide that the National Bureau of Standards conduct investigations to determine the practicability of U.S. adoption of the metric system of weights and measures. J. Herbert Hollomon, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology, told the Committee that if the U.S. did not adopt the metric system it would stand alone in this regard in 10 to 15 yrs. (CR, 8/3/65, D740; Transcript)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed the national space program in address before the Hartford Rotary Club, Hartford, Conn. Looking toward the future, he said: “The Gemini and Apollo-Saturn programs are providing this country with a broad base of technological, managerial, and resources capability which makes feasible a wide spectrum of space missions beyond the first lunar landings. This capability can be exploited in a wide range of earth orbital, lunar orbital, and lunar surface missions. . . . “Over 90 percent of the Apollo program is directly applicable to our earth orbital capability. Many interesting ideas are under consideration on how to use this extended earth orbit capability to yield great benefits to mankind in his daily life on earth, and to conduct much significant scientific research. “We are also studying the use of modified Apollo vehicles for missions both in orbit about the moon and for exploration of the moon’s surface. In lunar orbit, we can do mapping, surveying, and exploration of the moon. On the moon, we can conduct detailed exploration of the surface environment and the moon’s overall properties. We are also looking at the moon as a base for astronomical and for biological studies. “All of these applications will capitalize on the presence of men in space. There is no substitute for having man’s abilities available right on the spot during a mission, with his human intellect to cope with the unexpected and operate in an unplanned or unprogramed manner. . . .” (Text, CR, 4/7/65, A5656-58)
Tass reported that Crimean Astrophysical Observatory of the Soviet Academy of Sciences had photographed luna VII moon probe with 2.6-meter telescope, largest in U.S.S.R. and Europe. Photographic method used made it possible to obtain an image of the object in motion in the form of a chain of three dots. This made it easier to distinguish the object from weak stars. Photographs would help to determine LUNA vil’s orbit with greater precision. (Tass, 10/5/65)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.), speaking on the floor of the House, compared the states in distribution of Federal research and development funds per scientist employed: “Of the seven states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin only Illinois exceeds the national average of approximately $25,000 in research and development funds per scientist employed in educational institutions in this area. Even then this one state exceeds the average distribution by only $4,600. The shares of other states range from a high of $15,000 per scientist in Michigan down to only $9,000 in my own state of Indiana. In between these we find Minnesota, $13,000; Ohio, $11,000; and Wisconsin, $10,900. “Leading the national list is New Mexico with $163,000 per scientist followed by Nevada with $109,000 and California with $63,000 per scientist. At the very bottom of the list is Maine with only $4,000 per scientist. “. . . this matter of the uneven geographic distribution of Federal research and development funds is involving our national interest.” {CR, 3/18/65, 5186)
Continuation of Weather Bureau-Navy Project Stormfury during the 1965 hurricane season was announced. Hurricanes and cumulus clouds would be seeded to investigate the feasibility of modifying clouds and tropical storms. The hurricane research program began in 1961, included experiments on hurricanes Esther (1961) and Beulah (1963) and on tropical clouds (1963). Objectives for 1965 were to intensify the hurricane-seeding experiments and to begin new experiments on hurricane rainbands. (Commerce Dept. Release wb 65-100)
Fred P. Strother, in charge of requirements for Boy Scout merit badges, announced that details of a space exploration merit badge were being worked out with NASA. (NYT, 3/6/65, 27)	*
A 707 jet transport, owned and fitted by the Boeing Co. with extensive instrumentation, including an analog computer and a 15-ft. needle-like nose extension to make it an in-flight dynamic simulator, had arrived at NASA Langley Research Center for a four-month program of supersonic transport experiments. The research program would assess simulated landing approaches with both the fixed-wing and variable-sweep concepts, including conditions such as emergency use of cruise sweep-back during a landing. (NASA Release 65—233)
Educators from various elements of nasa and a group of 65 lecturers employed in the NASA Spacemobile program began a week-long training session at NASA Langley Research Center. (LaRC Release)
NASA Langley Research Center scientists Harry W. Carlson and Francis E. McLean said that for the first time there was hope for a significant reduction in the sonic booms expected from proposed supersonic airliners. A plane flying faster than the speed of sound compresses the air around it into shock waves trailing from the nose, wings, engine inlets, tail, and any other protuberances. Near the plane there would be separate waves, producing “near field effects.” Traced on a graph to show changes in pressure, the waves would make a jagged line resembling the letter “N.” As the waves traveled toward the ground, they would coalesce into two powerful waves—one appearing to trail from the nose and one from the tail—producing “far-field effects” also shaped as a letter “N” in terms of pressure patterns. The sharp peaks of this N-shaped wave were suspected of causing most of the annoyance and structural damage possible from sonic booms. Carlson and McLean discovered that planes the length and shape of supersonic airliner designs would not fly far enough away from the earth for their far-field effects to be felt on the ground, leaving only the less bothersome near-field effect to be taken into account. It was hoped that this new finding would mean that designs currently submitted to the Government in the design competition for supersonic transport, or minor refinements of them, would fit within Government-imposed sonic boom limitations and that still further improvement through design changes would bring further decreases in the boom. Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, LaRC Director, called what had been learned “significant new knowledge” and said it could, under the best of circumstances, “have great significance.” He pointed out that the best of circumstances were seldom found in designing an airplane— particularly the supersonic transport, which he said was “at least as sophisticated technically as the Apollo.” (Clark, NYT, 1/14/65, 1, 12)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, in Munich for the International Transport Fair, said at a press conference: “The fact is that never to date has a manned American satellite flown over even one square centimeter of Soviet soil.” Von Braun denied rumors that he might accept a position with a European aeronautics and space organization. He was presented with the international aviation decoration, Pioneer Chain of the Compass Card with Diamonds, while at the Fair. (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 9/3/65)
Management of the Voyager landing capsule system had been assigned to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA announced. Harris M. Schur-meier, former Ranger Project Manager at Jpl, had been named Voyager System Manager. Currently in a design study phase, Voyager was planned for unmanned planetary explorations beginning with a Mars mission in 1971. (nasa Release 65-242; jpl Release 346)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in an address to the American Ordnance Association:	. . In the case of the most recently announced space project, the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, we again have an example of a highly valuable exchange of technology and experience by two operating agencies of the Government. In this instance, NASA’s considerable success in manned space flight and in the development of spacecraft will assist the Air Force substantially in carrying out the Manned Orbiting Laboratory project. Such interagency cooperation will tend to improve rather than impair the peaceful image which this country has established. “Since I have mentioned the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, it is worth pausing right now to challenge forthrightly those who have asserted or intimated that it has something to do with a weapons race. We expect misinterpretations of that sort to come from unfriendly countries and sometimes from ignorant domestic critics. However, I was disappointed to find that a few otherwise well informed publications and invididuals have asserted that the MOL is a weapons carrier and a project contrary to our peaceful progress in space. “I assert as positively as I can that the MOL is not a weapons system, is not a means by which aggressive actions can be perpetrated, and is in no way in conflict with the established peaceful policies, objectives, or methods of the United States. Rather, it is a program that will increase our knowledge of man’s usefulness in space and will relate that ability to our national defense.” (Text)
An S-ivb facility vehicle and an S—II simulator arrived in New Orleans aboard the usns Point Barrow enroute to NASA Kennedy Space Center. Both the s-ivb and S-n were upper stages of the Saturn V launch vehicle. The s-ivb would also serve as the second stage of the Saturn IB booster, (msfc Release 65-161; Marshall Star, 6/30/65, 2)
Soviet pilot Natasha Prokhanova, flying an e-22 supersonic jet trainer, climbed to 79,000-ft. altitude, exceeding the world altitude record for women of 56,073 ft. set by U.S. pilot Jacqueline Cochran in 1961 at Edwards afb in a Northrop t-38 Talon supersonic jet trainer.	(NYT, 5/31/65, 24)
Remarkable adaptability of some fungi and bacteria to life in atmosphere containing high concentrations of ammonia and methane was discovered by Dr. S. M. Siegel and Miss Constance Guimarro of the Union Carbide Research Institute and reported in Icarus. The report suggested there might therefore be life on Jupiter, where extremes of temperature and a dense atmosphere of these noxious gases would seem to make life-forms resembling those on earth unlikely. The research was supported by nasa contract. (Schmeck, NYT, 5/12/65; Icarus, iv/1965, .37—40) During May: Carl Sagan, Harvard Univ. and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, and Sidney Coleman, Lyman Laboratory of Physics, Harvard Univ., reviewed the need for sterilization of Mars-bound spacecraft to protect that planet from contamination. Using probability theory, Sagan and Coleman specified formulas to provide predictions of onboard-experiment and Mars-contamination relationships. (.A&A, 5/65, 22-27)
President Johnson approved the following policy on the promotion and decoration of astronauts: “1. Each military astronaut will receive a one grade promotion as a direct result of the first successful space flight, but not beyond the grade of colonel in the Air Force and Marine Corps or captain in the Navy. Promotions to general officer rank will be accomplished through usual military selection board process. “2. Each Gemini astronaut will be awarded the NASA Medal for Exceptional Service (or Cluster) after completion of a successful space flight. The NASA Medal for Distinguished Service, the highest award which can be given by that agency, will be awarded for exceptional accomplishments in the Gemini program, including but not limited to accomplishments in actual flight. “3. Military decorations associated with space flights, such as awards for exceptional heroism or other distinguished service, will be determined on an individual basis consistent with general policy governing the award of traditional military decorations.” (Text, Pres. Doc., 9/6/65, 183-84) During August: Karl G. Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Assn., wrote in Aerospace: “Almost every aspect of our national life has begun to show a positive and beneficial impact of this nation’s decision to be a major participant in man’s greatest adventure. “There has been the direct economic impact on the communities and regions where the major parts of this large national event are centered. There has been introduced into our national economy a wide variety of radically new industrial techniques. There have evolved new standards of excellence in engineering, testing, design, reliability, environment, control, and the skill and dedication of personnel . . . “In space research, development and exploration, the identity becomes . . . more imperative. Aerospace companies go many routes attempting to achieve that goal. Leading aerospace companies, for example, developed a ‘Zero Defects’ program aimed at reminding, rewinding, and emphasizing to the worker that rejects are expensive and, if undetected, would contribute to tragedy. Other companies have instituted variations of the zero defects promotional program. “A second motivation campaign called ‘The Critical Parts Program,’ to insure that all 98 subsystem assemblies that go into a major space booster system will work, precisely in sequence, has been sold as an industry wide concept. “Another company reports that employes were amused and, more importantly, impressed, when a sign was tacked above the door of its main assembly room that reads: ‘In NASA we trust. Everything else we check . . .’” (Aerospace, Summer 1965, 25)
Decision to narrow the choice of type of broadcast satellite it would consider from three to two was announced by ComSatCorp president Joseph* V. Charyk at a stockholder’s meeting in Washington, D.C. Two of the approaches under consideration involved satellites that would operate about 6,000 mi. above the earth: one would have 18 satellites, orbiting in random positions; the other would have 12 satellites, orbiting at “phased” or controlled positions. The third approach, being tested in early bird I, had satellites placed at an altitude of 22,000 mi. in synchronous orbit. In his speech, Charyk revealed that the corporation had decided to drop from consideration the 6.000-	mi. random version. It had been discovered, he reported, that a 6.000-	mi.-high satellite could be controlled more easily than ComSatCorp had believed when it first started studying random satellites as one alternative approach. Moreover, Charyk said, it now appeared that a satellite could be designed that would operate either at 6,000 mi. in controlled positions or at the 22,000-mi.-high, synchronous position. LiOinSatCorp therefore wo: :Id invite satellite designers to offer bids to build this type of satellite. (Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/11/65, 12) . held in Mar del Plata, Argentina, where it was moved from Buenos Aires because of student demonstrations. A new working group was formed, with Morris Tepper (Chief of Meteorological Programs, nasa) as chairman. Called Working Group VI, for Scientific Space Experiments Concerned with Properties and Dynamics of the Troposphere and Stratosphere, it was formed to “further international understanding of, and cooperation in, the use of rocket and satellite systems and techniques for meteorological research, and to promote international discussions involving meteorologists with scientists of other disciplines in order to provide a good climate for the development of imaginative new approaches to the use of rockets and satellites for meteorological research.” (nas-nrc News Report, Vol. xv, 5/6/65, 6) Dr. 0. Z. Gazenko, physiologist and member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said that cosmonauts had no difficulty knowing the orientation of their bodies and experienced no nervous disorders if they were given visual cues. He based his remarks on experiences of Soviet cosmonauts, especially those of Lt. Col. Aleksei Leonov in VOSKHOD ii: “When he saw the spacecraft, he had no problem knowing his orientation, but it was different when he didn’t see the spacecraft.” During the launch phase, the cosmonauts’ pulse and breathing rates were greater than noted during centrifugal tests in ground laboratories. In voskhod II, it took a comparatively long time for the normal levels to be reached, according to Gazenko. Comparison of the data of the Voskhod flights with other space flights showed fewer cardiovascular variations and better responses to stress. He recommended crews of several people since “the feeling of togetherness of cosmonauts is very important.” (Text) Success of the fully stabilized British Skylark rocket in obtaining new astrophysical data was described. Skylark was a single-stage, solid-fuel vehicle designed to carry 150-200-lb. payload to 200 km. (124 mi.) altitude. Using the sun as a reference, Skylark could achieve pointing accuracy of between two and three minutes of arc in pitch and yaw, reported Kenneth Pounds, lecturer at Leicester College, England, and one of its users: “The new Skylark has revolutionized the whole field of rocket research as far as we’re concerned.” He pointed out that many scientific experiments, such as taking x-ray photographs of the sun, could not be done by an unstabilized rocket: “You need 100 sec. or more exposure time, plus roll stabilization, or the photographs will be blurred.” (cospar Rpt.) M.	S. V. Rao, reporting on the Thumba, India, experiments conducted on World Days during the 1964—1965 iqsy, said east northeasterly winds with speeds of 60-90 knots were observed in the stratosphere during the monsoon. In the mesosphere, data revealed a region of unusually strong winds with high shear. Rao reported that radar observations of the rate of dispersion of chaff confirmed existence of complex pattern of high shears and pronounced turbulence in the equatorial mesosphere in the monsoon season. (Text) NASA scientists at Wallops Station, Va., had made a similar rocket launching during the Thumba experiments to get a synoptic picture. Arnold Frutkin, NASA Director of International Programs, said at the cospar meeting that “these data were the first relating to the monsoon problem on a global scale. It shows what very important work less advanced countries can do.” (M&R, 5/24/65, 17) Activities in the 1964 U.S. space program were summarized by Dr. Richard W. Porter, National Academy of Sciences delegate to COSPAR:	“. . . Satellite storm warnings, intercontinental television, voice and data transmissions via satellite, all-weather navigational ‘fixes’ for ships at sea, and precise map making by means of satellite observations have become almost commonplace events. Space launchings at frequent intervals are providing a continuous stream of new information of value to science and mankind. ... In total, the various agencies of the United States carried out sixty-one successful satellite and space probe launchings; however, because of the occasional practice of launching several satellites at a time . . . the total number of useful discrete payloads in Earth orbit or escape trajectory was seventy-seven. . . . “In addition, the United States launched seven large high-altitude rocket probes, in the range from 700 to 1100 km., and well over one hundred other scientific sounding rockets, most of which reached altitudes between 110 and 250 km. Twelve hundred twenty-three small meteorological rockets, having a payload of about 5 kg. and a maximum altitude of about 60 km. were fired on regular schedules by the meteorological rocket network and more than one hundred scientifically instrumented large balloon flights were made during the period. “Technological advances made during this period which will contribute significantly to the space-research capability of the United States include the launching of three SATURN I booster rockets, capable of putting about 7500 kg. of useful weight into Earth orbit, one titan IIIA booster, and successful tests of the CENTAUR liquid hydrogen rocket. Electrostatic ion accelerator rocket propulsion devices were tested in space during 1964, and more recently a nuclear reactor with thermoelectric energy conversion devices successfully began an endurance run in space which is still continuing. Passive gravity-gradient stabilization techniques have been perfected by means of additional satellite tests to the point where this technique is ready for useful employment in a variety of space applications. The highly directional properties of a lasar beam were successfully used in tracking a satellite. Significant improvements were also made in sounding rocket, high altitude balloon design and in data conversion facilities.” (Text) K.	Maeda, chief Japanese delegate to the sixth international space symposium of cospar, told Missiles and Rockets Japan would launch its own satellite with its own launch vehicle within the next three years. A four-stage, solid-fueled rocket would be used, with the Mu rocket as first stage. The satellite, to be used solely for scientific research, would weigh between 50-100 kgs. and be sent into a 500-1,000-km. (311-621-mi.) orbit. (M&R, 5/17/65, 9) At a news conference during the cospar meeting, A. A. Blagonravov, chief Soviet delegate, said that in view of the difficulties of soft landing on the moon, the Soviet Union would probably try to soft land another Lunik before attempting to land cosmonauts. He said the lunar surface must be known in detail and “should be examined by automatic stations.” Because of the problems involved, he added, “it is not possible to set any date for a lunar landing.” (M&R, 5/24/65, 17)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said at the Boy Scout Launch-O-Ree in New York City that the “future will be determined in large measure by the kind of talented and dedicated youth found in the Boy Scouts. Science and technology, which form the basis for the national space program, are pioneering areas within which many of you can find opportunities for satisfaction and service.” (Text)
President Johnson signed into law the High-Speed Ground Transportation Act of 1965 (pl 89—220) in White House ceremony. He said: “. . . In recent decades, we have achieved technological miracles in our transportation. But there is one great exception. “We have airplanes which fly three times faster than sound. We have television cameras that are orbiting Mars. But we have the same tired and inadequate mass transportation between our towns and cities that we had 30 years ago. “Today ... an astronaut can orbit the earth faster than a man on the ground can get from New York to Washington. Yet, the same science and technology which gave us our airplanes and our space probes, I believe, could also give us better and faster and more economical transportation on the ground. And a lot of us need it more on the ground than we need it orbiting the earth. . . . “The High-Speed Ground Transportation Act of 1965 really gives us, for the first time in history, a coordinated program for improving the transportation system that we have today, and making it a better servant to our people. . . .”	( Text, Pres. Doc., 10/4/65, 329-30)
The last of 800 usaf Minutemen I icbms became operational at Warren afb, Wyo. Weighing about 65,000 lbs., the three-stage solid propellant missiles would have a range of more than 6,300 mi., a speed of over 15,000 mph, and would carry a nuclear warhead. The missiles were housed in individual blast-resistant underground launch sites and could be stored for long periods with a minimum of maintenance. (afsc Release 97.65) During June: First patent for production and separation of plutonium was granted to aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg and co-inventors the late Dr. Joseph W. Kennedy and Dr. Arthur C. Wahl. The patented procedure included treatment of uranium in a reactor to produce plutonium—first synthetic element to be seen by man—and to separate and recover the plutonium by a method called oxidation reduction. (Jones, NYT, 6/26/65, 33) During June: Interviewed in Data, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff discussed basic research in the NASA program: “The term basic is employed for two reasons. The basic research program involves elements which undergird everything we do in aeronautics and space. Such areas as materials, fluid physics, electrophysics and applied mathematics form a common base for all of our work. In addition, most of this program is carried on at a fundamental level, that is, at the atomic and molecular level. If we select, for example, the field of materials we can observe that nearly everything we do in atmospheric and space flight is limited in some way by materials. . . Asked about the role of industry in NASA’s advanced research and technology program, Dr. Bisplinghoff said: “About 75 per cent of the oart research and development budget is spent outside the NASA organization. This money goes to university and research institutes and to industrial contractors capable of carrying out the advanced work making up this program.” (Data, 6/65, 22-25) Five-week study of atmosphere contaminants in a closed environmental system was concluded at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks afb, Tex. The three phases of the test: determining leak rate of the main test cell; checking the manneu, iuuy Operational chumbc unmanned 19 cabin; and checking the In the third taViB.se four volunteer airmen lived inside the cabin in the strictly controlled experiment. They were not allowed to shave or wash; they subsisted on liquid nutritional compounds; they kept logs of diet consumed and waste volume and time; they occupied themselves only by operating psychomotor test panels or, for recreation, watching television. Study was conducted in cooperation with NASA, (afsc amd Release 65-125)
This has been the best year in history for airline-equipment orders, Stuart G. Tipton, president of the Air Transport Association, told a news conference in a summary marking the tenth anniversary of the first order for jet airplanes. Tipton said that U.S. airlines would make delivery this year on 161 jet and propjet airplanes costing $880.6 million; 239 jets and propjets costing $1,201,600,000 would be delivered to the U.S. airlines next year, on the basis of orders already placed; and 187, costing $1,033,900,000, in 1967. (ap, NYT, 10/12/65, 69) William B. Taylor, Director of NASA Apollo Applications Office, outlined some long-range goals of Saturn/Apollo: “By 1980, it seems likely there will be a vigorous program for manned exploration of the near planets, probably based on a new generation of space vehicles capable of flights for durations of 2 to 3 years with crews consisting of 6 to 8 men. Although by 1980 it is not likely that men will have landed on Mars, it is possible that a Mars flyby or manned orbiting mission will be imminent if not already accomplished. “On the moon by 1980, there may be in operation one or more multi-manned research observatories, conducting astronomical and geophysical operations on a year-round basis. These observatories may also be home base for mobile lunar explorations, using self-sufficient surface vehicles. “In earth orbit by 1980 there may be one or more multi-manned, orbiting space stations, functioning as research laboratories for the advancement of human knowledge and increase of living standards. In addition to these permanent space stations, there could be a variety of smaller earth orbiting spacecraft, operated by private industry or government agencies in much the way aircraft operate today, to carry out such applications as long term weather forecasting and control; surveys of water resources, crops, forests and ocean currents; continuous, wide-band worldwide communications; air, sea and space navigation, and traffic control. “These, then are some of the longer range objectives of the 1970’s and 1980’s which we feel can be achieved with the wide base of space technology which can be developed in alternate missions using the Saturn/Apollo systems. . . (Text) Undiscovered biological rhythms in man could prevent his visiting other planets, reported biologist Eugene Spangler, TRW Systems. “The consequences of the removal [of man from earth] are in many respects unknown. The solution may not come except by means of gradual accretions in the total time that man spends in space together with careful monitoring of his reactions as that time is increased. But it seems necessary to come to further grips with the problem insofar as possible before prolonged space flight is attempted. The goals must be first to define the problem in two steps: (1) what specific correlations exist between the life processes of man and the variations in his geophysical environment? and (2) what are the results of substantial alteration of that environment on these correlations?” Spangler noted that all of the known human rhythmic cycles could be interrupted without apparent harm, yet even the adjustment to a rapid change of several time zones after a jet flight could involve unpleasant recycling of the body’s “biological clock.” (Text) Suits of armor might be worn by astronauts on long lunar explorations, reported Richard S. Johnston, James V. Correale, and Matthew I.	Radnofsky, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The suits must be reliable, mobile, leak-resistant, and have lightweight construction and high durability for repeated wear. Two models of a metal spacesuit had met these requirements and been delivered to MSC for further testing, they said. Spacesuits for the Apollo mission, which would involve relatively brief lunar walks, would be of fabric and consist of several layers, starting with water-cooled underwear, followed by pressure layers to hold the suit’s atmosphere, and finally an “overcoat” of fabric. (Text) Greater space cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. was predicted by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) in a news conference. Cooper based his prediction on discussions he and fellow Gemini v Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), had had with Cosmonauts Col. Pavel I. Belyayev and L/Col. Aleksey A. Leonov at the International Astronautical Congress in Athens. Cooper said the cosmonauts were “mighty nice fellows” who “appeared to be very happy that we could get together and talk.” (Clark, NYT, 10/12/65, 9)	_ _ Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the meeting that the nation as a whole should be ready to decide whether to send men to other planets. He expressed faith that the public would want to continue space exploration: “It is all part of man’s wanting to know what the hell he’s doing in his environment. “The American people are just about what they claim they are—a people very fascinated with their environment, and when they can find another way to explore their environment they are very willing within reason to put their resources where their interest is. “They will do that so long as they are getting return on their investment. But there has to be a payoff here. . . The “payoff” would not necessarily come before the mid-nineteen seventies’ planetary decision, so the public would have to continue to have faith that the space program had such potential, Eggers said. (Clark, NYT, 10/14/65, 8)
The Gemini 4 manned spaceflight had been scheduled for June 3, NASA announced. The four-day flight would last about 97 hrs. 50 min., and would increase the U.S.’s hours of manned space flight to about 257 hrs. No decision had been made about opening the two-man spacecraft and letting one astronaut stand exposed to space. (Clark, Ayr, 5/22/65, 8)
Policy shift reflected in Administration approval of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory was discussed by Howard Simons in the Washington Post: “Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy virtually ignored Air Force arguments that it had a manned role in space. “. . . President [Johnson] has not committed the Nation to a longterm Air Force manned space flight effort. But what he has done is to protect himself politically against potential political repercussions should the Russians send a six- to eight-man orbiting space station aloft, as they now appear to have the wherewithal to do. . . . “Meanwhile the Administration is very wary about destroying the image of a peaceful American manned space flight program, which it has so carefully and lovingly constructed.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 8/26/65)
NASA announced it had approved a grant of $100,000 for establishment of a Technical) Utilization Program at the Univ. of Minnesota. Along with funds to be provided by private business concerns, the NASA grant would support the development and experimental testing of newT ways in which developments in space science and technology could be rapidly transferred to and assimilated by business and industry. North Star Research and Development Institute would participate in part of the program. (NASA Release 65-69)
Three Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched vapor trail experiments from Wallops Station, Va., as nasa completed a five-shot, two-day series of experiments to measure wind direction and velocity over the Atlantic coast as part of its meteorological research program. Payloads also contained instrumentation to compare electron densities with wind dispersion and to measure electron temperatures. Experiments were conducted for the GCA Corp. under contract to NASA. (Wallops Release 65-39)
Experiments at NASA Ames Research Center by Dr. John Young and Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma indicated that Mars may lie under a steady rain of edible sugars produced photochemically in the Martian atmosphere. It was speculated that the sugars and other compounds might drift to the Martian surface, seep into the soil, and form underground reservoirs of nutrients. Results of tests for survival of 50 strains of earth bacteria in simulated Martian atmosphere indicated that the strains of bacteria which form hard spores and are thus most likely to survive space flight are most sensitive to the freeze-thaw extremes of temperature that prevail on Mars. Thus, while the bacteria might survive on Mars in spore form, they would not grow there and would not contaminate the planet. Other bacteria would die en route. (S.F. Chron., 1/28/65)
A 37-man study group chaired by Dr. Colin Pittendrigh of Princeton Univ. and convened by the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences at the request of NASA had reconfirmed the Academy’s appeal for exploration of Mars to receive “the highest priority among all objectives in space science—indeed in the space program as a whole” and endorsed NASA plans to use the 1969-73 favorable Mars window for intensive study of the planet with the Voyager spacecraft. In its final report transmitted to NASA Administrator Webb, the group said that “given all evidence presently available, we believe it entirely reasonable that Mars is inhabited with living organisms and that life independently originated there,” and thus that “the biological exploration of Mars is a scientific undertaking of the greatest validity and significance.” The panel noted, however, that “while we are eager to press Martian exploration as expeditiously as the technology and other factors permit, we insist that our recommendation to proceed is subject to one rigorous qualification: that no viable terrestrial microorganisms reach the Martian surface until we can make a confident assessment of the consequences.” The group made seven basic recommendations: (1) “every opportunity for remote observation of Mars by earth-bound or ballon-and satellite-borne instruments should be exploited”; (2) “. . . An adequate program for Martian exploration cannot be achieved without using scientific payloads substantially larger than those currently employed in outer unmanned space research program. . . . We see very substantial advantages in the use, from the onset, of the new generation of large boosters which are expected to become operational toward the end of the decade”; (3) since flyby missions “yield at best a fleeting glimpse of the planet” and carry a relatively small array of instruments, “we deliberately omit an explicit recommendation in favor of any flyby missions additional to those already executed or planned”; (4)	“Every effort should be made to achieve a large orbiting mission by 1971 at the latest. This mission should precede the first lander. . . . By ‘large’ we mean a scientific payload that would include instrumentation for infrared and television mapping, microwave radiometry and bistatic radar, infrared spectrometry, and optical polarimetry”; (5)	“The first landing mission should be scheduled no later than 1973 and by 1971 if possible” and will “ultimately demand a large lander” like Abl (Automated Biological Lab) ; (6) “The task of designing an Abl should be initiated immediately as a continuing project”; and (7) to maintain “a continuing dialogue among all potential investigators and the engineers responsible for implementing their scientific goals,” the Academy’s Space Science Board should have a standing committee, (nas Release; Abraham, Phil. Eve. Bull., 4/26/65; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/26/65, 2; Sullivan, NYT, 4/27/65, 1)
Tabulations prepared by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center showed that more than 1,000 man-made objects—satellites, spacecraft, capsules, and assorted bits and pieces of them—had been placed in orbit since Oct. 4, 1957. Of these objects 243 were satellites launched by the United States or its allies and 94 were Soviet-launched satellites. 103 U.S.-sponsored satellites and 16 Soviet satellites were still in orbit. Of those no longer in orbit, 140 were U.S. and 78 Soviet. Many satellites had separated into two or more space objects or had broken apart accidentally or by design to produce space junk. GSFC records identified 469 hunks of junk of U.S. origin and 182 of Soviet as having orbited the earth at one time or another. Of these, 372 U.S. and 16 Soviet objects were still in orbit, (ap, NYT, 2/7/65, 80)
A nasa report on its Aircraft Noise Research Program to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences said: “. . . there is a growing understanding that efforts at a practicable and mutually effective solution will need to be evolutionary in nature, and involve a dedicated attack on all major aspects of the problem. These include the acquisition of definitive information on the manner in which aircraft noises are generated and propagated, and the associated development of efficient methods for the reduction of adverse aircraft noise at its source; the establishment of safe and efficient aircraft operating procedures that minimize and control the exposure of airport community property to undesirable aircraft noise; and the provision of a rational understanding of the specific aircraft noise factors which produce subjective annoyance for various activities and environments of a community population, and of optimum methods for the control and adjustment of community property usage in critical noise areas in the vicinity of the airport.” {CR, 5/27/65)
mariner iv’s ion chamber experiment failed completely, Jet Propulsion Laboratory officials reported. Count-rate of the Geiger-Mueller tube portion of the experiment had become abnormal in February. The experiment had been designed to measure proton and electron radiation. Otherwise the spacecraft was operating normally; all other high-energy radiation detectors aboard were continuing their interplanetary measurements. In its 110th day of flight, mariner iv was traveling 27,743 mph relative to earth and was 35,000,004 mi. from earth. It had traveled more than 178,000,000 mi. (nasa Release 65-90)
Honorary Doctor of Astronautical Science degrees were conferred on Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf) by their alma mater, the Univ. of Michigan where Maj. White received his bs degree in 1959 and Maj. McDivitt, his ms degree in 1959. The astronauts then attended a ceremony dedicating the University’s new $1.7 million space research building and rode in a motorcade through downtown Ann Arbor. NASA’s official representative at the festivities was Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of the nasa Langley Research Center, also a Michigan alumnus. (LaRC Release; ap, Balt. Sun. 6/16/65)
The first stage of the first Saturn IB launch vehicle to be flown arrived at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, aboard the barge Promise. This was the first transit of the new Port Canaveral locks, due for formal dedication Aug. 21.	(Brevard Sentinel, 8/15/65)
Army Corps of Engineers awarded Fisher Construction Co. a NASA-funded $1,497,728 fixed-price contract for construction of Lunar Mission and Space Exploration Facility at Manned Spacecraft Center. (dod Release 220-65)
Hearings on NASA budget authorization for fy 1966 began before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Of the $5,260 billion requested for fy 1966, $4,576 billion was for research and development; $74.7 million was for construction of facilities; and $609.4 million was for administrative operations. Administrator James E. Webb testified:	“This budget . . . supports an on-going successful research and development effort and the use of this knowledge to develop and test operating systems designed to give us what we need to know for national security, for applications in meteorology, communications, and other working satellite systems, and from which to make any decisions which may be called for in the future. “An important fact that underlies the President’s 1966 budget decisions is that the program is now operating at a level of 5/4 billion dollars instead of at the optimum level of 5% billion originally recommended by President Kennedy or the ‘fighting chance’ level recommended last year by President Johnson. This means that we cannot accomplish the 15 Saturn V-Apollo flights now included in the program within the period of this decade. If all 15 flights are required to succeed in the lunar landing, then this will not be done before 1970. However, our overall major milestones are being met and we still have a reasonable opportunity for success on a flight earlier than the 15th and thus within this decade. In effect we will be launching toward the moon on earlier flights than we thought a year ago would be possible, but we simply cannot predict which flight will be the first either to orbit the moon or to land there. “What we can say is this:	the systems of equipment for the utilization of men for flights of all kinds out as far as the moon are now rapidly proceeding toward tests that will work out any imperfections; and our fast-developing knowledge of both the space environment and the capabilities of this equipment gives us more confidence than we had a year ago that we are on the right track and proceeding on a reasonable basis for the development of machines of this size and power. . . . “In preparation of this budget, the President has faced two important facts. The first of these is that the central core of NASA activities as planned in 1961 is proceeding with excellent results. . . . “The second major fact faced by the President was the necessity for a continued emphasis on supporting research and development. . . . “Bearing these two facts in mind, this budget and this request for authorization call for an operating level which is approximately the same as that approved by Congress for fiscal years 1964 and 1965. This means that the work planned in 1961 for accomplishment in this decade must be spread out over a longer period, and the cost for the total will be increased. . . . “The essential funds to give us some opportunity to make the lunar landing within this decade are included, as are funds for studies toward further use of the Saturn launch vehicles and the Appollo-LEM manned space flight systems in the period following the lunar landing. By 1969, we will have the capability to launch 6 Saturn-iB’s and 6 Saturn V’s per year. In the unmanned area, we have begun planning for a Voyager-Mars mission in 1971 with the possibility of a test flight in 1969; funds are included in the budget for expansion of this design effort during fiscal year 1966. Development and hardware procurement could then be initiated in fiscal year 1967 if appropriate. . . .” (Testimony; 1966 NASA Auth. Hearings, 5-14)
dod had asked NASA to consider using Minuteman I missiles scheduled to be removed from their silos, as launch vehicles, Missiles and Rockets reported. NASA Hq. transferred study to Langley Research Center. LaRC was expected to complete its feasibility investigation in three to four weeks. (M&R, 4/26/65, 7; LaRC)
Operation Firefly ended as some 3,000 fireflies snared by Rockville, Md., children were turned over to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. An extract of the firefly’s lamp would be used in a life detection instrument under development at GSFC. Goddard’s “Firefly” instrument would contain a mixture of all the contents of the insect’s glow system except atp (adenosine triphosphate), a high-energy compound essential to all life as it is known on earth. Thus, when the instrument encountered a live microorganism in space, the atp contained therein would complete the circuit and a glow would be produced. (gsfc Release G-19-65; Wash. Post, 8/7/65)
Picket lines were established at all entrances to Kennedy Space Center, NASA as the International Assn, of Machinists and Aerospace Workers began a nationwide strike against the Boeing Co. Key issue was union demand that Boeing abandon performance analysis system of rating employees for promotion, demotion, and discharge. Union contended that seniority should be the sole factor in job security; Boeing claimed its system was necessary to keep the company competitive in the aerospace industry, (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/16/65; upi, Houston Chron., 9/16/65)
Pickets were removed from entrances to Kennedy Space Center, NASA, when printing and reproduction workers voted to end their 6-day-old construction-crippling strike and submit the dispute to the President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission. Removal of the pickets would enable 2,200 construction workers who had honored the lines to return to vital space projects, (ap, Balt. Sun, 6/30/65)
Officials at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory confirmed discovery by two Japanese astronomers of a new comet, Ikeya-Seki, named after its discoverers, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 9/22/65)
Soviet President Anastas Mikoyan sent President Johnson congratulations on the Gemini Gt-3 space flight, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/25/65)
Col. Jack Bollerud (usaf) was appointed Deputy Director of Space Medicine, Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA Hq. He would be deputy to Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace n. (nasa Release 65-207)
One of the five F-l engines on the Saturn V booster was successfully static fired at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for 16% sec. (.Marshall Star, 4/14/65, 1)
Paul Haney, Chief of Public Affairs for NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, addressed Oklahoma members of the American Legion to open their state convention: “Although we are not pursuing any military objectives as such, every once in a while somebody turns over a rock and finds something which could be of immense military value. “As Detroit learned to produce millions of cars in a hurry by production line development and thus was able to convert without a bobble to tank production in World War II, so could our entire manned space flight program be converted.” (ap, Houston Post, 8/8/65)
In his defense message to Congress, President Johnson cited major new developments in strategic weapon systems slated to begin this year: “A new missile system, the Poseidon [new name for Polaris B—3], to increase the striking power of our missile-carrying nuclear submarines. The Poseidon missile will have double the payload of the highly successful Polaris a-3. The increased accuracy and flexibility of the Poseidon will permit its use effectively against a broader range of penetration of enemy defenses. “A new Short Range Attack Missile (sram) that can, if needed, be deployed operationally with the b-52 or other bombers. This aerodynamic missile—a vast improvement over existing systems—would permit the bomber to attack a far larger number of targets and to do so from beyond the range of their local defenses. “A series of remarkable new payloads for strategic missiles. These include: penetration aids, to assure that the missile reaches its target through any defense; guidance and re-entry vehicle designs, to increase many-fold the effectiveness of our missiles against various kinds of targets; and methods of reporting the arrival of our missiles on target, up to and even including the time of explosion.” In addition, he said that development of the C-5A (formerly the cx) cargo transport and procurement of the Air Force F-lll fighter-bomber and new a-7 Navy attack aircraft would begin. Finally, regarding the role of science and technology in the Nation’s security, the President said: “We are currently investing more than $6 billion per year for military research and development. . . . About $2 billion a year of this program is invested in innovations in technology and in experimental programs. Thus, we provide full play for the ingenuity and inventiveness of the best scientific and technical talent in our Nation and the Free World. “American science, industry, and technology are foremost in the world. Their resources represent a prime asset to our national security.” (Text, Wash. Post, 1/19/65; ap, NYT, 1/19/65, 16; Norris, Wash. Post, 1/22/65)
Over 50 security guards at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center—members of the International Union of United Plant Guard Workers of America —went on strike over wage and contract issues with their employer Wackenhut Services, Inc. Wackenhut, operating at GSFC under contract, provided additional guards; there was no breakdown in security. Some 250 guards at NASA test sites near Las Vegas, Nev., also went on strike against Wackenhut. They were members of a separate local union. (Wash. Post, 7/2/65, A3; DJNS, Balt. Sun, 7/2/65; Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/65)
Dr. Donald Young and Dr. Ralph Pelligra of nasa Ames Research Center had been studying “the use of high caloric diets for prolonged space flights on the theory that it may be possible for astronauts to use their own fatty deposits as a source of energy.” It might be possible that future astronauts would prepare for spaceflight by eating “certain types of fats that would build up in their bodies,” thus providing them with “storage depots of their own fat” that could serve “as a backup if food supplies were limited.” (upi, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 9/26/65)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center awarded rca a $4.6-million contract to provide a real-time deep space tracking and data acquisition system for support of Project Apollo missions. Contract called for installation, checkout, and documentation of rca’s long-range (32,000 mi.) FPQ radar on land made available near a NASA site on Cooper’s Island, Bermuda, through a land-lease agreement with dod. The “Q—6” radar would have a flexible capability to support NASA programs other than manned flight, (gsfc Release G-9-65; gsfc Release G-10-65)
National Park Service delivered to NASA a comprehensive report outlining ways to make Kennedy Space Center a major tourist attraction. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/2/65)
NASA and usaf announced agreement for extended XB-70 flight research beginning next spring in joint project to' obtain supersonic operational flight information impossible to get in ground facilities. Among the items of interest were skin friction, stability and control, drag, boundary layer flow, air loads, thermal environment, sonic boom, landing, and crew workload, (nasa Release 65-393)
NASA announced two Radio Astronomy Explorer satellites (rae-a and rae-b) would be designed to investigate low-frequency (long wavelength) emissions from our galaxy, its planets, and the stars. These emissions are mostly intercepted by the ionosphere so that little can be learned about them from ground-based receivers. This would be the first attempt to map the galaxy for low-frequency emissions. The 280-lb. spacecraft would be launched by Thrust-Augmented Delta into circular orbits at altitudes of about 3,700 mi. and would measure the intensity of the signals, their frequency, times of emission and, within limitations, define the regions of space in which they originated. Proposed designs called for the development of two 750-ft., V-shaped antennas that would be mounted opposite each other, forming a giant X. They would be anchored to the basic spacecraft, a cylinder of about 40-by-40 in., capped by two truncated cones. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center would design, integrate, and test the two spacecraft. First launch was not expected before 1967. (nasa Release 65-20)
pegasus i satellite, launched by nasa Feb. 16, was functioning normally and recording information to ground stations on the size and frequency of meteoroid “strikes” or impacts on all three sensor panel groups. Scientists at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center said the number of penetrations of the panels was not greatly different from the expected level. PEGASUS I had a wing-like structure 96 ft. long and 14 ft. in width, offering more than 2,300 square ft. of area instrumented to detect collisions with meteoritic particles. The basic information on the penetrating power and frequency of meteoroids was needed for the design of future spacecraft. In addition, data on temperature, power levels, and the intensity of radiation were being received. The latter were also as predicted, (msfc Release 65—45)
mariner iv was performing normally after nearly 10 weeks in space, nasa announced. At 9 a.m. est the Mars probe was 14,421,246 mi. from earth and had traveled more than 117 million mi. in its sun-circling orbit. It was moving at a velocity of 14,478 mph relative to earth and 65,670 mph relative to the sun. Instruments aboard mariner iv Mars probe detected a solar flare and the spacecraft telemetered data to a tracking station at Johannesburg, South Africa, for relay to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, (nasa Release 65-30; L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 2/6/65)
A newly-created Manpower Utilization and Administration Office, headed by Keith Wible, became operational at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Wible had been assistant manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility from November 1961 to February 1965. (msfc Release 65-181)
NASA had awarded an $8,150,833 contract modification to General Electric Co. for supporting the Computation Laboratory at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, (msfc Release 65-169)
Robert Hotz wrote in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “A strong smell of sour grapes is beginning to emanate from the Soviet propaganda machine with its waspish comments on recent U.S. space achievements. . . . “This . . . was evident in the Soviet propaganda barrage aimed at the Gemini 5 flight when it became apparent that Astronauts Cooper and Conrad would surpass the world space flight endurance record set by Soviet Cosmonaut Valery Bykovsky in June 1963. Tass . . . charged that U.S. space officials were endangering the lives of the two Gemini Astronauts by keeping them in flight after the initial fuel cell problems in a supposedly rash effort to surpass the Soviet mark. Red Star, the official Defense Ministry newspaper, joined in by ‘exposing’ the Gemini 5 flight as a Pentagon plot to develop better space reconnaissance techniques and charged the peaceful scientific aims of space exploration were being subverted in Gemini by its military experiments. . . . “What is really significant about these Soviet sour grapes is that they reflect a realization that the USSR has been overtaken and is being passed in the space race by the U.S. program. The U.S. superiority in unmanned space probes has become clearly recognized by the world with the Ranger lunar pictures and the Mars data from Mariner 4. Gemini 4 and 5 finally erased the Soviet lead in the manned space flight. The solid operational foundation of the Gemini program has made possible the swift and sure pace which promises to eclipse significantly the Voskhod flights in the immediate future. . . .” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 9/13/65, 21)
Arthur D. Little, Inc., released a 54-page study entitled “Strategies for Survival in the Aerospace Industry,” which predicted that in the next five years the production portion of the defense budget would decline about 30 per cent and research and development would decline about 15 per cent. The report recommended that “in view of a declining market and fewer opportunities within the market, the aerospace industry’s principal objective within the next few years should be to achieve stability, rather than to search for growth opportunities.” (Duggan, N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/12/65)
OGO II, NASA geophysical observatory satellite launched Oct. 14 at Western Test Range, ceased normal operation about 24 hrs. after its attitude control system gas supply was depleted. Gas depletion was associated with automatic maneuvers to restabilize OGO II because one or more of its horizon scanners tracked temperature gradients (possibly cold clouds) near the earth’s surface rather than the horizon itself. Although NASA considered the mission a failure, OGO II had provided valuable data from 19 of its 20 onboard experiments. (NASA Release 65-368; nasa Proj. Off.)
NASA invited scientists to propose, by August 15, the various experiments to be included in a continuing Voyager program of exploration of the planets. The Mars Voyager program would begin with a test flight in 1969 followed by an orbiter-lander flight in 1971 with other flights following in 1973, 1975, and beyond. The program would also include missions now under consideration for flights to Venus and other planets. The experiments to be included in the 1971 mission of the landing capsule would be subject to strict sterilization requirements. In following programs, there would be considerable latitude in the choice of experiments. (NASA Release 65-230)
Formation of a program to achieve a more powerful Atlas booster for future Agena and Centaur missions was announced by NASA. Presently designated slv-3x, the program would seek a 21,000-lb. propellant capacity increase in the standard Atlas booster by making the top of the vehicle cylindrical and would increase the thrust of three Atlas engines by using modified Saturn H-l fuel injector and improved turbines, afsc Space Systems Div. would act as NASA’s procurement agent. NASA Lewis Research Center would supervise; General Dynamics Convair Div. was expected to receive the contract. Use of an uprated Atlas would increase the Surveyor mission capability by 600 lbs. and would permit similar payload increases for Lunar Orbiter, Ogo, Oao, and Applications Technology Satellite (Ats). (NASA Release 65-192)	.
Commenting on “race” between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. to be first on the moon, Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev said: “1 simply don’t understand such appeals. As far as I know, we have no intention of competing in this area.” Lt. Gen. Nikolai Kamanin said: “In a space research program, haste is out of place. Each space flight, especially with a cosmonaut aboard, must be the product of a sustained effort that may take months. Improvisation is impermissable in space research; we don’t believe in crash programming.” Cosmonaut Aleksey Lenov said: “I also think that all this talk of getting to the moon first is nonsense. What we must do is work toward that goal calmly and thoroughly and without any rush. I think that those who work that way will be first on the moon.” (Soviet Life, 9/65, 28-29)
$13-million, 140-ft.-wide radiotelescope, one of the largest in the world, was dedicated at Green Bank, W. Va., by the National Radio Astronomy Observatory. It would be able to amplify radio emissions from deep space. (Wash. Post, 10/14/65, A15)
A 28-day-old wage strike by 60 guards at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center ended with agreement on a two-year contract by the United Plant Guard Workers of America and Wackenhut Services, Inc., which employed the gsfc guards. (Wash. Post, 7/29/65, A18)
