Graduate Research Center of the Southwest president Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner addressed msc employees. Outlining postlunar landing exploration, Dr. Berkner said: "The very broad strategic objectives for the exploration of the solar system are clearly outlined in the National Academy of Sciences Summer Study that was done last summer. . . . It is urgent and imperative that this study be adopted, or something like it, as our major basic strategy beyond the moon. The first job is to adopt a national strategy. This is not just a decision of NASA; it is a decision of the administration, of the Congress, of the American people. "And second it is urgent and imperative that this study be translated by joint actions of NASA, the National Academy of Sciences and American scientists into specific tactical plans for a specific program with dollars attached to it. For example, in my opinion, it makes little sense to undertake the first Martian landing without some precedent exploratory steps. We must first orbit and map the planet and ascertain where a landing would be profitable. "To do the planetary exploration job effectively, we now need a tactical program of specific flights on specific dates with the instru-. mentation necessary to plan to accomplish those tasks. I remind you that what we are doing today was planned in 1961. And yet, when we get to our planetary program in the 1970’s, we don’t have corresponding specific plans.” He reemphasized the urgency by saying: "If we are to achieve in the planetary exploration of the future in an intelligent way, in light of the objectives of the Space Act, the time has come to get our scientists started now. Your vehicle program is already ahead of us.” Dr. Berkner said that the long-range program should meet certain specifications: "(1) step-by-step advancement of experiments in the proper order; (2) use of the right vehicles to carry out the experiments; (3) effective use of Saturn capabilities, from unmanned missions to the ultimate manned landing on Mars and perhaps Venus, and (4) proper phasing-in of smaller vehicles with the larger ones, and reasonable time/cost programming.” (msc Roundup, 5/27/66, 3)
L/C Vladimir Komarov, pilot-cosmonaut on U.S.S.R. voskhod I space flight Oct. 12-13, 1964, told second Japan-U.S.S.R. youth festival at Lake Yamanaka, Yamanashi Prefecture, Japan, that U.S.S.R. soon would softland an unmanned spacecraft on moon and return it to earth, then make similar flight with dog. Commenting on U.S. rendezvous and docking achievements, Komarov said: "The United States experiment was a very interesting one. But I do not believe that in the series of plans to conquer space the Soviet Union is behind the United States.” (Tass, 7/14/66; SBD, 7/25/66, 122)
Detailed report on "Scientific and Engineering Manpower in Communist China, 1949-1963,” by Dr. Chu-yuan Cheng, of the Univ. of Michigan, was made public by nsf. Communist China had been strengthening its scientific and engineering fields by putting thousands of students through colleges and universities. Yet, these masses of young scientists were getting less comprehensive training than older generations of scientists and also lacked sufficient experience to engage in top level research. In 1963, many of China’s leading scientists were 60 or 70 yrs. old and engaged in basic and creative research. The success or failure in bridging the gap between the mass of young scientists and the older scientists would determine whether Communist China would become a scientifically advanced power in the next decade or two, Dr. Cheng said. (Text) January 26: U.K. had made a successful underground test of a major component of its own nuclear warhead for American-supplied Polaris missiles, it was disclosed. Prime Minister Harold Wilson told the House of Commons the test would lead to a considerable savings in costs. An earlier test had been unsuccessful. (NYT, 1/26/66, 39) In a panel on the origin and possible death of the universe, P. J. E. Peebles and David Wilkinson of Princeton Univ. and Robert W. Wilson of Bell Telephone Labs, told about evidence indicating that space was permeated by black body radiation. If this were so, it would support the "big bang” theory of the origin of the universe which held that at first, all was a mass of dense energy; then came expansion powered by much of the energy. The original energy would have the properties of the energy emitted by a black body—light, heat, and radio waves proportionate to its temperature. Because no other explanation existed for the energy the Princeton and Bell scientists had detected uniformly distributed over space, and because black body characteristics were so clearcut, they believed confirmation could be achieved within a year. Yuval Ne’eman of Tel Aviv Univ. proposed a new theory to explain the quasar (quasi-stellar radio source): the force represented by the tendency of the universe to expand had been suppressed in some parts of the universe; thus, these areas were highly dense. But because this tendency is not suppressed under all conditions, it sometimes bursts forth and matter tears free of the intense gravitational attractions. When this happens, enormous amounts of matter and energy are emitted and observers on earth detect the event as a quasar. Scientists in a panel discussion on scientific data said the task of coping with the scientific information explosion should not become exclusively a Government responsibility. Discussion was based on December 1965 report of Federal Council for Science and Technology recommending that the Government—with participation of private groups—establish a national document handling system to help keep scientists abreast of new knowledge. In a discussion of planetary exploration, Cal Tech Prof. Robert B. Leighton, scientist in charge of the televising by mariner iv of Mars (July 14, 1965), said there was still hope the TV pictures would yield information about Mars’ canals: "When we know more nearly where the camera was pointed—because it is not known very clearly now ... we . may be able to say that this picture was taken at a place very near where a canal goes across.” Leighton said he had agreed to collaborate with Prof. Gordon J. F. MacDonald of ucla on a television experiment for the Mariner spacecraft scheduled to fly by Venus in 1967. (Texts; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/27/66, A3; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/28/66, A4; Weil, Wash. Post, 1/27/66, A2, 1/29/66, A6, 1/30/66, A7)
usaf XB-70 No. 2, flying at 2,000 mph, reached 70,000-ft. altitude for three minutes in 112-min. test flight from Edwards afb to determine how aircraft would handle during increasingly longer periods at top speed. Flight broke record set by XB-70 No. 1 Oct. 15, 1965. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/4/66)
Prime goal of space exploration was the development of scientific capabilities, but it was important to recognize the many other benefits accrued from the space program, NASA Administrator James E. Webb told ymca meeting in Oklahoma City: "We are developing, in government, in industry, in our universities, the sinews and nerves our Nation needs for healthy growth. Scientific discovery is no longer the sole province of the lone inventor. It requires an all-systems endeavor that calls on all the resources of a nation. . . . "NASA reaches across all industry. About 90 per cent of NASA’s budget goes out under contract to American industry—to pay for work by almost 400,000 men and women in the factories and laboratories of 20,000	prime and subcontractors. . . .” (Text)
"Love as an emotion will play a very important role in the future in the populating of outer space,” Soviet scientist Igor Zabelin wrote in Moskva. "In the future when mankind will fulfill its mission of populating outer space, men and women will be sent in spacecraft somewhere for many years.” Noting that "when a couple lives together for five to seven years, they may get sick of each other and very often there is a divorce,” Zabelin warned that such coolness could cause grave problems in outer space, (tipr, Wash. Post, 12/4/66, M7) During 1966: In 1966, NASA attempted 36 major launches with 34 successes. Of 29 NASA missions, 22 were successes, dod orbited 70 payloads in 43 launches. U.S.S.R. launched 43 payloads and France, one. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by surveyor I and lunar orbiters i and n, the soft-landing on the moon by surveyor I, and the five two-man Gemini space flights, surveyor I transmitted more than 10,000 photographs of the moon; the two lunar orbiters returned a total of 635 lunar photographs. Engineering data from these spacecraft indicated Apollo Lunar Module (Lm) could land and operate safely on the lunar surface. In Project Gemini, NASA conducted five two-man space flights, successfully concluding the project [see Nov. 15] and bringing U.S. manhours in space to 1,993 hrs. 34 min. (compared to 507 hrs. 16 min. for U.S.S.R.). Major ground and flight tests in Project Apollo accelerated preparatory to 1st three-man Apollo/Saturn spaceflight, planned for early 1967. Three Uprated Saturn I’s were launched; Saturn V stages for the 1st flight model passed their final ground test firings. Atlas-Centaur liquid-hydrogen-fueled booster completed its development testing, demonstrating restart capability in space. Applications satellites launched were nimbus ii meteorological satellite, three essa satellites inaugurating essa’s operational meteorological satellite system, and Intelsat ii-a communications satellite for Com-SatCorp. The first Applications Technology Satellite, ATS I, was launched into synchronous orbit. Scientific achievements included orbiting of OGO hi, pageos I, explorers xxxii and xxxiii satellites, and pioneer vii interplanetary spacecraft. More than 300 meteorological sounding rockets and 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched. A total of 20 flights of the X-15 research aircraft were conducted; X-15 No. 2 piloted by Maj. William J.	Knight set a new record speed of 4,233 mph (mach 6.33). nasa-usaf flight research investigating sonic booms got underway in six flights with XB-70 aircraft; research for the U.S. supersonic transport program continued. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle made 14 unpowered flights, and HL-10 lifting body made its first flight. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was static test firing of the 260-in.-dia. solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 3.5 million lbs. of thrust. Two test series of Nerva nuclear reactors were conducted. One, in 110 min. of power operation, demonstrated stability and controllability of the hot-bleed cycle nuclear rocket engine. The other involved first successful full-power operation and a restart operation, ending the program with an accumulation of more than 105 min. of reactor operation at full or near-full power. usaf flight tested its powerful Titan III booster and used it to orbit the first seven Idcsp satellites of an eventual worldwide military comsat system. Of the 43 Soviet payloads, 34 were Cosmos satellites and five, Luna spacecraft. Notable among these were cosmos cx, orbiting two dogs for prolonged period; cosmos cxxii, apparently first Soviet weather satellite; luna ix, achieving first soft-landing on the moon; and luna x, achieving first orbit of the moon. Also orbited were two molniya i com-sats and the 12-ton proton hi unmanned spacecraft used for cosmic-ray research; Yantar I ion-engine payload was flown in suborbital spaceflight test. France orbited her first instrumented scientific satellite, diapason i, the second satellite built and launched by France, (nasa Release 66-319; Major NASA Launches; nasc; Tass; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, passim; A&A 1966, passim) During 1966: International space events were highlighted by the U.N.’s agreement on a space treaty to govern "activities of states in the exploration and use of outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies.” The draft treaty—suggested by President Johnson May 7—was negotiatedby the Legal Subcommittee of theU.N. Committee onthePeace-ful Uses of Outer Space. On December 19 the U.N. General Assembly adopted a resolution endorsing the treaty, subject to ratification by five nations including U.S., U.S.S.R., and U.K. By the end of 1966, 72 countries had cooperated with the U.S. in space research activities. Six countries joined the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat), bringing the total membership to 54. France and U.S.S.R. entered into agreement on cooperative space research, including experiments in astronomy and communications. (U.S. Aeron, & Space Act., 1966, passim; A&A 1966, passim)
Five-man Observatory Class Spacecraft Review Board had been appointed by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications. Robert F. Garbarini, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Engineering), would head the board, established to "study all phases of design, development, testing and space operations procedures of the orbiting observatory spacecraft.” Other Review Board members were: F. John Bailey, Chief, Flight Safety Office, Msc; Jack N. James, Director for Lunar and Planetary Programs, jpl; Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director, erc; and Francis B. Smith, Assistant Director, LaRC. (nasa Release 66-91)
In answer to charge that the "rush of Jodrell Bank Observatory to distribute Luna IX pictures and of scientists both in the U.S. and U.K. to comment on the pictures can only be considered a breach of ethics [see Feb. 4 and 5],” Sir Bernard Lovell said in an open letter in Science: "We did not 'rush’ to distribute the Luna IX pictures in advance of the Russians. Our pictures came off the facsimile machine several hours after the Russians had convened a large press conference in Moscow to show the pictures which Luna IX had transmitted the previous night. Why they did not do so, or publish them in Izvestia the following morning remains a mystery. As for commenting on the pictures before the Russians, my only remarks were that the lunik seemed to be resting on a hard surface with little evidence of dust, and these comments had previously been made by scientists in Moscow. Any suggestion that we published a scientific analysis of the results before the Russians is absurd.” (Science, 3/25/66, 1477)
Testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Mac C. Adams said: "During 1965 we flew the three X-15 airplanes 32 times, setting a new activity record. These aircraft comprise a unique research facility capable of providing data during actual hypersonic flight. . . . "At the end of 1965, the three X-15 airplanes had been flown 156 times. . . .” Referring to rocket reactor tests, Adams said: "The kiwi-nerva-Phoebus operations during 1965 demonstrated an altitude equivalent specific impulse of over 750 lb-sec./lb., equivalent thrust of over 50,000 lbs., and total duration of 4200 seconds, or over an hour. The experiments have shown that rapid starts and restarts can be made and that operation is stable over a wide range of conditions. "On February 3, 1966, we made the first power run with a complete nuclear rocket engine system. Although the major components were spread out and connected in a 'breadboard’ fashion, the system started and operated as a unit with no external power. On February 11, the system was operated again. We feel that these runs are very significant milestones in the nuclear rocket programs.” (NASA Autk. Hearings, 50, 57)
NASA had awarded a $38,000 contract to U.S. Public Health Service on best approach to control and early diagnosis of viral infection in astronauts during space flight. Dr. Walter Kemmerer, msc’s monitor on the virus control study, said in an interview: "We want to have techniques to enable us to prevent this from happening, and to detect that it is happening. Also, we want to know how to prevent one astronaut from transmitting it to another inside the spacecraft.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/23/66, Al)
Technology and automation derived from U.S. space effort could not raise social, educational, moral, or religious values, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc, told Churchman’s Club in Baltimore, but "science and technology do increase the opportunity to make improvements. Where there is more leisure, more accumulated knowledge, and greater understanding, there is also increased opportunity to improve character and raise human values. Certainly, the opportunity which such progress gives toward the elimination of war is an impressive justification for the entire space program.” (Text)
Commenting on President Johnson’s proposed U.N. treaty banning sovereignty claims on the moon, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) told the House: "The President has taken a very progressive and forward step ... in trying to establish a barrier against the use of the moon or outer space as a place of contest for the nations of the world. He has asked that these areas be internationalized and we follow in space exploration that principle which has been established already with respect to the use of nuclear weapons. "This is a great step forward by the President, and we in the House should appreciate it, and commend him for it.” (CR, 5/9/66)
L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth flew X-15 No. 2 for 81 sec. in test to measure stability and control of X-15 with ventral fin attached. He reached 3,689 mph (mach 5.43) and 99,000-ft. altitude. Flight was 158th in nasa/usaf X-15 research program, (frc; X-15 Proj. Off.)
Arthur G. Wimer, Jr., assistant deputy chief of staff for science and technology in the Air Research and Development Command, was named chief scientist for AFSC, replacing Dr. Bernhard H. Goethert who had resigned to become director of Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute. (afsc Release 206.66)
Scientific and technological knowledge must be directed to the "making and keeping of peace,” Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of Office of Science and Technology and science adviser to the President, told General Electric Forum. "Science will not be the sole contributor toward this end. ... Its role must be to relieve those pressures that have traditionally been the causes of political, social, and economic instability—pressures which have always led to an upheaval of social order. By helping to alleviate poverty, ignorance and disease, and by improving food supplies and living conditions, science can help to remove the causes of war. . . .” (GE Forum, 7-9/66, 8)
Management organization to direct Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm) project at msfc was announced by msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun: Leland Belew, Program Manager; Reine Ise, Project Manager; William Keathley, Project Experiments Manager; E. B. Craig, Contracting Officer; and Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Project Scientist, msfc’s Astrionics Lab., headed by Dr. Walter Haeussermann, Director, and William Horton, Assistant Director, would be responsible for overall technical aspects of Atm development, (msfc Release 66-270) During November: Two experiments developed at arc and flown on Nov. 11-15 gemini xii mission were highly successful. Five runs with hand-held sextant proved it could deliver required accuracy of 10 sec. of arc (l/360th of one degree of a circle) in actual space flight. In experiment to study effects of weightlessness on living cells using newly fertilized frog eggs, astronauts arrested cell growth at programed intervals during mission. Data were being analyzed, (arc Releases 66-15, 66-16; arc Astrogram, 11/23/66, 1, 4)
Pratt & Whitney Div.’s entry in Sst engine competition—the JTF-17A—was operated for the first time at p&w’s Florida Research and Development Center, W. Palm Beach, Fla. Twin-spool turbofan "was started and operated for the programmed time.” (p&w Release, 4/1/66)	_
New NASA-developed technique for making biomedical checks on test pilots was being used at Univ. of Kansas Medical Center. Method, which replaced bulky sensors with bare wires acting as their own electrodes, permitted doctors to send instrumented patient home after office visit and record biomedical data while patient resumed normal activities. Wires were applied in three-minute operation. Data obtained in this way—rather than while patient was on operating table—were considered more meaningful by some physicians. Technique was conceived by Dr. James A. Roman, chief of biomedical research at NASA Flight Research Center, and introduced to the Univ. of Kansas by Midwest Research Institute, mri was under contract to nasa’s Technology Utilization Div. in its program of transferring aerospace technology to the public, (nasa Release 66-116)
Main battery system of oao i Orbiting Astronomical Observatory had failed, NASA officials at KSC announced: "Overheating of the OAO. primary battery, a problem which became critical late yesterday, has resulted in complications leading to degradation of the power supply from all three batteries aboard the spacecraft, and telemetry signals no longer are being received. "Efforts to overcome the problem have been unsuccessful and the OAO mission appears to have been lost.” Officials added, however, that before satellite had failed it had demonstrated a key maneuver of the OAO program by successfully locking into a series of stars for precise aiming. OAO I had been launched from etr April 8. (AP, NYT, 4/11/66, 71; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/11/66, BIO; AP, Balt. Sun, 4/11/66)
Dr. Winston E. Kock, first director of ebc, had resigned to return to Bendix Corp., effective Oct. 1. James C. Elms, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, would replace him. (nasa Release 66-247)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb and the late NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden were awarded the 1966 Robert J. Collier Trophy for "representing all of the Gemini program teams which significantly advance human experience in space flight,” at special ceremony in Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. Trophy was presented annually by Look and National Aeronautic Assn, "for the greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in America, with respect to improving the performance, efficiency, or safety of air or space vehicles.” Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, presenting the trophy, said: "I can think of no more fitting choice for this distinguished award than Project Gemini and all those who made it such a success.” He noted that Gemini manned spacecraft had spent 875 hrs. in space; Gemini was first spacecraft to rendezvous and first to dock with another spacecraft; and four Gemini astronauts had walked in space for total 5 hrs. 52 min. Administrator Webb, accepting trophy, said: "Gemini has broadened our vision, validated our concepts, proved out our technology, and has provided a much sounder structure of knowledge as to the importance of not accepting a position of second best in space.” Attributing Gemini program’s success to "the application of our scheduling principles,” Webb noted "milestones”: beginning of unmanned flights in 1963; first manned flight in 1S64; rendezvous, docking, and first extravehicular activity in 1965; first use of Agena for orbit change and first closed-loop guidance in 1966; completion of program in 1967. "We missed the first two milestones. From then on, with the exception of docking, we have accomplished each milestone ahead of or on schedule and we do expect to complete the Gemini program ahead of schedule next month.” (Text; NASA Ann.; naa News, 10/16/66; Wash. Post, 10/20/66, B7)
House passed NASA authorization bill for FY 1967 (H.R. 14324) totaling $4,986,864,150 as follows: $4,248,235,000 for research and development; $94,419,000 for construction of facilities; and $644,210,150 for administrative operations. NASA had requested $5,012 billion. During debate preceding bill’s passage, Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) offered amendments, subsequently rejected, to eliminate $41.9-million funding for Apollo Applications program and $9.1-million funding for construction of lunar sample receiving laboratory at msc; to reduce advanced missions by $5 million; and to cancel $10 million of prior authorizations for Facility Planning and Design. Rep. Fulton also offered, but later withdrew, an amendment to establish an Inspector General’s Office in NASA. Commenting on NASA’s $5,012 billion request for FY 1967, Rep. Fulton said: "[It] generally represents a tight program in terms of the allocation of resources to the programs that have been regularly approved by Congress as parts of the Nation’s effort in aeronautics and space. "At a level under $4.9 billion, I do not believe nasa can restructure its Apollo program moon landing in a form that would not cast the most serious doubt as to its ability to meet the objective of the manned lunar landing within this decade. "At $4.8 billion the moon landing objective could not be met. Below this level of the budget, it would become clear that the Nation had abandoned the concept of developing a well-rounded total space capability directed toward achieving space preeminence. . . .” Rep. John Wydler (R-N.Y.), proposing an amendment to earmark $20 million of the total h&d funds for development work on the problem of aircraft noise, suggested: ". . . it is incumbent upon us to bring this [space] program closer to the people and show them some way in which it can benefit them. We often hear there is going to be a fallout as a result of this program—some kind of fallout that will affect the civilian population beneficially. Here is an opportunity to give them some fallout directly that will be of benefit to them. . . .” Rep. Wydler’s amendment was defeated. (CR, 5/3/66, 9189-9223)
esro launched British Skylark sounding rocket from Salto di Quirra Range, to study photochemical processes in comets under meteorological research program which began in 1964 and would include 400 sounding rocket launches by 1972. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 7/13/66, A21)
International Union of Electrical Workers acceded to Government request to remove pickets at ksc from entrance gates used by building trades workers. Electricians had struck for higher wages April 18 after expiration of contract with United Technology Center. (NYT, 4/21/66, 27) April 20: H. Julian Allen, Director of NASA Ames Research Center, was among 27 elected to National Academy of Engineering "in recognition of their outstanding contributions to engineering theory and practice or to the pioneering of new and developing fields of technology.” (nae Release, 4/20/66)	_
Sharing of research with U.S. industry under NASA’s technology utilization program was commended in Petroleum Today article by Clay Hor-nick. December 1965 Conference on Selected Technology for the Petroleum Industry at Lewis Research Center, Hornick said, had encouraged utilization of space research discoveries in fields of combustion, lubrication, and nuclear resonance. (Hornick, Petroleum Today, Summer 1966, 16-19)
B/G J. C. Maxwell, director of faa Sst development, discussed supersonic air travel in Aerospace: . . The national sst program, though small (from a dollar point of view) when compared to the national space program, nevertheless may well have a more immediate impact. The challenge inherent in producing an economically attractive supersonic aircraft has already identified and created demands for improved manufacturing techniques, simple yet reliable electronic and communications equipment, advancements in extrusion and machine tooling techniques, more efficient (and less costly) fuels and lubricants ana many other needs. "The economic aspects are more easily definable. "Concerning the potential market for the SST, varying estimates have been made based on the expected growth of air transportation over the next 20 years and beyond. . . . "Conservatively speaking, we now look for a three-fold increase in long-haul revenue passenger miles flown by the airlines of the world by 1980 and a five-fold increase by 1990. ssts could carry almost half of this traffic. . . . "Obviously, the sst program will have a significant impact on the U.S. balance-of-trade position. Based upon past experience along with current encouraging signs, we expect that the export market for a U.S.-made sst will be about half of the total production rate. Over a 20-year period, this could result in a gold inflow approaching $10 billion.” (Aerospace, 5/66) During May: Space research programs of the U.S.S.R. and the U.S. were opening the way for solving earth’s future overpopulation problem and mankind’s future raw material needs, Soviet Prof. E. Kolman wrote in Mirovaya Ekonomika i Mezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniye, a publication of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. He referred to estimates that in 400 yrs. the earth would have a population of about 900 billion people, equivalent to about 10,000 people per square mile. In such a situation, this planet would not be able to give all its people even elementary living space, let alone food. Therefore, he said, "escape into cosmic space . . . will become inevitable.” Professor Kolman mentioned the stimulating impact of the space program on progress in science and technology and the likelihood of developments useful in more mundane areas of human activity. He cited the use of meteorological and communications satellites as examples of terrestrially useful byproducts of space research. (NYT, 5/22/66, 85)
Multi-foil high-performance insulation system to reduce supercold propellant "boil off” in space had been successfully tested for 96 hrs. at msfc in a vacuum chamber at pressures approaching the vacuum of space. Since liquid hydrogen propellant, already used in Saturn IB and Saturn V upper stages, was being considered as a propellant on longer-duration missions, cryogenic technology was being extended at msfc to meet the needs of future space exploration programs, (msfc Release 66-41)
Of President Johnson’s State of the Union message, Robert Hotz said in Aviation Week: "The President’s statement that he will 'propose a program to construct and to flight test a new supersonic transport plane that will fly three times the speed of sound, in excess of 2,000	mph.’ came as somewhat of a surprise in view of the stretched out program he had been sponsoring. Apparently, this statement means that some funds for actual prototype supersonic transport construction will be requested in Fiscal 1967, although the size of this request may dismay the management entrusted with the task of building the prototype in time to remain competitive with the Anglo-French Concorde.” (Hotz, Av. WL, 1/17/66, 21)
Close tie between President Johnson and Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of the Office of Science and Technology (ost) and science adviser to the President, was discussed in Science. During the first six or so months of Hornig’s term "the President and the White House inner circle had an unclear notion of how they might employ ost” with the result that "some of the science staff members complained that they were bored, and that OST was underemployed or involved with trivia.” But a transition had taken place, and as Hornig began his third year of service, "ost and its surrounding bodies—the President’s Science Advisory Committee and the Federal Council for Science and Technology—are heavily involved in policy formulation, coordination of the technical aspects of the Great Society programs, and troubleshooting in a variety of areas.” (Science, 1/28/66, 431)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center held an "open house,” including movies, live demonstrations, and exhibits, (gsfc Release G-7-66)
Rocket Propulsion Research Laboratory at afsc’s Arnold Engineering Development Center was completed, (aedc)
Data transmitted from NASA’s pioneer vii spacecraft (launched from etr Aug. 17) to Johannesburg dsn station indicated spacecraft had penetrated earth’s magnetic tail at 3.25 million mi. from earth, nasa Ames Research Center announced. Spacecraft measurements of solar wind flux suggested pioneer vii had emerged from and repenetrated tail several times, pioneer vi (launched Dec. 16, 1965) had observed that solar wind does not flow from the sun in straight lines but blows magnetic tail from side to side; this "flapping” was reason spacecraft entered tail several times, (arc pao, 9/26/66)
Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.), Operations Planning Chief in Mission Operations, NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, was appointed Assistant Mission Director, Apollo, (nasa Ann., 9/15/66)
In scheduling manned space flights, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., crew safety was the principal consideration, followed by accomplishment of program goals. He pointed out the "open-ended” aspect of Apollo mission scheduling and expressed confidence that lunar landing would be achieved before the end of the decade based on present program posture. During question and answer session, Dr. Mueller said that while NASA and its contractors had studied possible methods of rescuing astronauts in space and would continue to do so, the cost, complexities, and uncertainties made it appear to date that the money and effort would be better spent in making flights safer in the first place. He added: "We don’t exactly have instant rescue for people flying around in airliners and this is a large segment of the population.” (Text; Clark, NYT, 8/17/66, 16)
NASA launched from Wallops Station an Argentine-designed and -produced single-stage solid-fuel Orion II sounding rocket with Iiayload for upper atmosphere research. Reaching altitude of 51 mi., pay-oad was captured by helicopter as it descended by parachute to 2,500 ft., marking Wallops’ first such mid-air recovery. Test was second successful Orion II flight in three-flight series which began Nov. 4; Nov. 7 launch failed. Six Argentine engineers and technicians from Aeronautical and Space Research Institute (iiae) assisted Wallops personnel with launch operations. Arrangements were made by NASA and Argentine Space Commission (cnie). (nasa Release 66-291; Wallops Release 66-53)
Editorial comment on May 17 scrubbing of Gemini IX mission: New York Times: "For the third time in the past few months, a space experiment involving the Atlas-Agena rocket Has run into trouble. Late last year a sequence of events similar to yesterday’s led to a postponement of the original Gemini rendezvous experiment, while in March of this year, Gemini 8 nearly met catastrophe when it was docked with an Agena target vehicle. There may well be no connection between these three separate incidents; but since the Atlas-Agena has been a highly reliable and successful instrument in other aspects of the nation’s space program, its emergence as the weak link in the Gemini series poses something of a mystery. The setback caused by last year’s failure to orbit an Agena target vehicle was made up for by the brilliant improvisation that permitted Geminis 6 and 7 to rendezvous last December. Warned by that earlier experience, space officials were better prepared for this latest setback. The substitute target rocket they have on hand may permit much of the originally planned Gemini 9 experiment to take place early next month. But for the moment at least, a shadow has again been thrown over this country’s lunar program.” (NYT, 5/18/66) Washington Post: "We shall do well to prepare for many more disappointments before man reaches the moon, including the possibility of serious accident. What remains essential in the competition is that considerations of human safety not be sacrificed to too feverish a schedule.” (Wash. Post, 5/18/66) Washington Evening Star: "The simple fact is that the United States has been incredibly lucky that no catastrophic accident has yet taken place during a manned space flight. The further fact is that the nation cannot logically expect this luck to last forever. Progress in space, as with nearly all human progress, will come at the cost of men’s lives. And the nation should be prepared for the day when our luck runs out; prepared to accept tragedy as the inevitable concomitant of so ambitious a voyage of discovery.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/18/66, A18)
First full-scale Apollo/Saturn V booster-spacecraft combination rolled out at nasa Kennedy Space Center exactly five years after President Kennedy committed U.S. to manned lunar landing by 1969. Designated AS-500-F, the 365-ft., 500,000-lb. facilities vehicle was moved from Vehicle Assembly Building (Vab) on 3,000-ton, diesel-powered, steel-link-tread crawler transporter to Pad A for use to verify launch facilities, train launch crews, and develop test and checkout procedures, (msfc Release 66-114)
Shift of management of NASA’s Apollo Telescope Mount mission from gsfc to msfc was evidence of nasa’s effort "toward inhouse development of major space projects” to ''offset threatened loss of personnel” at NASA manned space flight centers as Apollo program passed its personnel peak, Aviation Week reported. (Av. Wk., 9/12/66, 80)
Heinz Kaminski, chief of the Bochum Observatory, West Germany, said the emergency abort March 16 of the gemini viii mission showed that control systems onboard the spacecraft as well as on the ground were versatile enough to cope with even the most serious trouble: "The Americans now have realistic data on space emergencies and. . .the mission has been very successful. The emergency has been a blessing in disguise.” (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 3/18/66)
Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko, member of Soviet delegation to iaf Congress, told press conference in Madrid that U.S.S.R. was "doing very serious preparatory work” for another manned mission that would be "a serious new step in space exploration.” He disclosed no details but indicated mission might include extravehicular activity. Asked why there had been no Soviet manned spaceflight since March 18, 1965, voskhod ii mission, Gazenko explained it reflected Soviet desire to make a major advance with each flight rather than repeat proved techniques. (Wilford, NYT, 10/15/66, 11)
Ability to induce genetically a hibernation state in man that would lessen the body’s needs by cooling could be beneficial for long space voyages, suggested Dr. R. R. Chaffee, Univ. of Missouri Space Science Research Center, in a speech before Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology meeting in Atlantic City. Dr. Chaffee told of genetic experiments in which the ability to hibernate gradually was increased over several generations in some families of Syrian hamsters and reduced in others, indicating that only a few hereditary genes might be involved in the hibernation process. (Carey, Wash. Post, 4/13/66, A3)
Alex P. Aven, owner of an Oklahoma City, Okla., petroleum consulting firm, was sworn in by NASA Administrator James E. Webb as consultant to the Administrator on management. (NASA Release 66-112) May 10-13: NASA successfully launched 18 Areas and Hasp meteorological sounding rockets to 200,000-ft. altitudes at intervals ranging from four minutes to six hours to investigate daily cycle of wind and temperature variations in upper atmosphere, compare results of various rocket and balloon measuring systems, and study effects of radiation from the sun on meteorological instruments. Instrumented payloads descending by parachute transmitted atmospheric temperature, density, and pressure data, and ten specially instrumented high-altitude weather balloons, interspersed among rocket firings, transmitted information as they rose to 130,000 ft. Radar tracked both balloon and rocket payloads to determine speed and direction of high-altitude winds. Launches were managed by nasa Langley Research Center and sponsored by NASA, USA, usn, usaf, and essa. (nasa Release 66-118; Wallops Release 66-25) National Academy of Sciences delegate Dr. Richard W. Porter, summarizing activities of 1965 U.S. space program, said a manned lunar landing by 1970 would be a "difficult goal” but U.S. had made "substantial progress.” Dr. Porter presented an analysis of data transmitted by NASA mariner iv Mars probe which appeared to support theory that earth sometimes has comet-like tail stretching past orbit of Mars. On Feb. 5, 1965, a peculiarly timed solar eruption sent series of intense proton clouds into space, five of which were detected within 48 hrs. by mariner iv and two other U.S. satellites in near-earth orbit. Second and third clouds were reported by mariner iv three to five hours prior to their detection near earth, possibly because solar eruption had blown earth’s tail to enormous length, forcing two clouds to detour through tail in order to penetrate earth’s magnetic field. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/11/66, 16; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/12/66, A14) Chief Soviet delegate Anatoli A. Blagonravov summarized 1965 U.S.S.R. space program, and said luna x, which entered lunar orbit April 3, had recorded radiation pattern from lunar surface similar to that from basaltic part of earth’s crust. Apparently lunar surface exhibited no differentiation equivalent to granite on earth, indicating that earth and moon were created separately, luna x had found level of moon’s magnetic field barely above that of interplanetary space; small increase was attributed to moon’s passing through earth’s magnetic tail at time of measurement. Implication was that moon is cold throughout, since liquid metal core would produce large magnetic field. Report suggested that new minerals would be found on the moon because of unusual chemical reactions caused by its extreme temperature range, the impacts of micrometeorites, and rains of high-energy radiation. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/11/66, 16; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/12/66, A14) Soviet delegate A. G. Prishchep, in a joint paper with colleague V. I. Vashkov, revealed that U.S.S.R. planetary probes were assembled in clean rooms and sterilized with two-fold process involving moist heat to prevent dryness and a gas mixture, harmless to the skin, which might have important surgical applications. Gas mixture contained 50% ethylene oxide—extremely poisonous substance which is dangerously explosive when combined with oxygen—diluted with 40% methyl bromide for safety reasons. General Electric scientists H. G. Lorsch and M. G. Koesterer reported that current sterilization cycles varied from treatment at 320° for three hours to baking at 200°F for 14 days. They argued that no more than 10 billion microbes should exist within a spacecraft prior to beginning of sterilization if reasonable chance of killing virtually all of them was to be assured. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/12/66, 79; Beller, M&R, 5/16/66, 17-18) Drs. Herbert Friedman and R. W. Kreplin, Naval Research Laboratory, reported that solar radiation level would probably exceed highest ever recorded in 100 yrs. during 1969-1970—time of first projected manned lunar landing. Basing their prediction on measurements of solar x-ray emissions taken by explorer xxx (iqsy Solar Explorer) satellite, Friedman and Kreplin explained that x-rays, which could not penetrate earth’s atmosphere, warned of approaching sunspots before they could be seen. Solar activities in the form of sunspots and gaseous flares occurred in 11-12 yr. cycles, but there was also a gross cycle which reaches its greatest intensity every 80 to 100 yrs. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/13/66, 19; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/13/66, A12) Dr. Bessel Kok, Research Institute for Advanced Studies, described a small instrument which could determine the existence of life when landing on another planet. Designed on the assumption that even the simplest forms of life use water and such common chemical compounds as phosphates and nitrates, device would trace the transfer of nonradioactive isotope—Oxygen 18—from these chemicals to water. (Wash. Post, 5/13/66, A12) Reports on little-publicized efforts were presented to the meeting: (1) Italy’s platform for launching San Marco earth satellite at sea was in African port of Mombasa and would be towed shortly to site where U.S. Scout booster would launch satellite into equatorial orbit; (2) Pakistan was conducting monthly firings of rockets that injected copper chaff into stratosphere to disclose winds in that region over subtropics; (3) U.S.S.R. had fired 150 meteorological rockets—almost half from shipboard—and U.S. was firing about 120 monthly; (4) Romania had used orbital data from Washington and Cambridge, Mass., to photograph echo I and echo ii comsats in coordination with Soviet expeditionary stations in Egypt and Mali; (5) Sweden, Finland, Russia, and East Europeans had joined in observing orbital flight changes of echo i and echo II attributable to density variations in wisps of air at satellite altitude; and (6) East German scientists reported their conclusions on upper air structure derived from real-time transmissions from NASA explorer xxh satellite. It was estimated that 60 stations in various parts of the world were monitoring satellites that sent out "blind” data. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/15/66, 10E; Sullivan, NYT, 5/16/66, 88) Dr. A. I. Lebedensky, Soviet Academy of Sciences, reported that Luna ix photos revealed lunar surface was steadily eroding, at least in some places. He suggested that erosion could be caused by solar winds or impact of micrometeorites. Lebedensky pointed out two peculiar features on luna ix’s photos which supported his theory. First was series of streaks, resembling mineral veins in earth’s bedrock, on floor of crater where luna ix had landed. It had previously been assumed that moon’s surface was buried deep in debris churned up by meteorite impacts. Second was presence of rock-like objects on small pedestals similar to those on earth where soft but rock-strewn surface had been eroded. Stones, which ranged in size from one foot to less than one inch across and whose pedestals appeared as high as they were wide, "were the most unexpected and important result of the flight,” Lebedensky said. "Our conclusion is that the stone is harder than the ground around it and screens the ground underneath from the erosion effects of solar winds and micrometeorites.” Lebedensky admitted the possibility that erosion was peculiar to the crater or a particular region of the moon, but saw no obvious reason why this should be true. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/17/66, 28; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/17/66, A17) Radio occultation measurements from mariner iv’s July 14, 1965, Mars flyby indicated that regions on the surface of Mars might vary in height by three miles (five kilometers), jpl scientist Dr. Arvydas J. Kliore reported, (jpl Release) Venus was rotating clockwise only once every 243 days, but during that period it seemed to be synchronized with earth, Dr. Richard Goldstein, chief of jpl Communications Systems Research, told the meeting. Dr. Goldstein also reported that radar probes of winter 1965 when Venus was nearest earth indicated prominences with the ability to depolarize microwaves. "They may well be mountain ranges,” Dr. Goldstein said, "although large fields of boulders would also depolarize microwaves. On earth, of course, such areas usually indicate the presence of nearby mountains.” (jpl Release) Chief Soviet delegate Anatoli Blagonravov, addressing the annual cospar press conference, said France and U.S.S.R. had been negotiating —within the framework of cospar—on cooperation in space research which might extend to incorporation of French instruments in Soviet satellites "if this should be asked for.” Asked if he could imagine similar close cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R., Blagonravov said there was no need for it; if the situation arose, it would be better for them to cooperate in processing data obtained from their own satellites. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 5/20/66, A5)	.
Fifth Saturn IB booster (S-IB-5) was successfully captive-fired by Chrysler Corp. for 2k£ min.—longest duration firing—at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Stage would be shipped to Michoud Assembly Facility for post-static-test checks and would be used in checking out the Apollo spacecraft, perfecting rendezvous and docking techniques, and training astronauts in preparation for manned lunar landing, (msfc Release 66-69)
Potential of manned space flight in Apollo Applications program was examined by Peter Chew in National Observer. He suggested "... earth-orbiting astronauts .. . may be able to locate and track icebergs . . . spot fish-feeding grounds . . . support oceanography . . . produce agricultural, mineral, and fresh water surveys.” Manned satellites could provide "worldwide television coverage” and serve as "relay points for deep-space communications.” (Nat,l. Obs., 1/11/66; CR, 2/8/66, A609-10)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 100-mi. (161-km.) altitude in Dudley Observatory (Albany, N.Y.) micrometeorite particle collection experiment at a time of 33-year maximum for Leonid meteor shower. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily; since radar signals were lost after 265 sec., intensive search was necessary for payload recovery. Chief objective was not accomplished because of range scheduling, and launch was used for control shot, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Dr. Hugh Odishaw was appointed executive secretary of the nrc Div. of Physical Sciences. Space Science Board, Geophysics Research Board, and Committee on Polar Research—groups with which Dr. Odishaw had heen closely associated—would be shifted into NRC as joint responsibility of Div. of Earth Sciences and Div. of Physical Sciences. They previously had been among 12 NAS groups that functioned outside the formal nrc divisional structure, (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 11/66, 1) November 1: Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by afcrl from wsmr reached 150 mi. (241 km.) in experiment to measure extreme ultraviolet solar radiation, (oar Res. Rev., 1/67, 8)
U.S. Army parachutists made first manned flight tests of NASA-developed parawing at Army’s John F. Kennedy Center for Special Warfare, Fort Bragg. Concept of maneuverable, parachute-like, flexible wing had been originated by LaRC scientist Francis M. Rogallo and Gertrude S. Rogallo in 1948, and on July 18,1963, NASA had awarded $35,000 to the inventors in recognition of their contribution to aeronautics. Parawing’s gliding and maneuvering capability results from aerodynamic lift developed in flight; conventional parachutes are drag devices and do not develop lift. Roughly triangular and about 400 sq. ft. in area, parawings used in tests had been built to LaRC specifications and could be folded, packed, and deployed like parachutes. Army Aviation Materiel Laboratories (avlabs) had recommended evaluation of parawings for personnel use, and NASA engineers and observers assisted Army with technical consultation. (nasa Release 66-106)
Cosmonautics Day in U.S.S.R., celebrating fifth anniversary of first manned space flight by Yuri Gagarin, was marked by condemnations of military orientation of U.S. space efforts and predictions of Soviet space successes. Cosmonaut Gagarin, speaking in the Kremlin, said: "American scientists and cosmonauts have carried out a number of interesting experiments. This is to their credit. It is to be deeply regretted, however, that American cosmonautics is increasingly falling under the influence of the Pentagon, which regards outer space as the theater of future military operations.” Gagarin pledged "all his energies and knowledge” to help in the lunar mission and said man must make himself at home on the moon "to establish stations which will serve as points of departure for longer space voyages and also as astronomical observatories and scientific laboratories.” Cosmonaut Gherman Titov, speaking in a taped interview on Moscow television, predicted that "builders and assemblers will one day exit into space and put together various parts of space stations, assemble spaceships and stations on the moon, and build various structures.” In a Pravda article Marshal Konstantin Vershinin, head of Soviet Air Force, predicted a new manned space mission that could take several cosmonauts through the Van Allen radiation belts. He noted that biomedical data from the cosmos cx flight would "doubtlessly . . . be used in preparing new manned space flights.” In an interview published in Prague, Cosmonaut Konstantin Feok-tistov predicted that man would land on Mars and Venus between 1970 and 1980. (Pravda, 4/12/66, 2; Wash. Post, 4/11/66, A8; AP, NYT, 4/11/66, 37; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/11/66, A8; upi, NYT, 4/14/66, 7; Wash. Post, 4/13/66, A14; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 4/13/66)
Calculations by computer at Astronomisches Rechen Institut, Heidelberg, Germany, and Yale Univ. Observatory had helped astronomers rediscover Tempel-Tuttle Comet responsible for Leonid meteor showers each November. Comet had been found 100 yrs. ago and not seen again until summer 1965. Meteor shower was expected to be spectacular in November 1966; it would occur close to time of comet’s return to vicinity of earth. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 6/19/66, 26)
Wilhelm Forster Observatory, West Berlin, reported U.S.S.R. had launched a satellite at 7:20 a.m. edt from space center in Baikonur. Spokesman said it had not been determined whether spacecraft was manned, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said report appeared to be in error and had apparently stemmed from misinterpretation of Soviet transmissions associated with tracking of previously launched Cosmos spacecraft. He added that if the U.S.S.R. did attempt launching, nothing got into orbit. U.S.S.R. made no comment. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/20/66)
"The lunar research program by means of Luna 9 has been fulfilled and successfully concluded,” Tass reported after LUNA ix had completed 48 hrs. of active life transmitting a total of 10 panoramic photographs of lunar surface. Several hours after the announcement, jodrell Bank Experimental Station reported it had received 2H more photos of poor quality. Third picture transmitted by luna ix’s instrument package Feb. 4 was shown on Moscow television. During transmission, camera was inclined toward horizon and sun was to the east. Part of spacecraft was visible in the lower left-hand corner of the picture and another part in the lower light, but out of focus because of short distance from camera lens. Soviet astronomer Nikolay Barabashov told Tass photographs confirmed his theory that moon’s surface was "highly pitted, porous and probably covered with numerous rocks and fragments.” luna ix "has proved beyond doubt that the upper layer of lunar soil is a spongelike rough-textured mass scattered with individual sharp-edged fragments of various sizes.” (NYT, 2/7/66, 1, 15; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/7/66, Al, A5)
nasa appointed George J. Howick Director of Technology Utilization Div. He would succeed Dr. Richard L. Lesher, Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization who, in addition to his other duties, had been serving as Acting Director of the Technology Utilization Div. Howick was formerly manager of industrial technology services for Midwest Research Institute, (nasa Release 66-5)
NASA’s Project Gemini officially ended. From first manned flight in March 1965, Gemini had achieved its goals: demonstration of ability to rendezvous and dock with target vehicle; demonstration of value of manned spacecraft for scientific and technological experimentation; performance of work by astronauts in space; use of powered, fueled satellite to provide primary and secondary propulsion for docked spacecraft; long-duration space flights without ill effect on astronauts; and precision landing of spacecraft. Records set during Gemini program included: (1) longest manned space flight (330 hrs. 35 min.); (2) altitude (851 mi.); and (3) longest total of Eva (5 hrs. 28 min.) in one flight. Total U.S. man hours in space to date: 1,993 hrs. 34 min. msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth told a news conference: "We have done all the things we had to do as a prelude to Apollo. I believe the Gemini program has been most successful.” (nasa Proj. Off.; Wash. Post, 11/16/66, A6; Tech. Wk, 11/21/66, 16; ATT, 11/20/66, 2E)
nas President Frederick Seitz told Charter Assembly of the Aerospace Science and Technology Branch of the Research Society of America, Bolling afb, he believed the scientific community would pursue the interests of science far more effectively if it recognized its unique opportunity to make the space program scientifically valuable by lending support to those components "which do have a significant bearing on scientific knowledge.” He believed the knowledge we could gain of the solar system through the space program represented "a major contribution to our heritage of knowledge, fully as important as the knowledge of the earth we have gained in the last 500 years through the exploration which began with Henry the Navigator’s systematic explorations of the coast of Africa.” (Seitz, Science, 6/24/66)
nas Space Science Board issued the first in series of three reports entitled Space Research: Directions for the Future. Report, prepared at NASA’s request, outlined research objectives for planetary and lunar exploration in 1970-1985. Compiled by working group led by Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald of the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics at ucla, Part I repeated nas’ 1964 recommendation that top priority in post-Apollo program be assigned to unmanned exploration of Mars. Report suggested secondary importance be divided equally between detailed investigation of lurain and unmanned exploration of Venus, and completed priority list with other major planets, comets and asteroids, Mercury, Pluto, and interplanetary dust. Major recommendations were: launching an orbiting planetary observatory, delivering a drop sonde to resolve question of high Venusian surface temperature, developing fine-pointing control, accurate to 10 sec. of arc, for rocket guidance, and considering enlargement of NASA deep-space communication capabilities beyond present plans. To support outlined scientific program, report recommended: (1) increasing manpower and facilities available to lunar and planetary science programs; (2) development by NASA of substantial program for observation of planets through ground-based telescopes; (3) early opportunities for experienced observational scientists to explore the lurain; (4) joint study by NASA ossa and omsf of early use of Saturn V for planetary exploration, with special emphasis on a Martian capsule landing in the early 1970’s; (5) increased attention by NASA to development of research and educational capabilities in theoretical sciences related to study of the solar system. Regarding funding of space research, the report said:	. . since we believe that the exploration of the solar system bears so directly on the major central scientific questions of our time, we anticipate that unmanned experiments will probably provide the most significant contribution to the program of planetary exploration ... we recommend that the percentage of support of lunar and planetary exploration be maintained over the 1965-1985 time period and be devoted predominantly to scientific objectives and that programs whose objectives are other than scientific be started only as additional resources become available.” It said there should be a gradual shift in emphasis from the moon to the planets, progressing toward nearly equivalent expenditures for lunar and planetary exploration in the 19701985 period. (Text; nas-nrc Release)
Survival of 17 chimpanzees without permanent damage after 3Vi min. in simulated space environment offered hope that an astronaut outside his spacecraft could be rescued if his spacesuit were to spring a leak. In 18 tests conducted at Holloman afb during one year, chimps placed in a decompression chamber for time periods that were gradually increased from 5 sec. to 314 min. suffered only temporary abnormalities. L/Col. C. H. Kratochvil, commander of Holloman’s aeromedical research laboratory, said close relationship between chimps and humans made it possible to assume that findings would be applicable to astronauts. (Nelson, Wash. Post, 11/2/66, A4)
Prof. Emilio Segre of Univ. of California, Berkeley, reviewed postwar physics in Science-. ". . . many illustrious men of science, physicists in particular, have made the mistake of thinking that the end of physics was in sight. They have consistently been proved wrong by the opening up of completely new fields. . . . Space exploration and the study of the interior of the earth are new departures. Here we do not yet see any new phenomena, but we are penetrating in unexplored regions. It is possible that these regions will not yield anything extraordinary, such as extraterrestrial life. However, they present phenomena on scales impossible to reproduce in the laboratory, and a change in orders of magnitude is a well-known source of surprises. Furthermore, we must not forget that particle physics originated .with the study of cosmic rays.” (Science, 3/4/66, 1052-5)
Role of NASA in aeronautical research and development was examined in Policy Planning for Aeronautical Research and Development, 279-page report released by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Document noted "space budget demands have probably hampered what might have been expected to be a normal growth of the level of effort in aeronautics within the agency” and questioned adequacy of $124 million (about 2%) earmarked for aeronautical r&d out of nasa FY 1967 appropriation of $5,012 billion. Separate budget for aeronautics was suggested as possible solution. (Senate Doc. No. 90, 5/19/66)
U.S. Army claimed 21 world records for its new light observation helicopter, OH-6A. NAA-supervised flights at Edwards afb resulted in 12 speed records, and three each for distance, climbing, and sustained altitude. Records had been submitted to Federation Aeronautique Internationale in Paris for official approval. (Chic. Trib., 5/23/66, 16) May 23: Debate began in Senate on authorization of NASA budget for FY 1967. Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.) said: "It is important to note that the pressures creating the great surges in progress-—whether it be in science, technology, exploration, or economic and social development—come from outside forces and considerations. . . . "It is these forcing functions which mainly set the pace of progress and development. Space is no exception. Indeed, the great surge in space research and exploration is a classic example of this historical pattern. It was these forcing functions which set in motion the revolution in science and technology which has brought us to the era we know as the Space Age. And it is these forcing functions which today and tomorrow will determine our future course and our future policies in space. .. . "The decisions which confront us today are those which will determine whether the history of the last half century will repeat itself a few years hence, and whether we will once again experience a bitter awakening to the fact that others have seized the initiative in the more advanced space missions of the future. Indeed, in today’s cold war arena, the question boils down to whether this Nation can afford such a luxury, in terms of our very survival. For it is clear that future leadership in this scientific and technological competition—which has such great economic, military, and political significance—will not be easily held, nor would it be easily regained once lost.” (CR, 5/23/66, 10681-2)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, who directed the development of usaf’s strategic missile force, would retire this summer, the White House announced. General Schriever, retiring for personal reasons, would be replaced Aug. 31 by L/G James Ferguson, usaf Deputy Chief of Staff for Research and Development. (AP, NYT, 4/23/66, 5; Norris, Wash. Post, 4/23/66, A2)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) commented on collision of XB-70 and F-104 aircraft: "This accident must serve as a reminder to the American public and to the world that all of the potential hazards of aircraft and space flight can never be entirely eliminated from our experimental program. The phenomenal success of our manned space flight programs Mercury and Gemini and the remaining flights of Gemini and the flights of Apollo . . . share the risk that Walker, White, and Cross faced each time they flew to test the XB-70.” (CR, 6/8/66)
25 scientific experiments for sixth Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (ogo-f), scheduled for launch into polar orbit in 1968, were selected hy Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, on recommendation of ossa’s Space Science Steering Committee. Fifty-five scientists at U.S. and foreign universities, industrial firms, and Government laboratories would make correlative experiments of near-earth space phenomena based on data from the ogo-f experiments, (nasa Release 66-36)
On the floor of the Senate, Sen. Daniel B. Brewster (D-Md.) paid tribute to the late Hugh L. Dryden and proposed "that Wallops Island be renamed Dryden Island, as^an appropriate memorial to his immense contribution to space exploration.” Dr. Dryden was born on the Maryland Eastern Shore in Pocomoke City. (CR, 1/19/66, 583)
U.S. did not have women astronauts because "we have not yet been able to find an applicant sufficiently qualified in both scientific and engineering background, who also possesses the required test pilot experience,” said nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller at dedication of Cedar Crest College’s science center in Allentown, Pa. He said NASA has always had the same requirements for both men and women; "there had never been any discrimination with regard to sex or on any other basis.” (Text)
NASA announced appointment of Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf), pilot in USAF’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program, to X-15 research program, replacing Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf), who had transferred to MSC April 4 to become an astronaut. Following extensive training program, Major Adams would become 12th man to fly the rocket-powered aircraft, (frc Release 15-66)
NASA Lewis Research Center, first Government laboratory devoted to flight propulsion in all its aspects, celebrated its 25th anniversary. Authorized by Congress in 1940, the naca facility was originally called the Aircraft Engine Research Lab.; it was renamed the Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in 1948 in honor of Dr. George W. Lewis, former naca Director of Aeronautical Research (1924-47). In 1958, when naca facilities and personnel were absorbed by the newly created NASA, the facility became the Lewis Research Center. From an initial Congressional appropriation of $2 million in 1941, LRC had emerged as a major research and development laboratory valued at $200 million. Marking the anniversary, LRC Director Dr. Abe Silverstein said: "Man isn’t going to be held to a single conquest or success. The past decade has seen aviation and rocketry undergo phenomenal change, but we’ve just started to realize its potential. The present generation will live to fly better than 2,000 mph in commercial aircraft and to observe at close range the interplanetary exploits of U.S. astronauts. The past 25 years have witnessed truly remarkable strides in aeronautics and space activities. In 1941, man had the capability to fly 300 mph and to attain altitudes of perhaps 30,000 ft. Today, he orbits the earth at 17,500 mph and in a few years will set foot on the moon and possibly later Mars.” (lrc Release 66-1; Lewis News, 1/23/66, 1-12; upi, Miami Herald, 1/24/66)
Sydney (Australia) Univ. physicist Stuart Thomas Butler said that U.S., U.K., and U.S.S.R. were studying the possibility of using a "nuclear rocket” to prevent the asteroid Icarus from colliding with earth, upi reported. Icarus would pass within four million miles of earth in June 1968. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, world clearinghouse for all astrophysical information, said it had no knowledge the three nations were studying the possibility. Two authorities on asteroids, Dr. Paul Herget, Univ. of Cincinnati, and Dr. Gerald Clemence, Yale Univ., said there was not "one chance in a billion” Icarus would strike earth, (upi, Chic. Trib., 7/28/66)
ComSatCorp signed agreements to purchase 210-acre site in Montgomery County, Md., for $7- to $ 10-million Research and Development Center. Construction would begin in 1967. (ComSatCorp Release)
"Nobody has yet found any space goals that will stir the Europeans the way manned space flight and the race toward a lunar landing have generated tremendous technical impetus in the U.S. and U.S.S.R.,” Robert Hotz reported in Aviation Week. "If new fomulae can be found to fit changing European requirements, the prospects for applying the spearhead technology of the aerospace industry will never be brighter. For the United States, this will require a more realistic government policy in permitting more first-line technology to be exported to our allies. For Europe, it will require a more realistic appraisal of how its technical resources can be applied to compete successfully in the world market.” (Hotz, Av.Wk., 9/5/66, 21)
Dr. James A. Hootman, executive secretary of nasa’s Inventions and Contributions Board, retired after 30 years Government service to become a professor of physics at Pensacola (Fla.) Junior College, (nasa Ann.) Dr. Hilliard W. Paige, vice president of General Electric Co., reported first known satellite collision: in April 1965 two experimental gravity-gradient-stabilized satellites launched pickaback by Naval Research Lab. March 9, 1965, locked booms in their 1,756th revolution. After collision, satellites separated and quickly were stabilized by gravity-gradient systems. They were still in orbit. Paige said NASA was currently reviewing GE study to equip a Saturn V 3rd stage with three-axis gravity-gradient system to orient vehicle as manned space laboratory. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 1, 2) Jack L. Bromberg and T. J. Gordon, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., said the asteroids between Mars and Jupiter could be investigated by utilizing basic Apollo/Saturn launch vehicles, launch facilities, tracking system, and manufacturing and engineering expertise. Bromberg said a three-stage Saturn V could propel a 7,000-lb. unmanned research payload into the asteroid belt and a four-stage Saturn V could propel a 22,000-lb. payload to same target. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 3) Dr. Luis Tapis Salinas, president of IX Colloquium on Law of Outer Space, urged changing present laws to cover situations that could arise in outer space. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/13/66, 1) Richard Johnston, Chief of msc Crew Systems Div., said that to work effectively in space, a future astronaut would require a more streamlined spacesuit, a better self-propulsion system, and an anchoring device such as "stable work platform which will permit his energies to be used in accomplishing the task and not in overcoming body instability.” He said that during extravehicular activity on NASA’s Gemini missions nearly 80 per cent of the astronauts’ energy had been expended to keep still and avoid tumbling. Johnston also recommended further investigation of metabolic expenditures required to perform work in space: twice Gemini astronauts had been forced to return to their spacecraft, overheated and exhausted, after struggling with relatively simple tasks. (Wilford, NYT, 10/12/66, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, presented a comprehensive review of NASA’s Gemini program and Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, gave a detailed biomedical report on the Gemini missions. Observations on the effects of spaceflight on man’s system had revealed significant changes involving only cardiovascular, hematopoietic, and musculoskeletal systems, but even these changes appeared to be adaptive in nature and were no cause for concern, Dr. Berry said. Results of a study on red blood cell loss during spaceflight were inconclusive, Dr. Berry reported; hyperoxia, lack of inert diluent gas, relative immobility of crew, dietary factors, and weightlessness were being examined as possible causes. (Tech. Wk, 10/17/66, 16) Soviet scientists V. E. Belai, P. V. Vassilyev, and G. D. Glod reported "significant changes in the effect of various pharmaceutical preparations” under spaceflight conditions and emphasized that new medicines adapted and tested for space were necessary. Report indicated U.S.S.R. used drugs in manned spaceflight both for "therapeutic purposes or to increase the resistance of the human organism to unfavorable effects.” Drugs mentioned included narcotics, to relax cosmonauts; stimulants; cardiovascular preparations; and antiradiation medications. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13) Soviet scientists A. A. Gurjian, A. V. Yeremin, and V. I. Stepanzov said the dynamics of men working in free space was one of the most important problems connected with manned spaceflight. They had developed a series of arm and leg movements for cosmonauts to maneuver into working position, which included raising one hand over the head and rotating arm in cone-like fashion to cause an opposite body reaction and enable cosmonaut to face about. (Av. Wk., 10/17/66, 30-31) Phil Bono, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., encouraged by recovery, virtually undamaged, of forward section of gemini v-Titan II booster from the Atlantic in September 1965 and of an intact Atlas-Centaur insulation panel in November 1565, proposed a "near-term technique for the land recovery of an earth-orbital stage” to be applied specifically to the Uprated Saturn I’s 2nd stage (S-IVB). (Av. Wk, 10/24/66, 32) H. B. Bjurstedt, Karolinska Institute of Sweden, suggested that moon’s low gravity field might lead to an accompanying loss of normal g-tolerance. He acknowledged that this was an uncertain extrapolation and that physiological effects of such exposure were as yet unknown. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13-14) Soviet delegate Vassily V. Parin narrated new film showing postflight activities of space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, launched Feb. 22, 1966, in cosmos cx. Dogs, who lost up to one third of their preflight body weight during 22-day mission, appeared very weak and dazed when they emerged from capsule, but fihn sequence taken four months later showed them completely recovered. Parin said flight had studied neurological regulators of cardiovascular system. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13) Dr. Luigi Napolitano, Univ. of Naples, was elected new president of iaf. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13)
In Reader’s Digest article, William Hines, science editor of the Washington Evening Star, charged and documented what he described as a banding "together in a unique alliance, [of] NASA and the Urban Renewal Administration” to build NASA Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, Mass., at the cost of several citizens’ rights. He said: "It was a splendid arrangement. The glamor of a Federal space center would grease the way for urban renewal which, realistically, didn’t otherwise stand a chance of tearing up this thriving industrial area. NASA had captured a prize piece of real estate at a bargain-basement price— roughly $4 million—thanks to the fact that urban renewal would pay most of the 'real’ cost of the land and would take on the expense and dirty work of removing the occupants. And the Cambridge-Boston area was going to have all that money spent there. "There was only one catch: nobody had bothered to ask the opinion of the 94 businessmen and their 3,500 employees who were on the Kendall Square chopping block. Most didn’t realize what had happened until they read the newspaper headlines on August 21: $60-Million NASA Plant To Be Built in Kendall Square.’ ” (Reader’s Digest, 1/66, 99-104)
Representatives of Intelsat (International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium) toured NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and received briefing on msfc programs and research projects, (msfc Release 66-77)
nasa Director of Program Review William A. Fleming reiterated NASA hopes of landing a man on the moon by mid-1968 at ieee conference in Milwaukee. Fleming said plans for post-Apollo space activity had not been completed but might include further exploration of moon, possibly with a roving vehicle; drilling to sample the subsurface of the lurain; or establishing manned space stations. Manned space flight to Mars was still at least 20 yrs. away, he said. (Milwaukee /., 10/25/66)
Helicopter-like atmosphere-entry-and-descent system employing unpowered rotor was undergoing wind tunnel testing at ARC as means of returning to earth from space. System could land on any solid, level surface and return vehicles of wide range of shapes from orbit; most of the lift would be supplied by auto-rotor and not by aerodynamic shape of vehicle. In orbit, blades for rotor system would be folded and stowed. On approaching earth, blades would be released and passage through atmosphere would start them turning, (nasa Release 66-217)
nasa oso II Orbiting Solar Observatory, activated by gsfc officials, transmitted scientific and engineering data from four of its eight experiments. Launched from etr Feb. 3, 1965, oso n had exceeded its six-month life expectancy by 50% before it was turned off Nov. 3. (gsfc Release G-10-66)
124,000-mi.-long cluster of sunspots which could affect weather and radio and television signals was detected by West Germany’s Bochum Observatory. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/3/66, B7)
Arnold Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs and U.S. representative to the Working Group of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, supported U.S.S.R. proposal for an international conference in 1967 to commemorate the first decade of space exploration, further international cooperation in space, and promote the practical benefits of man’s exploration of space. He suggested four topics for the conference: (1) appraisal of contributions of scientific research in space to practical applications and international cooperation; (2) opportunities for participation in space exploration through space research and cooperative projects; (3) applications and economic implications of space research; and (4) impact of space exploration on education. (SBD, 1/27/66, 170)
nasa and dod signed memorandum of agreement establishing Manned Space Flight Experiments Board (msfeb) to coordinate scientific, technological or nonmilitary experiments on dod and NASA flight missions. Board would recommend approval or disapproval, assignment, and relative priority of experiments submitted, after screening, by sponsoring nasa or dod Program Offices. Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, would act as chairman; other members would be Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology; Daniel J. Fink, dod Deputy Director for Strategic and Space Systems; and Gen, Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander. (Text; nasa nmi 1154.4, 4/27/66)
nasa Langley Research Center would negotiate $450,000 study contract with Martin Co. for 11-mo. study of "costs, crew size, and complexity of a flight research program using a manned lifting body vehicle.” In conducting the study, the firm would be required to consider an HL-10 lifting-body concept capable of carrying one, two, four, six, or eight crew members. HL-10 was considered representative of advanced lifting entry vehicles. nasa had specified Titan II, Titan in, and Saturn IB as potential launch vehicles. For study purposes, Rogers Dry Lake at Edwards afb would be a probable landing site, (nasa Release 66-82; LaHC Release)
British Research Council had offered to pay one half the $ 11.2-million cost of constructing a 150-in. telescope in Australia, largest in Southern Hemisphere. Similar offer from Univ. of California was pending before Australian Government. (NYT, 10/26/66, 1) nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said that "through the creative use of the capabilities that we are building up, space may ... be used as one of many approaches to alleviate” problems of "famine, disease, over-population, and the need for more and better education” facing developing nations. Dreams of eventual space travel were "pure fantasy,” according to Cal Tech astronautics professor Dr. Jesse L. Greenstein. He urged, however, that a greater portion of national expenditures be devoted to achieving interstellar communications—a task that "may ultimately become the greatest scientific adventure.” Dr. Robert P. Sharp, professor of geology at Cal Tech, noted that although "earth scientists” were playing important role in national space program, it was also important that they "look downward into our own planet. . . . Our understanding of these distant bodies will depend to a good degree upon how well we understand our own plain earth.” Likelihood that revolutionary improvement in communication on earth would transform society was suggested by John R. Pierce, research director of Bell Telephone Labs. Communications Sciences Div. Satellites would greatly expand potential of backward countries and would help build a sense of national identity in underdeveloped areas. "Technology is moving faster than our ability to assimilate it,” scientist and industrialist Dr. Simon Ramo postulated. Dr. Ramo urged development of new class of men called "socio-technologists” who could "effectively link scientific developments with social betterment.” Dr. Murray Gell-Mann, professor of theoretical physics at Cal Tech, said society must give new direction to technology, diverting it from applications that yield higher productive efficiency into areas that yielded greater human satisfaction. A symbol of this sort of change would occur when man no longer wanted to channel resources into "building bigger, noisier aircraft” or when society decided to divert a new highway around a virgin forest rather than build through it. (Texts; Bart, NYT, 10/26/66, 23; Duscha, Wash. Post, 10/26/66, A9; NYT, 10/30/66, 52)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh spoke at the dedication of Boeing Co.’s Industrial Research Center in Huntsville, Ala. "I believe that the next decade will find us marrying more closely the major features of aeronautics and astronautics so that manned spacecraft will take off and return to spaceports with reusable propulsion systems and reusable spacecraft. The near future will find us engaged in the exploration of the lunar surface, the development of manned earth orbiting permanent space stations, unmanned and then possibly manned travel to the planets, as well as in the progressive utilization of space technology in such fields as communications, navigation, meteorology, and observation. "In addition, I believe the next decade holds great promise for the utilization of space systems technology in the solution of many of the economic and social problems of this complex civilization. . . .” (Text)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. agreed in discussions at Geneva to treaty article on exploration of space barring any state from claiming sovereignty over space, including the moon and planets. Article was also approved by 28-nation U.N. Legal Subcommittee drawing up treaty from draft accords submitted by U.S. and U.S.S.R. Subcommittee also accepted article binding states to conduct space exploration in accordance with international law and in the interest of international peace. (Reuters, NYT, 1/22/66, 8)
New York Times praised success of NASA’s lunar orbiteh ii and GEMINI xii missions: "This week has seen two impressive demonstrations of United States space capabilities. . . . "It is no derogation of the important Soviet contributions to conclude that the United States efforts have contributed most of what men now know about the moon and about the possibilities and problems of manned space flight. In part this lead is the result of the long and unexplained halt in the launching of Soviet passenger-carrying rockets.” (NYT, 11/12/66, 28)
Lunar surface photograph from U.S.S.R.’s luna ix mission "fully coincided with the photograph of a model of the moon designed by scientists at Kharkov University’s laboratory several years ago,” Tass announced. Nikolay Barabashov, chief of university’s observatory, hypothesized that "the relief at the landing site of the Soviet station is typical of the entire lunar surface,” which he claimed was "porous, spongelike, and sufficiently firm to hold a rather heavy body.” (Tass, 2/24/66)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Business Council in Washington, D.C., that "so far as overall manned space flight manpower is concerned, we have passed our peak” in engineering, we’re "reaching our peak in manufacturing,” and we’re "at our peak in total manpower costs.” He added: "One of the anomalies of the space program is that we must begin to 'go out of business’ before we fly our first operational vehicle. ... By the time manned flights begin, the employment level will be quite low in comparison with the peak, which occurred in 1965. . . .” Commenting on post-Apollo plans, he said: "The budget for the coming fiscal year permits nasa to hold open the option for a program to procure additional flight vehicles beyond those now programmed, so as to employ the Apollo hardware and capabilities at least through 1971. If we do not exercise this option, in the decision for the [FY] 1968 budget we will have to begin a phase down of the manned space flight activities and the 'mothballing’ of some of our facilities.” (Text)
Two Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched from Ascension Island, 24 and 36 hrs. after Feb. 26 Apollo reentry test. Experiment, conducted by gsfc and Univ. of Michigan’s Space Physics Research Laboratory, was designed to measure pressure, temperature, density, and winds at altitudes of 19-75 mi. (30-120 km.) using pitot-static probe. First flight obtained necessary data for Apollo support program, attaining _82-mi. (131-km.) altitude. No useful data were obtained by second flight, because of breakup during 2nd-stage burn. (nasa Rpt. srl)
Major decisions on the future of space exploration facing the Administration received comment by William J. Coughlin in Missiles and Rockets: "History teaches us . .. that such exploration is more likely to come in waves, one overlapping the other, than in single units, each with a distinct beginning and a distinct end. "Man strives for the most distant objective within reach of his technology. And as the first explorers try and try again on that far reach, others—at first other explorers and scientists, then those scouts of commerce, miners and trappers, then businessmen, settlers and shopkeepers—follow in their wake to prove and develop what courage has proven attainable.” (Coughlin, M&R, 1/24/66, 46)
Mystery of how the universe began could be solved within 15 to 20 yrs. if U.S. would use the $100 million spent on one manned Gemini mission for five new 200-in. telescopes, MIT professor Dr. Philip Morrison suggested at New York meeting on cosmology. Morrison said three or four telescopes equal to the one at Mt. Palomar could be built for the f>60-to $80-million cost of one Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) and would provide more information on the origin and nature of the universe than the satellite. Meeting was sponsored by American Institute of Physics and National Assn, of Science Writers, Inc., with NSF support. (NYT, 2/5/66)
Astronomers in six European countries—Denmark, Sweden, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, and West Germany—had agreed to share the expense of constructing $7-million observatory on Lasilla, a mountain peak several hundred miles north of Santiago, Chile. (Reuters, NYT, 4/2/66, 27; Reuters, Wash. Post, 4/2/66, A16)
High military potential of space was discussed by Hanson W. Baldwin in New York Times'. ". . . the advent of the military man in space is inevitable. For man can supply the judgment that no machine can offer; he can monitor and correct and interpret the instruments and aids essential to space flight; he will be able to repair satellites and assemble space platforms. He will pilot tomorrow’s fighting machines in the cosmos. And in time he may actually be able, with a whole host of scientific aids, to control the weather with all the tremendous military and social consequences this implies.” (Baldwin, NYT, 11/20/66, A7)
Dr. Jan H. Oort, recipient of Columbia Univ.’s 1966 Vetlesen Award for his work in earth sciences, told Washington Post that Univ. of Leiden Observatory, which he directed, was building world’s largest radiotelescope. A one-mile-long row of twelve 83-ft.-dia. parabolic disks in a remote area of the Netherlands, device would enable Oort and his colleagues to extend their explorations beyond earth’s galaxy. 1968 was scheduled completion date. (Wash. Post, 12/18/66, B19)
West Germany’s Chancellor Ludwig Erhard and President Johnson are briefed by NASA officials at Kennedy Space Center.
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey presented 1966 Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy in Washington, D.C., to gemini vi Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford and gemini vii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Frank Borman for achieving first rendezvous in space by two separately launched maneuverable spacecraft Dec. 15, 1965. After the ceremony, the Vice President told newsmen he was one of those "manning the ramparts” against those who failed to see any direct public benefit from space exploration. He thought the space program had resulted in a superior educational system, increased industrial competence, new products, "and if it hasn’t done anything else it has taught us to manage” vast undertakings. (Clark, NYT, 12/16/66, 21)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified in support of NASA’s FY1967 budget authorization before the House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Manned Space Flight Subcommittee. Questioned by Congressman Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.) about the Apollo program schedule, Dr. Mueller said current budget request left no room for a major problem; any test failure would be directly reflected in a schedule slip. In connection with possible further use of Apollo/Saturn V hardware beyond the lunar landing mission, Dr. Mueller stressed necessity for early decisions on the FY 1968 budget. Industrial research, development, and manufacturing employment had already reached its peak and, ironically, would begin to decline sharply before the first manned flights with Apollo/Saturn hardware. Facilities now becoming operational would be scheduled for "mothballing” within two years if no further use were planned for capability beyond the lunar landing, Dr. Mueller said. (NASA Auth. Hearings, 279-384; msf Historian)
John F. Stearns, former chief of National Referral Center at Library of Congress, became Director of nasa’s Science and Technology Information Div., Office of Technology Utilization. He succeeded Melvin S. Day, who had been appointed Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization June 5. (nasa Ann.)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, after conferring with President Johnson, told newsmen at the Texas White House that there was "considerable evidence” that U.S.S.R. was building and deploying an antiballistic missile system around its cities, which might require an increase in U.S. offensive capacity. He said the Administration would probably recommend to Congress that U.S. begin production and deployment of Poseidon missile—a large submarine-launched missile with greater power to penetrate sophisticated defense system than Polaris missile. The Secretary reported that no decision had yet been made on deployment of Nike-X antimissile missile, on which $500 million had already been spent for research and development. (Semple, Jr., NYT, 11/11/66, 1, 19; Wilson, Wash. Post, 11/11/66, Al, A10; Horner, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/11/66, Al)	.
NASA Nike-Apache launched from wsmr to 100-mi. (161-km.) altitude carried NASA-Dudley Observatory (Albany, N.Y.) experiment to collect micrometeorite particles at time of 33-yr. maximum of Leonid meteor shower and gsfc experiment to determine vehicle slant range. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, but payload was not recovered and no data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
On floor of House, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) paid tribute to surveyor I and Gemini ix-A mission successes and said they were possible because of "the unity of purpose that exists between the aerospace industry and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.” (CR, 6/15/66)
nasa extended for one year a contract with Documentation, Inc., to operate its College Park, Md., Scientific and Technical Information Facility •—containing world’s largest collection of aerospace literature—during FY 1967 at cost of $5,150,000. Monitored by NASA Hq. Scientific and Technical Information Div., contractor would also operate Selective Dissemination of Information Program, using computer techniques to notify nasa scientists and engineers individually of new developments of direct interest to their work, (nasa Release 66-227)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told press conference in New York that U.S.S.R. had "a better chance now than two years ago” to land a man on the moon before the U.S. Basing his view on the Soviet lead in payload-orbiting capability, Webb said: "They have been launching and recovering 10,000-pound spacecraft for four years. You cannot work in space without large boosters.” He suggested that the 10-mo. period of Soviet inactivity in manned space flight would end "very soon.” (Loory, NYT, 10/11/66)
Dr. Eric A. Walker, president of Pennsylvania State Univ. and chairman of the National Science Board, was elected president of the National Academy of Engineering, (nae News) Dr. Vannevar Bush, Honorary Chairman of the Corporation, MIT, received the National Academy of Engineering’s first Founders’ Medal at 2nd annual nae meeting in Washington, D.C. Dr. Bush, former president of Carnegie Institution of Washington, director of Office of Scientific Research and Development during World War II, and naca Chairman 1939-41, was cited as "the engineer who mobilized this country’s scientific and technical resources for war and created the blueprint for the post-war cooperation of science and government.” (nae Release, 4/19/66)
Sociological repercussions of the space age might be most important to historians, suggested Robert Toth in the Washington Post: "In just nine years since the first man-made moon went aloft, the fact that man can escape his Earth has become so accepted Americans are almost blase about new manned flights. "It is too early for anyone to guess how such developments may affect the deeper thoughts of self and one’s place in the world and in the universe. But it is not too much to say that, even before man reaches the moon, he has begun to get a new perspective of himself and his place in the universe from the space adventure.” (Toth, Wash. Post, 11/10/ 66, P6) A total of 211 medium- and high-resolution photos of 13 potential Apollo landing sites were taken during mission’s photo acquisition phase. Readout would be completed Dec. 13. Among photos transmitted, described as "consistently high in quality,” was a picture of the crater Copernicus taken from an angle inaccessible to earth cameras. Dr. Martin J. Swetnick, NASA Hq., describing the closeup as "one of the great pictures of the century,” said: "It provides new information, which certainly will lead to better understanding of the processes and structures on the moon.” (nasa Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 11/16/66, A18; Sullivan, NYT, 12/1/66, 1, 36) Docking of spacecraft with gatv was in 2.3 revolutions—4:14 get. After plans to use gatv propulsion system to place gemini xii into higher orbit had to be abandoned because of gatv malfunction, gemini xii rendezvoused with Nov. 12 total solar eclipse over South America and made motion and still pictures of eclipse through spacecraft windows. Aldrin then began first of two standup Evas: hatch opening was at 19:29:01 get with closure 2 hrs. 29 min. later. Nov. 13’s activities revolved around Aldrin’s umbilical Eva: hatch opening was at 42:46 get with closing 2 hrs. 8 min. later. While on 30-ft. umbilical, Aldrin performed measured work tasks at Agena docking adapter and at work station in spacecraft adapter section. He also attached 100-ft. tether stowed in Agena adapter to Gemini docking bar in preparation for tethered operations, gemini xii backed out of Agena docking collar about 47:37 get and gravity gradient appeared to be established by one revolution later. Tether exercise lasted 4 hrs. 17 min. After failing twice to sight sodium vapor clouds released in upper atmosphere by French sounding rocket launched from Hammaguir Range and performing experiments with a space sextant, crew began experiencing problems with maneuvering thrusters on spacecraft. In second standup Eva, Aldrin jettisoned unused equipment and conducted additional experiments and photography. Hatch-open time was 66:04 get for 51-min. duration. Total Eva time for gemini xii mission was 5 hrs. 28 min. Retrofire took place Nov. 15 at 94:00:01 get; reentry in 59th revolution after 94 hrs. 34 min. in space was normal. Splashdown in the Atlantic was at 94:34:31 get. gemini xii landed about three miles from recovery ship U.S.S. Wasp and about four miles from aiming point. Astronauts were picked up hy helicopter within 20 min. Naucmher 10-30: Two historic lunar photographs returned by NASA's lunar ohbiter if. one, the first close-up photograph of the crater Copernicus, taken Nov. 23, is an oblique view from 28-mi. altitude; the other, the first detailed view of lunar domes, taken Nov, 25, confirms the moon's long history of volcanic activity. The domes range from 2 to 10 mi. in diameter and from 1,000 to 1,500 ft. high; they are best seen to the south and west of the crater Marius (upper right). White House announced promotion of Aldrin from usaf major to lieutenant colonel. Lovell had been promoted to usn captain after cemini vn mission. A Presidential statement read by Press Secretary Bill Moyers said the flight was "the culmination of a great team effort, stretching back to 1961, and directly involving more than 25,000 people in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Defense, and other Government agencies; in the universities and other research centers; and in American industry.” (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-272; Msc Roundup, 11/25/66, 1, 2; Wilford, NYT, 11/12/66, 1, 14; 11/13/66, 1, 34; 11/14/66, 1, 2; 11/15/66, 1, 17; 11/16/66,1,30; O’Toole, {Fash. Post, 11/12/66, Al, A4; 11/13/66, Al, A4; 11/14/66, Al; 11/15/66, Al, A10; Pres. Doc., 11/21/66, 1701-2) November 12: Total solar eclipse which moved across South America at 2,000	mph for 2 hrs. 42 min. received extraordinary scientific scrutiny: 800 scientists from 12 nations utilized $90 million of equipment, nasa’s activities were conducted in cooperation with Argentine and Brazilian scientists as part of an international program. Eclipse formed 55-mi. strip of total blackout beginning in Pacific Ocean west of Peru, crossing southern Peru, Bolivia, northern Argentina, southern tip of Brazil, and extending into South Atlantic. NASA-Ames Convair 990A jet aircraft "Galileo,” a flying research laboratory carrying 26 scientists, successfully rendezvoused with four other instrument-equipped aircraft and raced the eclipse at 575 mph as it moved out over the South Atlantic. Other NASA activities included: five NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched within two hours from Cassino, Brazil, in Univ. of Illinois-GCA Corp. experiment to measure D and E region electron densities and temperatures, absorption profiles 1216 A and 1450 A, and collision frequencies. First rocket ejected trimethyl-aluminum (tma) cloud for comparison of electron density profile with wind profile; however, no photographs of vapor cloud were obtained. Third rocket carried Brazilian experiment to study extreme ultraviolet. All rockets and instrumentation, except for mass spectrometer on third flight, performed satisfactorily. Specially constructed launch and tracking site was manned and operated by personnel of Wallops Station and the Brazilian Space Commission. Photographs were taken by nimbus ii meteorological satellite and by Astronauts James Lovell, Jr., and Edwin Aldrin, Jr., orbiting in Gemini xii spacecraft. AFCRL launched three Nike-Hydac sounding rockets from a site near Rio Grande, Brazil. Instrumented payloads, which reached 71-mi. (115-km.) altitudes, measured positive-ion mass composition, solar radiation, electron density and temperature, and positive-ion density. Data were telemetered to ground receivers. Scientists from Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Uruguay, Japan, the Netherlands, U.K., New Zealand, and France participated in observations which would increase knowledge of the solar forces and their effects on earth’s atmosphere and provide data for use in space travel, radio communications, and weather prediction, (nasa Release 66-285; Wallops Release 66-55; De Onis, NYT, 11/13/66, 35; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/13/66, A16; AP, Wash. Post, 11/12/66, A16; oar Res. Rev., 1/67, 8; nasa Rpt. srl)
zvaa’s Rocketdyne Div. at Edwards afb was struck by afl-cio United Auto Workers in a wage dispute. An estimated half of the 227 workers in UAW bargaining unit stayed off their jobs. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 2/1/66, A9)	_ During January: Series of tests was being completed by NASA msc’s Landing and Recovery Div. to check out direction and finding equipment for homing an Apollo spacecraft for post-landing location and recovery. Tests were performed off Galveston Island in Gulf of Mexico using Apollo boilerplate spacecraft with the Apollo Recovery Beacon and Apollo Survival Radio transmitting signals. Homing runs were made from altitudes of 28,000 ft. to 500 ft. to determine range of direction finder receiver onboard a usaf HC-130H air rescue aircraft with the Apollo Recovery Beacon and Survival Radio on the spacecraft in the Gulf. Equipment had performed as expected with line-of-sight acquisition of boilerplate Apollo on all homing runs by the aircraft, (msc Roundup, 1/21/66,3) During January: Eulogies for the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, and the late Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, nasa Director of Space Medicine, appeared in Air Force and Space Digest: Walter T. Bonney said of Dr. Dryden: "Hugh Dryden was a deeply religious man. He held that man’s life at its fullest is a trinity of activity, physical, mental, and spiritual. Throughout his life he preached the compatibility of religion and science, and he lived what he preached. No less, he was a realist; and so, as in 1954, he would often remind his listeners that: 'I am not one of those few who believe that we can abolish the use of force in the world. As a nation we find it necessary to build great military power. I am confident that such strength is a greater contribution to the peace of the world ... than military weakness.’ "In 1947, he was called to direct the work of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. His tasks were enormously difficult—radically new and expensive research facilities had to be provided, but even more important, learning the nature of the intricate problems of flight in the new speed ranges and methods for their solution demanded new concepts of team activity and functional coordination. His leadership, disarmingly light and unobtrusive, was amazingly perceptive and effective. Facilities were obtained and changes were made; the period 1947-58 became what might be truly called naca’s golden age. "With establishment of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (of which naca was the nucleus), he undertook the role of scientific leader, reporting to the Administrator, and made of it a position of paramount influence. He rejoiced in the US policy that activities in space should be devoted to peaceful purposes and worked to promote international space cooperation; but no less, he saw in US exploration of space an activity essential to the strength and security of the nation. As perhaps never before, his great wisdom and his unexcelled mastery of the art of the possible were in those later years valued and used to their fullest.” Editor John Loosbrock said of Dr. Lovelace: "In widening circles, the full import of Randy’s untimely death becomes apparent. The Air Force Association and the Aerospace Education Foundation have lost a distinguished leader. The medical profession is poorer for the passing of a brilliant surgeon, an imaginative ^researcher. The United States Air Force will miss his sound advice and pioneering efforts in the special kind of medical knowledge that is required for those who fly—in air and in space. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration must find new leadership for its space medical effort. The entire nation and the world itself will find that Randy Lovelace’s death leaves a large and well-nigh unfillable niche.” (AF/SD, 1/66) During January: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Special Assistant to NASA Administrator, paid tribute to the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, in Applied Mechanics Reviews on Dr. Dryden’s scientific and engineering accomplishments. Dr. Bisplinghoff noted that the naca, under Dr. Dryden’s leadership, "produced a vast body of new knowledge which made possible routine supersonic flight and laid much of the ground for space flight that was to come. We discern here, perhaps as much as any other place, the impact of Dryden’s leadership on the nation’s destiny. The development of high-speed wind-tunnel facilities and a companion competence for theoretical research within the naca contributed, in the opinion of the author, more than any other single factor to the leadership of the United States in supersonic flight. . . .” (AMR, 1/66, 1-5)
Fred J. Drinkwater III, aerospace research engineer, scientist, and test pilot at NASA Ames Research Center, received the Flight Safety Foundation’s Richard Hansford Burroughs Test Pilot Award for his "significant contributions to the safety and efficiency of flight testing.” Award was established by United Aircraft Corp. (Av. Wk., 1/3/66, 13)
John A. Edwards, Director of Gemini Flight Operations, became Deputy Director, Gemini Program, in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight. He replaced LeRoy E. Day, who became Director of Apollo Test, (nasa Release 66-176)
Some 1,000 meteors a minute were recorded at height of Leonid shower by Northwestern Univ.’s Observatory near Las Cruces, N. Mex., Dr. J. Allen Hynek reported. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/18/66, 39M)
Reports by Volunteer Flight Officers Network—new tracking system in which 22,000 commercial pilots on 51 airlines searched the skies for reentering space hardware-—had proved valuable to Smithsonian Institution’s Astrophysical Observatory and usaf in improving computer methods and clearing records. Network was founded by amateur astronomer Herbert E. Roth, director of Denver Moonwatch team. (Clark, NYT, 9/4/66, 68)
Striking members of International Union of Electrical Workers (afl-cio) picketed all gates of Kennedy Space Center, NASA, in wage dispute with United Technology Center, builder of solid-fuel boosters for usaf Titan III launch vehicle. UTC had about 175 workers at ksc, one-third of whom were iuew members. Some 300 of a total force of 366 construction workers honored the picket lines and failed to show up for work on the Saturn V mobile service structure and Vertical Assembly Building (Vab). Strike was first at ksc during 1966, but the ninth in 27 mos. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/18/66, Al; AP, NYT, 4/19/66, i8)
New York Univ. announced completion of New York Univ.-NASA aerospace laboratory in Bronx was scheduled for June 1966. One-story, 15,000-sq.-ft. facility constructed with $582,000 NASA grant would include wind tunnel capable of duplicating speeds of up to 14 times the speed of sound for four seconds; models of supersonic transports, spacecraft, and other advanced aerospace designs would be tested there. (NYT, 3/16/66, 55)
Soviet newspaper Trud said that although Sept. 12-15 Gemini xi mission had set new altitude record, it otherwise only repeated "already achieved results.” Trud added that some of these results were "worse” than before, citing the lesser length of time spent in Eva by Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/16/66, A2)
usaf awarded Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., $46,000 contract to continue studying methods of eliminating six-minute communications blackout caused when friction of the atmosphere envelops reentering spacecraft in a ball of hot, electrically charged gases. Dr. Ronald Row, Sylvania Electronic Systems Applied Research Laboratory, told the New York Times in a telephone interview of the development of a device to simulate the flow of charged gases around typical spacecraft antenna. He said Sylvania was considering shortening pulses of signals so they could penetrate gases or covering antennas with plastic or ceramic shrouds that would shield them from gases and heat but still permit radio signals to penetrate. (Wilford, NYT, 3/7/66, 19) During week of March 6: Possibility that residents of communities afflicted by jet noise might develop psychotic symptoms because their dreams were interrupted at night was suggested by Dr. Julius Buchwald, psychiatrist, and Dr. Howard M. Bogard, psychologist, at a hearing held by New York State Assembly’s Mental Hygiene Committee. Dr. Buchwald said that everybody dreams at least five times a night. If a person is awakened and prevented from having his dreams, psychotic symptoms from mild to "more severe” could occur, including paranoidal delusions, psychoses, hallucinations, and suicidal and homicidal impulses. Dr. Bogard said persons prevented from dreaming would "tend toward true psychoses.” He urged study of whether residents near airports "lose out on dream time,” whether such communities become "disoriented” by people leaving, and whether family life is disrupted because of interruptions of ordinary communications. (Hudson, NYT, 3/13/66, 66)
nasa’s ogo iii (Ogo-B) Orbiting Geophysical Observatory was successfully launched from etb with Atlas-Agena B booster into orbit with 75,874-mi. (122,157-km.) apogee; 183-mi. (295-km.) perigee; 48.6-hr. period; and 31° inclination. Third of seven spacecraft in NASA’s Ogo program and first to successfully operate three-axis stabilized in highly elliptical orbit, ogo iii weighed 1,135 lbs.; it carried 21 experiments—largest number ever carried by U.S. scientific spacecraft—to study solar wind, solar flares, magnetic field disturbances, radiation belt particles, aurora events, ionization, and variations in atmospheric density. Ogo program was managed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-132; AP, NYT, 6/8/66, 15; AP, Wash. Post, 6/7/66, A7)
Editorial comment on retirement of afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever: "Few men had a larger hand ... in developing the scientific 'mix’ of manned aircraft and missiles that is today’s U.S. Air Force. "From the day he was put in charge of our ballistic missile program in 1954 until today he has been the key man in Air Force research and development. "Only last August he was given what is probably the single most important scientific assignment in Air Force history-—developing the military Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol). . . .” (Wash. Daily News, 4/26/66)
National Science Foundation must abandon its passive role and be more dynamic if scientific progress is to keep pace with society’s growing technological needs, concluded a report released by the Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Subcommittee viewed the revitalization of nsf as "an area of the government-science relationship in which Congress should provide a large share of the leadership essential to significant improvement in the Nation’s resources and development.” Some recommendations of the report: (1) NSF supplement its traditional philosophy with positive plans and programs; (2) character and functions of the National Science Board be strengthened; (3) authority of nsf’s director be widened; and (4) important executive and policy problems of NSF be acted upon administratively or legislatively in the near future. (Text, Committee Print)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, told AP he saw "no urgency” in landing on the moon first. Discounting the theory that a manned lunar landing would have military significance, Senator Anderson said "had the United States and the Soviet Union cooperated from the start in space exploration, more knowledge at less expense might have resulted.” (AP, NYT, 12/15/66, 34)
NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said NASA would request $6 billion for FY 1968, including $900 million for Apollo Applications and $100 million for Voyager, Aviation Week reported. Seamans’ statement that "Apollo Applications will fill the post-Apollo gap and that there is no need to define another goal now” was said to conflict with the recent contention of Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, that a clear definition of the Nation’s post-Apollo goal was necessary. (Av. Wk., 5/9/66, 25)
Theoretical possibility of self-supporting tapered cable extending 22,000 mi. into space from earth and from extraterrestrial rotating or revolving bodies was examined in Science report by John Isaacs, Hugh Bradner, and George E. Bachus, Scripps Institute of Oceanography, and Allyn C. Vine, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. Cable, referred to as a "skyhook,” would be extended downward from a satellite in synchronous orbit, become an extension of the satellite, and be held in place by the balance between centrifugal and gravitational forces that keeps any satellite in orbit. Authors of the report conceded in a telephone interview with Harold Schmeck of the New York Times that "present-day engineering is not yet up to the task of making a cable strong enough and light enough for the sky hook project from earth.” (Science, 2/11/66, 682-3; Schmeck, NYT, 2/12/66, 12)
M/G John D. Stevenson (usaf, Ret.), former commander of Joint Task Force Eight of the Defense Atomic Support Agency, was appointed Special Assistant to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller to assist with general management of manned space flight activities, (nasa Ann.)
Report on national document-handling systems in science and technology prepared by Federal Council for Science and Technology’s Committee on Scientific and Technical Information (cosati) was summarized in Science by Launor F. Carter, vice president of System Development Corp.-—a participant in the study. Report had recommended that Office of Science and Technology: (1) accelerate its efforts to organize an integrated national network of information and document-handling systems in science and technology; (2) collaborate with other Federal agencies and private organizations to develop comprehensive, coordinated program and sponsor effective legislation; (3) encourage private sector to formulate plans for its consideration; and (4) encourage Federal support of experiments in information technology, including prototype information systems. (Carter, Science, 12/9/66, 1299-1304)
International Association of Machinists and Boeing Co. settled dispute on seniority issues under Federal mediation, averting strike of 50,000	Boeing employees, including those working on Saturn V boosters at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (upi, NYT, 4/20/66, 48; upi, Wash. Post, 4/20/66, A6)
nasa Langley Research Center awarded a $5-million contract to Virginia Associated Research Center to operate nasa Space Radiation Effects Laboratory—a $15-million facility established by LaRC for research in support of national programs in space technology—through mid-1970. (LaRC Release)
In statement presented to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant 1965 mission results: "The 1965 successful Space Science and Applications missions totalled 16. Of these, eight were scientific satellites; three, applications satellites; three, deep-space probes; and two were vehicle developments. Science and applications experiments have also been carried on five manned missions. "The list of U.S. space firsts was extended during 1965. Ranger IX took the first close-up pictures of the floor of a lunar crater. For the first time, as television pictures of the lunar surface were being obtained from the Moon, they were sent on a real-time basis to home receivers. Mariner IV achieved the first successful mission to Mars. It obtained the first close-up pictures of the Martian surface, revealing the cratered character of the planet. By October 1, 1965, Mariner IV had extended the long-range communication record to 191 million miles; it has since been tracked to its maximum distance of 216 million miles. The various measurements of the Mars magnetic field, atmosphere, and ionosphere constitute significant firsts. Early Bird became the first operational commercial communication satellite. The first full global picture of the Earth’s cloud cover in a single day as it will be observed by tos was provided by tiros ix early in the year. In the Gemini program excellent pictures were obtained of the terrain and the gegenschein, a faint reflection of sunlight from materials dispersed throughout interplanetary space. It was clearly established that astronauts can perform scientific experiments in space, producing excellent usable results. "During 1965, 138 sounding rockets were launched to continue the investigation of our atmosphere, and to carry out exploratory space experiments. In support of the International Quiet Sun Year, the ship USNS Croatan launched some 77 rockets while sailing down the west coast of South America. Over 90 per cent of the sounding rocket launches and about 80 per cent of the payloads were successful, yielding data on cosmic rays, and the Earth’s atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetic field. A Goddard Space Flight Center sounding rocket observed the planet Mars in the ultraviolet, indicating an atmosphere pressure of about five millibars at the planet’s surface, which agrees well with the Mariner IV data. Other rocket flights made ultraviolet studies of the [Ikeya-Seki] Comet of 1965, and of the Sun in ultraviolet and X-ray wavelengths.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 341-5)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.	Mueller, speaking at meeting of Texas Radiation Advisory Board and Texas Atomic Energy Commission in Freeport, Texas, cited reasons that it was vital the U.S. be pre-eminent in space: "First, consider the national security, or peace-keeping, aspects. "Although our space program is a peaceful endeavor, it cannot help but have a profound effect on our future military position. Although there is no military space force in being in any nation’s arsenal, it would be disastrous for the United States to lack the basic understanding, the basic technology, and the basic engineering which would be required if an aggressor should choose to make space a battlefield. . . . "In the international arena, our space program—and Manned Space Flight in particular—may be considered as a measure of our ability to compete with a formidable rival, and as a criterion of our ability to maintain technological eminence. "The influence of our scientific and technological progress and prowess is and has been one of the deciding factors in keeping the Cold War peace over the past 20 years. . . . Should we fall behind in the area of space technology, we would jeopardize our national interests, on earth as well as in space.” (Text)
Research and development in essential space programs would not be seriously affected By demands of the Vietnam conflict, usaf Under Secretary Norman S. Paul told a National Space Club meeting in Washington, D.C. Asked during question and answer period for rough estimate of military manned spaceflight expenditures in the 1970s, Paul said that currently dod was spending $1.3 billion of its $7-billion R&D budget on space and that it was "a safe guess this amount will go up.” Asked if there might be NASA programs competitive with USAf’s Mol, Paul said there was "not the slightest possibility.” (Text; M/S Daily, 10/19/66, 20)
Dr. Robert M. Page, retired as chief scientist and director of research at Naval Research Laboratory after nearly 40 yrs. service. One of foremost U.S. experts on radar and a pioneer in space exploration and rocket astronomy, Dr. Page warned that U.S. research was being threatened by "dangerous trends and controls. ... A complete lack of confidence is being shown in the integrity and judgement of responsible operating officials which will certainly lead to bad management of Federal programs.” (Naval Research Lab.; Kluttz, Wash. Post, 1/8/67, A2) December 31: Boeing Co. and General Electric Co. had been selected to continue development and refinement of designs for first U.S. supersonic transport (Sst), FAA announced. Decision climaxed 30 mos. of intense competition between Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for airframe design; and GE and United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div. for engine design. Boeing’s 350-passenger, 1,800-mph, variable-sweep-wing model would be powered by four 4.5-ton GE engines capable of generating 600,000 lbs. thrust. Approval for prototype construction was expected in early 1967. (faa Release; AP, Wash. Post, 1/1/67, Al; Wash. Sun. Star, 1/1/67, A10)
Minneapolis Tribune polled 600 Minnesotans on whether U.S. or U.S.S.R. led in space exploration. 79% believed U.S. was ahead; 11% gave lead to U.S.S.R. June 1965 poll had indicated that 59% thought U.S. led, while 24% considered U.S.S.R. in front. Increased confidence in U.S. position was attributed to success of Gemini vii-vi rendezvous Dec. 15, 1965. 68% thought men could reach the moon and return safely, 56% believed U.S. would be first to do it, and 25% considered trip impossible. (Minn. Trib., 1/30/66)
Japan successfully launched four-stage Mu-1 rocket from Uchinoura Space Center, Kyushu Island, to test lst-stage fuel combustion and booster propulsion. The 70-ft.-long, solid-fueled launch vehicle was launched at 69° inclination and impacted in Pacific after 3-min. 20-sec. flight. Scientists called test "a success.” Mu was scheduled to orbit Japan’s first satellite by 1968. (AP, NYT, 11/1/66)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, incoming president of American Society for Public Administration (aspa), discussed responsibilities of administering a "Great Society” at aspa conference in Washington, D.C. Webb said that ". . . with the seething mass of humanity all around the world, not many of them very happy today, we have a strong requirement for effective administration, precision in the use of public power, for prediction, for planned use of limited resources. . . . "It seems to me that the public administrator in this period . . . must be a bigger, broader person than has been required in the past because the forces he must work with are so much larger, and yet so much more complex. . . . Somehow he must command the respect and following that will convert criticism from destruction of ideas to clarification and perfection of those ideas. ... I believe his performance will be measured ... by the scope and sweep of his vision and adjustment to some forces that will be beyond his ability to prediot or control; also his ability to ride the crest of the wave, that wave of the incoming tide of tomorrow that is now bringing in the fruits of a vital and vigorous society.” (Text) April 16: Preliminary results of flight of U.S.S.R.’s luna x, placed in circum-lunar orbit April 3 to become moon’s first artificial satellite, were announced at Moscow press conference. President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Mstislav Keldysh said that considerably less braking power had been required to put a spacecraft in orbit around the moon than had been required in a soft landing. This had made it possible to increase the payload in luna x and to equip it with instruments for important studies of the moon and the space surrounding it. Academician Aleksandr Vinogradov, geochemist, said that study of radioactivity of rocks on the lunar surface had indicated the overall intensity of gamma radiation on the lurain was comparable to the intensity of gamma radiation emitted by terrestrial granites [see April 13]. However, part of it was not due to natural radioactivity but to interaction of cosmic rays and lunar matter. Such radiation was absent in terrestrial rocks because of the shielding effect of the earth’s atmosphere. Lunar rocks were comparable in natural radioactivity to basalt rocks on earth, indicating that "the processes of the formation of the core of the planets of the earth group apparently have the same mechanism.” Prof. Naum Grigorov said readings of luna x’s magnetometer indicated presence near the moon of a weak, homogenous, and regular magnetic field. Streams of ions of small energies were registered. Analysis of materials transmitted by luna x showed the intensity of particles in the moon’s radiation belt was 100,000 times less than in the earth’s radiation belts. Prof. Alexandr Mikhailov, director of the Pulkovo Observatory, said existence of an artificial moon satellite was important not only for physical research, but also for determining more exactly the mass and shape of the moon—information vital for building an exact theory of the motion of the moon and for study of the unevenness of the earth’s rotation. Replying to questions, Academician Keldysh said luna x did not carry photocameras but was intended for physical study of near-lunar space and the moon itself—its nature, ionosphere, radiations, and fields. Satellite would orbit the moon for "a few years.” Duration could not be predicted since parameters of the moon’s gravitational field were not known. Keldysh said that since assembly of large spacecraft in orbit was an important step toward the conquest of outer space, cosmonauts were preparing for the solution of this task. Referring to the problem of manned flights to the moon, he stressed that the most difficult task to be solved was return of the spacecraft into earth’s atmosphere. Keldysh said dogs Veterok’s and Ugolyek’s passages through radiation belts in cosmos cx had had no apparently serious effect on them but that prolonged observations were necessary. (Tass, 4/18/66)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded three new study contracts totaling $400,000 to investigate launch vehicle needs and best methods for sending manned spacecraft on planetary flyby trips: North American Aviation, Inc., received $100,000 to study feasibility of modifying Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II) for use as an orbital injection stage; Douglas Aircraft Co., $100,000 for feasibility of using Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) as part of a planetary vehicle; and TRW Systems, Inc., $200,000 for alternate mission modes for manned Mars and Venus orbital and landing missions, (msfc Release 66-223)
NASA Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr reached 102-mi. (165km.) altitude in GSFC-Princeton Univ. Observatory experiment to study ultraviolet radiation from the star Epsilon Canis Majoris. Although spectrograph recording was limited by rocket’s low altitude, good spectral resolution was obtained and wavelength limit was extended shortward to lines never before observed, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
President Johnson transmitted his annual Report to the Congress on United States Aeronautics and Space Activities, calling 1965 "the most successful year in our history.” He said in the transmittal letter: "As our space program continues, the impact of its developments on everyday life becomes daily more evident. It continues to stimulate our education, improve our material well being, and broaden the horizons of knowledge. It is also a powerful force for peace.” He cited U.S. accomplishments in the Gemini, Ranger, Mariner, and Early Bird programs. "Research and development in our space program continued to speed progress in medicine, in weather prediction, in electronics—and, indeed, in virtually every aspect of American science and technology.” Among chief aeronautical developments report cited "design refinement and wind-tunnel testing” of Sst and decision to build C-5A jet transport. Among successful U.S. launches during 1965, DOD had 67 satellites, 34 of which were unidentified. Military space programs were discussed, including Project West Ford; Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol); Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project; and the geodetic Secor satellites. Research was under way on the best means of determining physical characteristics of "uncooperating objects in earth orbit” through observation by ground-based radar. The section on aec said that a third pair of Vela radiation-detection satellites launched in July 1965 was watching for nuclear explosions in space and measuring x-ray emissions from the sun. In a separate chapter of the report, the nasc said: "This Nation’s space achievements during the year were so distinctive in quality and quantity as to cause people, at home and abroad, to conclude the United States had attained the space leadership of the world.” The Council said that in many respects this conclusion was correct "but it would be incorrect and unwise to minimize the vitality and size of the space program of the U.S.S.R.” (Text; CR, 1/31/66, A419; Pres. Doc., 2/7/66, 149)
Aerospace industry believed 4,000-mph hypersonic transport (Hst) could be ready for commercial service in 1990’s—but only if Government would support its development, Richard Cooke reported in the Wall Street Journal. "Aerospace . . . officials agree that the rate at which new developments in air transportation come along will hinge in large measure on Government policy. They note that the military has sponsored the development of every large American jet engine. . . . A military version of the craft will almost certainly have to precede the commercial one—but right now there’s no driving military sponsor at high level behind these advanced materials and engines.” Development of Hst would require new heat-resistant materials, a more efficient fuel, and higher-capacity engine. (Cooke, WSJ, 12/29/66)
Editorial comment on U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement on space law treaty announced Dec. 8. New York Times: "No one has yet demonstrated that there would be any military advantage to placing bombs either in orbit or on celestial bodies. But there is a clear need both for space law and for reducing the wasteful competition in space exploration. The ability of Moscow and Washington to reach agreement . . . offers hope of further East-West cooperation on space problems.” (NYT, 12/10/66, 36C) Washington Daily News: ". .. reason and peacefulness have prevailed. And we will all benefit. There will be no military bases or forts, no testing of weapons and tactics—nor their threat or expense. And no claims to territory in space, and thus no arguments and battles over conflicting claims.” (Wash. Daily News, 12/10/66) Washington Post: ". . . the treaty can be applauded for the good that it has achieved as of today; and it can be praised for the larger good that it will do tomorrow when the practical aspects of space relations have become infinitely more pressing. The world will surely have occasion to look back to this day as one that set the nations on the right path and on which the great powers made a wise decision to shun the military exploitation of celestial bodies and of outer space for narrow, nationalistic purposes.” (Wash. Post, 12/10/66)
Astronaut Bruce McCandless II, discussing role of manned space flight in science in address before Washington, D.C., Junior Academy of Sciences’ annual meeting, concluded: "Man is flexible; he is capable of responding to unforeseen situations intelligently and effectively. He has a limited and on-the-spot redesign capability built in and contributes to mission success through improved reliability. He is capable of evaluating and screening information and making decisions accordingly and independently. As long as these elements are required, man’s participation will be beneficial.” (Text)
Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator (1958-1961), was elected a director of Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., producer of industrial gases and chemicals. Dr. Glennan was currently president of Associated Universities which operated Brookhaven National Laboratory for aec and National Radio Astronomy Observatory under nsf sponsorship. (,NYT, 8/3/66, 50)
Proposal for an "international research program for the establishment of contact with extraterrestrial civilizations” was sent to International Astronomical Union by unidentified Soviet astronomers, Tass reported. The scientists believed search for extraterrestrial life should concentrate first on radiation from stars within 1,000-light-yr. radius from the three nearest galaxies. Kommunist, party’s major theoretical journal, said that question of the existence of other civilizations, and the establishment of contact with them was one of three "fundamental problems” confronting astrophysics. (Zorza, Wash. Post, 2/5/66, A7; AP, NYT, 2/3/66, 9)
gsfc Nimbus Project Manager Harry Press told Aviation Week that Nimbus B would move nasa’s weather satellite program into a second generation research and development effort by starting the measurement of fundamental quantities in the atmosphere necessary in new analytical weather-forecasting formulas. Nimbus B, third and largest in nasa’s meteorological satellite series, would carry seven major experiments: infrared interferometer spectrometer; satellite infrared spectrometer; image dissector camera system; high-resolution infrared radiometer; monitor for ultraviolet solar energy; medium-resolution infrared radiometer; and interrogation, recording, locating system. In addition, Nimbus B would carry Snap-19 radioisotope thermal generators capable of producing 60 w of power to supplement solar panels and determine feasibility of radioisotope generators for ultimate operational weather satellite system. Scheduled for launch in 1967 with Extended Thrust Augmented Thor-Agena D launch vehicle, Nimbus B would use basic Nimbus spacecraft configuration, but would require strengthened structural elements because of its additional weight. Press said the two major control difficulties which had shortened the August 1964 nimbus i mission had been analyzed and corrected on Nimbus C, scheduled for launch in 1966. A larger solar array drive motor, equipped with heat-conducting strap that would lower operating temperature of motor almost 100°C and with improved grease, would be substituted on Nimbus C for smaller motor whose failure had left NIMBUS i’s solar panels locked in near-vertical position when it apparently overheated and its grease failed to lubricate. Also, attempts would be made during Nimbus C mission to rely on the flywheels to dampen spacecraft oscillations and to use the gas thruster system as little as possible, Press said, nimbus i had spun about its roll axis when its depreciating power supply had caused its batteries to feed lower voltages to the attitude control electronics system and the thrusters had fired excessive amounts of cold freon gas. (Av. Wk., 1/3/66, 52, 53)
nasa, Japanese Science and Technology Agency, and Japanese Meteorological Agency agreed to launch jointly 10 Japanese MT-135 sounding rockets beginning in March 1967 to study rocket and payload performance and gain information on diurnal cycles of wind and temperature in the stratosphere. MT-135 could boost 6.6-lb. payload to 200,000-ft. (322,000-km.) altitude, (nasa Release 66-331)
NASA announced sponsorship during 1967 of seven specialized summer programs of research and study for about 245 college and university faculty members in engineering and science. Developed by nasa and American Society for Engineering Education, programs would combine space research at NASA centers and parallel seminar-type studies at adjacent universities. Fellowships would be available for about 225 faculty members. Participating were: (1) Univ. of Alabama, Auburn Univ., and MSFC; (2) Case Institute of Technology and LRC; (3) Univ. of Houston, Texas a&m Univ., and MSC; (4) Univ. of Maryland, Catholic Univ., and gsfc; (5) Virginia Associated Research Center (Univ. of Virginia, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, and College of William and Mary) and LaRC. Also, NASA would sponsor five-week summer faculty program in space physics at Yeshiva Univ. in cooperation with Goddard Institute of Space Studies, (nasa Release 66-305)
Commentary on numerous reports of Ufo sightings: Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said Ufo’s were "purely American phenomena.” What people really see "is most likely weather balloons, meteorites, fireballs, re-entry of nose cones or other space debris. No trained observer or astronomer has ever reported such a sighting.” Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: "Sir Bernard Lovell, the eminent British astronomer who runs the Jodrell Bank space observatory, believes that seeing ufos ... is strictly an American phenomenon. "Maybe he is right, but IF Americans are seeing ufos, and IF there are visitations from outer space, it may be that the terrestrial visitors believe that only America is worth investigating.” (Phil. Eve. Bull., 4/26/66) Rev. Francis J. Heydon, professor of astronomy at Georgetown Univ., said that people "are seeing things,” but that reports of flying saucers would "doubtless increase. The phenomenon of flying saucers is 100 percent imagination.” Roscoe Drummond, Washington Post: "History is littered with examples of the most eminent scientists who were dead certain that things couldn’t be done . . . and wrote with great displays of scientific evidence to prove that they couldn’t be wrong. We need more objective investigation than we have been getting. The scientific unbelievers may be right—but they could be totally wrong. They have been before.” Howard Simons, Washington Post: ". . . scientists point out that even traveling at the speed of light, which is 186,000 miles per second, whoever it is that is buzzing America in a flying saucer or saucers would have to have left the nearest galaxy 50,000 years ago.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/25/66, A2; Wash. Eve. Star, 4/18/66; Drummond, Wash. Post, 4/6/66, A25; Simons, Wash. Post, 4/24/66, A25)
Optimism about man’s ability to perform useful work in space was expressed by Dr. Charles Berry, msc Director of Flight Research and Operations, in telephone interview with Washington Post writer J. V. Reistrup. Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., had demonstrated problems involved when he had left gemini xi spacecraft Sept. 13 to perform seemingly simple tasks and had exerted enough energy to raise his heart rate to peak 180 beats a minute. Berry said there was a "tremendous amount of effort involved in getting into position for performing basic tasks”; once "positioning” was solved, jobs could be done. The problem was to set up each activity to require minimum effort. (Reistrup, Wash. Post, 9/18/66, A4)
France’s President Charles de Gaulle watched launch of cosmos cxxn unmanned satellite from Baikonur cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, into 625-km. (388-mi.) altitude circular orbit with 65° inclination and 97.1min. period. Tass said all instruments aboard satellite were functioning normally. De Gaulle was first Westerner to witness a Soviet launching and to visit Baikonur space center. (Tass, 6/25/66; Tanner, NYT, 6/26/66, 1; Wash. Post, 6/26/66, A20; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/26/66, A8)
Dr. Ivan L. Bennett, Jr., Deputy Director of White House’s Office of Science and Technology, warned in speech at seminar on Research in the Service of Man in Oklahoma City that unless scientists "educated” the President and "other intelligent, concerned laymen” about the applicability of their work, their fields of research would suffer. Science, he said, could no longer hope to exist "through some mystique, without constraints or scrutiny in terms of material goals, and isolated from the competition for allocation of resources which are finite.” (Sullivan, NYT, 10/25/66, 78M)
Sen. Karl Mundt (R-S.D.) informed Senate that Subcommittee on Government Research expected to make specific recommendations to improve Federally-financed research and development program, for which almost $16 billion was being expended during FY 1966. Sen. Mundt, ranking minority member of the subcommittee, said primary task of group was to determine and enunciate a more definitive, longer-ranging science policy. He said U.S. had reached the crossroads, where "it has become painfully obvious that we cannot continue to support all who demand support, but must be selective in the allocation of research funds.” This indicated that one of the most pressing questions was how to direct NASA efforts, with Apollo program reaching its goal and no follow-on approved: "nasa now is on the threshold of placing a man on the Moon within this decade. After this what? This question concerns the leaders of this fine NASA organization as well as its highly trained, scientific and technical staff. Where do we turn? Shall the space program continue on its present course, or shall it be broadened to better serve the everyday needs of the American people? This is a priority crossroads. . . .” (CR, 5/16/66, 10212)
U.S.S.R. was developing booster with 7.5- to 10-million-lbs. thrust—enough to send a man to the moon or past Mars, unnamed sources reported. Evidence presumably had been gathered by U.S. reconnaissance satellites. (Clark, NYT, 9/13/66, 28; Simons, Wash. Post, 9/11/66, Al) After initial docking, crew executed four practice docks and spent sleep period attached to gatv. Gordon began planned 107-min. Eva on schedule at 23:58 get, but ten minutes later, after setting up movie camera, retrieving micrometeoroid experiment, and attaching Agena’s 100-ft. tether to gemini xi’s docking bar, had to rest astride gatv. When blinded in his right eye by perspiration, Gordon was ordered by Conrad at 24:02 get to cancel power-tool evaluation experiment and return to cabin. At 40:58 get, following crew’s second sleep period, mated spacecraft used gatv’s primary propulsion system (pps) to attain orbit with 851-mi. apogee—record altitude for manned space flight. After two revolutions, second pps burn restored docked configuration to approximately 185-mi.-altitude circular orbit. At 46:58 get Gordon opened hatch to begin 2 hr. 8 min. standup Eva during which several photographic experiments were conducted. Tether dynamics exercise followed: gemini xi undocked from gatv and moved to end of 100-ft. tether which was supposed to hold two spacecraft on vertical line pointing earthward, proving that two objects could fly in formation for long duration without using maneuvering fuel. When vehicles began to drift, Conrad initiated slow rotation with appropriate spacecraft maneuvers, creating slight centrifugal force which kept tether taut and spacecraft at controlled distance. After separation from Agena during sleep period, Conrad executed successful re-rendezvous—added to flight plan because of gemini xi’s favorable fuel supply. Reentry Sept. 15 in 45th revolution after 71 hrs. 17 min. of flight was first in U.S. space program to be guided automatically by computer which fed commands directly to thrusters. Splashdown of gemini xi in the Atlantic 700 mi. from Cape Kennedy—within two miles of target— and recovery operations by crew of U.S.S. Guam were carried on live television via eably bikd i comsat. usn pararescue team, dropped from helicopters, attached flotation collar to spacecraft. Astronauts were flown by helicopter to recovery ship, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-226; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/66, Al, A6; 9/14/66, Al, 'A14; 9/15/66, Al, A6; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 9/13/66, Al, A3; 9/14/66, Al, A3; 9/15/66, Al, A6; 9/16/66, Al, A5; Wilford, NYT, 9/13/66, 1, 28; 9/14/66, 1, 32; 9/15/66, 1, 26; 9/16/66, 1, 24) Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh and honorary RAes president, said in a centenary address that ". . . making the right selection in research programmes and development projects has become crucial to the whole of aeronautical evolution. . . .” Risks involved in the total investment necessary for success, he said, had led European nations to "the obvious answer”—international cooperation: "If it is important to see that aviation is fitted into the national economy in such a way as to enable it to function most efficiently, it is even more important to work out an international structure which will enhance and encourage the chances of success rather than frustrate and defeat them.” (Hersey, A&A, 11/66, 126-30; Text, A&A, 12/66, 32-4)
George A. Lemke, Director of Apollo Reliability and Quality, NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, died at age 54. A veteran of more than 26 years in aircraft and space industry, Mr. Lemke had formerly been NASA Apollo Project Resident Manager at North American Aviation, Inc. (nasa Hq. Bull.)
faa Administrator William F. McKee announced that Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff would serve as a consultant on faa research and development efforts—particularly in supersonic transport (Sst) program— while continuing to serve as Special Assistant to NASA Administrator. (faa Release 66-30)
New studies of Martian atmosphere had rekindled hope of finding life on Mars, Dr. Lewis D. Kaplan of Jpl reported at Western meeting of American Chemical Society in San Francisco. French scientists Drs. Pierre and Janine Connes of the Observatory of Haut-Provence, using improved spectroscopic equipment designed by Dr. Connes, had found concentration of hydrogen compounds around Mars 1,000 times greater than in earth’s atmosphere. Dr. Kaplan, who analyzed observations obtained, said the hydrogen compounds—considered necessary to life— probably included methane derivatives and perhaps methane itself. Methane appears on earth as gaseous hydrocarbon product of decomposed organic matter and is known to he produced by anaerobic bacteria not requiring the oxygen essential to most life on earth. Dr. Kaplan’s work was sponsored by NASA and by France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes) and the Meudon Observatory. (AP, NYT, 10/18/66, 9)
nasa Lewis Research Center had awarded General Dynamics’ Convair Div. a $15,565,331, fixed-price contract to fabricate and assemble five additional Centaur stages for future space missions, (nasa Release 66-253)
In a lecture at Rice Univ., Dr. Henry Faul of the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest’s geosciences division insisted on the terrestrial origin of tektites in opposition to lunar-origin theory of many experts: "The fatal objection to the theory that tektites are of lunar origin is the fact that there is no known mechanism of flight that can explain how something that hits the moon, generates a lot of heat and is melted into a jet stream, is somehow dumped in the widely varying patterns and areas where tektites have been found on earth.” (Justice, Houston Post, 4/19/66)
Editorial comment on President Johnson’s proposal: ". . . In addition to rules governing space exploration a body of law is needed to govern the exploitation of useful resources that may conceivably be found on other solar bodies. Omission of this topic from the first international treaty on space law could produce future difficulties. But the President may well have felt that any present attempt to reach agreement on this delicate matter might prolong negotiations beyond the time of the first manned lunar landing. . . . There is no time to lose in getting international agreement to and ratification of this essential document.” (NYT, 5/9/66, 36) ". . . Someday such a treaty may save us from a new sort of far-out interplanetary imperialism. As revived by Mr. Johnson, however, the proposal has to do with a problem that will develop sooner and closer to home. After all between now and 1969 or 1970, Americans are going to be lofted to the moon’s surface, and so are Russians. This is a prospect full of very great historic importance. It lends special force to the President’s call for a renewed effort ... to negotiate an understanding under which the always unpredictable Russians will sign a treaty worthy of the name. . . .” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/10/66, A6) "The first manned landing on the moon seems likely before 1970. The implications are immense, regardless of whether the first one is American or Russian. President Johnson’s proposal for an international compact to govern this and outer space explorations makes much sense. ". . .Perhaps a willingness by Moscow to entertain a treaty on space may also open the door to discussions about pooling some of the costs, as the late President Kennedy proposed.” (Boston Globe, 5/11/66) ". . . Probably the most succinct argument against a comprehensive treaty of this nature is, 'Who needs it?’ Monopolization of the lunar surface by military units and establishment of terror weapons on the moon or in orbit appear to be neither immediate dangers nor remote possibilities. The bugaboo of an orbiting multimegaton H-bomb seems, on close examination, to be more trouble than it would be worth. . . . "There is no slightest indication that the Russians propose to lay claim to the moon if their cosmonauts get there first, any more than we do if we win the race. The precedent followed by both countries in Antarctica—nearest thing to the moon on earth—is neither to assert nor to recognize territorial claims. This was U.S. and Soviet policy before the Antarctic Treaty was signed in 1959. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/12/66, A20)
LaRC awarded 7-mo. study contracts, valued at $390,000 each, to Northrop Corp. and Fairchild-Hiller Corp. to design V/Stol aircraft for research on handling qualities and operation during instrument approach in the terminal area. Aircraft would be used by NASA and usaf to gather flight research information necessary to improve operation of V/Stol jet aircraft in hovering and transition speed range. (nasa Release 66-259)
Roll D. Ginter, nasa Centaur Program Manager, became Director of oart’s newly established Space Flight Programs Div. He would be responsible for mission planning, management, and coordination of technology space flight projects and experiments within OART. (nasa Release 66-276)
Independent Offices Appropriations Bill H.R. 14921 for FY 1967 was reported to the House and scheduled for floor action May 10. Appropriations Committee recommended $4,245,000,000 for NASA research and development, compared to $4,248,235,000 authorized by House; $75,000,000 for construction of facilities, compared to $94,419,000 authorized by House; and $630,000,000 for administrative operations, compared to $644,210,150 authorized by House. Total recommendation was $4,950,000,000, compared to $4,986,864,150 authorized by House. (Text; nasa lar V/75, 5/5/66)
Charles W. Mathews, msc Gemini Program Manager, was named Director of Saturn-Apollo Applications in NASA Hq. Office of Manned Space Flight. He would replace M/G David M. Jones (usaf), Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Programs, who had been Acting Director, (nasa Release 66-310)
Commenting on national space goals in the post-Apollo period, Henry Simmons said in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "NASA over the past year quietly shifted its emphasis from an aap exploiting already financed Apollo hardware for alternate missions to a much vaster aap involving outlays on the scale of the Apollo lunar effort itself to support an intensive follow-on effort extending perhaps to 1975. Some NASA Centers engaged in the Apollo program, and particularly the Marshall Space Flight Center, are already confronted with the prospect of unemployment among their most skilled and valuable design personnel. 'We are right now in the position where over the next six months the engineers who did the original design on the Saturn and probably a year from now those who did it on the Apollo will be out of work,’ NASA Administrator James Webb told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during its hearings last August on post-Apollo goals. . . .” (A&A, 2/66, 5)	...
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller spoke of reliability and quality assurance in the manned space flight program at the Annual Symposium on Reliability in San Francisco: "We have . . . had to organize our mission reliability around the concept of a very exhaustive ground test program, with a detailed, recorded tracking of the history and experience of every part, from the original developer-fabricator’s plant, through the entire chain of subcontractor and contractor activities, to the final, completed article on the launch pad. By this thorough and repeated testing under every environmental condition that it is possible to simulate, and by understanding and correcting each test failure or performance discrepancy, we believe we can achieve the required high reliability whereby we will be justified in conducting major missions on the second, third or fourth vehicle, rather than on the thirtieth or the hundredth as in Gemini and Mercury.” (Text)
nasa announced Atlas-Centaur booster would replace Atlas-Agena for launching Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) satellites and Applications Technology Satellites (Ats) D and E. Launches were scheduled to begin in 1968. Centaur stage—first to use liquid hydrogen as a fuel—was capable of boosting about 40 per cent greater payload than the Agena into near-earth orbit and about three times the payload on lunar trajectory, (nasa Release 66-328)
Gov. Edmund Brown of California told aerospace executives meeting in Los Angeles of plans to create state-level Office of Science and Technology to provide liaison between Government and industry in using aerospace skills to solve civilian problems. Five state contracts had been let for preliminary study of the problems, using the aerospace "systems engineering” approach. Brown said state’s studies "not only demonstrated that the systems analysis concept would work” but also that "in some cases it was the only concept that would cut through the red tape and the customs arising from generations of solving social problems in the same old ways.” (Sederberg, L.A. Times, 8/26/66; CR, 8/29/66, 20129-30)
First new comet in 1966 was discovered by Stephen Kilston, recent Harvard Univ. graduate, at Lick Observatory, San Jose, Calif., and confirmed Aug. 9 by Central Telegram Bureau, Smithsonian Astro-physical Observatory. Named for its discoverer, Comet Kilston had a magnitude of plus 10.6 and could be seen in the constellation Hercules, apparently moving southeast. (AP, NYT, 8/10/66, 5; AP, Wash. Post, 8/10/66, A5; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/10/66, B4)
usn’s Pacific Missile Range reported 2,608 live missile firings in record total of 13,155 operations during FY 1966. (SBD, 7/19/66, 93) During June: Lurain as seen by surveyor i Science Evaluation Analysis Team after preliminary analysis of data was a dark, relatively smooth, gently rolling plain "the consistency of a freshly turned field,” studded with craters ranging in diameter from one inch to several hundreds of feet and littered with fragmental debris ranging in size from few hundredths of an inch to more than three feet. Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, U.S. Geological Survey, said terrestrial scenery most closely resembling the lurain as seen by surveyor i would be Sedan crater at aec’s Nevada Test site—large crater covered with small craters and "secondary ejecta” resulting from explosion of subsurface nuclear device. Lurain appeared to be composed of soil-like substance, or a fine sand, with rougher material through it. It appeared to be about three feet deep with harder surface beneath. Surface had dynamic bearing strength of 6-10 psi. Leonard Jaffe, nasa Project Surveyor scientist, noted that results of surveyor i could be summarized by list of previous theories on nature of lurain that had been disproved: surface was not composed of hard rock; it was not composed of one piece of very porous rock; it was not covered by a layer of loose dust either thick or thin; it was a finely granulated material with particles that cohered to each other but did not seem particularly attracted to spacecraft; it was heavy enough for man to walk and work on and for a properly designed spacecraft to land on; and it reflected accurate radar signal from surface, not from subsurface substance. Jaffe noted there were a few hazards to manned spacecraft, mostly from large rocks and possibility of sinkage, but emphasized data so far indicated surface was adequate for landing Apollo Lem. There appeared to be two different types of rocks near surveyor i: one with pitted, spongy surface that appeared to be caused by molten rock that had cooled and from which gas had escaped; the other harder, smoother surfaced, and smaller grained. surveyor i photographs were considered superior to U.S.S.R.’s luna ix results because (1) camera was higher so that horizon was 10 times farther away; (2) camera resolution was greater (down to l/50th of an inch); camera worked longer and took more photos under different light angles, surveyor i’s pictures of its own footpad had yielded data on surface and subsurface composition. (Clark, NYT, 6/8/66, 1; 6/17/66, 15; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 0/11/06, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 6/19/66, 14F; SBD, 6/20/66, 297) During June: NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., writing in Astronautics & Aeronautics, outlined choices in "potential manned-spaceflight missions of the next generation” and argued for taking up the preliminary options now. He selected what he called "three natural, potential targets” for major extensions of manned space flight. First of these he saw as "a spacefaring research and operations center in earth orbit,” described as a "large, permanent, manned space facility” that would "make possible whole new ranges of experiments, investigations, and operations.” Second choice was "the moon itself... following up the initial exploratory landings with a permanent lunar base.” Third objective could be "manned surface exploration of Mars” within context of "extension of the lunar-landing experience to the near planets.” Citing both advantages and difficulties of the latter, he said: "Such an effort would represent a greater national commitment of far longer duration than our commitment in 1961 to a manned lunar landing, and would generate proportionately increased industrial, university, and government activities. Significant advances in virtually every field of space-related technology would be required. The increase in scientific knowledge from direct, firsthand observation and experimentation on another planet, however, has not yet been measured against the direct cost of its achievement, or against the more subtle cost of longterm dedication to a given course of action, with its inherent loss of national flexibility in allocation of the limiting resources—technical and scientific manpower.” (A&A, 6/66, 30-33)
usaf pilots Col. Robert L. Stephens and L/Col. Walter F. Daniel received official certificates from President Johnson for establishing three absolute and six jet-class world records May 1, 1965, in YF-12A aircraft. Col. Stephens had set new speed record of more than 2,070 mph and new altitude record of 80,259 ft. Col. Daniel had set new speed records for straight course of over 2,000 mph and on closed course of 1,688 mph. Records were formerly held by U.S.S.R. (Pres. Doc., 8/1/66, 1000)
Materials Research Center at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute—$1.6 million, NASA-sponsored facility—and adjoining Engineering Science Research Building—built with Rensselaer funds and matching nsf grant—were dedicated at Troy, N.Y. Principal speaker at ceremony, which climaxed two-day "Man and Materials” symposium, was NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Rensselaer had received first grant under NASA program for establishment of interdisciplinary centers at selected universities, (rpi Release, 4/2/66)
European Space Research Institute (esrin) had begun operations in a temporary location in the Park Hotel, Frascati, Italy. A center of the European Space Research Organization (esro), it would work initially on plasma physics and its application to spacecraft control as well as plans for proposed esro astronomical observatory. Permanent facilities were planned near the Italian Atomic Energy Authority’s research center. (M&R, 1/24/66, 7)
In speech at Univ. of Missouri on impact of Federal research and development expenditures on American colleges and universities, Leo S. Tonkin, Executive Director of D.C. Commissioners’ Council on Higher Education, cited statement by two NASA employees on problems involved in awarding research grants. Dr. Thomas P. Murphy, Deputy Assistant Administrator for Legal Affairs, and Dr. Thomas W. Adams, Socio-Political Specialist for Office of Policy Planning, said in a paper presented at 1965 annual apsa meeting: "Can a mission-oriented agency use geography as a criterion in awarding grants, recognizing full well that it concomitantly will sacrifice time, quality, and money in the process? When grants are given to one institution on grounds other than merit, there is little basis for denying similar grants to other universities which would not normally merit them.” (Text; CR, 2/23/66)
Proposal by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to establish nonmilitary global navigation system had been rejected by interdepartmental committee after two-year study. Leonard Jaffe, Director of nasa’s Communication and Navigation Programs Div., and chairman of the committee, said in interview with Aviation Week that further research and development were required. "Low-keyed” study effort planned by nasa would include award of more feasibility study contracts to industry and test of navigation equipment on Applications Technology Satellite (Ats) mission, during which voice transmissions would be made to aircraft. Report of committee, which included representatives from nasa, faa, dod, and Dept, of Interior, would be submitted to Congress in several weeks. (Av. Wk., 9/12/66, 38; Tech. Wk., 9/19/66, 3)
Purposes of Saturn/Apollo Applications program, M/G David M. Jones (usaf), nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in an interview in Data magazine, were to serve as transition program from Apollo to next space goal and to accomplish "significant scientific experiments.” Apollo Program Director M/G Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) said in an ' interview in the same issue that "barring some major setback, some major failure in a static test on the ground or major failure on a flight, it is reasonable to expect that the lunar landing . . . will be accomplished before the end of 1969.” (Data, 6/66, 27, 32)
1966’s second new comet—first with a tail—had been discovered by Dr. Roberto Barbon, Italian astronomer visiting Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar Observatories, and confirmed by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Named for its discoverer, ninth magnitude object was in constellation Cetus. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 9/6/66, 46)
oao i Orbiting Astronomical Observatory was launched by nasa from etr with Atlas-Agena D booster into parking orbit and then into planned circular orbit. Orbital parameters: 505.4-mi. (813.3-km.) apogee; 493.2-mi. (793.7-km.) perigee; 101-min. period; and 35° inclination. Satellite's solar panels and instrumented booms would be deployed April 10. First of four spacecraft scheduled for nasa’s Oao program, oao i— largest, heaviest, and most electronically complex unmanned spacecraft ever developed by U.S.—weighed 3,900 lbs., carried 10 telescopes, and contained 44,000 separate parts and 30 mi. of electrical wiring. It carried four scientific experiments to provide astronomers with their first sustained look at the universe from above the earth’s atmosphere, including Univ. of Wisconsin broad-band ultraviolet telescope package and detection devices to study the ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma-ray regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Through its complex ground-command spacecraft attitude control system, oao i would be aimed at individual objects in space with precision never before attained by an orbiting satellite. Information from experiments would be radioed back to earth in the form of digital data for analysis by experimenters. Oao program was managed by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 66-60; NYT, 4/9/66, 7; NYT, 4/10/66, 10E)
Former Vice President Richard Nixon told a Republican fund-raising dinner in Houston that U.S. should divert some of its space exploration funds to the Vietnam war effort. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/4/66, A36)
Changes in organizational structure of NASA Hq. were effective this date. Most important change was establishment of an organizational unit called the Office of the Administrator, which included the Deputy Administrator and his staff, the Associate Administrator and his staff, and the Executive Secretariat, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., newly appointed Deputy Administrator, was continuing to serve as Associate Administrator. Willis H. Shapley, Associate Deputy Administrator, serving as the principal assistant to Administrator James E. Webb and to Dr. Seamans, was responsible for policy planning and for general supervision of the agency’s work processes. The Executive Secretariat, headed by Col. Lawrence W. Vogel (usa), was responsible for channeling and scheduling work within the Office of the Administrator. Earl D. Hilburn continued as Deputy Associate Administrator. Director of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, Edmond C. Buckley, became Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition. (Other Associate Administrators were Dr. George E. Mueller, Manned Space Flight; Dr. Homer E. Newell, Space Science and Applications; and Dr. Mac C. Adams, Advanced Research and Technology.) Four Deputy Associate Administrators became Assistant Administrators: William B. Rieke, Industry Affairs; D. D. Wyatt, Programming; Adm. W. Fred Boone, Defense Affairs; and John D. Young, Administration. These were in addition to the four existing Assistant Administrators: Richard L. Callaghan, Legislative Affairs; Arnold W. Frutkin, International Affairs; Julian W. Scheer, Public Affairs; and Breene M. Kerr, Technology Utilization. Kerr also was serving as Assistant Administrator for Policy Analysis (formerly Policy Planning), (nasa Release 66-3; Organ. Chart, 1/2/66; NN 1132)
In msc ceremony, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented Gemini x Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins nasa Exceptional Service Medals for "outstanding contribution to space flight and engineering,” and the astronauts reviewed their July 18-21 mission for the press. Pilot Collins revealed that maneuvering difficulties during his walk in space had forced him to approach Gatv vm three times before successfully retrieving a micrometeoroid experiment. He felt the "basic problem” in Eva was that "without some sort of handholds or restraining devices, a large percentage of the astronaut’s time is going to be devoted to torquing his body around until it is in the proper position to do some useful work.” Command Pilot Young said mission’s fuel shortage had been caused by large out-of-plane error, not human error as previously believed: "We had to use a brute force method of rendezvous [with gatv x]. That takes quite a lot of fuel.” (Transcript)
Gemini vii Astronaut Frank Borman told a British television audience in London that the space vehicle, not man, was limiting the length of manned space flight. "We are finding that man is very adaptable and that if you provide him with the normal comforts he expects on earth, he can function as well at zero gravity as he can on earth.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/9/66, A2)
N. A. Zakharov, chief of Soviet Civil Aircraft Research Institute, announced that U.S.S.R. would construct 220-passenger, 560-mph Tu-154 subsonic airliner to replace the Tu-104, 11-18, and An-10. New Yak-40 short-haul aircraft, designed to carry 24 passengers up to 375-mi. distances at 275 mph, was already under construction and would replace the Li-2 and An-2. (Pravda, 8/1/66, 6)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, outlining the NASA manned spaceflight program at American Assn, of School Administrators meeting in Atlantic City, discussed the benefits to man on earth of the Apollo Applications program: ". . . man would have the capability of establishing world-wide, real-time television by placing large antennas and powerful transmitters into synchronous orbit; of establishing control towers in space both for aircraft and ocean-going ships; of using space observations to identify and exploit earth’s natural resources; and of controlling the weather.” (Text)
Col. Jack Bollerud (usaf) was named Acting Director, Space Medicine, NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, and would assume all duties assigned to the late Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace. He would also continue to discharge the functions of Deputy Director, Space Medicine, a position he had held since May 1965. (NASA Hq. Bull., 2/14/66, 2)
Giss marked fifth anniversary with lecture by Dr. Harold C. Urey, prof, of chemistry at large, Univ. of California, La Jolla. Reception preceding lecture had honored Dr. Urey’s 73rd birthday on April 28. (Goddard News, 5/30/66, 8) During April: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Special Assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb and aiaa President, sought to define the role of a professional and of a professional society in an editorial in Astronautics & Aeronautics. ". . . in my reading of the history of science and technology, I have been impressed by the key role of individuals who related science and technology to social needs. I would suggest that they are the professionals, and that a true profession deliberately exercises science and technology to meet social needs. "Unlike most professional and technical societies, aiaa composes a wide variety of engineers and physical and life scientists. Yet definite social concerns bind us in a single profession—society’s expressed need to transport goods and people by atmospheric flight and to explore space. . . .” (A&A, 4/66, 30-31)
France had requested that Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., photograph sodium vapor trail of Centaure sounding rocket during NASA’s Gemini XII mission scheduled for launch Nov. 9. Sounding rocket—to study winds up to 400 mph at high altitudes— would be launched from Hammaguir Range on signal from Gemini Mission Control at MSC. Experiment would be first by foreign government to be part of a U.S. manned space flight. {Wash. Post, 10/23/66, A10; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 10/23/66, A7)
NASA Langley Research Center had invited four aircraft manufacturers— Boeing Co., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Douglas Aircraft Co., and General Dynamics Corp.—to submit by Sept. 30 proposals for a research program to reduce noise generated by commercial jet transports, (nasa Release 66-242)
M2-F2 lifting body mated to B-52 launch aircraft at NASA Flight Research Center, in preparation for flight tests. for a space mission, Sedov said it would be economically and scientifically feasible, but "we don’t have any plans for joint launchings. The situation is not technical but political and I think the international situation in these days cann'ot change this.” (Wilford, NYT, 10/13/66,12) October 12: iaf conferees toured the nasa-inta Robledo de Chavela Space Tracking Station outside Madrid. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/14/66, 1)
Resources of U.S. space program were minimal "while the Russians apparently are increasing theirs,” Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told a news conference at mtf. "Competition in space is not lessening with time, but rather is increasing. What is needed is a clear definition of where the nation is going in space after the moon is explored.” (Russell, Miami Her., 5/3/66)
U.S.S.R. pilot Aleksey Anosov had established new world’s distance record for helicopter with 1,509-km. (938-mi.) flight in MI-1 helicopter from Sumi in the Ukraine to the Orenburg region in the Urals. Previous record of 900 mi. (1,449 km.) had been set by Capt. Chester R. Radcliffe, Jr. (usaf), July 5, 1962. (Wash. Post, 9/14/66, B2) a NASA manned space flight program, the greater part of logistics is not being provided by the Department of Defense. . . . "However, the need for increasing the emphasis on logistics management for Apollo is great. . . . "The Apollo Saturn space vehicle involves 20,000 contractors and subcontractors and has more than 900,000 individual parts. The Saturn V first stage holds 56 tank cars of propellants. The second and third stages of Saturn V transported by water during the Apollo program will spend a total of 700 days at sea. Apollo program transportation by all modes will require coordination with nine Government agencies. The launch windows for the Apollo lunar mission are relatively small, malfunctions on the pad must be kept to a minimum while corrective maintenance must be extremely fast and reliable. All of these elements make the Apollo logistics program both complicated and costly. . . .” (msfc Release 66-202; Text)
House passed H.R. 6125 amending Air Museum Act to authorize construction of a National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., to replace the National Air Museum, Museum, to be completed in five years at an estimated $40 million, would house permanent exhibits of space exploration and be part of the Smithsonian Institution. The NASA Administrator would serve on its advisory board. (NASA LAR V/20)
President Johnson, in 10th anniversary edition of Russian-language America Illustrated, published by usia for distribution in U.S.S.R., appealed to Soviet people for new era of friendship and understanding between the two countries. Johnson said "constructive steps” toward that goal would be "progress in the field of disarmament and in greater cooperative efforts ... in space exploration, medical research, and communications.” He added: rfWe’ve got to get into the habit of peaceful cooperation. The test ban treaty was a significant step. There have been others since 1963. We have agreed not to put bombs in orbit, we are working together on . . . desalination, weather information, exchanges of scientists, artists, and yes, magazines.” (Pres. Doc., 10/3/66, 1360-3)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported favorably H.R. 14832 incorporating changes and improvements in organization and operation of nsf recommended in Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development report, "The National Science Foundation—Its Present and Future.” (House Rpt. 1650)
Westinghouse Electric Corp.’s Defense and Space Center had developed a 7M-lb. TV camera that could be carried inside Apollo spacecraft and by astronauts as they explored the lurain. Prototype had been delivered to NASA and a commitment obtained for live TV coverage. (Gibbons, WSJ, 1/21/66, 1)
usaf XB-70 research bomber flew at 45,000-ft. to 47,000-ft. altitudes in test flight from Edwards afb, to collect data for development of supersonic transports, (upi, NYT, 1/16/66, 60)
A $50-million, 18-mo. flight research program involving afsc’s supersonic XB-70 experimental aircraft was scheduled to begin in spring 1966, afsc announced. Joint usaf-nasa effort would acquire experimental data on flight dynamics, flight loads, structures, propulsion and air induction, and environmental factors. Overall direction would be by afsc’s Aeronautical Systems Div. (asd) ; technical direction would be by nasa. (afsc Release 15.66)
Potential impact of aeronautical technology on social patterns of the nation was discussed by Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, chairman of mit’s aeronautics and astronautics department, at meeting of Aviation/ Space Writers’ Assn, in New York City. In only the 10th year of the space age, he said, the world was ". . . at the beginning of a new surge in science and technology stimulated by their interactions with each other and with social needs, nourished by the resources and needs of space exploration.” (Text; AF/SD, 8/66)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences as it began hearings on NASA’s FY 1967 budget authorization, said U.S.S.R. would become unchallenged leader in space exploration unless U.S. soon decided to support post-Apollo missions. Webb reviewed U.S.S.R.’s very active year in space and said: "More important to us than any other indication from Soviet space activity is the clear commitment to a long-term effort. The fact that they are making such a commitment shows the importance they attach to advancing their capabilities in space. Unless we soon decide to follow through with a strong program in the years after we have achieved a manned lunar landing, we cannot avoid a gap in our flight schedule while they forge ahead as the unchallenged contestant in the field.” Webb noted FY 1967 budget for NASA reflected a Presidential decision "to hold open for another year decisions which cannot be delayed beyond the period of the FY 1968 budget.” He added: "The programs we are now carrying out so successfully, the new knowledge we are acquiring so rapidly, the ending of the period of uncertainty as to what both Russian Cosmonauts and American Astronauts can achieve in space, and the growing utilization of the long term values that our investments have created in reliable launch vehicles, spacecraft, and assembly test and launch complexes, all point toward decisions to use rather than lose the values we have worked so hard and spent so much to create. And so I believe that our presentation of this 1967 Budget marks not just assertion to you that we have built well as we have created a foundation for space power, but also marks the beginning of a momentous era in which we must decide how we will use this power in future years.” He assessed the national space program: ". . . we have demonstrated that we can do the tasks we set out to do. An important value of the space program is this demonstration of national capability in science and technology. That we have this capability is no longer a matter of opinion but a demonstrated fact that is clear to all who concern themselves with the power nations can and do develop for many purposes from the mastery of a new environment or a new technology. We have put it on view for all the world to see. The world knows today that the United States can digest the space-related problems of long lead-times, can hold its position in a demanding competition, and can forge ahead simultaneously in both aeronautics and space and in those advanced technologies of which space is the leading symbol.” (NASA Auth. Hearings, 15-17)
nsf Reviews of Data on Science Resources indicated, in a preliminary report on research and development in American industry for 1964, that the aircraft and missile industry was responsible for 44% of total net increase in R&D performance funds from $6.6 billion in 1956 to $13.4 billion in 1964. Report attributed 17% of increase to the electrical equipment and communication industry, noting that performance of R&D in those two fields was "strongly influenced by the requirements of the Federal Government in the areas of defense and space exploration.” Only those two industries received more Federal than company financing for R&D; in 1964, 90% of aircraft and missile industry’s R&D funds came from Federal Government, and 62% of those of the electrical equipment and communication industry. Aircraft and missile industry employed 30% of total number of R&D scientists and engineers; January 1965 figure of 101,200 for these personnel showed decline of 7,700 from January 1964. Electrical equipment and communication industry accounted for 22% of total—74,800 scientists and engineers as of January 1965, 600 less than previous January, (nsf, Reviews of Data on Science Resources, 1/66)
U.S.S.R. objected to a U.S. proposal to allow military equipment to be used on the moon or other celestial bodies for peaceful purposes, Platon Morozov, deputy acting permanent U.S.S.R. U.N. representative, told the Legal Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in Geneva to draft a treaty governing outer space exploration. He said such a provision would create a loophole for violations; he was prepared, however, to accept with a few minor modifications other provisions of U.S. draft article. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 7/23/66)
gsfc selected Brush Instruments Co. for $900,000 contract to provide 22 Unified S-Band (Usb) Systems Monitors for NASA’s Manned Space Flight Tracking Network. Systems, composed of high-speed, finite sensing and recording devices, would provide "immediate reading of critical subsystems performance while simultaneously recording operating events as they occur,” pinpoint and record trouble or failure, and serve as diagnostic tool for remedial action, (gsfc Release G-ll-66)
Breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) was successfully tested for the first time by NASA and aec at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Four hours after initial ignition, engine restarted itself under test conditions simulating lower temperatures of space, thereby demonstrating its capability to start using only self-contained energy. Engine system was tested below peak power and temperature levels: exhaust temperature was 2,000°F compared with 3,500°F design temperature; reactor power was 440 mw compared with 1,100-mw design power. Test was first of a series scheduled by nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office as part of the Rover program to develop nuclear propulsion for space exploration, (aec Release J-35; Atomic Energy Programs, 1966)
Teat pilots saved one of two U.S. $500 million XB-70 research aircraft during test flight from Edwards AFB by short circuiting two terminals with a paper clamp. When a jammed door prevented hydraulic extension of nose landing gear, Col. Joseph Cotton {usaf), co-pdot with North American Aviation, Inc.’s chief test pilot, Alvin S. White, removed paper clamp from his brief case and touched it to two pin terminals in a small relay unit, following instructions radioed by NAA ground engineers. Gear extended, and although main gear burst into flame as 185-ft., delta-winged aircraft landed, naa reported damage was light. (Wash. Post, 5/3/66, Al; NYT, 5/4/66, 23)
Five-man nasa board and House Science and Astronautics Committee’s nasa Oversight Subcommittee had begun separate inquiries into failures of ogo I, ii, in, OAO i, and nimbus i. Questions under investigation included: (1) Is the expenditure on observatory satellites wise? (2) Are the projects being carried out on an efficient basis? and (3) Is the taxpayer’s interest being protected? GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark told AP he believed there had been "technical goofs but no management problems” associated with the failures. "Scientifically, we have not had a failure in ogo. Something less than 100 percent but more than 75 percent of ogo’s experiment return has been outstandingly successful. OGO 1 and ogo 2—although classified as spacecraft failures—gave us more data than all other satellites combined up to that time.” (NYT, 8/14/66, 1, 70; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/14/66, A23)
U.S. Astronaut Alan Shepard and Soviet Cosmonaut Boris Yegorov had same positive response to Parade editor Jess Gorkin’s suggestion that an American and a Russian fly together in the same spacecraft. Shepard, contacted at Msc, said it would be of "enormous value.” Yegorov indicated that U.S.S.R. might already be preparing for joint space exploration, saying: "If the Americans are really keen on the idea of joint flights, they had better start learning Russian. All of us are studying English already.” (Anderson, Parade, 7/24/66, 4-5)
An 8,189-hr. test of cesium electron-bombardment engine performed for LRC by Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., ended when supply of cesium fuel was exhausted. Conducted in space simulation chamber, test was part of NASA’s electric engine research program. Studies had shown that such systems could result in increased payloads in unmanned and manned spaceflight missions, (nasa Release 66-306)
Employment in the aerospace industry would reach 1,349,000 in December 1966—an increase of 11 per cent over December 1965—Aerospace Industries Assn, estimated in a semiannual survey. Estimate was based on reports from 267 plants and facilities of 59 companies which represented nearly 80 per cent of entire industry, (aia Release 66-55)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of OfficeAif Science and Technology, said in an interview with Robert Cahn of Christian Science Monitor: "There are two kinds of breakthroughs. There are those which come through completely new insight and understanding, which is what we usually mean by a scientific breakthrough. You might consider as scientific breakthroughs the discovery of a new kind of nuclear force or the discovery of a new fundamental particle. Then there are the more common breakthroughs in technology—the harnessing of principles in new and unusual ways to achieve the ends you want. Sending a man to the moon and back is one of these.” (Cahn, CSM, 1/25/66) Guest panelist Lord C. P. Snow, joint parliamentary secretary of U.K.’s Ministry of Technology, told Committee that U.K. had no intention of becoming totally dependent on U.S. technology: "By and large, our technological position is uncomfortable, and we have got to change it. . . before we get our economy sturdy again. ... It will take ten years to do all that has to be done. But it will be done.” Lord Snow also made these points: (1) if U.K. could not maintain a high competence in certain areas of advanced technology, she would lose her talented young men, "slide into somnolence and be no good” to herself, America, or the world; (2) the computer or cybernetic revolution would be the biggest revolution mankind had known; (3) mathematics would "take on a new relevance in all advanced societies.” Noting danger that allocational decisions for research in pure and applied science may involve "too much concentration of power,” Lord Snow added: "The scientific results— not the technological results—. . . of observational and radioastronomy have been greater by an order of magnitude than the scientific results of space exploration.” In discussion period, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Cal Tech president, commented: ". . . though I think I would agree with you generally, I hope you do not minimize the scientific results that have come from ... recent space exploration flights—the understanding of the earth’s magnetosphere, the nature of the solar wind, our closeup views of Venus, the Moon, and Mars have added a very substantial amount to our understanding ... of these objects and of interplanetary space ...” When Lord Snow replied that "space things are interesting, but not at the moment to the same degree”, as radioastronomy, Dr. DuBridge said: "Give us another 20 years.” Dr. Charles C. Price, Univ. of Pennsylvania chemist, pleaded for support of more basic research in the areas of living systems and suggested that "the more applied agencies such as NASA, nih and aec put increased emphasis on the support of fundamental research and education in chemistry ...” (Proceedings, House Comm, on Science and Astronautics, 1/25-27/66)
nasa’s Apollo/Saturn AS-202 mission was successfully launched from etr’s Complex 34 at 1:16 p.m. edt: 56,000-lb. unmanned Apollo spacecraft (Oil) was boosted into suborbital flight by Uprated Saturn I launch vehicle generating 1,600,000 lbs. thrust in second flight test of major spacecraft systems; second performance check of command module (Cm) heatshielding; and third flight test of Uprated Saturn I. Liftoff and powered flight were as programed. After spacecraft separation, 21,500-lb.-thrust service module (Sm) propulsion engine burned 3 min. 35 sec. to boost spacecraft to 706-mi. (1,128.6-km.) altitude. Sm’s engines ignited three more times to test rapid restart capabilities, with last burn separating Sm. Cm reentered earth’s atmosphere at more than 19,900 mph. Maximum temperature of spacecraft’s surface was calculated to be about 2,700°F; temperature inside Cm was 70°F. Main parachutes deployed at 23,850-ft. altitude, lowering Cm to splashdown in Pacific Ocean some 500 mi. southeast of Wake Island—200 mi. from target—at 2:49 p.m. edt. Recovery was by aircraft carrier U.S.S. Hornet. Apollo heatshield well withstood high heat-load test, and the spacecraft was in "stable condition 1.” Officials said that during flight, minor problem developed in unit which was to cool drinking water and various electrical components. They did not consider problem serious. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told postflight press conference that "the results of today’s flight—once examined—will provide us with the information necessary” to make a final decision whether to commit the next Apollo flight to a manned mission, (nasa Release 66-213; NASA Proj. Off.; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/26/66, A4; AP, Wash. Post, 8/26/66, A3; Wilford, NYT, 8/26/66, 1)
nasa released first 140 ft. of more than 1,500 ft. of color movies taken by Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., during their Nov. 11-15 space flight. Photography was of high quality. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/17/66, A4)
There might be a connection between period of inactivity in Soviet manned space flight and Soviet efforts to create an effective antimissile system, speculated Crosby S. Noyes in the Washington Evening Star. ". . . The Russians, in assessing the present state of the world, [might] have radically readjusted their priorities in favor of earthly defenses over celestial exploration. . . .” Noyes suggested U.S. might have to choose soon "between the astronomical costs of continuing exploration of space, and those of the best possible antimissile defense system. If the Russians have, in fact, already made their choice, our own dilemma should bejeasier to resolve. But in any event, the new Russian defense system raises military and political problems which cannot be simply ignored.” (Noyes, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/13/66, All)
New program to disseminate information to industry was initiated by NASA and aec’s Argonne National Laboratory. Purpose was to identify technological innovations resulting from Argonne’s research and development projects; prepare brief, business-oriented summaries of innovations; and distribute them to industry. Summaries—to be known as aec-nasa Tech Briefs—would contain information not customarily reported in scientific literature such as descriptions of devices, processes, and techniques developed to meet specific or engineering needs at Argonne and would be combined with similar information currently published by nasa. (nasa Release 66-183)
Prof. Philip Handler of Duke Univ., member of the President’s Science Advisory Committee, said at the Asia-Pacific Seminar that the U.S. was the only nation in the scientific revolution and that the U.S.S JL, U.K., and West Germany had not yet entered it. He described the scientific revolution as dependent upon man’s brains and not upon water, coal, or iron, as was the industrial revolution. The computer, he said, was the chief symbol of the scientific revolution. (AP, NYT, 1/27/66, 3) January 24-26: At aiaa Third Aerospace Sciences Meeting in New York City, Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff was elected 1966 aiaa president. Dr. C. Stark Draper, chairman of mit’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, gave 29th annual Wright Brothers Lecture on the role of "informetics” in modern flight systems. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell chaired a special "Space Sciences Report” plenary session which considered priorities in planetary exploration and the interaction of solar wind with the planets. Donald L. Hunter of Kitt Peak National Observatory said Venus exploration was likely to be as interesting as exploration of Mars; high Venusian surface temperature did not rule out possibility of rudimentary life forms, and Venus’ environment might be less hostile than that of Mars. Manned round trips to Mars could be shortened to 450-560 days by a Venus "swingby,” according to Rollin W. Gillespie and Stanley Ross of NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; direct flights would take 800 to 900 days. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, was principal speaker at the Honors Convocation. He said: "Yesterday, President Johnson presented his budget for the coming fiscal year to the Congress. . . . This year, the process of sorting out priorities and allocating resources has been especially difficult. Abroad, there is the growing commitment to Vietnamese freedom. At home, there is the growing commitment to freedom from poverty, ignorance, ugliness, and unemployment. In addition to these and other commitments, the President’s budget once again reiterates the commitment made in 1958 and repeated year after year: to undertake the exploration of space for the benefit of mankind. Even in a year of extraordinary budget pressures, slightly more than $5 billion for NASA’s part in this enterprise have been requested. . .. "It is within this framework that the nasa program has been hammered out—not representing the sum of our program demands. However, as we indicated in our budget briefing for the Press this past weekend, we believe we have a balanced program of aeronautics and space research, of science and technology, of large scale manned exploration and unmanned probes and satellites. "We recognize there is an enormous responsibility attached to the planning, justification, and direction of a sum so large during a period so rich in other needs. . . . "We have reached a point where the exploration of space is no longer a promise but a hard fact, where scientific data and tested capabilities are in hand instead of in the future. ". . . The program that we have laid out for nasa for the coming year will meet the highest priorities of scientific and technological needs. It will permit flexible evaluation of the next major steps open to us in space. It will maintain the forward momentum that has been built up with energy and care over the past years. It will permit strong competition for those who wish to outstrip us and meaningful cooperation for those who can find communities of interest with us. It will provide an honest and practical balance between the many elements of scientific investigation, technological application and operational experience. It provides a challenge that will require hard work, hard judgment, and careful appraisal at every step of translation from plan into execution. It does not close to future exploitation the many options that have been built for the nation in the past. Most importantly, it recognizes that true national security is best measured by the useful knowledge in men’s minds and that the great arena of space remains a battleground between the intellect of man and the unknown.” Tribute to late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden was made at the Honors Convocation by L/G James Doolittle (usafr) : "On the second of December 1965 the world became poorer; our country lost one of its foresighted leaders; aeronautics lost a man who had devoted a major part of his life to its advancement; astronautics lost its great ambassador at home and at large and those fortunate of us—who had been privileged to know and work with him—lost a beloved, revered and respected friend and associate. "Dr. Hugh Latimer Dryden dedicated his whole life to the service of his fellow man. He was a doer, but a gentle person—a man who strove prodigiously, but instinctively did the kindly thing. He was eager and courageous. He had been critically ill for several years, but he worked hard and effectively up to a few days before his death. . . . "Hugh Latimer Dryden: engineer, scientist, administrator, public servant, patriot, theologian, realist. With his immediate family and all the nation we, his close friends and associates, mourn his passing. We will long remember him with affection, admiration, respect, and gratitude, for excellence endures.” Goddard Award, aiaa’s highest, was presented jointly to Hans J. P. von Ohain, Chief Scientist, Aerospace Research Lab., Wright-Patterson afb, for "his contributions to the achievement in 1939 of the first successful application of turbojet propulsion to aircraft”; and to A. W. Blackman, Chief of Propulsion, United Aircraft Corp., and George D. Lewis, Project Engineer, uac Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div., for "their contributions to the understanding of the phenomenon of combustion instability and for their recognition of acoustical liners as a method of suppressing such instabilities in turbojet afterburners and rocket engines.” Sylvanus Albert Reed Award went to Clarence L. Johnson, vice president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., and designer of the U-2 reconnaissance aircraft and the YF-12A interceptor, for his "production of two triple-sonic military aircraft, for continuing personal design innovation, imaginative engineering, and practical manufacturing techniques that over the years have aided immeasurably in maintaining U.S. ascendency in defensive aerial weaponry.” 1966 Research Award was given to Prof. Shao-Chi Lin, Univ. of California (San Diego), for "basic research in the electric and electromagnetic properties of ionized gases, and for significant contributions to reentry physics.” (Texts; aiaa Release; aiaa Bulletin, 12/65, 693, 709, 710)
U.S.S.R.’s "period of inactivity in manned space flight” received editorial comment in Kansas City Star: "About all the West can do is wait until something happens. Meanwhile, the U.S. program moves ahead with significant achievements. But while guessing can be fun, a word of caution: Let’s not make the mistake of counting the Russians out of the space race.” (Kansas City Star, 9/26/66)
NASA successfully launched 550-lb. Project Scanner instrument package from Wallops Station to 380-mi. (612-km.) altitude on 13.5-min. suborbital flight: two-channel radiometers measured infrared energy emitted from earth’s horizon by carbon dioxide and water vapor; star-mapper telescope provided attitude orientation data. Managed by LaRC, Project Scanner was advanced research program to obtain data for designing and developing improved horizon-scanning instrumentation for space missions. (Wallops Release 66-43)
nasa had begun contract negotiations with TRW Systems to convert the prototype Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo) into a flight observatory. Negotiations might also include option to fabricate an additional flight observatory. Contract was expected to be for $9 million. (NASA Release 66-16)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. reached impasse over question of access to tracking facilities that would be part of U.N. treaty on space exploration. U.S. Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg blamed U.S.S.R. for halting agreement on treaty, voicing U.S. contention that tracking facilities must be negotiated by bilateral agreements and not guaranteed by treaty. Compulsory access to tracking facilities, Goldberg said, would constitute sovereignty violation. Soviet Ambassador Platon D. Morozov defended proposal as means to correct a discriminatory situation in which U.S. had certain advantages because of its alliances with other nations. (Teltsch, NYT, 9/17/66; Sanger, Wash. Post, 9/17/66, A4)
Program to seek basic principles of sonic booms—including flights over U.S. communities—was being prepared by a top-level, four-man Government committee, Evert Clark reported in the New York Times. Program hoped to obtain at least preliminary answers before Sept. 1 so that limitations on boom making could be written into Sst development contracts. Committee members: Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of Office of Science and Technology (ost) and Presidential science adviser; Dr. Nicholas Golovin, ost; Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara; and Dr. John R. Dunning, dean of Columbia Univ.’s School of Engineering and Applied Science. (Clark, NYT, 2/18/66, 8)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in a speech at the 51st annual meeting of the National Dairy Council in Washington, D.C.: "We in nasa do not feel that the planning of our space programs is the prerogative of nasa alone. . . . The participants should include men from all walks of life—national, political, and intellectual leaders, the business and agricultural communities, and all informed citizens—not just scientists and engineers nor those who are presently engaged in the space program.” Describing the launch vehicles and spacecraft in the Apollo program, Dr. Mueller said: "The uprated Saturn I launch vehicle [formerly Saturn IB] ... is capable of placing 40,000	pounds in orbit.... The Saturn V launch vehicle ... provides the power to place in orbit loads weighing 280,000 pounds. . . . The Apollo spacecraft itself consists of three major systems or modules. The Command Module . . . houses the astronauts during most of their journey. The Propulsion Module [formerly Service Module] has rocket engines and abundant fuel for mid-course maneuvering, for braking into lunar orbit, and for the thrust to return to earth. The Lunar Module [formerly Lunar Excursion Module] is for descent to and return from the lunar surface. . . . We have the ability to fly this equipment at an annual rate of six Saturn I launch vehicles, six Saturn V launch vehicles and eight Apollo spacecraft.” (Text)
Nike-Apache launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 59-lb. instrumented payload to 108-mi. (174-km.) altitude and impacted 67 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Conducted for essa and Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, Dallas, the experiment sought to obtain ionospheric electron density profile measurements using a plasma resonance probe and to obtain data concerning sporadic E phenomenon in the valley region between the E- and F-layers of the ionosphere. Data were telemetered to ground stations during flight. Experiment was first of three to compare techniques for measuring characteristics of upper atmosphere and ionosphere. (Wallops Release 66-16; nasa Rpt. srl)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of Office of Science and Technology and science adviser to the President, in memorandum to President Johnson said: "In October 1965 I convened an ad hoc Jet Aircraft Noise Panel... I am pleased to be able to present to you the report of this Panel entitled 'Alleviation of Jet Aircraft Noise Near Airports.’ ” Principal recommendations were: (1) initiation of Federally-supported studies of expected scope of noise problem through 1975 and of public and private programs needed to combat the problem; (2) creation of a Federal task force to analyze the problem; (3) development of valid, broadly applicable standards of noise measurement; (4) pursuit of definitive technical study to reduce noise levels; (5) establishment of task force to investigate methods for Federal participation in program for compatible land utilization near airports; (6) initiation of program to modify operating procedures and techniques that would reduce engine noise without compromising safety. {Pres. Doc., 3/21/66, 404)
Commenting on the Federal budget for FY 1967, Science said it was the first budget since the middle 1950’s which had not carried a request for an increase in total funds for research and development: "This downturn in what for about a decade has been a steadily ascending curve reflects the major rationale of the new budget: to provide funds to support a military buildup in Southeast Asia without underfinancing new education and welfare programs enacted during the past two sessions of Congress. ...” (Science, 1/28/66, 425)
U.S.S.R. launched five- to six-ton spacecraft, possibly from Cosmos series, which exploded into 51 pieces detectable by radar, gsfc Satellite Situation Report would later reveal that nine pieces of debris remained in orbit on Oct. 15, the rest having reentered beginning Sept. 20. Launch was first unannounced U.S.S.R. space flight since Jan. 4, 1963. Evert Clark said in the New York Times that launch marked first U.S.S.R. 49° inclination launch from Tyura Tam and that Kapustin Yar had been used for all previous 49° launches, (gsfc SSR, 10/15/66, 22-5; Clark, NYT, 11/1/66, 19; Wilson, Wash. Post, 11/1/66, 3)
Wilhelm Forster Observatory (West Germany) reported that on 127th orbit, Soviet spacecraft cosmos cxm returned to earth and soft-landed at Baikonur, Kazakhstan. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/30/66, A14)
Employment in aerospace industry would increase to 1,266,000 by June 1966—a gain of 94,000 or eight per cent from September 1965, reported Karl G. Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Assn. Aircraft employment was expected to show greatest increase, with missile and space employment remaining relatively stable. (Aerospace News, 3/15/66) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Deputy Administrator, delivering the first Annual Dr. Robert H. Goddard Lecture, stressed the importance of the contributions of men such as Dr. Robert H. Goddard and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden to the dramatic development of the space program: "The history of nasa reflects much of Dr. Dryden’s understanding of how progress can be made and what the conditions are that produce effective responses to the challenges being faced. A pivotal concept that has guided NASA administration has been that of the relation of the research and development project to many rapidly growing disciplines of science and technology. A project serves a larger purpose than its own defined immediate ends. A project is a disciplined and organized effort directed to a specific objective; one of its principal characteristics is that it has a schedule. As such a project provides a creative and driving force in the total achievement of science, engineering, and technology _____” (Text) Wesley A. Kuhrt, United Aircraft Research Laboratories, predicted interplanetary and translunar tourist travel for FY 2001: "A six-day round trip to the moon via 35-passenger, nuclear-powered 'clipper’ ships would cost each adventurer $10,000. For an 18-month trip to Venus, the passenger would pay $32,000. Steerage class to Mars, a two-year undertaking, would cost $35,000. But for $70,000 a passenger could ride the Mars Express to and from the red planet in 11 months. . . .” All fares assumed the Government would underwrite the cost of developing the spacecraft, Kuhrt said. Other predictions made at the symposium included teams of superhuman astronauts bred over several generations as a result of present studies in genetics and molecular basis of life; communications between ordinary persons in their homes and anyone, anywhere; versatile robots to perform human tasks; cosmic cargo transported at $10 per pound; network of satellites to link everyone in the world so they could speak in their native languages via rapid automatic translating computers; and man-shaped robots sending back threedimensional pictures to human masters hundreds of miles away. Harvard astronomer Carl Sagan speculated that the trip from other galaxies had already been made and that earth had already been visited from space at least once. (Text) Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) told a luncheon audience that "we must lay out basic objectives far enough ahead that they will serve as relatively fixed goals—or in non-technical terms, as dreams. Such an early dream of man was to fly like a bird; later, we gradually translated this dream into making it easy for everyone to fly in an aircraft. We have these dreams and they affect our progress strongly. ...” To meet these ends, Karth recommended forming a "Hoover-type” Commission to review planning and decision-making system in the area of science and technology. In addition he cited the need for "frequent, systematic, large-scale surveys and analysis of science and technology from the near-term to the distant frontiers of knowledge. . . .” (Text) In a prediction of what the "Space Age Society” would be like in 2001, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh told the symposium: "The major development over the coming years will be the speed of change. We already have great difficulty maintaining our perspective regarding the change which has taken place during the last 8 or lO years. Well, that rate of change is like the tortoise pace compared with what; is coming in the future. ... "Some with fertile imaginations foresee the time when there will be large scale emigration from earth to growing settlements on the moon and the planets. While I see the great growth in the ability to travel to such distant spots safely and speedily, I see little likelihood of any sizable movement of population even though nuclear reactors would furnish much of the competence to make conditions in such places both livable and productive. My reason for not predicting such movement is due to the simple belief that living conditions are going to be so improved here on earth that few would want to leave. .. . "As for space travel, we can certainly let our imaginations soar, as we are now only in the infancy of growth. The space child has barely learned to walk. The future with its space travel being almost as common as airplane travel is today is yet to come . . . but it will come. Interplanetary trips, at speeds many times what we now attain, will take place in craft as reusable as the jet plane is today, with at least as many passengers aboard. . . . "One more thing I can predict with great confidence. The debate on the worthwhileness of space technology and space exploration—still continuing on the part of those of little vision—will have disappeared completely within a decade or so. The benefits will have become so obvious and the potential so exciting that even the most near-sighted will be aware of the rich space harvest. . . (Text; Weil, Wash. Post, 3/16/66, A10; Hoffmann, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/16/66) Importance of materials science and space vehicle technology was discussed by Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicle Research and Technology, nasa Hq. oart. "The structural designer of future launch vehicles will face many new and challenging problems. Launch vehicles ... [will be] larger, complex, and more costly. If we are to reuse these launch vehicles without having to spend large sums of money either to bring them back or to refurbish them after recovery, major advances will be required in structural and materials technology.” Development of new materials and methods, such as "superinsulations” to prevent heat leakage; stronger shielding materials to protect spacecraft from meteoroids and intense radiation; advanced lifting-body designs for greater reentry precision; and folding spacecraft parts which could be reassembled in space, would play a major role in U.S. space program before the year 2000, he said. (Text) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, nasc staff member, discussed overall economic outlook for space age up to FY 2001. Sheldon noted that U.S. space program took about one per cent of gross national product and estimated that "Soviet Union is putting about two per cent of their Gnp into space efforts . . . .The close tie with military rocketry has speeded space development in these recent years, but it has also saddled space technology with an expendable ammunition philosophy rather than aiming at the lower operating costs of a recoverable transport philosophy. . . . "Today we probably are headed toward an age of conservation, and one of deliberate recycling .. . the task of the remainder of this century may include the development of closed ecological systems for long-duration space flight, and on a different scale, heroic measures to recycle waste water and to reprocess industrial and consumer wastes into reusable products. . . . "If our urbanized society requires closed ecological systems even here on Earth, we can, in effect, air condition whole cities.” Discussing weather modification and climate control, he said: ". . . whether we bend nature itself, or create new sealed urban units, each almost self-sufficient in its ability to control its temperature, clean and recycle its air and water, and put all other wastes to productive use, some such heroic measures will be needed as this century runs out.” (Text)
President Johnson, in World Meteorological Day statement, said: "This day symbolizes for us—and for all mankind—a new dawn of hope for a better, safer, and more meaningful life. It looks to the time when all our science and technology, and all the wonders of the space age, will give us the power of which man has always dreamed—not the power of one nation over another, but the power of the human race over the forces of nature. "The instrument of this program is the World Meteorological Organization—a specialized agency of the United Nations with a membership of 127 countries. Through the World Meteorological Organization, the concept of a World Weather Watch is now taking shape. On this occasion, I am proud to say that the United States strongly supports international cooperation in this vital field.” {Pres. Doc., 3/28/66, 439)	;
Role of Venus in NASA’s future space sciences program was reviewed in report by ossa to House Science and Astronautics Committee. Report suggested that NASA might increase interest in Venus with combinations of Mars-Venus flights and single missions to Venus using Mariner, Voyager, and advanced Automated Biological Laboratory spacecraft to investigate "the possibility of life forms. . . . From almost every aspect . . . Venus is an important, puzzling, and paradoxical planet, meriting continued examination by space flight missions.” (Text; Tech. Wk., 9/12/66, 18-9)
Dr. Clark Blanchard Millikan, director of Cal Tech Graduate Aeronautical Laboratories and pioneer in the development of multiengine, high-altitude airplanes, jet propulsion, and guided missiles, died of a heart ailment. Millikan, chairman of the board of jpl in its early days, had been awarded the Presidential Medal of Merit for his work in wind tunnel research during World War II and had been given the British King’s Medal. (NYT, 1/3/66, 27; AP, Balt. Sun, 1/3/66; M&R, 1/10/66, 13)
Sunspots as large as 12 times the earth’s diameter were detected by Bochum Observatory, West Germany. One group reportedly measured about 97,200 mi. across; smaller sunspots were about 27,000 mi. wide. (Reuters, NYT, 11/15/66, 61; Reuters, Wash. Post, 11/14/66, A23)
HL-10 lifting body vehicle, designed and developed by nasa Langley Research Center to help solve control problems of future manned spacecraft entering earth’s atmosphere, was formally delivered to nasa by its builder, Northrop Corp., in ceremonies at company’s Hawthorne, Calif., plant. The 22-ft.-long, 4,600-lb., wingless, tri-finned research vehicle would be dropped from B-52 aircraft for flight tests at 45,000-ft. altitude and mach .8 (530 mph). (LaRC Release)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, former NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology and new aiaa president, wrote his first "President’s Message” in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "One of the dilemmas of modern times is that science and technology can do a multitude of things—many of which the community may not necessarily desire and so will not support. As professionals we have tended to preoccupy ourselves with the potential of science and technology rather than the expressed needs of the community. A responsible professional society of the future must find . . . the wisdom among its members to relate its technologies to human needs. A wise professional society . . . will convey the legitimate aspirations of its thinkers and men of action to the community at large. . . .” (A&A, 2/66, 29)
Dr. George Veis of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory revealed that the earth’s mean radius, measured from satellite observations, was 3,963.203 mi. Radius determination was based on analysis of more than 46,500 observations of 13 different satellites. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 1/22/66)
Thirtieth anniversary of Jet Propulsion Laboratory of Cal Tech. In March 1936 Dr. Theodore von Karman approved initiation of rocket propulsion studies by Frank J. Malina with the assistance of John W. Parsons and Edward S. Forman at the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, (nasa Historian)
NASA Langley Research Center awarded General Electric Co. $3,000,000 incentive-type contract to build the sixth spacecraft in nasa’s Scout-launched reentry heating flight series. The 13-ft. conical spacecraft would be launched to measure heating rates associated with turbulent air flow close to vehicular surface, which could not be simulated with ground equipment. (LaRC Release; NASA Release 66-54)
U.S. physics was facing severe shortage of funds necessary to sustain progress in research and education, concluded nas Physics Survey Committee in its report Physics: Survey and Outlook. Report recommended that physics support by Federal agencies be increased by 1969 to two and one-half times the 1963 1500-million level for physics and astronomy. Assessing U.S. strength in six subfields, report noted for astrophysics "a pressing need for more observational facilities.” Based on 1964-65 studies by an 18-member group headed by George E. Pake, Provost of Washington Univ., St. Louis, report stated: "Our strength in observational astrophysics with optical telescopes has long been established with the 200-in. telescope on Mount Palomar, but we have many more bright astrophysicists and astronomers than have access to the two US telescopes most suited for frontier research. Our relative strength will be altered with the implementation of plans for construction of several large telescopes in the Soviet Union. Any nation can, by placing a large telescope in the Southern Hemisphere, assume leadership in the observational astronomy of stellar evolution and cosmology, because the Magellanic Clouds are the nearest of all external galaxies. The United States has taken the initiative in the expensive but highly promising field of space-based optical and x-ray astronomy. "In radioastronomy the United States now has an impressive group of major radio telescopes, but the US position is not preeminent. Even the new instruments nearing completion at the California Institute of Technology and the National Radio Astronomy Observatory are inferior to existing instruments in Australia and the Soviet Union and to large new crosstype arrays nearing completion near Sydney and Moscow. The US position in space physics and cosmic radiation is good, with some question whether present conditions permit further strengthening of that position. Research on gravitation is at present not a large sector of research, but the US effort is of very high quality and is being increasingly recognized.” (nas Release; Science, 3/18/66, 1363-6; Physics Today, 4/66, 23-36)
Edmond C. Buckley, nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, reviewed nasa’s tracking and data acquisition network program: "During fiscal year 1965, the network, under the management of Goddard Space Flight Center, successfully supported four Gemini missions, two of which were manned. So far in fiscal year 1966, three manned Gemini missions have been supported, including the highly successful Gemini VII/VI rendezvous in December.. . . "During 1965, an average of 32 satellites was supported at any given time. This included satellites launched in prior years which were still transmitting useful data plus new satellites which were launched during the year. In 1966, the average number of satellites to be supported is expected to increase to more than 35 including flight of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, the Biosatellite, and Applications Technology Satellite. "In 1967, the average number of satellites to be supported is estimated to exceed 40 with the spacecraft, collectively, contacting the network stations more than 650 times daily. Contributing to the extensive workload in 1967 will be the additional flights of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, Biosatellite, Applications Technology Satellite, and Orbiting Geophysical Observatory. . . . "During fiscal year 1965, the [Deep Space] network successfully supported the Ranger VII, VIII, and IX missions and the cruise phase of the Mariner IV mission. The precise operation of the facilities at Goldstone and the control center at Pasadena in support of the Ranger missions was essential to the accuracy achieved in impacting on the surface of the moon, and to the activation of the cameras and transmission of live television pictures of the moon’s surface. In fiscal year 1965, 85-foot antenna facilities at both Canberra, Australia, and Madrid, Spain, became operational and participated in Mariner IV support.. . . "The excellent support provided the Mariner IV mission permitted the spacecraft, after a flight of 325 million miles and an elapsed time of 228 days, to pass Mars with a deviation of only 1,000 miles from the projected fly-by distance of 5,000 miles and to take the first close-up pictures of the planet. The Deep Space Network continued to support the Mariner IV spacecraft after encounter and established a new twoway communications record of 191 million miles between network stations and the spacecraft. .. . On January 4, 1966, the Goldstone facility received a signal from the Mariner IV spacecraft over a distance of 216 million miles.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 608, 727-9)
President Johnson’s message to Congress on the FY 1967 budget said in part: "Just over 60 years ago man entered the age of controlled flight. Today, men orbit the earth at speeds measured in thousands of miles an hour. In 1967, less than 6 years after this Nation set the goal of a manned landing on the moon within the present decade, we will begin unmanned test flights of the giant Saturn V rocket and the Apollo spacecraft—the complete space vehicle required for achieving that goal. Later on in the 1960’s, we will undertake the manned lunar mission itself. "Our many space achievements—both manned and unmanned—have dramatically advanced our scientific understanding and technological capabilities. They have also demonstrated our remarkable progress in the peaceful exploration of space. In 1967, our large space projects will be progressing from the more expensive development phase into operational status, and new projects of equivalent cost will not be started. Accordingly, expenditures of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration are estimated to decline by $300 million in 1967 [as opposed to the new authorization requested in the FY 1967-budget]. This level will sustain our progress in space exploration and continue the advancement of science and technology.” (Text, CR, 1/24/66, 861; Pres. Doc., 1/31/66, 88-9)
Rep. Mark Andrews (R-N.D.) introduced a resolution calling for nsf to make recommendations for wider geographic distribution of Federal funds for research and development. (CR, 3/16/66, 5755)
Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Director of Field Center Development, NASA omsf, speaking in Washington, D.C., before the Community Development Conference of the 16th District of Texas, said that the magnitude and importance of the investment in the space program dictate that informed citizens from all walks of life participate in a national dialogue on decisions involved: "We in NASA do not feel that the planning of our space programs is the prerogative of NASA alone... . The budget for the coming fiscal year permits NASA to hold open the option for a program to procure additional flight vehicles beyond those now programmed, so as to employ the Apollo hardware, facilities and capabilities at least through 1971. If we do not exercise this option in the decision for the 1968 budget, we will have to begin a phase-down of the manned space flight activities and the 'mothballing’ of some of our facilities. At a small fraction of the initial cost we can continue and we can expand our operations in space for the next ten years and more. These operations will have tremendous implications for our national security and for our position of world leadership, in addition to the benefits of scientific advancement and the betterment of man’s life on Earth. ... In the area of national security, our expenditures in space probably represent the cheapest insurance policy the nation can buy for the future.” (Text) "The 747 concept promises to be as revolutionary in relation to the current generation of jets as the initial 707s were to the piston-powered transports they superseded,” Aviation Week editorialized. "Biggest technical advancement will come from the new generation of high bypass ratio, high temperature, large turbofans typified by the Pratt & Whitney Aircraft JT9D. This new gas turbine cycle promises as much improvement in load-carrying capacity and operating economy as the original turbofan gained over the straight turbojet. It is the real root of the economic and technical revolution embodied in the 747 concept.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 4/18/66, 21)
Attempt to launch NASA’s Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) was halted by failure of one of the three engines in the Atlas booster to reach full 60,000-lbs. thrust upon firing. Launch was rescheduled for April 2, later for April 8. (upi, Phil. Inq., 3/31/66; upi, NYT, 4/1/66,15)
At ksc post-launch conference, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller commented on AS-201: "This test was of extreme importance to the eventual manned lunar landing in that it provides us with the first test of the ablative characteristics of the heat shield protection for the Apollo spacecraft. It is the one test that we were unable to perform on the ground—the one test, therefore, that was a qualification test and which will be repeated again on 202, which is the next flight in the Apollo system.” (mcs Roundup, 3/4/66, 1-2)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station carried proton magnetometer and Langmuir probe to 104-mi. (167-km.) altitude in NASA-Indian National Commission for Space Research (incospar) experiment to determine intensity of ionospheric electric current system near magnetic equator. Payload had been developed by Physical Research Laboratory in Ahmedabad, India; NASA provided launcher, ground telemetry system, and rocket, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
Catalog identifying and locating every known star in the heavens down to the ninth magnitude, providing astronomers with instant reference to the entire sky, was published by gpo. Compiled by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory under NASA grant, 2,700-page, four-volume catalog unified 50 different sources to provide position, photographic and visual magnitude, spectral type, and other essential data for 250,000	heavenly bodies. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 5/5/66, 21)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., received Great Silver Medal of Paris from Mayor Albert Chavanac for being "one of the pioneers of space, who was able to give a human aspect to the experiment he attempted so successfully.” (AP, NYT, 5/25/66, 33) AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, in luncheon address, cited three factors which could restrain full advancement of technology: "The first of these constraints is the relative silence of our opponents. A few years ago the headlines were full of Soviet threats of orbital bombs, missiles that could 'hit a fly in the sky,’ and similar weapons. Today, by contrast, the Soviets are not boasting about their new weapon developments. . . . The second constraint is the argument made in some quarters that U.S. military research and development could be 'provocative’ to our opponents. This argument overlooks the fact that our very existence as a free society is 'provocative’ to our opponents, because it contradicts their theory of history. . . . The third constraint is the immediate need for large funds to support our forces in Vietnam. . . .” To overcome these constraints, General Schriever said, "we must harness our management experience and technological knowledge to serve the national purpose,” in an effort involving every "segment of our national life. . . .” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed implications of 1968 space budget decisions. He said U.S. today was "not ahead in this deadly serious competition,” and "strong and increasing effort” would be required "to prevent the Soviets from forging ahead as the unchallenged leader in space.” (Text) Nike X system had been improved so that it could not only destroy hostile satellites but also provide defensive cover for the entire Nation, reported Dr. Oswald H. Lange, chief scientist for the Nike X project office at Redstone Arsenal, Ala. He described the Nike X system as employing two interceptors—the long-range Zeus and short-range, high acceleration Sprint. (NYT, 5/26/66, 4) R. I. Mitchell, vice-president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s JetStar program, said that Lockheed would produce advanced version of four-engine JetStar business aircraft capable of taking off on shorter runways and carrying more cargo and passengers than previous models. New Dash 8 JetStar, powered by Pratt & Whitney JT12A-8 engine, would reduce runway requirements from 6,425 ft. to 5,550 ft. and would have 1,000 fpm faster rate of climb. (Lockheed Release) Two space rescue systems being tested for possible use by usaf were discussed by Harold L. Bloom of General Electric Co.’s Re-Entry Systems Dept.: (1) "Emergency cocoon”—an inflatable shelter to maintain astronaut in a "livable environment” while awaiting rescue— would use thin silicone rubber membrane in dacron and Mylar skin to provide C02 and water vapor control; (2) one-man reentry vehicle for self-rescue—"Manned Orbital Operations Safety Equipment (moose)” —would consist of foldable heat shield bonded to Mylar bag. Astronaut would zip himself into moose bag, leave spacecraft, and initiate polyurethane foaming process; foam would insulate and support him during reentry oriented with small rocket in an attitude/de-orbit package. Form-fitting couch, designed to be traveling at less than 30 feet per second at the time of impact, would also double as a life raft. (Text; Wilford, NYT, 5/8/66, 66)
Dr. Jan H. Oort, head of Leiden Observatory, the Netherlands, and former head of International Astronomical Union, received 1966 Vetlesen Award in earth sciences. Administered by Columbia Univ. for the G. Unger Vetlesen Foundation, the prize was awarded for "outstanding achievement in the sciences resulting in a clearer understanding of earth.” NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell noted in speech at award dinner that "through the space approach . . . the domain of the geosciences” had been strengthened and extended: "The theories, instruments, and skills needed and developed to study the earth can now be applied to investigating the moon and planets at first hand. Comparative studies of the planets and their atmospheres, ionospheres, and magnetospheres, promise increased understanding of our own planet, earth.” (Text; Sullivan, NYT, 10/19/ 66, 36)
Astronomers at Bochum Observatory, West Germany, reported they had sighted a giant new sunspot at the approximate center of the solar disc. Visible to the naked eye in early morning or just before sunset, sunspot had 88,000-mi. dia. and was expected to affect weather conditions and radio communications on earth during the next few days. Sunspot was unexpected since 1966 had been designated "year of the quiet sun” and scientists had expected only a minimum of solar disturbances, (upi, Chic. Trib., 3/21/66)
NASA would ask $1 billion for Apollo Applications programing in FY 1968 to prevent a lapse in manned space flight by offsetting reduction in expenditures and aerospace industry manpower for Project Apollo, William Normyle reported in Aviation Week. He continued: "nasa was permitted by the Administration to request only $41.9 million for Apollo Applications in Fiscal 1967. Some of nasa’s advanced planners argued for $500 million in the Fiscal 1967 budget now under consideration, but the agency went to the Bureau of the Budget with a request for only $270 million, which was reduced to the $41.9 million.” (Normyle, Av. Wk., 4/25/66, 30)
Lewis Research Center awarded Aerojet-General Corp. a $10-million contract for fabrication and static test firing of 260-in.-dia. solid propellant rocket motor. An advanced version of two motors of the same diameter previously tested by Aerojet, new motor would use propellant with higher burning rate and was expected to develop 5.25 million lbs. peak thrust when test-fired for 80 sec. in June 1967. Earlier versions had produced 3.6 million lbs. thrust during 114-sec. tests, (nasa Release 66-236; lrc Release 66-52)
D. Brainerd Holmes, former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (1961-1963) and now with Raytheon Co., reflected upon his NASA experience at National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C. "nasa has done well” to date but today decisions must be shaping up for continuing space exploration beyond the lunar landing by an American by 1970. "Whither now NASA?” was the question, Holmes said, and in the democratic process of decision an informed public must play a vital part. He asserted that it was not only NASA’s job to inform but the duty of everyone aware of the significance and challenge of space exploration to the future of the U.S. (EH)
Thorough knowledge of cosmic dust, particularly interplanetary dust particles near the asteroid belt, was necessary for space engineers to successfully design manned and unmanned probes, wrote M. J. S. Belton of Kitt Peak National Observatory in Science. He stressed the importance of cosmic dust in theoretical and observational astrophysics: "It is apparently an important factor in the process of star formation. The polarization of starlight which is induced by aligned particles of interstellar dust gives information about the magnetic field in galactic systems, including our own. ... In the solar system, the presence of dust in planetary atmosphere may lead to misinterpretations of photometric and polarimetric data that would otherwise give important information about the total mass of the atmosphere. . . . And finally, dust is responsible for such interplanetary phenomena as the F corona, zodiacal light, gegenschein, and type-II comet tails. . . .” (Belton, Science, 1/7/66, 35-43)
Dr. Serge A. Korff, director of New York Univ.’s cosmic research program, told a youth science seminar at the Explorer’s Club in New York that he believed many Ufo sightings had been of giant balloons sent aloft by nyu to test the upper atmosphere: ''[They] are 300 to 400 feet across and because they are partly inflated, assume strange shapes as they ascend. At high altitudes they often reflect sunlight and become visible to viewers below in areas where the sun has set or before it has risen.” (NYT, 10/30/66, 45)
Quasars are relatively small objects 10 million to 1 billion yrs. old and 30 million to 300 million light years from earth that have been shot at super speeds out of another galaxy by a titanic explosion, astronomer Dr. Halton C. Arp, Mt. Palomar Observatory, contended in Science. Arp’s theory contradicted prevailing view that quasars could enable man to see the ends of time and space and possibly glimpse the secrets of creation because they were on the rim of the universe—10 or more billion light yrs. away—and were almost as old as the universe—8 billion yrs. Astronomers believed that the quasars’ "red shifts” in light-—changes toward red end of the light spectrum as objects speed away—were caused by extremely rapid motion away from our own galaxy. Arp suggested that quasars might be very dense and compact, exerting a strong gravitational attraction for their size which could shift wavelengths to produce "red shifts.” (Science, 3/11/66; Weil, Wash. Post, 3/12/66, 2; Sullivan, NYT, 3/11/66, 28; Ubell, N.Y. Her. Trih., 3/11/66)
Meteorite crater 1,476 ft. in diameter and with an average depth of 100 ft. ■—third largest crater on record—was discovered in the western foothills of the Chilean Andes by geological team led by Dr. William A. Cassidy, Columbia Univ. Lamont Geological Observatory, and Joaquin Sanchez, Instituto de Investigaciones de Geologicas de Chile, nsf announced. Crater, which lies in an area 1,000 ft. above sea level accessible only by foot, was discovered while team was investigating a depression shown in an aerial photograph. Crater’s age had not been determined. (Chic. Trib., 3/13/66)
