Quasars, which radiate as much light and energy as a galaxy, appear to have a diameter only 1% as large as galaxies, scientists from U.K.’s Royal Astronomical Observatory and Royal Radar Establishment reported in Nature. Theory was based on measurements of radio signals of 30 quasars, obtained by using two radiotelescopes 80 mi apart in combination as if at extreme ends of single instrument. Data indicating quasars are smaller than previously believed compounded the problem of explaining their enormous quantities of energy. (W Post, 2/26/ 67) .
Need for design modifications had required shipment of a manned orbital workshop to the McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Center, Huntington Beach, Calif., said Marshall Space Flight Center. Workshop, built by McDonnell Douglas, was model for the Saturn S—IVB stage and when modified would represent Saturn stage as it was to he used in Apollo Applications program as a manned space laboratory. Some 50 ft long and 21.5 ft in diameter, workshop was used at msfc as an engineering tool in designing structures, equipment, and experiments for the initial mission of 28 days, (msfc Release 67-181)
NASA’s Lunar Orbiter III (Lunar Orbiter C) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in mission to photograph possible lunar landing sites for Apollo astronauts (see Feb. 8-28). Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb spacecraft into 100-mi (161km) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 15-min coast period, injecting spacecraft on 92-hr translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule Lunar Orbiter III deployed its four solar panels and two antennas, locked its five solar sensors on the sun, and fixed its star-tracker on Canopus. Primary objectives of NASA’s Lunar Orbiter III mission, third in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; (2) to obtain high-resolution pictures of previously photographed lunar surface areas to confirm their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft; and (3) to improve knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 12 primary target sites located within the Apollo zone of interest on the moon’s front face. Spacecraft would also monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in the lunar environment, refine definition of moon’s gravitational field, and serve as a target for tracking operations by Manned Space Flight Network stations. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under ossa direction. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of JPL-oper-ated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67—12; AP, W Post, 2/5/67, A6; AP, W Star, 2/5/67, A8; AP, NYT, 2/6/67, 12)
Most probable cause of Jan. 27 flash fire in which Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee died was a sparking short circuit in worn, defective, or poorly insulated wire, Apollo 204 Review Board concluded in its final report. Copies of report were distributed simultaneously to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, congressional committees, and the press. Board was unable to pinpoint exact ignition source, but identified conditions which led to the disaster: (1) a sealed cabin, pressurized with an oxygen atmosphere; (2) an extensive distribution of combustible materials in the cabin; (3) vulnerable wiring carrying spacecraft power; (4) inadequate provisions for the crew to escape; and (5) inadequate provisions for rescue or medical assistance. Having identified these conditions, the Board addressed itself to the question of “how these conditions came to exist. Careful consideration of this question . . . leads ... to the conclusion that in its devotion to the many difficult problems of space travel, the Apollo team failed to give adequate attention to certain mundane but equally vital questions of crew safety. “The board’s investigation revealed many deficiencies in design and engineering, manufacture and quality control. When these deficiencies are corrected the over-all reliability of the Apollo program will be increased greatly.” Board offered a total of 21 recommendations, including: (1) an “indepth” review of the entire Apollo life-support system; (2) an investigation of effective ways to control and extinguish spacecraft fires; (3) severe restriction and control of amount and location of combustible materials inside spacecraft; (4) reduction of time required for crew to egress and simplification of escape operations; (5) continuous monitoring of safety of all test operations to assure adequacy of emergency protections; (6) improved ground communications system; (7) continued studies of two-gas cabin atmosphere; and (8) full-scale mockup tests to establish fire safety of reconfigured command module. Board emphasized that its report was not intended as a criticism of NASA’s entire manned program: “The board is very concerned that its description of the defects in the Apollo program . . .will be interpreted as an indictment of the entire manned space flight program and a castigation of the many people associated with the program. Nothing is further from the board’s mind.” (Text; NYT, 4/10/67, 1, 28-9; W Star, 4/ 10/67, Al, A6-7; W Post, 4/10/67, Al, A8) .
Displeasure with NASA’s administrative officials was voiced by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), member, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, on floor of the House, “nasa continues to evade the serious responsibility of candor,” said Rep. Ryan while inserting a series of documents in Congressional Record, including Feb. 15 letter from msfc Director Wernher von Braun to S. K. Hoffman, naa Rocketdyne Div. president, on “. . . hardware failure, most . . . traceable to human error, inadequate manufacturing, quality control, or test procedures.” NASA Hq. news conference, called at 5:00 pm same day by NASA Administrator James E. Webb, accompanied by key NASA and industry officials, responded to Rep. Ryan’s charges and explained that letter to Hoffman had been a case of normal Government-contractor business. Webb pointed out that subcommittees of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were kept informed each month so that emergency matters could be brought to their attention. Dr. von Braun explained how inspection and quality control procedures were continued as rocket engines were processed at contractor’s plant and at Government test sites. He stated that NASA-Rocketdyne coordination on inspection continuity and quality control were applied to both the rocket engine as an entity and the rocket engine/launch-vehicle-stage complex. As trend of news conference discussion turned from quality control to Saturn/Apollo weight problems, m/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director, said the heavier Lunar Module resulted from fire-hazard-type design changes. He stated that lm was now 31,500 lb against a 32,000-lb control weight. Referring to weight-lifting capability of Saturn V, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said lunar payload had increased from 90,000 to 100,000 lb by increasing engine efficiency. Similar improvement was expected in lm’s propulsion, which would ease the weight problem. (CR, 10/5/67, H13046-8; Transcript)
Naval Research Laboratory scientists reported the Milky Way galaxy was not capable of producing numerous new stars; instead, its star-producing days were virtually over, based on data gathered from rocket-borne instrument, a Far-Ultraviolet Image Intensifier Spectrograph [see Mar. 16]. Mission of spectrograph was to measure amount of invisible, gaseous, molecular hydrogen in interstellar space along the Milky Way; should bountiful amounts of hydrogen be indicated by the spectrograph, proof of Milky Way’s capability to produce numerous new stars would have been obtained. Instead, spectrograph measurements had found no such evidence. (AP, NYT, 5/14/67)
The Federal Government had involved itself in the SST program because failure to do so would have resulted in a loss of jobs and progress in U.S. aviation industry, m/g J. C. Maxwell (usaf), Director of faa sst Development, told the National Space Club. “The aircraft industry had been challenged by a powerful consortium [Concorde] of two large aircraft companies fully subsidized by two major governments. Our aircraft companies did not have the resources to meet this challenge. The government acted.” Federal participation had resulted in some major side effects, Maxwell said. “We were able to make available to all . potential sst contractors a vast amount of technological information that the government had acquired in its own huge aircraft endeavors. The flight test experiences of the B—70, the SR—71, and the F—111 were and are being provided to our sst contractors. . . . We were able . . . to contribute some 49,000 hours of sst wind tunnel tests conducted by NASA. The military . . . has logged some 300,000 hours of supersonic experience. . . . The sst program is founded on the experience and know-how from other programs sponsored and paid for by the government—and that includes the space effort. “Another benefit . . . [was] the fact that the resources of the whole aviation industry were brought into the project. Our search for the best design was, in every sense of the word, a competition. The best talent and genius of American aeronautical engineering was put to work.” (Text)
European leaders had realized in recent months that only they could close the “technology gap” between their countries and the U.S., Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, told New York Times reporter Evert Clark. Dr. Hornig reached this conclusion after a 16-day tour of six European capitals. The belief that U.S. had created the gap and should therefore assume the burden of closing it “has entirely disappeared,” he said. “What we found [on the tour] was a realistic approach, a realization that most of these things are basic problems, ones they have to tackle themselves.” This realization was “a most important advance” that represented an “enormous closing of the understanding gap” and meant that discussion of the many problems making up the larger technological gap “has now come down to earth.” (Clark, AFT, 7/21/67,15) 324-801 0—89
NASA’s Ogo IV (ogo-d) Orbiting Geophysical Observatory was successfully launched by a Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena booster from WTR into polar orbit with 564-mi (908-km) apogee, 256-mi (412-km) perigee, 97.9-min period, and 86° inclination. Primary mission objective was “to acquire data for studies of latitude-dependent atmospheric phenomena, from an attitude stabilized platform, during the period of perigee rotation from the Northern Hemisphere across the Arctic pole into the Southern Hemisphere.” Secondary objective was to conduct “detailed correlative investigations in atmospheric physics, energetic particle physics and polar region physics with known spacecraft attitude for the greater part of one diurnal cycle.” Carrying 20 experiments, 1,240-lb satellite was fourth of six spacecraft in nasa’s Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (ogo) program. Ogo I was launched Sept. 4,1964; Ogo II, Oct. 14,1965; and Ogo III, June 7, 1966. To date these missions had provided over 450,000 experiment hours of data on earth’s environment and had resulted in over 100 scientific papers and published reports. OGO program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction, (nasa Release 67-187; nasa Proj Off; AP, NYT, 7/29/67, 7)
Lewis Research Center issued rfp’s on system employing 2,000- to 6,000-lb comsats which could broadcast directly to home TV sets from 22,300-mi-altitude synchronous orbits. Successful proposal would receive study contract. (LeRC Release 67-6)
Glennan Space Engineering Building in Cleveland at Case Institute of Technology was dedicated, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “We need more men like nasa’s first administrator . . . Dr. Keith Glennan . .. men who are willing ... to seek out new facts, new concepts of reality as to the current human situation and [who] have the courage to base new and untried political, professional, industrial and technological ventures on information they test and learn to trust.” Recognizing the value of institutions who provide graduate education, he said: “There is little further room to doubt that a high level of basic research, an intellectual activity that must be closely associated with graduate education, is indispensable to an advancing front of scientific knowledge. . . .” Webb referred to a June 1957 speech of J. S. McDonnell of St. Louis who had made predictions to graduating students at Rolla’s Missouri School of Mines. Prediction No. 1 had a satellite circling earth and moon in 12 years. Webb said accomplishment was completed in three months for earth and in two years for moon. Prediction No. 2 had a satellite circling earth and Mars in 23 years. Webb said this was accomplished in seven years. Prediction No. 3 had manned space flight in earth orbit in 33 years. Webb pointed out this was done in four years. Webb continued: “If we look backward, we can easily see that it took 37 years to conquer the earth’s oceans ... by the Caravelle sailing vessel [and] after that 37 years, the mind of man was never the same again. Control of the earth’s ocean avenues by England through the maintenance of a favorable balance of ocean technology was a predominant force for stability in the affairs of men for over 400 years [but] no clear favorable balance of air technology was held by any one nation long enough to create world stability. It was, in fact, a predominant force in the affairs of men for less than 60 years. Space technology will be a dominant force far longer than was the case for those of ocean and air. Not limited as was the ship to the water or the airplane to the air, or by international boundaries, or to the fuel that its tanks can carry, spacecraft are today unlimited tools to explore and measure the environment within which the earth itself moves and has its being.” (Text)
Chimpanzees could survive sudden exposure to near vacuum according to tests performed by 6751 Aeromedical Research Laboratory at Holloman afb. Visual inspection of the eeg as well as power spectral density computer analysis indicated the expected greater subcortical resistance to anoxia when compared to cortical responses. Results showed that all subjects not only survived the exposures in excellent health but recovered within 4 hr after rapid decompression and were able to execute a complex behavioral schedule at a preexposure level of performance. Central nervous system damage was absent or negligible. (Text)
NASA engineers maneuvered Lunar Orbiter III, launched Feb. 4, by firing spacecraft’s velocity control engine 125.5 sec, with intent to simulate planned orbit for manned Apollo. Planned 100-mi circular orbit for Apollo was approximated in 196-mi apolune and 89-mi perilune achieved by maneuver from Lunar Orbiter Ill’s prior 1,133-mi apolune and 87-mi perilune. Data on lunar gravity fields would be obtained for Apollo program. Lunar Orbiter series of four spacecraft orbiting around moon was providing valuable tracking target activity for NASA’s Manned Space Flight Network (msfn) . (nasa Release 67-233)
U.S. space program could benefit from experience and scientific research in the Antarctic, group of NASA officials headed by msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun concluded after studying U.S. installations and activities at McMurdo Station since Jan. 3. Interest in the Antarctic was based on research being conducted there which was applicable to space flight and on way Americans worked under conditions of stress, isolation, and extreme cold—conditions similar to those on the moon and in space flight. The group also observed minute fungi and algae growing in Antarctic and studied methods being used to detect living organisms, as preparation for detecting and studying such growths possibly existing in harsh environments of other planets. (Durdin, NYT, 1/15/67, 87)	.
NASA would delay scheduled 1967 launch of second Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (oao) until late 1968 to incorporate changes made necessary after failure of Oao I, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell said in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Third oao would be launched in 1969 and fourth in 1970 to continue studies in ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma-ray spectral regions. Dr. Newell explained that “the intensive investigations by NASA of Oao—I program development, test, and operations history have resulted in design and program modifications directed toward increasing the reliability and the operating efficiency of the OAO system in order to insure the success of the second oao missions. . . . Although the remaining three approved missions have been delayed . . . the scientific goals of these missions will be accomplished . . . [and oao] will continue to be the backbone of the NASA space astronomy program. . . .” (Testimony)
West Germany’s 1966 budget for space technology and research shown on Finance Minister’s summary report revealed that, while $57 million had been available, only $44.3 million had been spent, according to Interavia Air Letter. Aerospace industry complained government was so slow to issue contracts that firms themselves had to provide about 50% advance financing. Contracts were not officially approved until the end of each year. (Interavia, 11/16/67, 3)
Office of Science and Technology released an interim report on usaf test flights at Edwards afb to study the effects of the sonic boom June 3-23, 1966, and Oct. 31, 1966-Jan. 17, 1967, 11 types of aircraft made 367 supersonic and 261 subsonic flights. Report concluded that flights caused little or no physical harm to test structures, 393 test subjects, or 220,570 test animals, and noted relative annoyance of booms of differing intensity and of booms compared to jet aircraft engine noise. Between 33% and 98% of the test subjects objected to booms in the 2.0- to 3.5-lb-psf overpressure range that ssts were expected to produce under the worst possible conditions. Other preliminary conclusions: (1) sonic booms sounded louder outside than inside; (2) walls of houses were more effective in blocking out jet engine noise than sonic booms; and (3) annoyance increased faster with increasingly bigger booms than with increasingly louder engine noise. (Text; Clark, NYT, 8/3/67, 1, 24)
U.S. space program was a sound investment which would pay “handsome dividends” to all Americans and to humanity in general, UCLA professor of chemistry Dr. Willard F. Libby told aas meeting in Denver. Winner of the 1960 Nobel Prize in chemistry and discoverer of radio-carbon dating, Dr. Libby suggested that space program opponents “quit grumbling about going-to-the-moon extravagance with taxpayers’ money” and realize that large expenditures were necessary to maintain U.S. world leadership in space.	• “And we can’t stop at the moon. . . . Once we’ve ventured that far, we should establish a base there for manned takeoffs to Mars and Venus. “Now Congress is debating the merits of authorizing space exploration beyond the moon in the early ’70s. They have dpty to debate such a venture, costing more than $2 billion. But what . . . would Congress do with that money if it weren’t spent on future space research?” Space research had already made great contributions to medicine, microelectronics, worldwide communications, and many other fields, he said, and could continue to achieve much mote “for the good of humanity and the expansion of frontiers of human knowledge.” (Lindbergh, Denver Post, 7/16/67)	_
Memorial service for Astronaut Roger B. Chaffee was held in Houston. Among those attending were Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of msc; and Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. (Bloom, W Post, 1/30/67)
According to National Aeronautic Assn., Soviet authorities had filed with Federation Aeronautique International two new world speed records and one new world altitude record for their Mikoyan E-266 twintailed fighter aircraft. Pilot Peter Ostapenko had completed 1,000-km (621-mi) closed course with 4,410-lb load at average speed of 2,910 km/hr (1,808 mph). With same load, pilot Mikhail Komarov had completed 500-km (311-mi) closed course at 2,928 km/hr (1,820 mph). Alexandr Fedotov reached an altitude of 98,462 ft. (Av Wk, 12/18/67, 54-5; naa/pio)
NASA rejected industry bids ranging from $13.6-14.9 million for construction of four buildings at NASA’s Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, Mass, erc Director James C. Elms said that difference between bids and $10.4-million, Government estimate was too great to be adjusted and that building plans would have to be revised. (McElheny, Boston Globe, 4/6/67)
nasa appointed an interim working group composed of Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, and Gen. Jacob E. Smart (usaf, Ret.) to review nasa safety procedures and prepare a plan under which the Administrator could establish an Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel. Gen. Mark Bradley (usaf, Ret.), Garrett Corp., would serve as a consultant to the chairman, Dr. Eggers. The action would implement Section 6 of Public Law 90-67 (the nasa Authorization Act for FY 68). Eggers was Special Assistant to the Administrator and Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. Thompson, Director of nasa’s Langley Research Center, served as chairman of the Apollo 204 Accident Review Board. Gen. Smart was NASA’s Assistant Administrator for Policy, (nasa Release 67—249)
In informal remarks at Kennedy Space Center, NASA Administrator James E. Webb predicted that congressional cuts in the space budget would slow up the launch rate and lead to the phasing out of Apollo equipment after man landed on the moon. Webb said that only nine of the 15 Saturn V launch vehicles could be launched before 1970, instead of 13 planned launchings. “I don’t think there’s any doubt that to absorb this cut for $500 million, after already having absorbed a $600 million cut back in 1964, means that we will have to slow up the launch rate,” he stated. The cut had also knocked out any new planetary missions before 1975. Space budget cuts would likely mean die elimination of the Saturn IB from the middle-term space program, Webb explained in a brief press conference. NASA was committed to the purchase of 16 Saturn IB launch vehicles. Three had been flown; the next one would propel the first manned Apollo into earth orbit in mid-1968. NASA planned to switch manned flights to the three-stage Saturn V as soon as possible. The first Saturn V flight, an unmanned test, was scheduled for Oct. 19. The Saturn IB had been planned for continued use on flights not requiring the huge power of the Saturn V, but Webb said that emphasis instead would switch to the Air Force’s Titan HIM launch vehicle, being developed for the military Manned Orbiting Laboratory. Webb listed several future checkpoints: (1) fewer orders for new Apollo spacecraft equipment after the moon landing, in such programs as Apollo Applications; (2) definition of the next system after Apollo, which could be a 100,000-lb space station, or something bigger, launched with Saturn V, or a new launch vehicle; (3) development of new and better concepts since planetary missions have been knocked out until 1975; and (4) massive reorganizational changes a possibility for NASA. Webb and West Germany Minister for Scientific Research Dr. Gerhard Stoltenberg, at the press conference, stated jointly: five West German scientists would participate in studying Apollo program results, and two research satellites and a solar probe would be launched in West German-U.S. cooperative program. Stoltenberg also said that West German industry would be main contractor for an ESRO satellite for 1969 launching, the “first German satellite.” Webb said Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell had been asked to examine question “How do we . . . decide whether a mission should use man or not use man?” (Text; upi, W Star, 9/21/67; Hill, H Chron, 9/22/67)
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Science, Research and Development Subcommittee, spoke on “A Challenge to the Scientific Community,” at autumn meeting of nas, at Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor. He urged scientists to become more actively involved in helping Government leaders find effective ways of dealing with national problems, and he believed that Congress should take an active interest in the “state of science” because scientific activity “is critical to the deliberations and the decisions of our political representatives.” In turn, he urged an understanding by scientists and engineers of “pressures and functioning of a government which must be responsive to every shade of thought which our nation harbors.” (Text)
Jerome F. Lederer, NASA Manned Space Flight Safety Director, received Flight Safety Foundation’s Distinguished Service Award for distinguished service in achieying aircraft uses under safer conditions. (NASA Hq WB, 50)
Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, in its report to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, recommended that $46.8 million be cut from $3.4 billion requested by nasa for FY 1968 manned space flight program. Recommendation, which included $25-million reduction in Apollo program, was approved by full committee May 16. (W Post, 5/12/67, A13)
U.S. industry would spend $16.6 billion for r&d in 1967—double the amount spent in 1957, McGraw-Hill, Inc., reported in its annual economic survey. Federal Government had financed 54% or $8.4 billion of the $15.5 billion spent for research in 1966. Survey estimated that 1970 expenditures would reach $21 billion. It noted that more than half of the R&D was concentrated in two industries—aerospace, and electrical machinery and communications—both of which were heavily involved in defense and space exploration. (Koshetz, NYT, 5/12/67,67)
10th anniversary of the space age, inaugurated with the launching of first man-made satellite, U.S.S.R.’s 184-lb Sputnik I. During first decade of space age 803 spacecraft were successfuly orbited: U.S. orbited 529; U.S.S.R., 269; France, 4; and Italy, 1. U.S. total included 14 manned orbital space flights with 677 orbits and 1,993.4 man hours; U.S.S.R. had 9 flights with 310 orbits and 532.5 man hours. Of 45 worldwide flights related to the moon, 20 were successful— including 5 softlandings—providing high-quality photos and on-site analyses of lunar surface. Some 24 planetary flights provided close-up photos of Mars and atmospheric data on Mars and Venus. Some 17 bioscience payloads, including mice, dogs, mold spores, plants, insects, a chimpanzee, and an anthropomorphic dummy, were successfully launched and recovered, providing data on effects of space flight on living systems. Space applications satellites totaled 292; advanced technology satellites, 26; and military support and observation satellites, 158. (EH; Sheldon, “Review of the Soviet Space Program,” Report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics)
NASA’s Oso III (oso e) Orbiting Solar Observatory was successfully launched from etr with three-stage Thor-Delta booster to study the sun and its influence on earth’s atmosphere. Orbital parameters: apogee, 354 mi (570 km); perigee, 336 mi (540 km); period, 96 min; and inclination, 33°. Third of eight spacecraft in NASA’s oso program to provide direct observation of the sun, Oso III weighed 627 lbs, carried nine experiments, and had two main sections: the wheel (lower) section provided stability by gyroscopic spinning and housed the telemetry-command equipment, batteries, electronic controls, gas spin-control arms, and seven experiment packages; the sail (upper) section was oriented toward the sun and contained solar cells and two solar pointing experiments. Primary purpose of Oso III was to obtain high-resolution spectral data in the range 8A-1300A from pointed solar experiments during major portion of one solar rotation and adequate operational support of spacecraft subsystems to carry out acquisition of these scientific data. Spacecraft’s experiments were designed to continue and extend work of Oso I (launched March 7, 1963) and Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965) spacecraft by collecting data on solar x-rays, gamma rays, ultraviolet radiation, and other solar activity. Project management officials at gsfc tested or turned on all nine experiments and reported that satellite spin rate, power level, charge rate, and temperatures were normal. Both tape recorders were operating. Last experiment, the high-voltage portion of gsfc’s x-ray spectrometer, was successfully turned on March 14. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 67-32,67—52)
NASA personnel changes: (1) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, resigned effective Aug. 1 to become a vice president of Polaroid Corp.; (2) b/g Carroll H. Bolender (usaf), omsf, was named manager for the Lunar Module (lm) at msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, replacing Dr. William A. Lee, who resigned for personal reasons. Bolender would be responsible for management of the lm program including design, development, and fabrication of the vehicle by Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., lm prime contractor; (3) Col. Maynard E. White (usaf, Ret.), former Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel, usaf Hq. in Europe, became Director of Program Control, omsf, replacing William E. Lilly, who was appointed Assistant Administrator for Administration March 8. White would be responsible for the total financial, administrative, and business management support services for omsf and the administration and direction of approved facility projects in support of the manned flight program, (nasa Releases 67-196, 67-198; O’Toole, W Post, 7/26/67, A10; AP, W Star, 7/26/67)
Japan launched three-stage Lambda 3H rocket from Uchinoura Space Center, Kyushu Island, to 1,337-mi (2,142-km) altitude—record altitude for Japanese rocket. The 9.5-ton vehicle carried instruments to obtain nine types of scientific data on the Van Allen belts and the ionosphere; all equipment functioned normally except electronic thermometer. The 29-min flight ended when rocket’s 3rd stage impacted 1,400 mi down-range in the Pacific. (AP, NYT, 2/7/67,27)
Spectrometer aboard NASA’s Oso IV, launched Oct. 18, had obtained spectral data providing complete picture of corona over whole face of solar disc, Harvard College Observatory Director Professor Leo Goldberg said. Primary purpose of satellite, to obtain high-resolution spectral data, had been achieved. Goldberg said that 4,000 uv photos of the sun, made above earth’s atmosphere, would provide three-dimensional information on sun’s structure, temperature, and density, and on how they vary with height. Previously, scientists could study solar flares only by observing them at the sun’s rim during eclipse. Goldberg said interpretation of uv photos, still being "transmited to earth, should also be related to unsolved problems about sun’s chemical composition and in turn to theories of sun’s origin and evolution. (Weil, W Post, 11/26/67, A6; AP, W Star, 11/26/67, A17)
American Astronautical Society’s (aas) 13th Annual Convention, “Commercial Utilization of Space,” was held in Dallas. msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun stressed the importance of space exploration to man’s general welfare: “The space program is providing us with new and valuable scientific information about our environment in this universe. The space budget cannot be justified, however, solely on the basis of expanding scientific knowledge, even though the discoveries may be regarded priceless by one segment of society. Space technology must continue and expand its contributions to the satisfaction of the needs and desires of society in general if it is to become a permanent outlet for man’s creativity and energies.” Dr. von Braun later suggested to the press that the lunar module (lm) might not be ready for the Apollo lunar mission as soon as the other launch vehicle and spacecraft elements. In that event, he said, NASA might decide to “fly the lunar mission [as a manned circumlunar flight], but just not activate one phase of it.” (Text; Av Wk, 5/8/67, 17) Future potentials of navigation satellites were outlined by Eugene Ehrlich, Navigation and Traffic Control Program Chief, OSSA. Navigation satellites could provide: (1) high-accuracy position determination service to craft, people, and shore stations; (2) communications service to pilots, traffic controllers, and passengers; (3) air traffic control and maritime coordination; (4) sst radiation warning; (5) search and rescue aid during emergencies; (6) weather routing for aircraft and ships; (7) iceberg warning; and (8) data on migratory habits of marine, land, and sea life. (Text) George S. Trimble, Director of Advanced Planning, omsf, called for increased industry responsibility in space exploration. NASA builds “the roads into space. It is beholden on . . . industry to make certain that we build the proper ones for . . . future use. ... As we look forward to missions of ever-increasing complexity, it is important that we continue to insure the most effective accomplishment of the most worthwhile experiments that this country can devise.” (Text) Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), describing industry’s attempts to capitalize on non-Govemment space business opportunities as “substantially insufficient,” urged industry to submit imaginative proposals for commercial development of space and to solicit Congress’ support for the effort. (AvWk, 5/15/67,67) A more realistic basis for determining space transportation costs should be devised to reflect actual use of the object in space, ksc Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus suggested. Although cost reductions were being studied, prospective commercial users of space should expect to spend about 10% of their overall program costs for launch operations, he said. He emphasized that more substantial savings could be realized in other areas such as reusable boosters and payload; increased life cycle of payload; reserviceable payload; and booster and spacecraft propulsion. (Text; Av Wk, 5/15/67,69) NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin noted that space program had to defend itself continuously to enlist international support: “In ten years of space development, no nation has been harmed in any way. We must point to this record constantly in order to improve the atmosphere and wisdom of international consideration . . . [and] emphasize the expansion of benefits rather than restrictions upon progress. The record makes clear that we can address the more complicated questions of international organization on an evolutionary basis with the advantage of growing experience. The needs of the developing world and the magnificent record of space applications so far combine to show that the issues of international organization are secondary to the task of accelerating benefits for the world.” (Text) mit Head of Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics Dr, Raymond L. Bisplinghoff and NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop discussed selection of technology and optimum conditions for its development. They pointed out how such development “. . . triggered vast areas of accomplishment in [its] wake [and] produced a sustained and long-term stimulus to education [and provided] influence [that is] one of spirit rather than power. . . .” Turning to discussion of impact of space program on engineering practices, they cited a major stimulus which was produced by “. . . the extreme environment of outer space combined with the requirements for low weight, small size, and exceptional reliability.” They pointed to the new stimulus to “imagination and creativity” among engineers. Among important reasons for having a space program they listed satisfaction of society’s needs; developing technology should serve as “. . . a solution to an existing or foreseeable social problem.” Calling attention to the international arena of technological development, the speakers urged “a balance of technologies in our favor [which] will . . . require wisdom in the selection of new tech324-801 0—69 nologies ... so vital to our national well-being and survival that [we] must, to the greatest extent of our ability, use imagination, good judgment, and energy in their planning and execution.” (Text) TRW Systems Group President Dr. Ruben F. Mettler suggested that space environmental characteristics could be useful and, in some ways, unique for certain manufacturing operations. He stated: “An environment so widely different from that to which we are accustomed suggests we [determine] whether the new features can be used for making conventional products of improved quality or performance or at lower cost, whether they can support new processes previously considered impractical, or if they can lead to new products of such characteristics that they create new and currently unidentified markets.” Mettler suggested these environmental characteristics for space operations which would be of interest to “possible specialized manufacturing operations”: low temperatures, approaching absolute zero with use of space cryostat; high temperatures with use of solar concentrator; near-perfect vacuum of infinite extent; weightlessness in orbit; low gravitational forces on moon; and radiation environment. (Text) Awards for achievement in 1966 presented at convention included: (1) aas Space Flight Award to msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth for “distinguished contributions to aeronautical and space research . . . direction of continuing investigation of man’s capabilities in space, and . . . active participation in the scientific community for the public good”; (2) aas Flight Achievement Award to Astronauts Charles Conrad and Richard F. Gordon for “their new space flight altitude record and the world’s first one-orbit rendezvous on Gemini XI”; (3) Melbourne Boynton Award to Col. William K. Douglas (usaf), Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff, Bioastronautics and Medicine, afsc, for exceptional accomplishments as the first flight surgeon in charge of astronaut medical operations; (4) W. Randolph Lovelace II Award to Dr. Robert M. Page, former Director of Research, Naval Research Laboratory, for pioneering work in rocket astronomy and contributions to radar development; and (5) aas Fellowships to msc Director of Medical Research and Operations Dr. Charles A. Berry “for providing exceptional medical support for the NASA manned spacecraft programs,” and to msc Director of Engineering and Development Maxime A. Faget for “contributions to the basic conceptual design of the Mercury spacecraft and . . . subsequent engineering efforts” on Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo Projects, (msc Release 67-15)
Dr. Ludwig Roth, 58, McDonnell Douglas director of Saturn-Apollo extension program died in Redondo Beach, Calif. Bom in Gross-Gerau, Germany, he had been an associate of Dr. Wernher von Braun in pioneering rocket engineering and space sciences, He had served as Assistant Director of Army Ballistic Missile Agency. (AP, NYT, 11/3/67, 43; World Space Directory, Fall 1967, 155) During October: jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering stressed importance of unmanned space exploration in Astronautics and Aeronautics: “During the past decade of space exploration, unmanned spacecraft have demonstrated a remarkable versatility in performing a wide variety of scientific tasks. The success of these robots is due largely to the ingenuity of the designers in building complex but reliable automated devices, capable of withstanding the constraints imposed by the hostile spaceflight environment. “It is clearly evident that many difficult engineering and scientific problems remain to be solved. The experience of the past decade demonstrates, however, that within the next decade unmanned spacecraft can initiate a detailed surface exploration of our neighboring planets. “The unmanned exploration of the solar system is technically and scientifically possible. It presents a unique opportunity to step boldly forward into new areas of both technology and science.” (Pickering, A&A, 10/67,80-4)	.
Report by nrc Space Science Board on the concept of orbiting large reflecting mirrors concluded that there was no overwhelming evidence that scientific damage would result from the deployment of a single reflector system. It recommended, however, that such a satellite not he considered in the future unless the ability to destroy it by ground signals were an inherent part of the design and unless detailed studies of its effects on ecology, biology, and astronomy were previously conducted and made public. It said it could see no scientific merit for such a satellite system commensurate with its cost to the public and its nuisance to science. Report was prepared by Board’s Committee on Potential Contamination and Interference from Satellites as a result of NASA’s 1966 announcement that it had asked five aerospace companies to study feasibility of orbiting large reflecting mirrors that could illuminate land masses at night. Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, confirmed in a letter to nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz that the Government no longer had plans for such a project. (NAS—NRC—NAE News Report, 5/67, 2) 0 National Academy of Sciences Panel on Applied Science and Technological Progress had concluded that the “most important invention in the pursuit of modem . . . applied science is the big mission-oriented industrial or Government laboratory,” and had underlined importance of a symbiosis between mission-oriented institution and university. Panel’s report, forwarded to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, also recognized Government’s special responsibility for integrity and sufficiency of man’s environment and for dealing with national and regional social questions. It urged adaptability of large, interdisciplinary Government laboratories to new national problem areas. (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller appeared before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight to submit Apollo project reprogramming plans presented to the Senate May 9. Dr. Seamans assured the Subcommittee that schedules could be met and urged that Congress continue to support NASA: “We have confidence in the ability of our technical and adrrdnistrative teams, both in government and industry, to meet the challenge before us. But that is not sufficient; the Congress, representing the people of the Nation, must
Vladimir Komarov was twelfth Soviet cosmonaut to die in a spaceflight accident, Julius Epstein, a Stanford Univ. professor, told upi. He claimed he had conclusive evidence including the names of Soviet cosmonauts who had supposedly died on space missions. Epstein said U.S. policy of not disclosing Soviet space disasters that U.S.S.R. does not publicize was based on the State Department’s desire “not to embarrass the Russians.” (upi, P Inq,	1) During April: The U.S. press commented on the April 24 death of Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov. New York Times: “Men have risked their lives in pioneering since history began—explorers, mountain climbers, the first aviators who conquered the globe’s blanket of air, and now the cosmonauts who enter the ‘infinite spaces.’ That much has to be accepted—but how much? It seems clear that the three Americans who died in the oxygen fire at Cape Kennedy were victims of insufficient care, slipshod work and haste. There is no way of knowing whether similar factors led to the death of Komarov yesterday; but it is a fact that the Russians are aiming at time schedules, hoping to beat the United States to the moon, trying to meet special dates connected with the fiftieth anniversary of their Revolution. The United States still insists on trying to reach the moon by 1970. “Both nations are duplicating costly and dangerous work. Thus good and brave men die unnecessarily, vast sums are wasted, and without doubt the progress that humanity could make through cooperation in the thrilling quest for knowledge of the universe is being hampered by pride, prestige and the nebulous possibility of strategic gain.” (NYT, 4/25/67,40) Philadelphia Evening Bulletin• “. . . hard on the heels of a test disaster that took the lives of three U.S. Apollo astronauts, tragedy has also struck the Russian space program with the crash of a new giant spacecraft and the death of its pilot, Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov. . . . “Had the Russians succeeded in mounting a new space spectacular at this time, it is possible that some of the sobering impact of the Apollo on this country would have been dissipated. Although there have been repeated disclaimers of a space ‘race,’ the sight of the Soviet Union again forging ahead would surely have fanned anew American competitive instincts. Surely the death of brave men on both sides will reemphasize for both the element of human fallibility and the need for offsetting it with infinite pains and caution in space exploration.” (P EB, 4/25/67) Technology Week: “The Soviet tragedy, by emphasizing the hazards of space flight, has perhaps eased some of the pressure of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and North American Aviation. There is more awareness now that the exploration of space will not be a series of glittering successes, one after another. There are dangers; there will be further tragedies, other brave men to mourn. While bringing home the care which must always be taken, the Soviet accident also makes it clear that in programs of this magnitude humans are not always infallible. . . .” (Coughlin, Tech Wk, 5/1/67, 50) Aviation Week and Space Technology: “It is fortunate that the Apollo and Soyuz tragedies came this far downstream in the history of manned space flight. If they had occurred in the initial phases of Vostok or Mercury, the hue and cry of technical timidity in both countries might have killed the manned space flight programs before they had a chance to demonstrate their technical feasibility. Viewed against the perspective of Vostok, Mercury, Voskhod and Gemini and more than 2,000 hr of successful space flight logged by crews of both nations, the recent tragedies spotlight development problems but do not raise any fundamental doubts about man’s ability to reach the moon. . . .” (Hotz, Av Wk, 5/1/67,11)
NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried afcrl solar radiation experiment to 142-mi (229-km) altitude in test to complement March 14 mission which was hot entirely successful. Primary objective was simultaneous measurement of solar extreme ultraviolet radiation (euv) in upper atmosphere with Aerobee’s photoelectric spectrometer and similar instrument on NASA’s Oso III Orbiting Solar Observatory, launched March 8. (WS Release 67-11)
NATO intelligence had learned that French President Charles de Gaulle would begin extensive cooperation with U.S.S.R. in the field of space exploration, including the orbiting of nuclear weapons, Henry J. Taylor reported in the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin. Taylor claimed U.S.S.R. was devoting a “substantial percentage” of its total military budget to the orbiting of nuclear weapons. (Taylor, P EB, 8/30/67)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried Naval Research Laboratory payload containing two coronagraphs to 113-mi (180.8-km) altitude. Primary purpose of flight was to launch externally occulted coronagraphs during period when moon was very close to the sun. Rocket also carried a photographic spectroheliograph, a photographic extreme ultraviolet heliograph, and an ion chamber to measure total solar flux at Lyman-alpha. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA’s previous approach to preventing spacecraft fires by “preventing their ignition” had been inadequate, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified at open hearing held by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy. Also present were NASA Administrator James E. Webb, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations. NASA’s future approach would seek to: (1) minimize possibility of ignition, recognizing “that this possibility will always exist”; (2) limit chance of fire’s propagating once it has started; and (3) minimize consequences of fire to crew. Dr. Mueller outlined an extensive program of testing, redesign, and procedural changes, which included escape hatch for Apollo spacecraft that could be opened in two seconds; search for new, less flammable materials for cabin interior and spacesuits; and revised emergency procedures. All improvements and changes would be incorporated into an advanced version—Block II—of Apollo spacecraft. No more Block I spacecraft like Apollo 204 would be used for manned space flights. Dr. Mueller said no estimate of fire’s eventual cost in time or money would be made until completion of Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation, but he indicated that it would be at least 8 to 10 months before next manned Apollo flight. Dr. Mueller testified that launch rehearsal during which fire had occurred had not been classified as “hazardous” because seven years of experience with Mercury and Gemini programs had never indicated such tests were particularly dangerous. Even if the test had been categorized as hazardous., he said, it would have still taken 90 sec for crew to open the double hatch and complete their egress. Crew died within 20 sec after detection of fire. Webb added that the handle for equalizing pressure, necessary precondition to opening hatch, had not been actuated. Dr. Berry said carbon monoxide had asphyxiated astronauts. He confirmed that bodies had had “some thermal bums of second and third degree” but “not of sufficient magnitude to cause death.” Dr. Berry warned that “we are never going to be able to completely eliminate the risk of fire as long as oxygen is available.” Dr. Mueller said “an atmosphere which will support life will also support combustion. Therefore the first answer . . . must be fire prevention in terms of strict control of both potential ignition sources and combustible materials.” During the questioning session, Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) inquired about a 1965 report by Apollo Program Manager m/g Samuel Phillips (usaf). Dr. Mueller said that he did “not recall such a report,” and when asked to supply a copy, Webb said NASA would try and identify the specific report and would make it available to the Comptroller General “under any request that the Committee . .. would make to him.” (Testimony; Transcript, 3-4, 24, 41-2, 61, 70, Apollo Accident, Part 2, 65-66, 75, 86, 97, 108, 115, 125 ff., and 130 ff.)
A. O. Tischler, director of oart’s Chemical Propulsion Div., received aiaa’s 1967 Wyld Propulsion Award for leadership and management of rocket programs. He was cited for his “outstanding contributions to the research and development of Liquid Rocket Propulsion Systems and overall management of the nasa Liquid Rocket Propulsion Program.” (nasa Release 67-186)
Object, believed to be “probable” 10th moon of Saturn discovered by French astronomer Dr. Audouin Dollfus of Meudon Observatory in December 1966, had been sighted by Richard L. Walker of the U.S. Naval Observatory, Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times. New moon, believed to be a 150-mi-dia “snowball” of very light, frozen material, was in orbit 52,000 mi from Saturn with a period of 18 hrs. Confirmation was uncertain, however; Walker, in a telephone interview, said the object was so close to the rings of Saturn that it could be a lump . in the rings, rather than a moon. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/5/67, C17) January 6: Harold B. Finger, Director of Nuclear Systems and Space Power in NASA Hq. oart and Manager of AEC—NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, temporarily assigned additional duty of heading group of NASA officials who would analyze needs for procedural revisions and functional alignments within NASA Hq. (nasa Release 67-2)
Dr. Herbert Friedman, Naval Research Laboratory Superintendent of Atmosphere and Astrophysics Div., received 1967 Rockefeller Public Service Award ($10,000) from Princeton Univ. President Robert F, Goheen. Award was given in the field of science, technology, and engineering. Scientist had specialized in astrophysics from first experiments in rocket astronomy (revealing strength and pattern of uv and x-rays 50 mi above atmosphere) down to present service, which also included post of Chief Scientist of Hulburt Center for Space Research. (Lobsenz Public Relations Co. Release, 11/13/67; Science, 12/29/67, 1655)
A total lunar eclipse began at 3:10 am edt; the earth cast an almost 900,000-mi-long moving shadow on its journey around the sun. A meteor shower—the Orionids—added to the meteorological event. Weather permitting, these events would have been visible over most of North America. Schedule for meteor shower was Oct. 16-21. During eclipse, infrared studies of lunar soil were made by msfc Space Sciences Laboratory and Univ. of Georgia research team. Perfect weather at Athens, Ga., permitted 20 traverses of moon during the eclipse. Using university observatory equipment—infrared radiometer attached to large telescope—to look for volcanic hot spots, scientists saw crater Tycho against cooler background during eclipse. The more general radiation pattern would be heat being radiated from lunar surface, including anomalies. Results were highly successful, reported Space Sciences Laboratory’s deputy director Gerhard B. Heller. (W Star, 10/15/67, B6; McCandlish, NYT, 10/19/67, 49; msfc Release 67-214)
NASA announced that research at Ames Research Center indicated a probability of meteoroids’ puncturing spacecraft at about six times greater than previous calculations. Tests which simulated meteor entry into atmosphere were conducted in aec’s Hypervelocity Planetary Gas Tunnel. arc Director H. Julian Allen and assisting scientists Charles Shepard, Howard Stine, and Barrett Baldwin used melting or ablating tests on one stony meteorite and on samples of gabbro—common, meteor-like earth rock—at simulated speeds up to 35,000 mph. Tunnel tests showed that heat of entry into earth’s atmosphere melted rock surface, boiled off interior water, and expanded gases occurring in rock. Expansion of exterior rock layer by 10 to 1,000 times converted exterior to foam and acted as a heat shield. Foam was 2 to 20 times less dense than the unheated rock; depending on entry conditions, foam would or would not break off. Past experience and theory had suggested that meteors were sandlike and would be remains of broken up comets; in addition, studies of meteor and comet trajectories had supported current theory that comets would be like “dirty snowballs” made mostly of ice, frozen ammonia, and methane with rock and sand additives. Opposed to these beliefs, arc scientists speculated that many more meteors originated in the rocky asteroid belt and that much more solid rock would be contained in luminous clouds of comets, arc could now prophesy the need for greater protection on long missions where the probability of meteoroid hit would be highest. (NASA Release 67-281)
U.S.S.R.’s next manned space flight would use a Soyuz spacecraft similar to the one which crashed April 24, according to Astronauts Michael Collins and David Scott who had discussed future space plans with Soviet cosmonauts at the Paris International Air and Space Show [see May 26-31]. In upi interview Collins and Scott said they were “amazed by the similarities between the two [U.S. and U.S.S.R. space] programs.” Collins said that Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Konstantin Feoktistov indicated “that there would be several earth orbital flights and then ... a circumlunar flight” (upi, W Post, 6/4/67, A9)
Electronics Research Center was studying a navigation satellite system capable of providing location information to ships and aircraft accurate to within 0.1 mi, Aerospace Technology reported. System would be competitive with recently declassified Navy Navigation Satellite System [see July 29], but would be aimed primarily at small users such as private aircraft and pleasure craft. User cost for receiving equipment would range from $1,000 to $5,000. Current phase of program involved three contractors: (1) Philco-Ford Corp., which had completed study on fan beam navigation satellites; (2) RCA, which was studying a hyperbolic L-band ranging system providing continuous radiation of the signal; and (3) trw Systems which was designing a synchronous-orbit satellite system, also operating in the L-band. The next phase, pending NASA Hq. approval, was laboratory testing followed, possibly, by flight experiments in Applications Technology Satellite (ats) or Apollo Applications (aa) program. (Aero Tech, 8/14/67, 10)
LaRC Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson had been selected as one of 10 public servants to receive National Civil Service League’s 1967 Career Service Award for his pioneering efforts as an engineer, scientist, and administrator in advancing the science of aeronautics and space flight in the U.S. Award would be presented to Dr. Thompson April 21 at Annual Career Service Awards banquet in Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 67-69)
NRL announced world’s lowest recorded temperature—less than onemillionth of a degree Kelvin above absolute zero—had been achieved by Naval Research Laboratory scientists Dr. Arthur Spohr and Edwin Althouse through use of magnetic cooling technique, described as nuclear cooling. Previous lowest recorded temperature had been about 1.3 millionths of a degree above. The difference was of great significance because in this range most physical properties, including degree of orientation of atomic nuclei, varied markedly with even a slight change of temperature. At absolute zero, nuclei of most materials would have the highest state of order possible for the material. New record at Naval Research Laboratory would further advance development of an apparatus to study interaction forces between nuclei and to examine effects of oriented nuclei, (nri. Release)
Growing confidence that U.S. would accomplish a manned lunar landing by 1970 had plunged space planners into an urgent debate over post-Apollo plans, John Wilford wrote in the New York Times. Should the U.S. concentrate on unmanned and manned exploration of Mars or Venus? An expanded lunar-oriented program? Giant manned laboratories in earth orbit for research and surveillance? Networks of communications and meteorological satellites? Or a series of instrument probes to comets, asteroids, and outer planets? Such questions had opened a searching reexamination into the value of space exploration, and some critics were urging a less ambitious and costly program, with more emphasis “on the problems that confront us here on earth.” While the debate continued, nasa was said to favor concentrating on manned orbiting laboratories that would exploit present technology. Although a broad range of space goals was considered attainable in the next two decades, NASA officials said failure to define post-Apollo objectives soon could cause U.S. to find itself unprepared to achieve any major space goal before the mid-1970s. (Wilford, NYT, 1/22/67, 1)
Successful simulation of a meteor was achieved when tiny manmade iron pellet fired by Trailblazer launch vehicle reentered earth’s atmosphere at unprecedented speed of 38,180 mph and landed on target. Launched from NASA Wallops Station, six-stage Trailblazer reached 190mi (306-km) altitude before firing one-gram pellet on downward leg of ballistic trajectory. Artificial meteor was visible for two seconds. Experiment was part of LaRC-Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory program to study luminosity and ionization of simulated meteors, thereby increasing scientists’ knowledge of natural meteoroids. (LaRC Release)
Although junior colleges constitute a major segment of higher education in terms of number of institutions (about one-third), their resources . for science, in terms of expenditures and manpower, are meager,” nsf reported to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Science, Research, and Development Subcommittee, nsf report, The Junior College and Education in the Sciences, stated that junior college “share of expenditures for separately budgeted research and development, in 196364, was one-tenth of 1 percent of the total for all colleges and universities; for science ‘plant,’ 3.7 percent; and for instruction and departmental research, 4.8 percent.” (Text)
Trained monkeys completed a two-month simulated space flight which indicated that astronauts could return their spacecraft to earth even after a near-fatal dose of solar radiation. Sixteen rhesus monkeys, trained to operate an instrument panel, were used in a test at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Some of the animals were exposed over a 10-day period to from 500 to 1,000 roentgens of gamma radiation. Three of the monkeys in the high-dose group died but the others survived. This evidence of monkey vitality was of great importance to man because the U.S. target date for moon landings would come at a peak of the sun’s 11-year-cycle for emitting deadly radiation. (C Trib, 9/5/67)
U.S.S.R. and North Vietnam signed agreement to establish a satellite tracking station in North Vietnam and cooperate in synchronic photography of earth satellites. (Reuters, NYT, 10/19/67,9) Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke on role of Congress in r&d in 1970s. Citing increasing “Government concern for the involvement of science and technology in the welfare and security of the American people,” he said it was increasingly obvious that science and technology, a prime source of many environmental problems, must be means by which they are solved. He also called for realism in minimizing influence of competition between political philosophies on implementation of scientific knowledge for human problems. “We must direct more and more attention ... to the effects of urbanization, such as the pollution of air, water and the land, the practical control of population, to offsetting the constantly decreasing supply of natural resources such as fresh water, arable land, and fuels.” (Text) Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), speaking on techniques for forecasting technological advances, emphasized need for enlightened and comprehensive planning and bold, imaginative management. He described technological forecasting as one of most valuable new tools for planners and managers. Indicating that forecasting must go beyond advanced planning, he called for its use in determining long-range implications of technological progress. If a manager, keeping a program open to possible advances in technology, chose improved performance, then he could be assured that when his truly advanced item entered the market or the military inventory, it would be effective for the maximum number of years. (Av Wk, 12/4/67,21) All scientific instruments and spacecraft subsystems performed properly during encounter sequence, as they had throughout flight. Sequence of 15 significant events during encounter, occultation, closest approach, exit occultation, and return to cruise mode, had begun at 10:49 pm edt Oct. 18 and had ended at 3:55 am edt Oct. 23. Full recorded account of experiments performed by Mariner V—first and second playbacks— exhibited clear and steady signals, jpl scientists obtained meaningful scientific data from all of spacecraft’s experiments. Results of experiments included: solar plasma probe and magnetometer showed existence of solar wind/Venus interaction; trapped radiation found no energetic particles or radiation belts, and found magnetic moment less than 1% of earth’s; S-band occultation estimated carbon dioxide and found ionospheric observations on daytime side indicated electron density; dual-frequency radio propagation provided data on Venus mass as 81.50% of earth’s mass, and astronomical unit determination agreed with radar computations; and ultraviolet photometer found hydrogen corona comparable with that of earth, detected no oxygen, and found night airglow to be very faint ultraviolet emission detected at dark limb of planet—probably result of chemical reactions, particle bombardment of electrical discharge. Spacecraft’s mission also was to accumulate data on interplanetary environment during period of increased solar activity. After return to cruise mode, Mariner V would resume report on interplanetary space weather. By end of November 1967, when earth was no longer in direction of high-gain antenna pattern, communications would be terminated; however, three-month-duration communications would be possible during next five years. (NASA Proj Off; Wilford, NYT, 10/20/67, 1; Sullivan, NYT, 10/22/67, 12)
Informed sources reported that U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 supersonic transport would not be ready for the Paris International Air Show in May as upi reported March 7 but would still fly before the Anglo-French Concorde and U.S. SST, according to AP. First test flight of Tu-144 would be in late 1967. (AP, NYT, 4/19/67,73)
NASA’s Lunar Orbiter IV (Lunar Orb iter D) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from ETR on mission to photograph lunar surface [see May 8-June 1]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb spacecraft into 100-mi (161km) -altitude parking orbit, reignited after 21-min coast period, injecting spacecraft on 89-hr translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule Lunar Orbiter IV deployed its four solar panels and two antennas, locked its five sensors on the sun, and fixed its star tracker on Canopus. At 16:45 GMT midcourse maneuver with 53.8-sec engine burn was successfully conducted to slow spacecraft’s speed and alter its aim point slightly. Primary objectives of NASA’s Lunar Orbiter IV mission, fourth in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into high-inclination lunar orbit; (2) to obtain broad systematic photographic survey of lunar surface; (3) to improve knowledge of the moon; and (4) to provide basis for selecting sites for more detailed scientific study by subsequent orbital and landing missions. Full photographic flight plan would require more than 200 camera-pointing maneuvers, compared to 50 for Lunar Orbiter III. Photos would cover more than 80% of the moon’s front face and more than 90% of the hidden side. Spacecraft would also monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in the lunar environment, refine definition of moon’s gravitational field, and serve as a target for tracking operations by Manned Space Flight Network stations. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under OSSA direction. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-101)
Laser applications in industry and space were rapidly increasing, William Smith noted in the New York Times. A solar-powered laser was being developed for communication across the 50 million mi between earth and Mars, and Dr. Henry Lewis, director of rca’s David Sarnoff Research Center, predicted the laser would also play a very important role in tracking space vehicles. Said Dr. Lewis: “The laser fits the bill with greater accuracy than radar is capable of obtaining.” (Smith, NYT, 1/15/67, FI)	.	.	„
Astronauts on long-duration space flights might have to accept greater radiation exposure than the amount considered safe for industrial workers and, in some cases, this additional exposure could heighten the risk of cancer and shorten life expectancy, nrc’s Space Science Board concluded in report entitled Radiobiological Factors in Manned Space Flight. Board recommended that criteria different from those used in industry be set up to gauge radiation risks in space flight and to decide what was acceptable. “Manned space flights are high risk endeavors. They take place in a hostile environment that cannot be permitted to encroach beyond the limits of human endurance if the missions are to succeed.” Report noted, however, that radiation was “only one of many recognized and accepted potential risks” to space flight and shielding against it added weight to the spacecraft. Consequently, protection against radiation had to be balanced against other needs vital to the success of the mission, (nrc Release; Schmeck, NYT, 7/18/67, 38M; Reistrup, W Post, 7/18/67, A3; AP, WStar, 7/18/67, A3)
Third U.S. Redstone rocket in the “Project Sparta” antimissile-missile research program was fired from Woomera Rocket Range near Canberra, Australia, Supply Minister Denham Henty announced. (AP, C Sun-Times, 4/21/67)
nasa announced that Ogo IV Orbiting Geophysical Observatory, launched from WTR July 28, had passed its primary test objective of collecting scientific data while remaining stable in all three axes for more than 50 days and was continuing to radio data from 18 of its 20 experiments. Unexpected oscillation in 60-ft-long experiment boom, apparently caused by heat from the sun, had been controlled by manually operating satellite’s control system and thus expending less control-jet fuel than with automatic control, (nasa Release 67-252)
The U.S. should expect “an early Soviet attempt to send a large payload around the moon and recover it on earth,” Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said in releasing committee report: “Review of Soviet Space Program,” prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Library of Congress’ Science Policy Research Div. This 1957-67 review drew comparisons with the corresponding program in U.S. Rep. Miller commented: “At the same time that space efforts in the United States appear to be slackening, the pace of Soviet space flight has picked up by about 60 percent this year over the corresponding ten months total of last year. The strong technological base the Russians are building through a sustained, longterm commitment to space [assures them] sophisticated and intricate planetary probes . . . unmanned or manned space platforms . . . [application of] aerospace technology systems management to a great variety of industrial and social purposes here on earth.” Committee report gave “no simple, direct answer” on “whether there is a space race” but suggested “at the present time both the Soviet Union and the United States have put large resources of somewhat similar size into very broadly based programs of great strength.” Competition in overall space capability, especially on weight lifting and thrust of launch vehicles used by U.S. and U.S.S.R., was illustrated: “In connection with the nasa Administrator’s August 1967 pronouncement on the expected large Soviet vehicle [Saturn V class], he made a plea for support of an American nuclear stage to mount on Saturn V in order to leapfrog the Russians. A month later, Leonid Sedov in Moscow stated his belief in the importance of nuclear propulsion for the very large rockets which will soon be needed.” (Text; nasa SP-4007, 212; Committee Release, 11/20/67)
usaf reported that an SR—71 strategic reconnaissance aircraft was missing and presumed down after test flight from Edwards AFB. (UPI, W Post, 1/7/67,3)
usn F-111B fighter aircraft crashed on takeoff in test flight at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp.’s Calverton, N.Y., flight test center. Both Grumman pilots were killed. Adapted for use by usn and usaf, the F-lll (formerly tfx) had been subject of continued controversy between Congress and DOD since Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara insisted that the F-lll be used by both services and overruled military leaders’ objections to selection of General Dynamics Corp. for construction of the aircraft. Crash was first for USN test model, which had been stripped to remove excess weight; USAF test model (F-lllA) crashed in January, killing one crew member. (Wilson, W Post, 4/22/67, A5)
Texas’ role in U.S. space program was summarized by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller for the Texas State Society. “Many thousands of Texans working for dozens of Texas firms are creating through their . . . [r&d] effort the new technology required for space exploration. One measure of Texas contributions may be made in terms of the $771,000,000 of work that . . . [its] firms have performed on NASA’s programs. In addition, Texas colleges and universities are not only conducting high level research for NASA, but are training future space scientists and engineers under nasa grants.” He noted also that Texas was birthplace of seven astronauts and five astronaut wives and “home town” of all 56 astronauts, based at msc. (Text)
Lift-drag space vehicle had been gaining more attention, Space/Aeronautics reported; reasons were said to be: “X-15 hypersonic tests, unmanned lifting-body reentry, manned subsonic glides and wind tunnel research.” For manned spacecraft, atmospheric lift would put an end to worldwide recovery alerts as in Mercury/Gemini experience. (S/A, 2/67, 52)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, accompanied by Apollo 204 Review Board members, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, testified on Jan. 27 flash fire before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. Webb said the Board had found error, “but it has also found the capability within NASA and the Apollo team of contractors to overcome error.” NASA and industry would share their part of the blame “for what we have done or left undone,” Webb said, but the committee could have confidence that “nasa and its contractors have the capability to overcome every deficiency required to proceed to successfully fly the Apollo Saturn system and accomplish its objectives.” He said Board Chairman Dr. Floyd Thompson had reassured him that the “concepts and the basic design on which the Apollo system is based can be made to work in a reliable manner,” and Astronaut/Board member Frank Borman had reported he would be confident to fly the Apollo spacecraft if reported deficiencies were eliminated. Webb concluded: “If any man in this room asks for whom the Apollo bell tolls, it tolls for him and me, as well as for Grissom, White and Chaffee. “It tolls for every astronaut test pilot who will lose his life in the space simulated vacuum of a test chamber or the real vacuum of space . . . for every astronaut scientist who will lose his life on some lonely hill on the moon or Mars . . . for Government and industrial executives and legislators alike . . . for an open program continuously evaluated by the opinion makers with little time for second thought—operating in the brilliant color and brutal glare of real time, worldwide mass media with the speed of the television, from euphoria to exaggerated detail....” Asked why six of the eight Board members were NASA employees, Webb replied that they were the best qualified people for the investigation and noted that they were all familiar with the spacecraft or with similar types of investigations. He said that in his opinion the Board had “to a large degree . . . overstated the case.” Questioned about charges by the press that many qualified Project Apollo technicians were not called to testify before the Board, Webb responded: “It is easy to make allegations, hard to conduct an investigation, and even harder to make the Apollo Saturn fly at the earliest possible date. I do not believe these allegations are worth your consideration.” Dr. Thompson discussed methods and procedures followed by the Board, and key Board members traced the process of establishing the course of the fire, the “most probable” ignition source, and detailed findings and recommendations. (Testimony; Transcript 10, 15-8)
Vexing problem of the direction and period of Venus’ rotation had acquired a new dimension in recent ultraviolet photographs, according to an article in Science by Bradford A. Smith of the New Mexico State Univ. Observatory. Smith recounted the history of 60 yrs of visual and spectroscopic observation of Venus that produced inconclusive evidence. Radar observation begun in 1961 by 1967 had produced what was considered firm evidence that the solid globe of Venus in 244 days rotated once in a direction retrograde to that of its planetary neighbors earth and Mars. Recent ultraviolet photos taken at the New Mexico State Univ. Observatory with a new 61-cm reflector indicated that ultraviolet clouds of the Venusian atmosphere rotated retrograde in five days. This large discrepancy between movement of the globe and atmosphere of Venus could be explained only by the existence in the Venusian atmosphere of a persistent and widespread planetary wind system blowing at more than 180 mph, Smith said. Although earth’s jet stream reached such speeds, it was narrow and zonal, in contrast to the massive system that would have to exist on Venus if these observations were correct. {Science, 10/6/67, 114r-6)
USA—USAF—usn X-22A v/stol research aircraft designed and built by Bell Aerosystems Co. under USN contract completed its 100th successful test flight at Niagara Falls (N.Y.) International Airport. The four-engine, dual-tandem, ducted-propeller aircraft had made 239 vertical and 100 short takeoffs and 245 vertical and 94 short landings. During 40.9 hrs of actual flying time 54 vertical/horizontal transitions had been conducted. Present aircraft was second of two models in X-22A program; first model crashed Aug. 8, 1966, after completing 15 flights. Second model would be tested through 1968 and would then be delivered to a tri-service group at Patuxent (Md.) Naval Air Test Center for further evaluation. (Bell Release 92; NYT, 12/25/67,42)
Lane was developing a new airfoil that could improve performance of advanced variable-sweep-wing fighter aircraft, increase efficiency of subsonic jet transports, reduce helicopter blade tip stalling, and virtually eliminate local shock wave formation, B. K. Thomas, Jr., reported in Aviation Week. Airfoil, which was actually a “transonic wing,” delayed boundary layer separation at high subsonic speeds, thereby delaying the rapid rise in aerodynamic drag in the transonic region. It was currently undergoing wind tunnel tests at LaRC, but no aircraft flight testing was planned before FY 1970. (Thomas, Av Wk, 1/24/61, 25)
Group of NASA officials, headed by MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun, arrived at McMurdo Station in the Antarctic beginning 10-day expedition to observe environmental conditions—including temperatures, isolation factors, and survival techniques—for comparison and possible application to problems of space flight, (msc Roundup; NYT, 1/4/67,10; AP, W Post, 12/22/67, A21)
Christian Science Monitor, commenting on space law treaty which went into effect Oct. 10, noted that space exploration had evolved this treaty which banned military installations and nuclear weapons from moon and planets and which could evolve into space cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R. Treaty did not halt use of reconnaissance satellites but it provided for international inspection of vehicles and installations on moon and other bodies. Although there would be no right of inspection to see whether satellites were carrying nuclear weapons, and vigilance would always be vital in this regard, treaty was one more visible proof that Moscow and Washington could make useful progress. Space law treaty was agreement, following Antarctic Treaty, which could remove installations of war from one more section of mankind’s expanding environment. (CSM, 10/14/67)
NASA and usaf were expected to sign an agreement in fall 1967 for a joint lifting-body vehicle research program, Technology Week reported. nasa would probably have overall management responsibility of program, which would include test flights by USAf’s SV-5P and NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicles. {Tech Wk, 6/19/67,3)
Congressional role in space program and possibilities for improved international cooperation in space was discussed in General Electric Forum interview by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee. Congress’ role, Rep. Teague said, was “to examine periodically how well the work is being done and what return we are gaining in new knowledge and practical utility from the space program. . . . Each decision . . . involves the setting of a relative order of priorities for the use of the Nation’s resources for science and technology.” Expressing conviction that international cooperation in space would increase, he noted that there was “great potential in the use of space for human betterment. . . . More than 60 per cent of the world’s people, for instance, are protein-deficient today. If, by earth orbital surveys, in cooperation with the less-developed countries, we can improve that situation, our entire space program will have paid for itself many times over.” (GE Forum, Autumn 1967, X/3, 11-12; CR, 10/19/67, H13719-20)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh stressed at aiaa meeting in Baltimore the importance of space exploration as a contributor to peace: “. . . space activities can be a substitute for aggression, a bridge to understanding between the nations, and a major tool of arms control and disarmament. Once man accepts the challenge of exploring the great universe around us, he can more readily rise above the terrifying grip of parochial hatreds and fears. Space exploration helps satisfy man’s unquenchable thirst for knowledge—a basic characteristic which sets him apart from other creatures. Compared to the business of coercing and killing his own kind, the challenge posed by the prospect of crossing the established frontiers of the normal physical world is not only infinitely to be preferred, but its potential is limitless.” (Text)
NASA had modified TRW Systems’ $34.7-million contract for Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (ogo) satellites to a $53.7-million fixed-price incentive contract. Revised agreement provided for assembly, test, and launch of ogo-d, ogo-E, and OGO-F, in addition to incorporating previously authorized work. (NASA Release 67-213)
Robert Walker, writing in the New York Times, reviewed new applications for industrial use of gold. In telephone industry, gold was used for coating electromechanical switchgear and for transmitter domes; in computers, for coating metal tapes and electroplating printed circuits; and in automotive industry, for connecting alternator-regulator systems. To aerospace industry, one of gold’s most important characteristics was that it reflected heat and light. Gold was used to coat the “umbilical cord” which connected Astronaut Edward H. White II to Gemini IV spacecraft (June 3, 1965); to cover shrouds that contracted very hot jet aircraft engine parts; and to coat satellites so that they reflected more than 90% of sun’s heat. By adding oxides to gold coatings space scientists used the gold to absorb infrared energy which could be converted to electrical energy. (Walker, Ayr, 12/24/67, IF)
nasa’s decision to launch Ats I satellite Dec. 6, 1966, with one of its important experiments purposely rendered inoperative, was praised by G. W. Swenson, Jr., National Radio Astronomy Observatory, and R. N. Bracewell, Stanford Univ. Radio Astronomy Institute, in Science. “The NASA people made a courageous and farsighted decision . . . [when] they disconnected the beacon transmitter” in Ats I which would have operated on the same frequency band as many of the world’s most important telescopes. (Science, 2/3/67,518-21)
NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 190-lb payload with AFCRL solar radiation experiment to 128-mi (206-km) altitude and impacted 60 mi downrange in the Atlantic. Protective nose cone was ejected during ascent, but payload did not separate from rocket. NASA later reported that desired results were not fully achieved because of partial failure in the spectrometer. Prime mission objective was simultaneous measurement of solar extreme ultraviolet radiation (euv) in upper atmosphere with Aerobee’s photoelectric spectrometer and similar instrument on NASA’s Oso III Orbiting Solar Observatory, launched from ETR March 8. Data from two would be correlated to verify satisfactory operation of Oso IIPs instrument. Secondary experiment on Aerobee 150A involved measurements of ion and electron concentrations and changes in radiation along rocket’s trajectory, (nasa Release 67—56; WS Release 67—7)
usaf launched 8 satellites by Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb. This solar-cell-powered, 85-lb, satellite experiment, designed for developing satellite navigation technique as easy to use as celestial navigation and more accurate, would assist pilot or navigator of ship or aircraft who could make direct, simultaneous measurements. Signal measurement from two or more satellites with known positions to determine location of ship or aircraft would make use of signal transmission times and standard navigation techniques. Experiment had been built by Naval Research Laboratory as one to be compatible with Doppler equipment for low-altitude satellites. Naval Air Systems Command had been project sponsor, (upi, W Post, 6/1/67, C4; nrl News 5/31/67)
Satellites should be used to enable land-based air traffic control centers to track constantly commercial airliners flying over oceans, urged Pan American World Airways’ chief electronic engineer Ben F. McLeod at nato’s Advisory Group for Aerospace Research and Development (agard) meeting at New York City. McLeod said that within five to 10 years traffic increases and new aircraft would demand improved air traffic control system with positions of hundreds of aircraft being sent automatically by satellites to ground stations for plotting. (NYT, 10/12/67, 50)
Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, a leading scientific pioneer in the U.S. space program, died at age 62. He collapsed, apparently of a heart attack, while attending a Washington, D.C., meeting of the nas Council, and died the next day. Credited with being the “father” of the International .Geophysical Year (igy), Dr. Berkner was the principal administrator of the U.S. part of the igy program during its operation in 1957 and 1958. From 1958-1962, he was chairman of nrc’s Space Science Board, which advised the Government on the national program of space research. For his “outstanding and pioneering leadership,” of ssb, he received NASA’s Distinguished Public Service Medal Oct. 7, 1966. He served as President of the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest in Dallas from I960, until 1965, when he retired because of health. He continued until recently as Chairman of the Board of Trustees, and was a member of the NASA Historical Advisory Committee. A Rear Admiral in the U.S. Navy Reserve, Dr. Berkner would be buried with full military honors in Arlington National Cemetery June 7. (NYT, 6/5/67, 41; W Star, 6/5/67, B5; Science, 6/9/67, 1349)
Fabrication of five S—IIs (Saturn V’s 2nd stage) would be accomplished under a contract modification awarded by NASA to North American Aviation, Inc. Purchase of the five stages would complete the S-II requirement for the 15 Saturn V launch vehicles currently approved for development as a part of the Apollo program. The first of the stages would be delivered to nasa in Feb. 1969. The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., managed the Saturn program, (nasa Release 67-244)
Engine noise survey designed to study noise prediction during ground runups was postponed by NASA, reported Aviation Week. Tests, which would have been combined wth usaf studies of propulsion system calibration for amsa, were given lower priority because these' experiments would have caused two-week stand-down between flights. (Av Wk, 10/23/67, 23) Reviewing history of naca and NASA, giss Executive Officer Arthur L. Levine noted that forces which accounted for creation of naca in 1915 were both different from and far less intense that those behind creation of NASA in 1958. NASA played a much more significant role in the Nation and in Federal activity in science and technology than naca, he said, and NASA’s leadership was subjected to a wider variety and greater intensity of pressures from within Government and from outside interests. NASA Historian Eugene M. Emme reviewed historical evolution of U.S. aeronautics and astronautics in context of major national policies and decisions. Citing effects of World Wars I and II, the “cold war” of the 1950’s, and launching of Sputnik, he described how they helped' determine the pace and utilization of technological advances and reviewed major U.S. turning points and relevant factors contributing to the Apollo decision. (Program) m/g J. D. Caldara (usaf, Ret.), President of Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., suggested commonality between safety problems and solutions for underwater, aircraft, and space systems based on recognition, reasoning, and responsibility: “This process [of problem solving] spells out the basic building blocks in the structure of the man/machine relationships . . . involving safety. ... If every scientist-engineer accepts his rightful responsibility and applies his imagination and experience to his task, the end result will be . . . [operations that are] 100% efficient and . . . 100% safe.” (Text) GSFC engineers F. 0. Vonbun and J. T. Mengel proposed development of a worldwide tracking and communications system for manned planetary missions similar to that used for Apollo. Planetary Manned Space Flight Network (pmsfn)—consisting of three 30- to 50--ft-dia ground stations, three 210-ft-dia dish antennas, and three synchronous orbiting tracking stations (sots)—would obviate need for other radar, ships, and aircraft, sots, they said, while providing continuous communications, tracking, and telemetry functions, would be more cost-efficient by removing requirement for numerous new tracking stations. (Text; Program) Addressing Honors Banquet, use President Dr. Norman Topping stressed need for expanded program to search and disseminate data produced in space research. Although such data did reach social problems occasionally, “the arrival in the right place at the right time is largely a coincidence,” he noted. To realize the total potential of modern discovery, scientists had to communicate outside their separate, narrow fields, find a common language with the layman, and work together to “find places for their discoveries within the social, ethical, and moral framework of our civilization.” (Text) Princeton Univ. economics professor Oskar Morgenstem, participating in President’s Forum, “The Worth of the Space Program,” contended that the space effort, as a public investment of natural resources, had to be evaluated by comparing its benefits with other ways the resources could have been used. Although no basic discoveries as important as atomic fission, the transistor, or the laser could be attributed to space exploration, he said, U.S. could still afford a high degree of space exploration and could expect discoveries “of a magnitude that will astonish even this generation which has seen so much and is prepared to expect that our knowledge will increase without limit.” Dr. T. Keith Glennan, President of Associated Universities, Inc., and first NASA Administrator, submitted that the most important enduring contribution of the space endeavor to U.S. future was education. Progress in higher education, he said, had occurred as a result of the compelling challenge of space exploration along with nasa’s “clear and evident desire to assure an adequate flow of highly trained manpower. . . Current statistics on NASA investments in higher education were very impressive, he noted, but if NASA’s budget were trimmed further its support to education would have to be diminished. Dr. Willard F. Libby of ucla predicted that space program would “come out to be the best bargain the American people have ever made— both for its practical value in technological developments, and for its contributions to pure knowledge through science.” Space program had already contributed to and answered questions about geosciences, interplanetary sciences, astronomy, and chemistry but most consuming question was that of extraterrestrial life in solar system. (Texts) Major aiaa awards presented at Honors Convocation included: Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award to LeRC Director Abe Silverstein for “imagination, technical excellence and leadership which have led to practical application of high energy liquid hydrogen fueled propulsion for space transportation, and for initiating and contributing to the free world’s first manned space transportation system”; De Florez Training Award to Edwin A. Link, chairman of General Precision Equipment Corp.’s Link Aviation Div., for “conceiving and implementing the idea of ground-based flight training equipment”; G. Edward Pendray Award to Columbia Univ. professor Robert A. Gross for “original contributions to gas-dynamics and plasma physics especially in the field of shock wave ionization phenomena”; and Lawrence Sperry Award to msc Flight Director Eugene F. Kranz for “outstanding contributions in directing spacecraft mission planning in developing flight control teams, and as Flight Director of manned Gemini spaceflight missions.” (Av Wk, 10/30/67, 13; aiaa Facts)	,
Eastern Airlines named A. Scott Crossfield, naca test pilot from 1953 to 1961, Systems Director of Research and Development for Flight to help prepare airline for its first Concorde and Boeing 2707 supersonic aircraft. Crossfield in 1953 became the first man to fly at twice the speed of sound when he piloted the rocket-propelled D-558-II aircraft. He was also the first pilot to fly the X-15 to mach 2.97 (Nov. 15, 1960). In 1961, he became division director of test and quality assurance for naa’s Hound Dog Missile, Apollo, Saturn, and Paraglider projects. For his contributions to aviation he was awarded the Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy in 1961 and the Robert J. Collier Trophy in 1962. (NYT, 8/9/67,61) Nike-Apache launches were conducted for GCA Corp., under contract to gsfc. Areas launch was part of Wallops Station’s Bio-Space Technology Training Program to assist biological experimenters in evaluating the engineering and operational aspects of spaceflight research. (WS Release 67—27)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Dudley Observatory instrumented payload to 93-mi (150-km) altitude to test modified parachute recovery system and evaluate performance of Dudley Observatory micrometeoroid collection payload before flight during meteor shower. Malfunction of recovery system resulted in hard impact of scientific payload and loss of collection material. Flights using modified recovery system were discontinued until cause of malfunction was determined, (nasa Rpt srl)
Dr. James I. Vette, staff scientist at Aerospace Corp.’s Space Science Lab., was named Director of the National Space Science Data Center (nssdc) — a $1,491,600 central facility for collection, organization, storage, retrieval, and dissemination of space science data obtained from satellites, sounding rockets, balloons, and high-altitude aircraft—nearing completion at gsfc. (nasa Release 67-6)
esro’s Kiruna rocket range—esrange—had been officially opened in March, Space Flight reported. The Kiruna facility was situated 30 mi north of Kiruna (north of Arctic Circle in Swedish Lapland) and occupied about 300 sq mi of virgin forest and tundra; Kiruna range would be firing base for atmospheric sounding rockets [see Mar. 15]. (S/F, 4/67,114—6)
U.S.S.R. had invited U.K. to help track its Venus probe, Venus IV, in telegram from Mstislav V. Keldysb, President of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, to Sir Bernard Loved, Director of Jodrell Bank Observatory, reported Washington Post. U.S.S.R. did not furnish code to signals; Sir Bernard had said that tapes of signals would be sent to Moscow. Keldysh’s telegram referred to “this experiment’s extraordinary importance and significance for mankind.” Sir Bernard speculated that U.S.S.R. might attempt softlanding on planet Venus. Not since launch of Venus I in 1961 had the Soviets requested British working assistance. (Schmidt, NYT, 10/17/67, 13; W Post, 10/17/67, A17)
AIAA President Harold T. Luskin, in Astronautics and Aeronautics editorial, proposed a joint Soviet-American safety program to reduce hazards of manned space flight. He urged that representatives of U.S. and U.S.S.R. meet to exchange technical data on spacecraft safety features, to set up a common communications network for use in emergencies, and to plan joint rescue operations. “Cooperation for safety could be a step forward in promoting the greatest possible success of manned space exploration. The world would regard it as a meritorious indication that nations can find ways to compete and cooperate at one and the same time. . . . “Let both countries work toward the day when a flight crew is saved through cooperative action. That event would be the finest space spectacular, the best space first!” (A&A, 7/67,33—4.)
nasa’s Lunar Orbiter V (Lunar Orbiter E) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr on mission to photograph the lunar surface [see Aug. 5-27]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 860-lb spacecraft into parking orbit of 100-mi (161-km) altitude, reignited after 30-min coast period to inject spacecraft on 89-hr translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule, Lunar Orbiter V deployed its four solar panels and two antennas and locked its five sensors on the sun. On Aug. 2 the star tracker encountered slight difficulty in locating Canopus because of “glint” from the sun and “earthshine,” but obtained a fix at 18:34 get, before midcourse maneuver. At 06:00 on Aug. 3 midcourse maneuver with 26-sec engine burn was successfully conducted to slow spacecraft’s speed and alter its aiming point slightly. Primary objectives of NASA’s Lunar Orbiter V mission were: (1) to place three-axis-stabilized spacecraft into high-inclination lunar orbit; and (2) to obtain photography of selected scientifically interesting areas on lunar surface and supplemental photography of candidate Apollo lunar landing sites. Photos would cover five Apollo sites, 36 scientific sites, and areas of the moon’s hidden side previously unphotographed. Spacecraft would also provide precision trajectory information to refine definition of lunar gravitational field, monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in lunar environment, and serve as a target for tracking operations by Manned Space Flight Network stations. Last in series of five spacecraft designed to improve knowledge of the moon, Lunar Orbiter V differed from four earlier missions because it would concentrate on targets of primary interest to science. Lunar Orbiter I (launched Aug. 10, 1966), Lunar Orbiter II (launched Nov. 6, 1966)	, and Lunar Orbiter III (launched Feb. 4, 1967) were in direct support of Apollo and Surveyor programs, identifying at least eight areas suitable for manned landings. Lunar Orbiter IV (launched May 4, 1967)	completed broad photographic survey of 99% of moon’s front face with 10 times finer resolution than best existing telescopic views. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under ossa direction. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj OS; nasa Release 67—192)
Findings of 14-mo study by Denver Research Institute (dri) , under NASA contract, of methods governing acquisition of new technology in 62 firms in four industries—electric batteries, printing and reproduction, industrial controls, aqd medical electronics—were summarized in Science. Report, “The Channels of Technology Acquisition in Commercial Firms and the NASA Dissemination Program,” concluded that (1) few organizations were vigorously seeking to acquire new technological know-how from space research; (2) little had been done to increase the technical awareness of the manufacturer outside the space and military fields; and (3) the technologist faced with an immediate problem was inclined to use information in standard manuals two to five years behind the state of the art. The report noted that “most individuals felt it too difficult to retrieve relevant material from the mass of government publications and indicated that they expected to learn of important government-developed technology through trade and professional channels. In several firms, those interviewed felt it wasn’t really practical to keep up with and use government technology unless one’s firm had government R&D contracts.” (Greenberg, Science, 9/15/67,1016-18)
U.S. tourist vacationing on beach at Harbour Island in the Bahamas had found a 10-ft-long piece of metal bearing words “United” and “destruct mechanism here,” San Diego Union reported. Assuming metal to be part of a rocket, the tourist had notified Ksc officials, who retrieved the part and determined that it was an insulation panel from the upper stage of an Atlas-Centaur used Oct. 26, 1966, to launch a Surveyor model on a test flight. (AP, SD Union, 7/14/67) Launched by the last direct-ascent (single-burn) Centaur vehicle in Surveyor program, 2,290-lb Surveyor IV performed all required sequences on schedule, including a midcourse maneuver which narrowed estimated target miss from 124 mi to 2.4 mi. Landing sequence began as planned when spacecraft shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket downward toward moon. Radio contact was lost two seconds before retrorocket ended its planned 42-sec burn to slow spacecraft’s speed from 5,900 mph to 350 mph. Repeated attempts to reestablish radio contact with spacecraft failed. Surveyor IV carried photographic equipment, a surface sampler, and a magnetic device on one of its footpads to test for magnetic materials in the lunar soil. Primary mission objectives: (1) to softland on the moon in the Sinus Medii and (2) to obtain TV photos of the lunar surface. Secondary objectives: (1) to conduct a vernier engine experiment; (2)	to manipulate lunar surface with surface sampler in view of TV camera; (3) to obtain touchdown dynamics data; and (4) to obtain thermal and radar reflectivity data on lunar surface. Target zone in the Sinus Medii was almost in the exact center of moon’s visible hemisphere and was rougher than the Ocean of Storms where Surveyor I and Surveyor III had landed. Benjamin Milwitzky, NASA Surveyor Program Manager, said the site was so rugged that spacecraft had only a 50-50 chance of landing intact. “But this region is extremely important to Apollo and that’s why we’re going there.” Surveyor IV was fourth in series of seven spacecraft in NASA’s Surveyor program: Surveyor I (launched May 30, 1966) and Surveyor III (launched April 17, 1967) both softlanded successfully and transmitted photos to earth; Surveyor II (launched Sept. 20, 1966) did not soft-land because of ignition failure in one of its three vernier engines. Program was directed by OSSA Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; program management was assigned to JPL. (NASA Release 67-172; NASA Proj Off; upi, NYT, 7/15/67, 22; AP, NYT, 7/17/67, 16; Reistrup, W Post, 7/15/67, B4; 7/16/67, A5; 7/17/67, 1; upi, W Star, 7/14/67, Al; 7/15/67, A2; 7/16/67, B5; 7/17/67, Al)	.
NASA appointed m/g John D. Stevenson (usaf, Ret.) Director of Mission Operations, omsf, succeeding Everett E. Christensen who returned to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. General Stevenson had been serving as special assistant to Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, (nasa Release 67—23)
Blastoff of Saturn V at ETR produced one of the loudest noises in history, natural or man-made, according to Columbia Univ.’s Lamont Geological Observatory at Palisades, N.Y. Observatory physicist Dr. William Donn labeled U.S. and U.S.S.R. nuclear explosions the only louder manmade sounds and 1883 fall of Great Siberian Meteorite as the only louder natural sounds on record. (AP, W Post, 11/10/67, A8)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Science, Research, and Development Subcommittee released report, Science, Technology, and Public Policy during the Eighty-Ninth Congress, January 1965 through December 1966. Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), subcommittee chairman, emphasized: “Congress does indeed recognize the impact of science and technology on modem society and is moving expeditiously to meet its challenge and shape its potential on behalf of human welfare [and] ... is becoming aware of the difficulties and dangers which technologically applied science may carry in its genes—and is searching for effective means to counter them.” NSF Director Dr. Leland J. Haworth, in statement before Subcommittee, said: “In all honesty, it must be admitted that thus far there have been no broad, systematic, and intensive studies designed to develop an understanding of alternative policy structures and options open to the Nation as a whole and to assess the associated opportunities and risks, as well as the impact, which such policies and choices might have on the individual agencies, disciplines and the Nation’s goals.” Haworth referred to the major lack in the studies concerning long-range national needs. (Text)
MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun was presented the Smithsonian Institution’s Langley Medal by Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Dr. von Braun was cited in “recognition of his creative vision of the practical application of rocket power to space flight leading to the first U.S. satellite, and of his technical leadership in development of the Saturn class of large launch vehicles upon which the Apollo moon flight is based.” He was the 13th recipient of the award, which was established in 1908 to commemorate the aeronautical achievements of Samuel Pierpont Langley, third Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution. Other recipients included Orville and Wilbur Wright, Charles A. Lindbergh, Robert H. Goddard (posthumously), Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. In making the presentation, Dr. Whipple said U.S. could have launched the world’s first satellite if it had endorsed the proposal which he and Dr. von Braun developed in 1954 to launch small spacecraft from the equator using existing rockets. Government decision to fund, instead, usn’s Vanguard project, allowed U.S.S.R. to win “the first space race.” (Text; Smithsonian Release; Marshall Star, 6/7/67, 1; AP, NYT, 6/6/67. 3)
The creation of a European Institute of Science and Technology to help narrow the technological gap between U.S. and Western Europe was proposed at a Deauville, France, conference of 70 U.S. and European businessmen, scientists, academicians, and public officials. Institute, which would be supported initially by private funds, would offer one-year postgraduate course. Faculty and student body would be international. Conference concluded that such an institute would be “a considerable stimulant for the various European educational systems and a rich source of trained engineers.” Meeting was sponsored by North Atlantic Assembly’s Science and Technology Committee and Univ. of Pennsylvania’s Foreign Policy Research Institute. (Mooney, ATT7,5/30/67,25)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb testified before the Subcommittee on Independent Offices, Senate Committee on Appropriations. His prepared statement made these principal points: NASA would not be able to achieve for this Nation “a position of leadership in space” for less money than an annual budget of between $5.5-$6.0 billion a year. At the proposed level of funding, after launch vehicle #216, production of the Saturn IB and the earth-orbital portion of the Apollo Applications Program would be terminated. Rather than continue to use the Apollo system for work in orbit at conclusion of Apollo flights, NASA would accept a hiatus in the continuous development of manned space flight, deciding on a fresh start for the years ahead. A new study would be begun in FY 1968 and FY 1969 on purposes and form of future development of spacecraft and “the national family of large launch vehicles that should be available in the 1970’s.” This “basic change in the United States space outlook” would make it “clearly prudent to preserve the physical facilities which have been built and paid for and which would be required if a decision is made to construct a large solid rocket vehicle.” Because the budget level approved by the House would prevent beginning work on NERVA II, development of a flight weight engine of the nerva i class, “with probably from 60,000 to 75,000	lbs of thrust” would be initiated in FY 1968. Because we would have “no choice” but to accept the fact that Voyager cannot be initiated in FY 1968, and, in order to preserve “a capability for future planetary programs,” NASA would propose about $10 million for the “lunar and planetary program for studies and supporting research in the technology of planetary exploration.” NASA would propose no changes in the budget for the Apollo program but would “accept the legislative history as a clear signal that we should proceed with a hard-hitting carefully managed effort to achieve the objectives of the Apollo program.” nasa would be able to launch “a total of nine Saturn V unmanned and manned missions before the end of Calendar Year 1969.” A further reduction in funding in FY	1968 could only cause	“complete havoc” and	would be a blow to the	national aeronautical	and space effort	from	which it would be extremely difficult to recover. Webb told the subcommittee: “In this situation, we cannot ask, as we otherwise would have done, that the Senate restore in full the amount reduced by the House. . . . We are here to ask the committee that the Senate approve the amounts passed by the House and accepted by the President, and to make a clear record in the legislative history that will give us	the flexibility we will	need to permit	us to	carry out the strongest	possible program within the amounts	made	available to us. . . . Long leadtimes requiring timely initiation of new programs and implying commitment to proceed over a period of years would . . . make it perfectly clear to all that we cannot somehow find a way to carry forward the same program and give the Nation the same assurance of a strong position in aeronautics and space with a $517 million cut in our budget.” He said he had been in touch with the President in the last 24 hours and “he still believes the recommendations he made in January represent” the best budget for the country. But the President also believed his proposed 10 percent income tax surcharge “is more important to press for than extra money for the space bill.” Webb said he had drastically reshaped the space program to comply with the $4.5 billion fund for this year voted by the House and approved by the President. But Subcommittee Chairman Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) and several senators, with major space installations in their states, gave strong indications they would plan to restore some of the millions of dollars cut by the House. Webb promised to revise his multi-billion-dollar space plans again “and bring you the best program possible for the money.” (NASA lar VT/101; Text; Testimony; AP, NYT, 9/29/67, A3; 9/30/67, 52)
A fir tree had been tested in the Royal Aircraft Establishment’s wind tunnel at Farnborough, U.K., to study the effects of high storm winds on forests. (Can Press, NYT, 1/21/61,3)
Three Lewis Research Center engineers received “I-R 100” awards at National Industrial Research Week ceremonies in New York City. The “I—R 100” awards were sponsored by Industrial Research Magazine and presented in observance of National Industrial Research Week. LeRC recipients William D. Klopp, Peter L. Raffo, and Walter R. Witzke were cited for the development of tungsten rhc, the highest strength metal known at temperatures above 3,500° F. The alloy Would have eight times the tensile strength of pure tungsten at the same temperature with no sacrifice in ductility at low temperatures. At temperatures below 250°F, pure tungsten would be very brittle and alloying it to increase strength usually made it more brittle. (LeRC Release 67-60)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb held press conference on management changes: (1) George S. Trimble, Jr., Director of Advanced Manned Missions Program, OMSF, was appointed Deputy Director of msc. (2) NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Edgar M. Cortright was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. He would be replaced by Donald P. Hearth, Voyager Program Manager. (3) MSFC Deputy Director Eberhard F. M. Rees was named to serve as Special Assistant in Manufacturing Problems to msc Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager George M. Low. Discussing space law treaty [effective Oct. 10] after making announcements, Webb said it was a valuable further advance of the rule of law into spaee but noted that laws could be broken. “We have an agreement in the Antarctic . . . not to introduce military operations or equipment and this has worked well. . . . We now have this agreement in space, and . . . the most important enforcer of these that relate to space technology is momentum and continued development of technology. The forward capability is what in essence has produced cooperation when we have had it. . . . [U.S.S.R.] and other nations must recognize that they’re not going to have a monopoly in this field. [Our being] . . . there is the most important way to make sure we get the benefits of the treaty. Without continued development of this kind I am not sure what the treaty means.” (Transcript; NASA Release 67-268)
Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, Acting Under Secretary of Commerce and Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology, had been appointed President of Oklahoma Univ., effective Sept. 1. (AP, NYT, 5/23/67, 32)
usaf’s $3.3-million solar vacuum telescope, designed to predict more accurately solar proton showers which endanger astronauts and spacecraft, was meeting its timetable for construction at Sacramento Peak Observatory near Sunspot, N. Mex., Office of Aerospace Research announced. Telescope—of which 193 ft would be underground and 135 ft above ground—would be largest solar vacuum telescope in the world when completed in 1968. In addition to predicting “safe periods” for space flight, it would study solar phenomena and solar-terrestrial relationships. (oar Release)
White House Office of Science and Technology (ost) had failed to move effectively in the direction of long-range planning and had been seriously hampered by a “thinly spread” staff, concluded report prepared by Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service and released by House Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Military Operations. Presented as a background document for future congressional action or legislation, report reached no direct findings or conclusions but noted that during four years ost had been in existence its “most conspicuous operating characteristic has been the wide span of issues in which it has become involved. “But with the office numbering only seventeen to twenty professionals its staff must be thinly spread.” Although ost had not moved spontaneously in the direction of long-range planning, report said questions posed by various groups of Congress “at least imply a need for this policy planning, systems analysis capability, especially to deal with issues of transportation, waste management, water resources, and energy development.” (Text)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George Mueller announced revised Apollo mission schedule of six flights in 1968 and five in 1969 using “200-series” (Uprated Saturn) and “500-series” (Saturn V) launch vehicles to test and qualify Command, Service, and Lunar Modules (c&sm and lm) . Schedule for 1968 would include: Apollo/Saturn 204 (AS-204), first unmanned test of lm in earth orbit; AS-502, second unmanned flight test of Saturn V and Apollo c&sm; AS-503, third unmanned test of Saturn V and c&sm; AS—206, second unmanned flight test of lm in earth orbit; AS205, first manned Apollo flight, a 10-day mission to qualify C&SM for further manned operations; AS-504, first manned Apollo flight on Saturn V, to provide experience with both c&sm and LM, including crew transfer from c&sm to LM and rendezvous and docking. Schedule for 1969 would include five manned flights (AS-505 through AS-509) with the first four programmed as lunar mission development flights or lunar mission simulations—AS—509 being that on which lunar landing would he made. Possibly the lunar landing might be delayed until one of the remaining six Saturn V flights beyond 1969.	• All opportunities to accelerate progress in 1969 toward manned flights and a rapid accumulation of manned experience with Apollo/ Saturn system would be sought, Mueller said, (nasa Release 67-282)
Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd addressed Sixth Annual Editorial Conference of Magazine Publishers Assn, and American Society of Magazine Editors in Washington, D.C.: “Today, April Third, is a memorable day in the history of communication. On this day, one hundred and seven years ago, the Pony Express began. . . . The Pony Express lasted only eighteen months. It was superseded by the transcontinental telegraph. And probably the managers of the Pony Express knew all along that that was going to happen. But they had customers who couldn’t wait, who were willing to pay for a faster mail service. “. . . this episode illustrates the driving impatience of the American people for progress. . . . We’re doing the same thing today in the aerospace industry. We’re building the sst. We already have a grasp of the technology that will supersede the sst, fifteen or twenty years from now. But Americans are not the kind of people.who’ll passively wait for new developments. . . . They’re engaged now in pushing jet aviation technology to its practical limits.” ( Text)
A 236-in-wide mirror which would be used by U.S.S.R. in world’s largest reflector telescope was nearing completion, Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times. After cooling from a molten state for D/> years, mirror had been cut to produce concave, parabolic configurations and was currently undergoing final grinding at a factory near Moscow. It would soon be shipped to a new observatory in the northern Caucasus, which would be operated directly by the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Largest reflector telescope in use at present time was 200-in-wide instrument at Mt. Palomar Observatory. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/11/67, 15)
NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 300-lb payload containing two white rats to 85-mi (137-km) altitude in first of four experiments to study behavior in an artificial gravity field and determine minimum level of gravity needed by biological organisms during space flight. Two arms of payload were extended after rocket burnout, producing a centrifuge with artificial gravity levels between 0.35 and 1.65 g. During five minutes of free fall, rats selected their own gravity levels by walking along tunnel runway. Data on their movement and position were telemetered to ground stations. Payload impacted 70 mi downrange in the Atlantic; no recovery was attempted. (WS Release 67-36; NASA Release 67-290; NASA Rpt srl)
Hall of Aerospace Art would become “an integral part” of the new National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution announced. Permanent collection already included paintings and drawings of NASA manned space flight projects by Norman Rockwell and Chesley Bonestell and 18th and 19th century prints illustrating balloon flight. (Smithsonian Institution Release)
To astronauts, Maj. Edwin E. (Buzz) Aldrin, Jr. (usaf), and Capt. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn), had won the 1967 Harmon International Aviation Trophy, the Clifford B. Harmon Trust announced in New York. Trophies also would go to Miss Sheila Scott of Britain, who had established speed records during a 28,633-mi solo flight around the world in a single-engine plane, and to Alvin S. White. White, now manager of supersonic flight research and development for Trans World Airlines, was named the outstanding airplane pilot for test flights of the XB-70 at mach 3 as chief test pilot for North American Aviation Company. The awards are made annually for exceptional feats of individual piloting skill. (NYT, 9/10/67)
Italy’s space effort for 1967-68 was detailed in Interavia Air Letter. National research program ($2.72 million) included studies of solar winds, ionosphere’s electronic composition, albedo neutrons, x-rays and cosmic rays, solar and galactic gamma radiation, and stellar uv radiation. Other research would cover celestial mechanics, propulsion systems, and telemetry. For international programs, $3.52 million had been approved for Phase B of San Marco project and for launching San Marco C in joint effort with NASA. Supplementary funds ($1.3 million) probably would go for Bologna Univ. and nasa effort using oso-G to measure x-rays and cosmic rays. Italy’s share in 1967 eldo funding would be $10.2 million, and in esro $5.63 million. For esro programs, Italian industry would supply antennas and telemetry equipment for tracking network, pcm telemetry equipment, and radars for launching base at Kiruna, Sweden. (Interavia, 11/14/67, 3)
nasa awarded General Electric Co. and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. $50,000, fixed-price contracts to conduct four-month parallel studies of a medical laboratory for Apollo Applications (aa) flights. Designated Integrated Medical and Behavioral Laboratory Measurement System, laboratory would permit detailed measurements of human systems and crew functions during space flight. It could be flown as a complete laboratory or as selected group of measurement modules on specific missions. (nasa Release 67-102)
Dr. Alan T. Waterman, 75, physicist and for 12 years Director of National Science Foundation, died at the National Institutes of Health. During WW II, he had served on the National Defense Research Committee and in the Office of Scientific Research and Development. More recently, he had been a member of NASA’s Historical Advisory Committee. President Johnson said: “The American people mourn the passing of a foremost man of science and of human purpose, Dr. Alan T. Waterman. Our Government has lost a trusted counselor. As Chief Scientist of. the Office of Naval Research and as first Director of the National Science Foundation, he left an indelible stamp of achievement on one of the most vital areas in American life. He will be missed. But succeeding generations will be wiser for his skill and richer for the foresight that marked his long career.” {PD, 12/8/67, 1648; W Post, 12/2/67, B6)
Press briefing on future ossa programs was held at nasa Hq. Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, served as moderator. Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed the importance of basic research to all national scientific programs. “. . . the results of basic research are vital to the realization of practical applications. When we began the NASA program, we had the sounding rocket, we had the capability of putting together small satellite launchers and to apply those techniques, and we built the best program on those techniques that we could. Now we have manned flight capabilities; we have large boosters, the ability to get out further into the solar system than ever before. . . . Now is the time to profit by those capabilities, to continue the basic research.” Sunblazer probe that could be launched into orbit around the sun and transmit radio signals back to earth was discussed by Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs. Spacecraft would determine electron density in solar atmosphere by measuring time it took signals to travel from spacecraft back to earth. NASA was also considering a plan to launch a satellite toward Jupiter, then use Jupiter’s magnetic field to push the spacecraft toward other planets and eventually hurl it into space 1-10 trillion miles away. Oran W. Nicks, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, outlined plans for unmanned missions to Mars and Venus, beginning with a small instrumented probe scheduled for launch in June 1967. In the 1971 Mars and 1972 Venus missions, teams of two spacecraft would be launched by a modified Saturn V booster. One spacecraft would penetrate planet’s atmosphere; take measurements as it sped toward planet’s surface; and flash data to the second spacecraft— programed to fly past the planet—before crashlanding. Data would be transmitted to earth by the flyby spacecraft. Missions would pave the way for later spacecraft with improved equipment—possibly including TV cameras—to softland on the planets. Thumb-sized desert mice fitted with tiny radio transmitters and telemetry equipment which could broadcast mouse’s temperature up to six months were being conditioned for future space flight, Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Director of Bioscience Programs, disclosed. “Astromouse”—which ate only sunflower seeds and never drank water—might be orbited with three astronauts in Apollo spacecraft. Others might be launched into interplanetary space in a Pioneer study of biological specimens outside earth’s gravitational field. Plans for a multi-purpose satellite that would combine the functions of many unmanned spacecraft currently in orbit were revealed by Dr. Morris Tepper, Deputy Director of Space Applications and Director of Meteorology. Developed under unified space applications program, satellite would carry equipment to observe weather conditions; relay communications to distant earth stations; provide navigation traffic control for ships and aircraft; and compile data on earth’s natural resources. No mention of unmanned scientific lunar probes was made during the briefing. When asked later in an interview whether he thought interest in unmanned exploration of the moon would diminish after astronauts landed, Dr. Newell replied: “Not at all.” Although astronauts would dominate lunar exploration, unmanned Surveyor spacecraft would probably land in unsafe areas, and Lunar Orbiter photography missions would continue for mapping. Discussion of unmanned lunar missions had been omitted because “we wanted to tell about the newer of new things in our thinking.” (Transcript; Hines, W Star, 1/8/67, A16)
Hawker Siddeley P—1127 Kestrel vtol strike fighter crashed on ferry mission over Great Britain with heavy damage. Pilot, Sqdn. Ldr. Hugh Rigg, ejected and sustained cuts and bruises. In U.S., LaRC had decided against repairing one of two P-1127s obtained for flight testing; NASA’s aircraft had crashed at WS Aug. 21 with heavy damage. Parts would be used as spares for remaining aircraft. (Av Wk, 10/2/67,17) Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Science, Research, and Development Subcommittee, addressed House Seminar on Technology Assessment: “The past few years have brought a change in attitude toward science and technology, both in the public which is more technically literate, and in the Congress with its enhanced understanding. Faith in science, and awe of technology, have been supplanted by a recognition of a grave responsibility for decision—that is, what should we do with what we know? Technology assessment is a major key to discharging that responsibility. We are now turning to the natural sciences and asking them to move further in achieving a collective wisdom with politics, law, economics, and social interests for the management of technology. . . . The technical community must introduce a concern for public policy impacts and methods of operation—at an early point and in considerable detail. We believe that technology assessment will involve the scientific method and will be largely accomplished by scientists and engineers. But the purpose of assessment is to enable decisions for the public good.” (Text)
F-111A aircraft, lent by usaf to nasa to obtain basic flight research data for the design and development of advanced variable sweep wings, was delivered to frc. (nasa Release 67-7)
Apollo Applications (aa) briefing was held at nasa Hq. Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, presented most detailed statement to date on the program. He said plans were to form an “embryonic space station” in 1968-69 by clustering four aa payloads launched with Uprated Saturn I boosters. First mission would be launch of manned spacecraft, followed several days later by launch of spent S-IVB stage converted into a workshop. After two spacecraft had docked, crew would enter workshop through an airlock. They would prepare workshop for storage and return to earth in their spacecraft 28 days later. In three to six months, second manned capsule would be launched on 56-day mission to deliver resupply module to workshop and rendezvous with unmanned Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), fourth and last launch in series. Cluster would be joined with multiple docking launched on S—IVB workshop. Emphasizing the importance of manning the atm, Dr. Mueller said: “. . . if there is one thing the scientific community is agreed on it is that when you want to have a major telescope instrument in space it needs to be manned. “First of all you need him to point it. Second, you need him to be able to change the films and so on. Thirdly, you need him to maintain it so when something goes wrong he can fix it instead of having to sit here on the ground and be frustrated by the fact that some little gadget didn’t quite trip when it should have. . . .” Dr. Mueller said principal areas toward which $454.7 million FY 1968 post-Apollo effort would be directed were “development of extended flight capability, the conduct of manned astronomical and Earth observations from space, and continued exploration of the Moon.” (Transcript; Marshall Star, 2/1/67, 7-8; Clark, NYT, 1/30/67, 2; Reistrup, W Post, 1/27/67, A7)
At the insistence of Sen. Albert Gore (D-Tenn.), the Senate Foreign Relations Committee agreed to qualify in its forthcoming report its interpretation of two clauses in the space law treaty [see March 7]. One clause questioned said benefits of space exploration “shall be the province of all mankind”; the other said that each nation would be liable for damages to another caused by its space vehicles. Committee specified that (1) nothing would “diminish or alter the right of the United States to determine how it shares the benefits and results of its space activities”; and (2) damage “pertains only to physical, non-electronic damage.” Senator Gore had suggested that if there were two competing U.S. and Soviet space communications networks, one nation might sue the other for damage from electronic interference of one system on the other. (W Post, 3/14/67, A7; Finney, NYT, 3/14/67, 20)
In its resolution ^2260, U.N. General Assembly urged its Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to elaborate on “agreement on liability for damage caused by the launching of objects into outer space and an agreement on assistance to and return of astronauts and space vehicles.” On July 17, Legal Subcommittee of Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, meeting in Geneva, had reached such provisional agreement. On July 26, 1966, U.S. and U.S.S.R. had agreed ii\ principle that countries Were internationally liable for damage caused to other states by objects they launched into outer space. Other concerns of the resolution were education and training for space exploration, feasibility of communications for direct broadcast from satellites, and applied satellite technology of benefit to man. On Jan. 18, 1966, Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space had proposed a world conference on outer space to be held in New York. This conference should examine the impact of space data on education and communications—issues of major importance even to poor and economically retarded states [see NASA SP-4007, 20], (Text; NASA SP-4007, 20, 250)
Astronaut-Aquanaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) was detached from NASA at usn’s request for assignment in Navy’s Deep Submergence Systems Project (dssp) . One of the Nation’s seven original astronauts, Carpenter became the second American to orbit the earth when he piloted Aurora 7 spacecraft on three-orbit mission May 24, 1962. Active in USN’s Man-in-the-Sea program since 1965, he set a world record in underwater work during Aug. 28-Oct. 10, 1965, Sealab II experiment when he lived 205 ft down in the Pacific for 30 consecutive days. Under dssp he was tentatively assigned as an aquanaut in Sealab III, a 60-day experiment 600 ft down in the Pacific scheduled to take place in 1968. As usn’s senior aquanaut, Carpenter’s duties would include responsibility for Sealab III ocean floor operations, experiments, and equipment and for coordination of aquanaut team training. NASA Administrator James E. Webb commented on Carpenter’s departure. “. . . we are grateful to him and the United States Navy for his services over the past eight years. During the past two years, he has demonstrated that many of the technologies, techniques, and psychophysiological factors related to space flight have direct applications to the Man-in-the-Sea program. Thus, Cdr. Carpenter becomes the first astronaut to return to his parent service in order to apply the skills, knowledge, and experience acquired during his assignment to NASA. ...” (nasa Release 67—208)
First manned Apollo flight had been delayed at least one year by Jan. 27 fire at esc, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He said he believed men could still land on the moon by the original 1970 deadline “although the probability is lowered.” Dr. Mueller told the Committee that the replacement spacecraft for the first manned Apollo mission, which incorporated “all changes resulting from the findings of the Apollo accident investigation,” was on the assembly line at North American Aviation, Inc.’s plant in Downey, Calif. (AP, B Sun, 4/20/67)
Ats I (Advanced Technical Satellite) was used experimentally to relay weather photographs of current storms to the U.S. Weather Bureau’s National Hurricane Center in Miami and other hurricane watchers in the Caribbean. The satellite was launched by NASA into its synchronous orbit on Dec. 7, 1966, and was positioned over Christmas Island in the Pacific at an altitude of 22,000 miles. The satellite had been used as a testbed for advanced meteorological, communications, and satellite control systems, and also had made scientific measurements of its orbital environment. Photographs were recorded and radioed to earth by the Essa V weather satellite while passing over the storm area. The collected photographic data were then compiled as a mosaic and gridded by computers at essa before delivery to the Goddard Space Flight Center ground station at Mojave, Calif., for radio transmission to the Ats 1. The satellite then retransmitted the gridded data to earth by means of its weather fascimile (weafax) experiment. Any ground station equipped with the relatively inexpensive Automatic Picture Transmission receivers could read out the pictures. Mosaics would be transmitted daily on an experimental basis in this manner between 9 and 10 pm, edt. weafax was a joint NASA—essa experiment, (nasa Release 67-243)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, speaking at National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., criticized the press for uninformed discussion of the Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy: “I deplore comment in the press recently regarding the accident. The press has a responsibility not to comment in areas about which it is not informed.” Speaking on the fifth anniversary of his space flight in Friendship 7, Glenn noted that the deaths of three Apollo astronauts were part of the price man must pay in his quest for knowledge: “Man tries something and sometimes he succeeds and sometimes he fails. It is very regrettable. We hate to lose good friends, but we think they went in a good cause.” (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 2/21/67,8; AP, WPost, 2/21/67; NYT, 2/22/67,50) During week of Feb. 20: Princeton Univ. announced development of accelerator capable of raising electrically neutral atoms and molecules to energy levels never before obtained in controlled experiments. Utilizing supersonic jets of mixed gases in high-vacuum container, accelerator could generate molecular beams of neutral particles with kinetic energies of 10 or more electron volts. Particles at this energy level were necessary to many common gas-phase chemical reactions. Dr. John B. Fenn, professor who directed NSF-sponsored project, said accelerator would aid studies in meteorology and aerospace technology. (NYT, 2/26/67, 59)
JPL scientist Sidney J. Slomich, writing in Astronautics and Aeronautics, emphasized need for national purpose to apply the highly advanced technology of space. “New impetus would be gained through the establishment of a coordinating national organization, governmental or private, to take advantage of the potential of advanced technology through modern communication techniques. The situation calls for a comprehensive national effort, with leadership coming from the highest levels of government to break down further interdisciplinary, interagency, organizational, and psychological and occupational barriers and to check out in detail a wide variety of potential applications like those cited above, relating them to the country’s and the world’s most pressing problems. . . . Emphasis should he on the application of the vast array of existing techniques, not on the development of new ones, and on nearterm objectives—no longer, say, than two or three years. Government agencies, the universities, publicly and privately supported research centers . . . must be banded together into a cooperative effort devoted to applying to the problems of our age the many solutions the new high technology makes possible. There is needed ... a public or private national organization, a research center, and, above all, a national purpose to bring this about.” (Slomich, A&A, 12/67, 54-8)
European aerospace industry assn., Eurospace, was urging formation -of an optional regional communications satellite system to provide TV and telephone coverage for Europe, Donald E. Fink reported in Aviation Week. An expanded version was also being studied to link the continent with the entire Mediterranean basin, the Middle East, and major portions of Africa. Designated Eurosat, system would consist of one 375-lb comsat launched into stationary orbit by an eldo Europa II booster and at least 18 ground stations in Europe and North Africa. Fabrication of satellite and ground stations would be restricted to European aerospace companies. Initial cost estimate for satellite system was $100 million. (Fink, Av Wk, 8/28/67,29)
The first manned Apollo space flight might be delayed from spring to mid-summer of 1968 by modification of the Apollo spacecraft by its prime contractor, North American Rockwell Corp., according to NASA spokesman Julian Scheer. Scheer, nasa Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, told upi the anticipated delay, among other things, could be because of considerable changes in the capsule after last January’s fire, (upi, W Post, 9/27/67, A6)
Calculation of effective radiated power by measurement of signal strength from eleven orbiting military communications satellites was accomplished by AFCRL; two satellites exhibited below standard response. Measurements, made at 401 megacycles, were carried out at the 84-ft parabolic antenna facility, Sagamore Hill Radio Observatory, Mass. {OAR Res Rev, 12/67,4)
At dedication of Georgia Institute of Technology’s Space Science and Technology Center, NASA Administrator James E. Webb reviewed nasa-Georgia Tech relationships: “In the first year of the NASA Traineeship program, Georgia Tech was one of the ten original schools. It is one of five schools . . . that started NASA’s new program of Systems Design Traineeships in September. . . . Thirty-eight NASA regular trainees and five design trainees are enrolled at Georgia Tech this fall. “The . . . Center we are dedicating is one of 36 such facilities that nasa has helped to build and support on university campuses ... in a very real sense a new and valuable kind of ‘capital asset’ that will pay dividends to our nation—and to the states in which they are located— for many years to come. Here . . . for example, in the past few years nasa has invested $6.5 million for research, training, and the facility dedicated today. . . . “Even under our reduced budget nasa is sponsoring sustaining research here at a level of some $300,000 annually. ... In project research, nasa has funded a cumulative total of some $2.1 million at this university. . . . The total picture of cooperation . . . would also include a cooperative student program . . . started with . . . naca, in 1952. There are currently 31 Georgia Tech cooperative students at [msc] and six at [LaRc]. More than 125 Georgia Tech alumni are employees of [msc], and 60 alumni are at [LaRc]. . . .” (Text)
Dr. Mac C. Adams, nasa Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, was featured speaker at MIT conference sponsored by Electronics Industries Assn, to acquaint aerospace industry with NASA’s requirements for electronic systems on future space missions. He outlined objectives of nasa’s electronics research program: (1) stabilization systems to maintain orientation in space environment and to point telescopes and other experiments at celestial bodies with precise accuracy; (2) communications systems to translate data acquired in space activities over millions of miles and at rates comparable to exchange of information on earth; (3) communications and navigation satellites to meet increasing demands in commercial air transportation; (4)	data-handling systems to quickly and efficiently store, catalog, analyze, and edit data produced by space exploration; (5) instrumentation systems to detect and measure environmental characteristics over broad ranges of temperature, pressure, and density; and (6) components and technology which could operate reliably for long periods of time despite extremes in radiation and temperature. (Text; NASA Release 67-103)
Operation of Wilhelm Forster Observatory’s tracking station in West Berlin was described by its director, Harro Zimmer, in an AP interview. The station, built on a 250-ft mound of rubble, was in a geographic position enabling it to detect Soviet signals from launching pads in the U.S.S.R. Zimmer said he wired tracking data to Smithsonian Astro-physical Observatory, Cambridge, Mass., on various assignments involving both U.S. and U.S.S.R. satellite launches, but received no pay from either the U.S. or the Observatory. (AP, NYT, 1/31/67) During January: British government awarded Manchester Univ. a $126,000 grant to design a successor to radio telescope at Jodrell Bank Experimental Station. New radiotelescope would have an aerial dish 400 ft in dia, and would cost about $11.2 million to build. (AP, W Star, 2/1/67, A3 ;AP, AIT, 2/2/67,2)
A college which would train 2,000 pilots and technicians annually for the expanding aviation industry was proposed in report by a study group sponsored by the Economic Development Administration. Report recommended that various segments of the aviation industry join to form a nonprofit organization to operate flight training portion of the college. Academic side would be handled by Arizona State Univ. Report estimated college would cost $13-million and could be opened by 1969. (upi, NYT, 8/23/67, 73) Dr. Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech reported that there were about three times as many craters on Mars as preliminary photos transmitted in 1965 by Mariner IV spacecraft indicated. Citing data from two-year study of photos using new computer-enhancement technique, Dr. Leighton said pictures showed 300 clearly defined craters and more than 300 additional possible craters. Original estimate from unprocessed pictures was less than 100. Mars appeared to be about as densely pitted as the moon but its craters were smoother because of more effective erosion processes. Several photos showed a number of linear features similar to lines formed by rifts and faults on the moon. These features were not the “much-discussed” canals of Mars because they were too narrow to be visible from earth. Dr. Leighton said, but they might be related to some of the markings identified earlier as canals, (nasa Release 67—225) Dr. and Mrs. Pierre Connes of Haute Provence Observatory and Meudon Observatory, France, respectively, reported evidence that might indicate Venusian clouds are not formed by water. Observation technique which greatly increased precision with which planets’ spectra could be analyzed showed spectral lines of hydrogen chloride and hydrogen fluoride in the light reflected from Venus. When hydrogen fluoride combines with water it creates hydrochloric acid which absorbs radar waves; yet radar waves are known to penetrate Venutian clouds, returning echoes to the surface of the earth. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/24/67) The “mysterium phenomenon”—peculiar radio emissions from the Milky Way which display almost all the characteristics of artificial interstellar communication—was the subject of a report by Dr. T. K. Menon, National Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va., and a later panel discussion. Dr. Menon said most recent observations of the emissions in the nearby part of the galaxy had been made simultaneously from California, Massachusetts, and U.K., using almost the entire width of earth as a baseline for measurement. They had identified sources of emissions which were smaller than the smallest star as seen by the human eye and discovered some of these emissions were fluctuating on time scales measured in hours or even less. Panel raised the possibility that emissions might be from stars in the process of formation. They were being transmitted at four closely spaced wavelengths associated with hydroxyl, a molecule formed of a single oxygen and hydrogen atom, and were being given off when such molecules shed energy. Emissions also appeared to have various properties associated with a maser—man-made device in which a radio or light wave is beamed through certain atoms whose energy has been raised, enormously amplifying original wave and, if wave is confined to a single axis, producing a beam of extreme intensity. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/26/67, 1, 10; 8/28/67, 22) Lunar Committee postponed naming of surface features on moon’s far side pending the results of Lunar Orbiter V mission. A list of 228 names for approximately 500 major features had been submitted by Soviet scientists, but U.S. delegates cited errors in their designations and asked that features be assigned numbers until a more definitive map could be prepared using Lunar Orbiter V photos. Commission agreed to interim number designations and accepted U.S. map temporarily, assigning study group to report on specific names at next assembly. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/25/67, 13; nas-nrc-nae News Report, 10/67, 6-7) IAU president Dr. Pol Swings of Belgium confirmed an observation made by two obscure Irish astronomers in 1882. Astronomers Lohse and Copeland had observed a comet during the day, apparently with a handheld spectroscope, and reported that it glowed strongly with spectral lines of iron as it passed the sun. All earlier observations of light emitted from comets as they neared the sun indicated they were composed of very light materials, and the idea that they were rich in iron was viewed skeptically. However, photos and electric recordings taken of the comet Ikeya-Seki as it passed the sun in 1966 showed unmistakable spectral lines of iron, Dr. Swings said. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/27/67, 51) Dr. Gordon H. Pettengill, mit’s Lincoln Laboratory, said that results from an experiment which studied Martian terrain by bouncing radar signals off the planet indicated: (1) Mars was roughly as mountainous as earth; (2) there were no large bodies of water on Mars; and (3) there was no clear correlation between height of land and presence of dark areas on Mars. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/30/67, 15) Dr. Bradford A. Smith, New Mexico State Univ., confirmed report by French astronomer Pierre Guerin that atmosphere of Venus was moving around the planet in a clockwise direction at a remarkable rate of speed. Conclusion was based on photos of Venusian atmosphere taken successively both at night and during the day, which recorded changes in wavelengths of ultraviolet light. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/30/67, 15)
General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. engineers said NASA had tentatively selected its double delta wing design for a hydrogen-fueled hypersonic aircraft of the future. Aircraft would weigh 500,000 lbs and cruise at six times the speed of sound. (AP, NYT, 3/2/67)
On presentation of NASA Exceptional Service Medal to m/g David M. Jones (usaf), Commander of afetr, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller stated: “As Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (programs) and as Acting Director, Apollo Applications, General Jones played an important role in guiding the definitions and development of future manned space missions.” Jones had been assigned to NASA from December 1964 through April 1967. (afsc Release 137.67)
Charges that many specifications for construction of $25-million tank chamber at Plum Brook Station were being compromised were denied by Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of NASA Lewis Research Center which operated station. Charges, made by Plum Brook employee and referred to Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio), were being investigated by GAO. Silverstein said almost all the allegations were “not true” or represented a difference in judgment between himself and the complaining employee: “It’s a matter of his judgment against ours, and I don’t have to accept it.” (Thomson, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 1/20/67)
dod announced appointment of Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, jpl Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition, to new position of Director, Advanced Research Projects Agency. Rechtin would be responsible for planning, initiating, and directing research and development programs assigned by Director of Defense Research and Engineering Dr. John S. Foster, Jr. (dod Release 1107-67)
Western Electric received a $43.4 million addition to an existing Nike-X research and development contract. Approximately $18.0 million of this was initial implementation of the decision announced Sept. 18 by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara to deploy a Communist Chinese-oriented abm system. The remainder of the announced addition of $43.4 million would be for continuing research and development on the Nike-X system, supplementing the FY 1968 contract signed early in September. Under that contract Western Electric had received initially $215.3 million for continued research and development effort on Nike-X. The Communist Chinese-oriented abm system would consist of two types of radar and two interceptor missiles, (dod Release 992-67)
The efficiency of Soviet scientific research was deteriorating and the price of getting an idea into production was rising, biologist Alexander Nei-fakh wrote in Literaturnwya Gazeta. Although scientists had doubled every 7 to 10 yrs, published works had doubled only every 13—15 yrs. “This shows that the effectiveness of scientific activity per scientist or per ruble invested in science is consistently falling,” Neifakh concluded. (Reuters, NYT, 4/22/67,31) Miami News: “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration badly needed a victory to demonstrate that the moon program is not threatened by technical deficiencies, as the Apollo investigation seems to suggest. The landing of Surveyor III . . . and the transmission of TV picture fills the bill. . . . There is no denying, however, that Apollo is in serious difficulty . . . [and] NASA is creating the impression that it is unwilling to see the investigation carried to a complete conclusion. . . . Surveyor and dozens of similar achievements demonstrate that the overall space program has been a remarkable success. NASA would make a mistake to see the luster of this record dimmed by its failure to cooperate fully in the Apollo investigation.” (Miami News, A/21/67) New York Times: “Inevitably, Surveyor 3 calls attention to the fact that the first stages of lunar study and exploration do not require men, that the moon can be investigated to a considerable extent without incurring either the great risks or high costs of manned lunar flight. From the scientific and technical points of view, Surveyor-type flights are a rational and feasible alternative to Apollo. . . . Manned space exploration has unavoidable dangers, but these are multiplied many times by the pressure of the 1970 deadline that dominates the Apollo project. What Surveyor 3 has done is to remind us that—aside from propaganda and prestige considerations—there is no need to endanger brave men’s lives.” (NYT, 4/23/67,10B) Washington Post: “With the success in landing Surveyor III . . . [nasa] once again exhibited its stunning scientific and technological skills. . . . Surely the time cannot be far off when men will be shuttling from earth to the moon—and far beyond. . . . Bold ventures of mankind are always undertaken in din of criticism, and the manned flight to the moon will be no exception to the rule. Space exploration will continue—not because it excites expectations of an El Dorado or a Fountain of Youth—but because it is an inescapable challenge to human curiosity and imagination.” ( W Post, 4/23/67, C6) Launched April 23 from Baikonur by a “powerful new carrier rocket,” Soyuz / entered initial orbit “close to the estimated one,” Tass announced with unprecedented speed, only one hour 20 min after launch. Orbital parameters: apogee, 224 km (139 mi); perigee, 201 km (125 mi); period, 88.1 min; inclination, 51.4°. Onboard equipment was “functioning normally” and Komarov was “in good health and feeling well.” During the flight Tass distributed only a few terse reports in contrast to extensive publicity usually accorded manned missions. Final announcement, which followed 11-hr silence, said accident occurred during 18th orbit after program of test flight had been completed and spacecraft had been successfully braked with retrorockets for reentry. “. .. when the main parachute was opened at an altitude of seven kilometers [4.3 mi], the lines of the parachute, according to preliminary information, got snarled and the spaceship descended at great speed, which resulted in Komarov’s death.” Tass did not report whether the cosmonaut had a personal parachute to attempt an escape. Western experts believed Soyuz I was tumbling or spinning out of control during reentry : when parachutes were deployed, tumbling caused them to tangle among themselves or wrap around spacecraft resulting in crash-landing. Experts said difficulties apparently developed earlier in the flight because Komarov tried to reenter during 15th orbit but was unable to control his spacecraft. Informed sources had speculated that mission involved the launch of a second spacecraft carrying several cosmonauts that would dock with Soyuz I and permit at least one cosmonaut to transfer from second spacecraft to Soyuz I. Tass’s official announcement said mission would “test the new piloted spaceship, check the ship’s system and elements in conditions of space flight, conduct expanded scientific and physical-technical experiments and studies in conditions of space flight, and continue medical and biological studies on the influence of various factors of space flight on the human organisms.” Mstislav Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said on April 26 that Soyuz I spacecraft had been tested previously in two to four unmanned flights. Weight, size, and capacity of new spacecraft were not revealed. Immediately following the accident, which was first known fatality during a space flight, the Kremlin announced it was appointing a Government commission to investigate “all the circumstances” of the cosmonaut’s death. Komarov would be cremated and buried in the Kremlin Wall—a final resting place for Soviet heroes—and a monument would be erected on the site of his birthplace in Moscow. (NYT, 4/24/67, 1, 27; 4/25/67, 1, 20 ; 4/27/67, 2; W Post, 4/23/67, Al, A16; 4/24/67, A5; 4/25/67, Al, A16; W Star, 4/23/67, Al)
Separate memorial services were held in Houston for Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Edward H. White II. Among those attending were Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of msc; Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Astronaut Alan Shepard; and former Astronaut John Glenn. (Hines, W Star, 1/30/67, 1)
Wind tunnel tests at usaf’s Arnold Engineering Development Center (aedc) in Tullahoma, Tenn., indicated “nasa has miscalculated the control spacemen would have over the Apollo spacecraft at the critical point it reenters the Earth’s atmosphere,” the Nashville Tennessean wrote in a copyrighted story. Loss of control “means that the Moon spacecraft’s maneuvering ability would be cut, perhaps to a dangerous degree.” Results of tests, which had been forwarded to msc, “will cause NASA to alter its computer projections of the Apollo’s reentry path.” (AP, H Chron, 7/21/67)
U.S. defense warning system was “highly vulnerable” to missile attack because of increasing Russian missile strength, report by Institute for Strategic Studies warned. Institute, 2m unofficial body of military and international affairs’ experts from 28 countries, recommended that U.S. establish a new back-up interceptor control against hostile missiles by mid-1970. {W Post, 4/11/67, A15) Computer technique which had been used to enhance 12 Surveyor I photos of the lunar surface in August 1966 might be applied to diagnostic x rays, Dr. Robert Nathan, jpl scientist who developed the process, suggested in speech over closed-circuit TV broadcast. Process, which separated significant from insignificant detail, could remove distortions and obscurities that often make it difficult for physicians to interpret x-ray films. Dr. Nathan also predicted technique might enable scientists to see the inner details of human chromosomes and gain a new understanding of birth defects. (Randal, W Star, 4/11/67, A3) faa would appoint 10 radiation biology experts to study the radiation aspects of sst operation, faa Administrator William F. McKee revealed. “We want to assure ourselves, beyond any doubt, that high-level altitude flights can be made routinely.” faa was also studying new pressurization on equipment to assure passenger safety at 40,000-ft flight levels as well as new escape devices and evacuation methods, McKee said. (AEr, 4/13/67,74)	_ nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh predicted that U.S. would have the best sst in the world. “Despite its timing, I nominate it for the ‘clean-up’ position in sales, safety, and economy.” Dr. Welsh said expenditures for the SST could be justified because it was important to “our international balance of payments, to our technological progress, to our private enterprise system, to improved transportation, as well as to our international prestige.” (Text) Philco-Ford Corp. and General Dynamics Corp. both displayed several monitoring devices which had grown out of technology acquired by NASA in the development of remote sensing equipment for astronauts. The corporations indicated they would attempt to market the devices for use in medical sciences. (Tech Wk, 4/17/67, 22) Dr. Charles F. Gell, chief scientist of Submarine Medical Research Laboratory at U.S. Naval Submarine Medical Center, received Eric J. Liljencrantz Award and $500 honorarium for his contributions to the advancement of aeronautics and space sciences through medical research. (Av Wk, 4/24/67,121)
nasa’s Surveyor III (Surveyor C) was successfully launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur (AC-12) booster on 65-hr lunar intercept trajectory. Primary mission for the 2,283-lb spacecraft was to perform a soft-landing east of the Surveyor I landing site within the Apollo zone and to obtain post-landing TV pictures of the lunar surface. As secondary mission spacecraft would obtain data on lunar surface bearing strength, radar reflectivity, and thermal properties and photograph use of a surface sampler to manipulate the lunar surface [see April 19]. At 34:53 GET Surveyor III with two-bum Centaur—being used for the first time on a Surveyor mission—separated from Atlas and ignited to reach 100-mi-altitude circular parking orbit where it coasted for 22 min; Centaur then reignited to escape earth orbit and boost spacecraft toward the moon. Surveyor III separated from Centaur, deployed its solar panels, and locked on the sun and the star Canopus. Based on a 248-mi target miss estimate, a 4.2-mi midcourse maneuver was conducted shortly after midnight April 18 to assure precise landing on target in the Ocean of Storms. Surveyor III was third in series of seven spacecraft designed to prove out design, develop technology of lunar soft-landing, obtain post-landing TV pictures of lunar surface, and provide basic scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo. Surveyor program was directed by ossa Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; project management was assigned to JPL; Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle was managed by Lewis Research Center; and prime contractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-85)
Edward H. White II, one of the three Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc, was named to receive AlAA’s 1967 Haley Astronautics Award. Selection had been made in early January. AIAA cited White for his historic walk in space and other contributions, undertaken “at great personal risk in the advancement of space flight” during June 3—7, 1965, Gemini IV mission. Award would be presented to his widow. (AP, W Post, 2/8/67, A6; upi, NYT, 2/9/67,9)
Trendex poll conducted for Thiokol Chemical Corp. in six American cities indicated that interest in the national space program had dropped to lowest in more than four years. Some 41% of persons questioned thought the Government was spending too much on the space program; 83% thought more attention should be given to water pollution, 82% to air pollution, 68% to training unskilled workers, 51% to beautification program, 45% to antipoverty drive, and 26% to space exploration. Competition to achieve first manned lunar landing was favored by 51%, dropping from 77% in September 1965, and opposed by 35%. Most significant change of attitude, Trendex said, was increase in number of respondents who did not know whether they fayored the competition— 14%, compared to 1% in 1963. (NYT, 12/3/67, 28; Thiokol pio)
nasa’s Oso IV (oso-d) Orbiting Solar Observatory was successfully launched from etr with three-stage Thor-Delta booster to study the sun and its influence on earth’s atmosphere. Orbital parameters: apogee, 358.8 mi (577 km); perigee, 336.7 mi (542km); period, 95.8 min; and inclination, 32.9°. Fourth of eight spacecraft in NASA’s oso program to provide direct observation of the sun during most of an 11-yr solar cycle, Oso IV weighed 599 lbs, carried nine experiments, was designed for a six-month lifetime, and had two main sections: the wheel (lower) section provided stability by gyroscopic spinning and housed the telemetry-command equipment, batteries, electronic controls, gas spin-control arms, and six experiment packages; the sail (upper) section was oriented toward the sun and contained solar cells and three solar pointing experiments. Primary purpose of Oso IV was to obtain high-resolution spectral data within the range lA-1350A from pointed solar experiments in the spacecraft during major portion of one solar rotation and adequate operational support of spacecraft subsystems including raster scan of solar disk to carry out acquisition of these scientific data. Secondary objective was to obtain useful data from nonpointed experiments and from pointed experiments during more than one solar rotation. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of Oso I (launched March 7, 1962), Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965), and Oso III (launched March 8,1967) by collecting data on solar x-rays, gamma rays, ultraviolet radiation, and other solar activity, were provided by two American and two British universities, one U.S. Government agency, and one private company. Oso IV was first in series to carry foreign experiments and second (Oso II was the first) capable of scanning entire solar surface by means of a Solar Ultraviolet Scanning Spectrometer which could record a “picture” (digital number) of the sun and transmit it to receiving stations. Spacecraft also had an improved ground-control system whichjpermitted it to receive up to 140 different commands—compared to 10 for Oso /, 70 for Oso II, and 94 for Oso III. Project officials at GSFC reported that satellite spin rate, power level, charge rate, and temperatures were normal and that both tape recorders were operating; all experiments were fully operational by Oct. 25. oso program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67—262)
Dr. Donald H. Menzel of the Harvard College Observatory said in a letter to Time that he planned to propose naming features of moon’s far side for the three American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut who lost their lives in accidents connected with space research. Features were to be named at 1970 meeting of International Astronomical Union. (Time, 9/29/67,11)
Scientists at National Radio Astronomy Observatory (nrao), Green Bank, W. Va., and Naval Research Laboratory successfully demonstrated new technique to obtain high-resolution pictures of quasars. Radiotelescopes at both locations were focused simultaneously on a quasar 240 trillion mi away, and radio signals beamed to earth by the quasar were recorded on magnetic tape at both centers; processed by a computer; and matched to form a single, clearer tape. NBAO Director Dr. David Heeschen speculated that facilities even farther away could be combined for sharper pictures: “Using this technique, there’s no reason why we can’t link up two telescopes 1,000 miles apart and improve our resolution 100 times over what we had.” (O’Toole, W Post, 5/25/67, D18)
NASA launches Apollo 4 into orbit from Complex 39A of Kennedy Space Center in successful first flight test of Apollo/Satum V space vehicle. gency Detection System (eds) in an open-loop configuration; and demonstrate mission support facilities and operations required for launch, mission conduct, and CM recovery. Saturn V was the most powerful space vehicle developed in U.S. space program; in launch configuration with Apollo 4, height was 363 ft, and weight, fully fueled, was 6,220,025 lbs. Saturn V’s 1st stage engines produced 7,610,000 lbs of thrust at liftoff, and the launch vehicle placed 278,699 lbs in earth orbit. This launch vehicle could place 96,000 lbs on the moon. Kerosene (RP-1) was the fuel used in the five 1st stage (S—1C) engines, while 2nd stage (S-II) engines used liquid hydrogen. The five S-II stage J-2 engines, developing total thrust of 1,000,000 lbs, were rated for operations to 117-mi altitude and to 935-mi distance down-range. Third stage (S-IVB) J-2 engine, using liquid hydrogen fuel, developed about 200,000 lbs of thrust. High-quality pictures of the earth were obtained from about one hour before to one hour after apogee on Command Module apogee camera film processed at MSC. Success for Apollo 4 (AS-501), according to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, had been achieved in terms of “pre-set primary objectives.” Heat shield design, S-IVB restart, structural/thermal integrity, compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft, and ground support had been proven. Direction of Apollo Program had been the responsibility of OMSF; development of Apollo spacecraft, flight crew training, and mission control the responsibility of msc ; development of Saturn launch vehicles the responsibility of MSFC; and Apollo/Saturn launch operations the responsibility of KSC. Under overall direction of OTDA, msfn had been managed by gsfc. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 67-275; msfc Release 67-226)
Secretary of State Dean Rusk, in keynote address to annual meeting of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Panel on Science and Technology, suggested that many of the potential perils of advancing technology might be avoided if a group of experts were impanelled every live years “to explore our technological future. . . . The values of this type of forecasting to policy judgments is obvious,” Rusk said. “In most cases a true technological innovation does not reach full bloom for some years—the first basic patent on the transistor was, after all, issued in 1930. . . .” He recommended that panel members be selected from the natural sciences, the social sciences, and industry. (Text)
Former Vice President and current leader for Republican Presidential nomination, Richard M. Nixon, on TV said it was “very likely . .. some of those appropriations [for the space program] are excessive.” Referring to the space program as “a sacred cow,” he called for the President to be “a balance wheel” in evening off the pressure from “vested interests.” He defended a congressman’s right when representing an area with important space business to fight for more funds. (SBD, 11/29/67,140) Coupling a plea for constructive realism with a denunciation of U.S.S.R.’s mere lip service toward international space cooperation, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin discussed ways for understanding “international space cooperation.” No Russian attended the conference, two speakers and one cosmonaut declined invitations. Frutkin explained that cooperation meant “joint projects, jointly undertaken, jointly carried out, and jointly profitable.” Realistic projects practicing space cooperation on an international scale were cited by Frutkin to be: nasa’s program; esro/eldo complex for combining “ten European nations in spacecraft development and seven nations in large vehicle development;” and Intelsat satellite telecommunications consortium, including “some sixty nations in day-to-day operational space communications traffic.” He included in U.S. benefits from the NASA cooperative program “gold flow [for] foreign purchase of space hardware and services,” Canadian ionospheric investigations, West German barium cloud technique, Italian atmospheric density measurements, and French global wind circulation studies. Frutkin referred to esro’s program as “a true pooling of resources [which] goes well beyond the NASA cooperative program. In esro, “common facilities have been planned, financed and operated on an international basis by an international governmental agency.” MSC Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth discussed manned space flight “from Mercury to Apollo.” He said Mercury defined man’s survivability in space, Gemini defined man’s operational capability, and Apollo would be first in utilizing space for manned exploration. “To progress in ten short years from exploring survivability to utilization on the most difficult exploration mission ever undertaken implies a rate of change in technical capability which has no real parallel in history,” he said. Deep space and lunar operations would be faced as “two new major dimensions to our space capabilities.” Space explorers would be coping with the need for huge amounts of energy, extremely precise navigation to hit target and reentry corridor, and radiation protection that could include the intensities generated by solar flares. Lunar explorers would require a vehicle designed to operate entirely outside earth’s atmosphere, descend to and ascend from lunar surface, and propel reliably while exhibiting “relative sophistication of a throttleable engine.” Man returning from first lunar exploration trip would have accomplished “an age-old dream [of visiting] his nearest neighbor in space [and found] a key to the riddle of Earth’s relation to its nearest neighbor [and] a chance of understanding the creative forces that formed his own home—Earth.” “For the first time he will have soared beyond the confines of Earth’s gravity and felt the pull of a foreign planet [and] personally viewed our whole planet as a small bluish ball only four times the span of the lunar disk. These experiences may well produce profound changes in man’s attitude towards himself and his world comparable to those wrought by Galileo’s dramatic demonstration of the Copemican theory, changes which should tend to inspire man to place the affairs of his very small house in order.” (Text) NASA’s Apollo Applications Program (aap) Director Charles W. Mathews listed basic objectives for aap: long-duration space flights of men and systems based on unique capabilities of man, habitability, biomedical and behavioral considerations, and systems development; scientific investigations in earth orbit based on solar astronomy, earth observations, and stellar astronomy; applications in earth orbit based on meteorology, earth resources, and communications; and extended lunar exploration. “The activities involved in [aap] represent major steps in the utilization of our space capability. The results , . . can serve to establish the direction of future space exploration and applications. In particular, increased knowledge on the effective integration of men into the total system should accomplish much in determining the character, systems configurations and operational approach in future programs. The ability to capitalize on the large investments already made in the Apollo Program affords the opportunity to carry on this work in [aap] in an efficient and economical manner.” (Text)
Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (ogo) satellites, Ogo I, II, III, and IV,	transmitted data simultaneously for the first time. Launching dates for four satellites had been: Ogo I, Sept. 4, 1964; Ogo II, Oct. 14, 1965; Ogo III, June 6, 1966; and Ogo IV. July 28, 1967. (nasa Release 67-252)
Employment in the aerospace industry would reach 1,384,000 by September 1967—a 3.4% increase over September 1966—Aerospace Industries Assn, predicted. Forecast, based on survey of 60 companies representing 80% of entire aerospace industry, cited continuing demand for civilian aircraft; stable levels of missile and space sales; and increases in nonaerospace activities as reasons for steady growth in number of employees, (aia Release 67-17)
President Johnson submitted to Congress nasa’s 15th Semiannual Report, covering January to June 1966, and praised the continued progress of U.S. space program: “The achievements reported here reflect not only our progress in space flight, but also new steps taken toward the real objective of all our efforts in space—the application of new knowledge to bettering the lives of all people. Already, we see dramatic examples of success in the satellites which have improved our weather forecasts and navigation, and which are extending radio and television communication to the farthermost regions of the earth. . . . “The United States space program, as reflected in this report, continues to exemplify our Nation’s conviction that the road to peace, progress, and abundance is through continued cooperation among all nations.” (PD, 5/15/67,729-30)	_
U.K. had agreed to buy 40 more F—111 supersonic military aircraft from U.S. at total cost of $785 million, Anthony Lewis reported in New York Times. Ten F-lll’s had been ordered March 31, 1966, with a one-year option to purchase 40 more. Deliveries were expected to begin in 1969. To offset impact on U.K.’s balance of payments, U.S. had agreed to buy $785 million worth of British equipment during the next 10 yrs or help U.K. get orders elsewhere. (Lewis, NYT, 4/1/67, 1) During March: Aerospace praised NASA’s contributions to U.S. aeronautical research: “Since the United States started sending experimental vehicles beyond Earth’s atmosphere nine years ago aeronautical research has been overshadowed by space exploration as far as the annual budgets of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration are concerned. . . . But dollar comparisons fail to tell the whole story. For its space work, NASA has had to build from scratch a variety of expensive ground facilities and equipment and to make heavy outlays for complex, nonreusable flight hardware. NASA’s aeronautical teams spend little on flight equipment and what they do buy is reusable; furthermore, they operate from facilities for the most part built and paid for prior to the Space Age. There is no question but that space has played the dominant role in nasa’s programs, but the aeronautical research effort has been far more substantial—and more rewarding—than an examination of budget figures would indicate. In the coming year, assuming Congressional approval of the pending budget, it will be increased.” (Aerospace, 3/67, 3)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed Edison Electric Institute’s 35th Annual Convention in New Orleans: “Our flight projects, both manned and unmanned, depend upon electronic links back to earth where their data are recorded and analyzed, where their actions are controlled, and where the new knowledge is put to use. We must therefore continue to provide and operate the tracking and data acquisition networks and their associated communications. Our technology utilization program will continue to provide effective means for making available the fruits of our technological progress to the scientific and industrial community at large. And, in every area of our program effort, we are continuing the underlying supporting research and technology which make possible the development of experiments, the implementation of ideas, and the advances in technology which culminate in meaningful aeronautical and space projects. . . . Research and development, scientific inquiry and technological advance, are the province of men working here on earth. New knowledge and new tools for its application are major elements of our total national power—political, military, and economic.” (Transcript)
First flight test of Apollo Lunar Module (lm), designated Apollo 5, was scheduled no earlier than Jan. 17, 1968, NASA announced. The 31,700-lb lm, one of three modules comprising the Apollo spacecraft, was designed to carry two astronauts from lunar orbital flight to a landing on the moon, then back to the Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit. It would be launched on the 6-hr 30-min test flight by 1.6-million-lb-thrust Uprated Saturn I (AS-204) originally scheduled for first manned Apollo mission in February 1967, and would not be recovered. Primary objective of the unmanned Apollo 5 flight would be verification of lm’s flight readiness for manned operations in space. Test would flight qualify lm descent stage propulsion engine, including restart; ascent stage propulsion engine; systems; structures; and staging. (NASA Release 67-313; upi, NYT, 12/27/67, 15; AP, W Post, 12/27/67, A4)
The Senate had unanimously passed S.J. Res. 109, which would mark the 50th anniversary of the Langley Research Center in October 1967. (NASA lar VI/102)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X—15 No. 3 to 250,000-ft altitude and 3,886 mph (mach 5.35) at Edwards afb. Purpose of test flight was to check: ultraviolet exhaust plume; solar spectrum measurement; micrometeoroid collection; air density; x-ray air density; arc boost guidance; and tip-pod camera, (nasa Proj Off)
NASA was consulting with Aerospace Industries Assn, (aia) and with individual aircraft companies on a proposed research program which would support areas of general aviation, Technology Week reported. At the request of several users, NASA had identified a number of technical areas where the application of advanced technology seemed warranted but emphasized that NASA’s efforts should be with aircraft designers and it should have no responsibility for the application of technology. (Tech Wk, 6/12/67, 3)
NASA announced that Oso HI Orbiting Solar Observatory, launched from ksc March 8, had not only achieved but exceeded its primary and secondary objectives. Primary objective was to obtain high-resolution spectral data from pointed solar experiments during major portion of one solar rotation and adequate operational support of spacecraft subsystems to carry out acquisition of these scientific data. Secondary objective was to obtain useful data from the non-pointed experiments, and to obtain data from pointed experiments during more than one solar rotation. Oso III had operated satisfactorily for over two solar rotations and was continuing to acquire useful scientific data from both pointed and wheel experiments, (nasa Proj Off)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell, accompanied by his deputy Edgar M. Cortright and OSSA Director of Space Applications Programs Leonard Jafle, stressed importance of space science in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. “The space research effort has been abundantly fruitful in answering first and second generation questions about our space environment, and in turning up a whole new generation of fundamental and important questions, and potentially fruitful practical applications. To answer these new questions, and to continue advancing in this important field, it is time to select new missions to replace old ones.” Past OSSA successes and proposed 1968 program were outlined by Cortright: “During the past two years (1965 and 1966) 23 of the 28 OSSA missions were successful, including 7 out of 8 deep space missions to the Moon and into interplanetary space. In addition, we successfully launched 6 out of 6 payloads for other organizations. Further, the Atlas Centaur development program was successfully completed and Centaur was used to launch Surveyors I and II. The 1966 series of dramatic successes with second and third generation automated spacecraft demonstrated striking advances in the utility, durability, versatility, and effectiveness of this equipment.” The 1968 program—including Voyager, Mariner Mars ’71, Sunblazer, Nimbus (E and F), ATS, and Voice Broadcast Satellite—had been carefully planned to meet U.S.’s most urgent minimum future needs, Cortright stressed. “. . . this is a critical year in the development of our Country’s program to explore space and to apply space technology to the benefit of man. . . . Those new missions which we have selected to pursue . . . constitute the most important of a long list of exciting opportunities for' space exploration and practical application.” (Testimony; Transcript)
Using $55,000 nasa grant, ucla had purchased a 24-in telescope with photometer and spectrograph for observatory at Thacher School, Qjai, Calif., New York Times reported. Telescope was 15th largest in California and already had produced the most complete spectrographic coverage of stellar explosion of star Nova Delphini. (NYT, 11/19/67, 73)
NASA released “Opportunities for Participation in Space Flight Investigation” (nhb 8030.1A) describing opportunities available to scientists and technical groups for including their experiments and equipment on NASA missions. Handbook, which superseded earlier edition published in July 1965, described each of NASA’s present flight programs and noted opportunities available in automated and manned flights and in flight-related programs so that scientists would have an up-to-date review of missions currently being sponsored by NASA and could develop compatible experiments. (nasa Release 67—169)
Donald L. Mallick, a pilot and engineer at frc, and L/Col. Emil Sturmthal (usaf), chief of afftc’s bomber section, were selected as pilots in joint nasa—usaf XB-70 research program, (frc Release 17-67)
President Johnson signed Executive Order 11381 enlarging Federal Council for Science and Technology to include representatives from dot, hud, and Dept, of State for more effective operation. (PD, 11/13/67,1537-8)
Vesta rocket launched by France from Hammaguir Range carried macaque monkey Martine to 233-km (145-mi) altitude in experiment to measure effects of extreme altitude and weightlessness on reactions of the monkey, who had been trained to push a button in response to a red light, for possible application to problems of manned space flight. Monkey was successfully recovered when she landed by parachute 98 mi from launch site after 21-min flight and was reported to be in good health. (NYT, 3/8/67,24; W Star, 3/7/67)
President Johnson, in his State of the Union address before joint session of Congress, deferred decision on deploying a Nike-X antimissile missile system despite evidence that U.S.S.R. was building a defensive system near Moscow. “We have a solemn duty to slow down the arms race . . . if that is at all possible, in both conventional and nuclear weapons and defenses. ... I realize any additional race would impose on our peoples and on all mankind for that matter, an additional waste of resources with no gain in security to either side.” The President said he intended to seek international agreements “bearing directly on this problem.” He did not mention the U.S. space program in his address. {PD, 1/16/67, 26-39) January 10—11: Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed achievements and objectives of U.S. space program in a series of lectures at the Univ. of Sydney Summer School, Australia. After emphasizing intimate interrelationship between nasa’s unmanned and manned programs, Dr. Mueller assessed Mercury and Gemini flights: “In the Mercury program, we established man’s capabilities in short space flights and we laid the foundation for manned space flight technology. In the Gemini program, we gained operational proficiency, learned about man’s capabilities in flights lasting up to two weeks, and developed new techniques.” The Apollo program, he said, was proceeding on schedule, and several alternative post-Apollo programs were under consideration: “(1) Direct economic benefits, with emphasis on extensive earth-orbital activities; (2) Lunar exploration and science; (3) Planetary exploration and science; (4) Maximum effort aimed at pre-eminence in earth-orbital, lunar, and planetary activities; (5) Balanced combination of economic benefits, lunar and planetary exploration, and science.” (Text) Scheduled to enter commercial service Jan. 27, Intelsat II—B would provide 24-hr communications service between U.S. and earth stations in Hawaii, Japan, and Australia; assist in fulfilling Project Apollo communications requirements; and provide military communications between Hawaii and Japan, and Thailand and the Philippines for National Communications System (ncs) . It was second satellite in ComSatCorp’s intelsat II program to place two comsats in synchronous orbit—one over the Pacific, one over the Atlantic; first satellite— Intelsat II-A—was launched by NASA Oct. 27,1966, but failed to achieve synchronous orbit because apogee motor malfunctioned. Subsequent “systems tests” of the apogee motor at Arnold Engineering Development Center indicated malfunction had been thermal in nature, intelsat ii comsats, larger and improved versions of Early Bird (intelsat i) satellite, were capable of handling television and data transmissions of 324-801 0—69up to 240 voice channels, (nasa Proj Off; ComSatCorp Release; UPI, NYT, 1/8/67,18; 1/12/67, 8; 1/15/67, 57; AP, W Star, 1/8/67, A18; Reddig, W Star, 1/11/67, A5; W Post, 1/12/67, Cl)
Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) flew X—15 No. 3 to 82,000-ft altitude and 3,136 mph (mach 4.71) at Edwards afb. Purposes of test flight were to check: (1) phase II tail loads; (2) boost guidance checkout; (3) traversing probe; (4) tip pod accelerometer; and (5) boundary layer noise. (NASA Proj Off)
Lewis Research Center awarded two one-year award-fee contracts totaling $22,500,000—$17,665,000 to General Dynamics Corp. and $5,171,000 to Honeywell, Inc.—for management and sustaining engineering services on Centaur launch vehicle (nasa Release 67-43)
NASA had been concerned about oxygen fire danger prior to Jan. 27 flash fire and had taken steps to curb the danger, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. NASA felt it “had control of the sources of ignition . . . [but] underestimated badly .. . the course such a fire would take. If more thorough testing of flammable materials used in the cockpit had been conducted, the accident might not have happened.” He denied emphatically April 11 suggestion by naa Director of Research and Engineering Dr. John F. McCarthy that Astronaut Gus Grissom could have triggered the fire by kicking loose a wire, and said he generally agreed with the Apollo 204 Review Board’s criticisms of deficiencies in project operations, conceding: “We were wrong in the standards we applied to the selection of materials for the spacecraft.” Efforts were currently being directed toward eliminating flammable cockpit materials such as nylon and replacing them with glass fiber cloth and Teflon plastic. Although a study was also under way to assess the relative merits of pure oxygen and two-gas life-support systems, Dr. Mueller doubted that present system would be abandoned. In answer to specific questions concerning escape and rescue, Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, testified that the astronauts had died from asphyxia before the spacecraft hatch was opened and that their bums alone would not have caused death. Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips told the Committee that his concern “about the load of work on naa” had prompted an inspection by a NASA team of naa’s Downey, Calif., plant. He had reported to naa President J. Leland Atwood Dec. 19,1965, “some of things that if done differently would contribute to the progress of the program,” and on April 22, 1966, noted that progress was satisfactory: naa was “completely responsive to the programs we described ... and a very aggressive effort___was applied to these problems.” He declined to discuss specifics as requested by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) but indicated that NASA would consider releasing his report to the subcommittee [see April 18]. (Wilford, NYT, 4/13/67, 52; Reistrup, W Post, 4/13/67, A2)
Apollo spacecraft would carry two fire extinguishers, designed and built for NASA by Southwest Research Institute, the New York Times reported. Foam from new extinguishers would provide fire protection for astronauts. Extinguishers would weigh about eight pounds, measure nine inches long with five-inch diameter, and would have removable safety pin and pistol-type grip with thumb button for release of foam. (NYT, 10/15/67,29)
Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.) expressed concern on Senate floor that the Nation’s space program suffered from a “serious lack of centralized leadership within the administration. Leadership is needed to weigh and decide on the merits of proposed space projects; to coordinate program requirements and development efforts of civil and defense agencies; and to establish long-range national space goals and to seek the resources necessary to achieve them. “I believe that this failure to assert administrative responsibility has resulted in the costly and needless development of two families of launch vehicles—one for NASA and one for the Department of Defense. Currently, NASA and the Department of Defense are each separately undertaking manned space programs having similar, if not identical, basic objectives—to determine whether man can effectively operate in space. . . .”	. Criticizing President Johnson’s support of NASA FY 1968 budget cuts recommended by House Appropriations Committee [see Aug. 21], Sen. Smith said: “I am mindful that some significant budgetary decisions must be made because of our commitments in Vietnam and social strife at home. But is the Congress to supply the initial decisionmaking power for the executive branch? Is so little consideration and concern given to determining the required resource level for space technology programs that across-the-board reduction recommended by a legislative committee can be accepted so lightly ? “There are many of us who feel that science and technology may well be the key to our future existence—to the very survival of freedom in the world of tomorrow. In the past, I believe that the administration also held this to be true. However, the present lack of responsible action in regard to our space program leads me to wonder whether the administration plans and manages the future course for our country with any foresight or merely reacts to events with fear and trepidation.” (CR, 8/29/67, S12399)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller testified on Apollo project reprogramming before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. First “man-rated” Apollo Block II spacecraft would be delivered to ksc in late 1967 and launched three months later with Walter M. Schirra, Walter Cunningham, and Donn F. Eisele as prime crew, Webb said. Back-up crew would be Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Ceman. Spacecraft would still have 100%-oxygen atmosphere, but use of noncombustible and fire-resistant materials would minimize fire hazard, he asserted. “We are confident that the results of the first Block II Apollo flights will justify moving rapidly to follow-on flights, thus overcoming some of the effects of the present delay ... [so that] we can carry out this plan within the funds now available for fiscal year 1967 and in NASA’s budget for fiscal year 1968.” In order to “assure maximum progress” and reduce pressures on North American Aviation, Inc. (naa), prime Apollo spacecraft contractor, nasa was realigning its contracting arrangements, Webb said. Contracting changes included: negotiation of a new strong-incentive contract with naa for manufacture, test, and delivery of standard Block II spacecraft; extension of Boeing Co.’s present contract responsibility to include integration of command and service module and lunar module with the Saturn booster system; selection of a third contractor to make necessary modifications to standard Apollo spacecraft produced by NAA; and consideration of offers by other aerospace companies to provide contractor assistance in Apollo systems management and check-out and test procedures. Dr. Seamans described impact of Jan. 27 fire on Apollo schedule and budget. Lunar landing before 1970 “remains possible,” he said. “The impact . . . has been to reduce that probability, not eliminate it. . . . After the first manned Block II flight on the uprated Saturn I in 1968, we plan three to four manned Saturn V missions . . . [and] in 1969 ... up to six Saturn V missions.” Resulting $75 million of additional costs through FY 1968—for materials and equipment changes, flammability testing, launch facility modifications, and spacecraft delivery rescheduling—would be absorbed within the total budget plan currently before Congress. NASA’s responses to recommendations by Apollo 204 Review Board were outlined by Dr. Mueller: (1) bulk combustibles and other flammable materials had been replaced with flame-resistant materials, and necessary flammables stored in fireproof containers; (2) emergency procedures would be reviewed and exercised prior to each hazardous operation, and a quick-opening hatch installed for simplified egress from capsule; (3) new NASA Office of Flight Safety would be established under omsf to review and evaluate safety provisions and monitor test operations; (4) all emergency equipment had been reviewed and additions or substitutions—including installation of water fire extinguishers—made where necessary; (5) detailed design review of spacecraft communications system had been conducted and minor changes made to assure reliable operation; (6) full-scale mockup tests had been conducted to assess fire hazard and problems of gas detection and control; and (7) management and organizational changes had been instituted to clarify responsibilities and improve coordination between NASA centers and contractors. In response to questions by Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.) regarding rating of companies in the 1961 Apollo spacecraft contract competition, Webb said that Martin Co. had been rated first, on the basis of its technical proposal, by the source evaluation board. However he, Dr. Dryden, and Dr. Seamans—considering other factors such as lower cost estimate, outstanding company performance record, overall capability offered, and experience with X—15 experimental aircraft— chose NAA as prime candidate. Senator Smith expressed concern that the Committee was not kept informed of serious problems revealed in the Phillips Report and asked whether NASA followed any guidelines to determine when situations should be brought to the attention of the Committee. Webb replied that no such guidelines existed and indicated that he thought it unnecessary to detail the problems to the Committee since he thought that NASA could control them. Several other committee members also expressed their desire to be informed of any problems approaching the magnitude of those surrounding the Phillips Report. When Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) continued to criticize NASA’s reluctance to make the report public, Webb offered to discuss it, in complete context, in executive session, and repeated his objection to releasing such evaluations of contractor performance out of context. (Testimony; SBD, 5/10/67, 57-66; O’Toole, W Post, 5/10/67, Al)
Georgi Petrov, director of Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Space Exploration Institute, claimed that docking of Cosmos CLXXXVI and Cosmos CLXXXVlll, “for its technical perfection and the possibility it has opened for space exploration, is of greater importance than the American experiment in manual docking . . . [of Gemini VII and gatv]. Since the completely automatic linkup, despite the difficulty of its realization, will always he more economical as regards the payload which is so expensive on an orbit, this will make it possible to solve the tasks of helping the crews of space vehicles and open up new prospects for arranging experiments that demand a great weight on an orbit around the earth.” (SBD, 11/1/67, 3)
Dept, of State announced appointment of Office of Outer Space Affairs Director Robert F. Packard as director of new Office of Space and Environmental Science Affairs. This office would be a part of the International Scientific and Technological Affairs offices, whose responsibility is to advise and assist the Secretary on scientific and technological factors affecting foreign policy. Packard would be responsible for the international aspects of U.S. programs in space, atmospheric science, marine science, and earth sciences. Packard had served from 1961 to 1962 in the Office of the Special Assistant to the Secretary for Atomic Energy and Outer Space. (State Dept. Release, 9/13/67)
NASA would use AS-204 booster—an Uprated Saturn I—to launch first Apollo Lunar Module (lm) on unmanned flight in summer 1967 because it was last booster equipped with full research and development instrumentation. Original plans had been to use AS-206 booster. Undamaged during Jan. 27 fire, AS-204 launch vehicle would be moved from Launch Complex 34 to Launch Complex 37, which was equipped for unmanned launches of the LM. AS-206 booster would be stored for use in a subsequent mission. Purpose of first LM mission was to obtain data on ascent and descent propulsion systems, including a restart of the descent system; verify lm structure; and evaluate staging, (nasa Release 67-67)
U.S.S.R.’s Venus IV planetary probe (also designated Venera IV) entered atmosphere of planet Venus at 12:34 am edt and ejected instrumented capsule intended for softlanding on Venus. After aerodynamic braking, automatic parachute system provided gradual descent through 15-mi dense, hot, windy atmosphere, and capsule made [purported] softlanding at 2:08 am edt. Mstislav Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, later presented scientific proof for softlanding [see Oct. 30]. Launched June 12, the 2,438-lb Venus IV had traveled trajectory of more than 210 million mi; 49 million mi would be covered by transmitted signals from capsule to earth antennas. According to Soviet scientists, atmosphere as recorded by instrumented capsule had almost whole carbon dioxide composition with about 1.5% oxygen and water vapors; no significant traces of nitrogen; and a temperature range of 104-536° F. Reports indicated no noticeable magnetic field and no radiation belt, but detectable weak hydrogen corona. “Because Venus rotates so slowly around its axis [purported to be once in 244 earth days] half the planet is cold,” said Soviet scientist Josif Shklovski. Because the other half heated to “monstrous temperature,” he said surface of Venus would appear to be “a dry hot desert.” He noted that temperature extremes would cause constant winds on Venus “of about 450 mph” [accounting for large amount of drift of capsule during descent]. Moscow news reports from Izvestia and Tass said: Venus IV’s mission had been accomplished and instruments had ceased functioning after radioing data from softlanding site on heat, pressure, and carbon dioxide hostile to most forms of life; mother spacecraft burned in Venus’ atmosphere. Some reports did not claim softlanding. Soviet astronomer Vitali Bronshtein’s claim that radio contact was being maintained with instrumented capsule was unconfirmed. Also, cessation of signals from instrumented capsule received varied explanations from international sources. Tass reported antenna of package had failed to point in the right direction and that package’s bulk had blocked direct contact with earth. Jodrell Bank Observatory Director Sir Bernard Lovell expressed doubt that any electronic device could withstand high temperatures on Venusian surface. (Friendly, W Post, 10/18/67, 1; Kamm, NYT, 10/19/67, 1; Bishop, WSJ, 10/19/67, 4; AP, B Sun, 10/20/67; AP, W Star, 10/22/67, A3; SBD, 10/24/67, 283-5)
NASA’s Mariner V being weigbt-tested at Cape Kennedy before its successful launch on a four-month mission to perform a close flyby of the planet Venus. Mariner V, fifth in a series of interplanetary probes, had originally been built as a Mars probe to back up Mariner IV but was remodeled to accomplish Venus ’67 mission. Primary mission for the 540-lb spacecraft was to fly by Venus to obtain scientific data which would complement and extend data obtained by Mariner II pertaining to the origin and nature of Venus and its environment. Spacecraft’s secondary mission was to obtain data on interplanetary environment during a period of increased solar activity and provide engineering experience in converting and operating spacecraft designed for flight to Mars into one flown to Venus. Mariner V carried automatic sensing devices to record data for derivation of radiation levels, temperatures, pressures, magnetic fields, and atmospheric density near Venus. First Venus probe, Mariner I, was destroyed during launch July 22, 1962; second, Mariner II, was successfully launched Aug. 27, 1962, and flew within 21,600 mi of Venus Dee. 14, 1962. Mariner III, a Mars probe launched Nov. 4, 1964, failed to achieve desired orbit when shroud remained attached to spacecraft. Mariner IV was successfully launched Nov. 28, 1964, and transmitted first close-up photos of Mars in July 1965. Mariner program was directed by ossa Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; project management and responsibility for spacecraft, mission operations, and tracking and data acquisition were assigned to JPL; and Atlas-Agena launch vehicle was managed by Lewis Research Center, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-124)
Paper model of “possible lifting re-entry vehicle design” had flown at 17 times the speed of sound and withstood 4,000° F temperature and pressure equal to 177,000-ft altitude in test to check out recently repaired wind tunnel at LTV Aerospace Corp. in Dallas. Designed by ltv scientist Charles J. Stalmach, model emerged after *4-sec test with only the nose and leading wing edges slightly blackened, (upi, NYT, 3/17/67)
NASA’s Manned Space Flight Network would be tested for the first time with the unmanned Apollo 4 mission, tentatively scheduled for early October, Barry Kalb reported in the Washington Evening Star. Dr. Friedrich 0. Vonbun, chief of gsfc’s Mission and Trajectory Analysis Div., told Kalb in an interview that the “reliability of the system is 99.5 percent.” Network included a new system, he said, which combined functions of tracking, signaling, and voice communication. Previously a separate system was required for each. Only certain portions of the network would be used for the Apollo 4 mission, Von Bun said. The entire system consisted of 13 earth orbit tracking stations, three deep-space stations (each with a backup unit), five tracking ships, and eight specially fitted jet aircraft. Three deep-space stations, located in Gold-stone, Calif., Madrid, Spain, and Canberra, Australia, were designed specifically for “communicating with vehicles at lunar distance.” (Kalb, W Star, 8/14/67, A6)
The 20,000 concerns that work for NASA under contract have laid off employees at the rate of 4,000 a month, largely because of cutbacks in funds, James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, told an audience at the dedication of the Olin E. Teague Research Center, Texas a&m Univ., College Station, Texas. He said about 100,000 persons had been laid off and the figure might reach 200,000. Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), in a short conference following the dedication, said lack of money would be the biggest detriment to U.S. space programs, (upi, NYT, 9/18/67; Bryan Daily Eagle, 9/17/67)
Langley Research Center engineers at jpl, after repeated efforts to reactivate Lunar Orbiter Ill’s photo system which failed March 2, had concluded there was virtually no hope for transmission of further photos from the spacecraft. Analysis of events indicated failure had originated with momentary fluctuation in spacecraft’s electrical power which disturbed photo system logic by turning the film advance motor memory to forward mode. Cause of fluctuation had not been identified. Motor, following incorrect logic, stalled as it attempted to move film which was being mechanically held in a fixed position while readout was in progress. During stalled condition, motor overheated to failure point. Despite termination of photo transmission, Lunar Orbiter III continued to serve as a tracking target, providing practice for nasa Manned Space Flight Network stations, and to record information on radiation and meteoroids in moon’s vicinity, (nasa Release 67-76)
Spanish scientists had submitted to the Spanish government a five-year, $10,000,000 space research program, the Chicago Tribune reported. According to Comision Nacional de Investigacion del Espacio (conie) President Gen. Rafael Calvo Rodes, primary program objectives would be to gather scientific data and gain practical experience in designing and launching rockets. During separate, $1,500,000 preparatory program which was completed in December 1966, Spain launched her first rocket, collected data, conducted preliminary experiments, trained technical personnel, and prepared permanent launching sites; during next phase, Spain would build her own Skua rockets. (Darrah, C Trib, 1/3/67)
Committee on Science, Engineering, and Regional Development had been formed from persons working on problems of science and technology impact for nas and nae. Among other projects, Committee would examine “effects on given region of different kinds of institutions— university, not-for-profit laboratories, industrial and government laboratories [and would assess] . . . role of r&d institutions [and] . . . other factors . . . such as risk capital, entrepreneurial skills, and political leadership.” The 14-member committee would be chaired by Univ. of Illinois Graduate College Dean Daniel Alpert. (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 12/67,8-10)
First two of series of 20 Japanese and U.S. sounding rockets were launched from nasa Wallops Station as part of Japanese-U.S. meteorological rocket project to conduct comparative meteorological research between 12-mi (20-km) and 37-mi (60-km) altitudes. Japanese rocket was an MT—135; U.S. rocket was an Areas. Payloads were ejected at programmed altitudes and descended on parachutes: wind measurements were obtained from radar tracking data; temperature measurements were radioed to ground receiving stations. Objectives of the mission were to compare and cross-calibrate data from various payloads; verify flight and operating characteristics; obtain new information on operation of each rocket system as a whole; and obtain additional data on diurnal cycles of wind and temperature in the stratosphere. Flights were conducted under a Dec. 26, 1966, agreement between nasa, Japanese Science and Technology Agency, and Japanese Meteorological Agency. Results of experiments would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 67-73)
Australia would be able to maintain its prominence in radio-astronomy with a new 150-in optical telescope to be constructed at Siding Spring, New South Wales, the New York Times reported. Construction of the $11,760,000	telescope, a joint British and Australian project, was expected to be completed in six years to provide Australian scientists-—who currently had to send findings to Mt. Palomar (Calif.) Observatory for verification—with a suitable size optical telescope to check their observations. {NYT, 5/14/67, 37)
NASA reported its space engineers at jpl’s Space Flight Operations Facility, using Goldstone dsn station, had sent commands to check Mariner IV’s camera and data storage system; spacecraft, launched Nov. 28, 1964, had now traveled about 1.5 billion miles and was circling sun between earth and Mars. Mariner IV had been commanded to take TV pictures of black space and record on magnetic tape after long space environment exposure. The spacecraft had responded perfectly. Commands also were sent to switch Mariner V’s transmitter from high gain directional to low gain omnidirectional antenna, mission of spacecraft being terminated; Mariner V, launched June 14, had completed its Venus mission and was in solar orbit between orbits of Venus and Mercury, about 74 million miles from earth and about 60 million miles from sun. NASA reported that it might be possible to recontact Mariner V in Sept. 1968, when spacecraft’s antennas would be pointed once again toward earth. Both Mariners would remain in solar orbit indefinitely; however, 'because Mariner IV’s stabilizing nitrogen gas supply was expected to run out in the next few weeks, spacecraft would drift and solar panels would no longer face the sun. Data reception would end because storage batteries would no longer receive charge, (nasa Release 67-291)
Development of a laser system for detecting small variations in moon’s motion, and for measuring earth-moon distances to within two meters was reported by afcrl. A laser beam would be directed at a reflector placed on lunar surface; reflected light would be detected. (OAR Res Rev, 12/67, 5) During 1967: In 1967, U.S. orbited 87 spacecraft; U.S.S.R., 67; France, 2; Italy, 1; Australia, 1; and U.S.-U.K., 1. U.S. total included 30 launches with 61 payloads for dod and 20 successful nasa missions in 22 attempts—highest percentage of successes in one year to date. NASA had one satellite as a secondary payload. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter spacecraft; soft-landing on the moon by Surveyor III, V, and VI; successful Venus flyby by Mariner V; and preparation of a uv chart of sun’s surface temperature from Oso IV photos of the sun. Surveyor III, V, and VI radioed more than 50,000 closeup photos of the moon and conducted on-site chemical analyses of the lunar soil, confirming its being similar to basaltic rock on earth. First launch from lunar surface was accomplished when Surveyor Vi’s retrorockets were fired, lifting spacecraft and translating it to another site eight feet away. NASA launched Lunar Orbiter III, IV, and V, successfully completing the five-mission program and obtaining detailed photos of entire lunar surface—with 100 times the detail possible with earth-based telescopes—including eight prospective Apollo manned landing sites. Mariner V passed within 2,600 mi of Venus and radioed data on Venusian atmosphere and effects of solar wind. Ground tests in Project Apollo were continued in preparation for three-man Apollo/Satum space flight planned for 1969. Following flash fire in which three astronauts died Jan. 27 during ground test at ksc, intensive studies were Conducted to devise new safety measures. Nearly all combustible materials were removed from the spacecraft, and the hatch was redesigned for fast escape. Apollo program climaxed Nov. 9 with successful maiden flight of Saturn V which orbited unmanned Apollo 4 spacecraft. Applications satellites launched included three Intelsat comsats for ComSatCorp and three essa meteorological satellites for essa. Ats II provided first continuous high-quality photos of earth from geostationary orbit, and Biosatellite II provided new knowledge on effects of radiation and weightlessness on life forms. Scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso III and IV, Ogo IV, Explorer XXXIV and XXXV satellites, and Pioneer VIII interplanetary spacecraft. Some 180 meteorological sounding rockets and 105 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—1 spacecraft was launched on suborhital mission to measure effectiveness of water-injection concept in maintaining communications during reentry. Some 12 flights of X—15 rocket research aircraft were conducted, including record-setting 4,534 mph (mach 6.72) flight by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf). Following crash Nov. 15 in which first fatality in 191 X-15 tests occurred, flights were suspended pending a review of the accident. NASA—USAF flight research continued with 14 flights of XB-70 supersonic aircraft. President Johnson authorized faa to proceed with SST prototype construction, contracts were signed with Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., and construction was begun. Research programs were initiated for wing-structure designs for hypersonic aircraft which could make sustained flights at 5,300 mph (mach 8), and studies were undertaken to reduce aircraft noise. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle crashed May 10, during its second flight of the year. dod program included orbiting of two Vela nuclear-detection satellites and 11 idcsp comsats; static test-firing of Titan HIM 1st stage; and beginning of construction of MOL launch complex at Yandenberg AFB. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was the third and final test firing of the 260-in-dia solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 5.8 million lbs of thrust. One test of NERVA nuclear reactor was conducted in which NRX—A6 was operated at full design power for 60 .min, achieving major goal of one-hour-duration operation. Phoebus IB was operated at 1,500 mw for 30 min, and Phoebus 2C-F underwent series of systems tests with conventional fuel. Tracking, communications, and data acquisition reached greatest volume in 1967 with a large number of unmanned satellites and space probes, msfn stations conducted tracking operations with Lunar Orbiter spacecraft as targets after completion of missions’ photo-acquisition phases, and new Apollo Manned Space Flight Network was completely checked out using Tts I, launched as secondary payload with Pioneer VIII. At end of 1967, NASA’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition was simultaneously supporting 50 flight programs for NASA; six in cooperative international programs; and 12 for dod. U.S.S.R. launched 67 payloads, including 61 Cosmos satellites, one Venus probe, one Soyuz spacecraft, and three Molniya I comsats. Venus IV landed on the Venusian surface and transmitted atmospheric data; Soyuz I, after 25-hr manned flight, crashed on landing, killing the pilot; and Cosmos CLXXXVI and Cosmos CLXXXVIII unmanned spacecraft achieved world’s first automatic docking in space. (NASA Release 67—301 ; Space Flight Record 1958—1967; NASA Proj Off)
Soviet newspapers revealed that two cities devoted entirely to scientific research were being constructed near Moscow, Theodore Shabad reported in the New York Times. The first, Pushchino, would be devoted entirely to research in biology and related fields; the second, Krasnaya Pakhra, would specialize in earth sciences. (Shabad, NYT, 1/23/67,1, 8) Cal Tech’s Dr. Maarten Schmidt told conference of a new quasar, pks 0237-23, that appeared to be farther from earth than any other reported to date, pks 0237-23, receding at 80% the speed of light, was most remarkable, however, because it displayed two “red shifts”—displacement toward red end of the light spectrum as objects speed away. If both shifts were indicators of velocity,, it would mean that part of the quasar was receding from earth 17,000 mps more slowly than the rest. Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of American Science and Engineering, Inc., and Dr. Sandage reported that second starlike source of intense x rays had been discovered by Oct. 11 sounding rocket and later telescopic observation. Of 30 known x-ray sources, only one had previously been linked to a starlike object. Finding of second source, located in Constellation Cygnus, persuaded a number of astronomers that such visible objects represented a new type of celestial phenomenon, perhaps related to the manner in which stars are formed. Princeton Univ. physicist Dr. Robert H. Dicke revealed an observation that might invalidate Einstein’s general theory of relativity. Dr. Dicke told the conference that his experiments showed the sun to he flattened at the poles and that the oblateness was sufficient to explain a significant portion of Mercury’s orbital behavior, without recourse to relativity. It was the precise conformity of Mercury’s orbit to Dr. Einstein’s predictions that was the chief pillar of his theory. “It wouldn’t surprise me if general relativity is just plain wrong,” Dr. Dicke commented. {NYT, 1/24/67,22; 1/26/67,18; 1/28/67,1,12; 1/29/67,621
Reorganization of the Bureau of the Budget had created the Economic, Science and Technology Division, headed by John D. Young, reported Jerry Kluttz, in Washington Post. Young, at one time NASA’s Assistant Administrator for Administration, had headed the task force that recommended the shakeup. Reporting to his new division would be the Departments of Commerce and Transportation, aec, nasa, nsf, Small Business Administration, and the regulatory agencies. Both nasa and aec were transferred from the Military Division. (Kluttz, W Post, 9/7/67)
Noise problems arising from commercial jet aircraft operations, and the Government’s attack on these problems were described by ost Director Dr. Donald F. Hornig in appearance before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee [see Feb. 1]. He stated: “At the request of the Chairman of the President’s Advisory Committee on Supersonic Transport, Secretary McNamara, I assumed responsibility for defining and directing an interagency sonic boom program. Its goal is to determine the potential sources of difficulty or additional costs associated with commercial operation of supersonic transports.” ost, said Hornig, had framed “action program” with faa, NASA, and Depts. of Commerce and of Housing and Urban Development—responding to President Johnson’s Transportation Message of Mar. 2, 1966. He added: “. . . NASA’s aeronautics research program in the sonic boom problem areas is both broadly conceived and well defined to provide technical support to the FAA and to the aerospace industry in the national sst Development Program.” (Text)
The X-15 research aircraft stands with the XB-70 research plane outside the hangar at NASA’s Flight Research Center. The X-IS’s new white ablative coating is designed to protect its metal skin from overheating during speeds of more than mach 6. Univ.’s proposal to improve accuracy of the surface of 300-m antenna at Arecibo, Puerto Rico; and (2) Cal Tech’s proposal to add seven dish antennas to one already in existence at Owens Valley Observatory. Panel rejected or deferred: (1) National Radio Astronomy Observatory’s (nhao) proposal for a Very Large Array (vla) consisting of 36 25-m dish antennas distributed along three arms of a Y; (2) Northeast Radio Observatory Corp.’s (neroc) proposal for 135-m fully steerable dish antenna under plastic Steel-ribbed radorae; (3) Associates for Radio Astronomy’s (ara) proposal for 100-m fully steerable dish antenna without radome; and (4) Committee on Institutional Cooperation’s proposal for a device to study upper atmosphere and ionosphere. Eight-member panel was chaired by Princeton Univ. physicist Dr. Robert H. Dicke. {McEIheny, Science, 8/18/67, 782-4; 8/25/67, 907—10)
ComSatCorp awarded J. W. Bateson Co., Dallas, Tex., a $7.9-million contract for construction of a new research laboratory near route 70-S in Montgomery County, Md., 30 mi from ComSatCorp’s Washington, D.C., headquarters. Construction would begin immediately. (ComSatCorp Release 67-56; W Post, 12/28/67, F9)
President Johnson’s Science Advisory Committee’s (psac) report, The Space Program in the Post-Apollo Period [see Feb. 11], was criticized by Dr. Philip H. Abelson in Science. Report did not fully discuss the comparative value of space and nonspace activities and “quickly ducked” the difficult problem of priorities, Dr. Abelson said. Nowhere was there an evaluation of the chances of finding extraterrestrial life. “Another deficiency is the lack of a full discussion of the role of man in deep space exploration. To date, manned missions have contributed little scientifically. The unmanned missions have had a cost effectiveness for scientific achievement perhaps 100 times that of the manned flights. Nevertheless, the report implicitly calls for a major role for man in the post Apollo program. . . .” (Abelson, Science, 5/17/67)
More than 2,000 major construction and supply firms in the U.S. received invitations to bid on the second phase of NASA’s Electronics Research Center at Kendall Square, Cambridge, Mass., announced the New England Division Engineer, Corps of Engineers. The construction package would include three brick-faced buildings: one at least 10 stories high to house laboratories, offices, and cafeteria; 350-seat auditorium; and a center support building for service utilities. The Electronics Research Center had been in operation since Sept. 1, 1964, in temporary quarters at Technology Square near the permanent site in Kendall Square. (USA Release, 9/22/67)
Aerospace industry must develop new type of management to cope with its record $26-billion workload during 1967, Robert Hotz wrote in Aviation Week. “What makes the current management problem so acute is the fact that military demands are reaching a peak at the same time that commercial aviation is soaring on the greatest boom in its history. During 1965, the aerospace industry actually manufactured slightly more commercial airframe pounds than military—a historic milestone. The industry also has under development six new types of airline jet transports for which there were no prior military programs and which must be financed from privately raised funds. This is another unprecedented task for aerospace managements to tackle. . . .” (Hotz, Av Wk, 1/2/67, 11)
Dr. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development, was awarded National Geographic Society’s General Thomas D. White Space Trophy for outstanding contributions to U.S. aerospace progress. First civilian to receive the award since its establishment in 1961, Dr. Flax was cited for “his effective direction of Air Force aerospace research and development programs enhancing national security and advancing space technology.” (ngs Release)
Apollo Command Mod ole at Launch Complex 34, Kennedy Space Center, is a silent, grim reminder of the dash fire that took the lives of the three-man crew when it swept through the spacecraft during launch rehearsal. 204) died, apparently instantly, when flash fire swept through their Apollo I spacecraft mated to an Uprated Saturn I booster 218 ft above the ground. Crew was Virgil I. Grissom, one of seven original Mercury astronauts; Edward H. White II, first American to walk in space; and Roger B. Chaffee, preparing for his first space flight. Accident, worst in the history of the U.S. space program, occurred at 6:31 p.m. est at ksc’s Launch Complex 34 during first major rehearsal for scheduled Feb. 21 . mission. Immediately after tragedy, msc Director Dr. Robert Gilruth, Chairman of the Board of North American Aviation, Inc., Lee Atwood, and NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips flew to Ksc from Washington, D.C. General Phillips described the accident at a press conference Jan. 28: “The facts briefly are: at 6:31 p.m. (est) the observers heard a report which originated from one of the crewmen that there was a fire aboard the spacecraft . . .” At T-10 and holding in the countdown, observers saw a “flash fire” break out inside the spacecraft, penetrate its shell, and surround its exterior with smoke. Rescue workers rushed to the pad area but could not open the hatch for five minutes. Phillips said astronauts’ only hope of escape would have to open hatch manually with a crank tool. He refused to speculate on how long accident would delay the Apollo program or on source of the fire but admitted that “if there is an ignition source ... in pure oxygen this, of course, has flash-fire potential.” His statement that spacecraft was operating on internal power when fire broke out was corrected Feb. 3 by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans: “The fuel cells in the service module were not in use, and the so-called internal power was being supplied by batteries having the same characteristics as the fuel cells but located external to the spacecraft.” NASA immediately appointed a board of inquiry (see Jan. 28) and announced that all data had been impounded pending its formal investigation. Unmanned Apollo flights would proceed on schedule, but manned flights were postponed until board’s inquiry was completed. Apollo I backup crew—Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham—were expected to be named prime crew for rescheduled mission, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 67-16; NYT, 1/28/67, 1, 18; 1/29/67, 1, 48, El; W Post, 1/28/67, Al, A7; 1/29/67, Al, A18; WStar, 1/28/67, A1,A4; 1/29/67, Al, A6)
Sprint, launched from underground cell as the high-speed, short-range missile for Abm system, completed successful test flight at wsmr when it hit intercept point in sky after several planned sharp maneuvers. Interception simulated actual one for incoming enemy missile and was programmed into computer for 27-ft-long missile. Sprint tests had been conducted since March 29,1965. (dod Release 1040-67)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X—15 No. 3 to 84,000-ft altitude and 3,682 mph (mach 5.51) at Edwards afb. Purpose of test flight was to check (1) cold-wall heat transfer, (2) wavy panel heat transfer, (3)	boost guidance, (4) pcm, (5) horizontal tail loads, (6) nose gear loads, and (7) tip-pod accelerometer, (nasa Proj Off)
First SV-5D lifting body vehicle ever recovered from a suborbital space flight was displayed by usaf at Pentagon press briefing. Seven feet long and weighing 860 lbs, it was heat-blackened and slightly charred on its outer surface from 3,000° F reentry heat. Col. Curtis L. Scoville, afsc, said vehicle, launched April 19 by an Atlas booster, had achieved an orbital speed of 17,000 mph and reentered in a maneuvering descent that took it “hundreds of miles” off its straight-line trajectory. A USAF aircraft recovered it in mid-air during final parachute descent. Mission was third successful flight in usaf’s Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry (prime) program; first two vehicles were not recovered, but program was considered so successful that planned fourth flight had been canceled. (Schmeck, NYT, 5/24/67, 50)
Electronic machine was developed by erc contractor Dr. Huseyin Yilmaz of Arthur D. Little, Inc. Machine visually displayed spoken word profiles on small oscilloscope, with objective of eventually allowing voice commands to maneuver spacecraft. Used to teach deaf and retarded people, machine helped deaf person to correct his speech by “seeing” his voice, and NASA scientists would use this project and similar studies to categorize and encode speech patterns, (erc Release 67—39)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, during debate on NASA appropriations bill on floor of House, said: “China is now proceeding with the development of a rocket with nuclear propulsion. The Chinese nuclear rocket program is based upon a nuclear reactor through which passes liquid hydrogen that is stored in the rocket. This same fuel . •. . is also used as a coolant for the nozzle of the rocket.” He also said Communist Chinese “are proceeding with the development of a sounding rocket called Caditi . . . [and] telecommunications satellites.” He explained that Communist Chinese believe, “to operate successfully in space, big booster power, high energy fuels, and nuclear propulsion are necessary. The University of Nanking ... is conducting training courses in various applications of rocket programs. The Chinese space research center of Sinkiang now has programs in the study of materials necessary for space experiments. In addition, it should be seriously considered that the Chinese rocket institute— Balon Roditi—is interested in the development of rockets ‘for all purposes.’ This, of course, includes military as well as peaceful uses. Peking is not a signatory to the recent peace treaty for the peaceful uses of outer space. . . . “The nations of the West, including Russia, should not underestimate Chinese competence in these matters and the pace of their research and development programs. The U.S. Government and the American people must be alerted to the swift progress of the Red Chinese nation in space research and development, high energy propulsion, and large boosters . . . [and they] must realize the tremendous advances being made in the Red Chinese nuclear research field. ... It is my belief and prediction that the [Communist] Chinese will orbit . . . [their] first . . . satellite by January 1968. . . .” {CR, 10/23/67, H13785-93)
JPL issued RFp’s to industry on contracts for preliminary design and definition studies of an unmanned Voyager landing capsule. Two identical Voyager spacecraft would be launched by a single Saturn V booster in 1973 and 1975 to conduct scientific studies of Mars and search for extraterrestrial life. From the industrial proposals, due in March, two to four contractors would be chosen. (NASA Release 67-15) * U.S.S.R. was definitely trying to achieve the first manned lunar landing, concluded a 920-page report on the Soviet space program prepared by Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service for Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences:	. . materials gathered from Soviet sources on future lunar missions reveal this pattern of complete unanimity: the lunar mission is desirable and necessary; it must be a manned mission; it is certain to succeed. . . Report characterized Soviet space program as “well-planned, orderly, and vigorously pursued with concentration on specific, limited objectives, each achieving a marked advance beyond the one preceding.” There was said to be no evidence “of either Soviet disenchantment with the program or a desire ... to cut it back. On the contrary, space specialists have underscored the durability of the Soviet commitment to space exploration. . . .” Report was entitled: Soviet Space Programs, 1962-65; Goals and Purposes, Achievements, Plans, and International Implications. (Text)
U.S.S.R. marked Cosmonautics Day—anniversary of first manned space flight by Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, in 1961—by launching Cosmos CLV. Orbital parameters: apogee, 286 km (178 mi); perigee, 203 km (126 mi); period, 89.2 min; and inclination, 51.8°. Satellite reentered April 20. (upi, W Star, 4/12/67, 1; gsfc SSR, 4/30/67)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller stressed importance of manned spaceflight program in speech before ieee meeting in Washington, D.C.: This is a particularly appropriate date for us to review our manned space flight programs. It was just five years ago today that John Glenn became the first American to orbit the earth in his Mercury spacecraft, Friendship 7. Since that time, we have made noteworthy strides in the manned exploration of space. ... In the Mercury and the Gemini Programs, we learned much about man’s capabilities in space flight. . . . “We will learn much more from the Apollo missions. By 1970, we will have provided the capability to explore space out to 250,000 miles from earth and to conduct manned operations and experiments on flights of up to two weeks duration. The Saturn I and Saturn V boosters will have injected up to 140 tons of payload per launch into near-earth orbit. The Saturn V will have sent 48 tons to the vicinity of the moon. The Apollo spacecraft will have sustained a three-man crew for two weeks in a two-compartment, maneuverable vehicle and will have landed two men on the moon and returned them with samples of lunar material, to earth. The U.S. manned space flight programs will have logged more than 500 man days in space, during which data and experience will have been acquired from approximately 100 in-flight experiments.” (Text)
NASA’s work on advanced air-breathing engines was aimed at development of significantly improved propulsion systems, primarily for second-generation supersonic transports, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Based mainly at LeRC, advanced engine component research program was designed to improve overall performance by improving efficiencies of individual components such as the compressor, combustor, turbine, and nozzle. Although program was directed primarily to supersonic powerplants, most anticipated improvements were expected to be applicable to future subsonic jet engines. (Av Wk, 9/4/67, 64-71)
NASA announced establishment of an Astronomy Missions Board, to be chaired by Harvard College Observatory Director Dr. Leo Goldberg. Twelve astronomers and physicists would make up the Board, which would advise NASA through Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. John E. Naugle. Executive Director for the Board would be ossa’s Deputy Director of Physics and Astronomy Dr. Henry Smith. The Board would develop and review scientific objectives and general strategy for space astronomy missions of sounding rockets, balloons, and satellites and would recommend designs for missions, telescopes, and other equipment. Excluded from the Board’s responsibility would be studies of moon and planets from close range and earth orbital observations of the earth, (nasa Release 67-284)
nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell and ossa Director of Space Applications Programs Leonard Jaffe discussed impact of space research on science and technology in Science. As a result of space research, they said, science and technology could contribute to the arts by furnishing new media for human expression; enrich the humanities hy furnishing new media for broader basis for understanding himself and his place in nature; provide the historian with a better approach to history because of scientific methodology; and enable archeologists more accurately to date materials and identify their sources. As the entire world “absorbs the increased understanding of man and nature that science generates, and reflects that understanding in its literature, its social, political, and economic institutions, and its application to human daily living ... it may be hoped that this common bond will . . . give increased motivation to solve peaceably the problems that beset the world . . . [and] provide increased means for doing so. . . . To use properly and effectively these powerful tools of our times is an inescapable challenge to men and governments the world over.” (Newell, Jaffe, Science, 7/1/61, 29-39)
Aerospace industry sales in 1967 would total $27.3 billion—a 13% increase over 1966 sales—and in 1968 would reach $29.2 billion, Aerospace Industries Assn, (aia) predicted. Commercial transport aircraft production and DOD procurement had increased significantly in 1967, while NASA sales had declined from $4.9 billion to $4.1 billion, (aia Release 67-55)
Lunar Orbiter II, Lunar Orbiter III, and Lunar Orbiter IV, all circling the moon, were being used by NASA’s Manned Space Flight Network personnel and stations for practice tracking exercises. Satellites served as “stand-ins” for the manned Apollo spacecraft which would eventually orbit the moon, (nasa Release 67-183)
U.S. officials reported that Cosmos CXLVI, launched March 10, had split into three parts: two were spacecraft and one was final stage of launch vehicle, Evert Clark said in New York Times. Exact date of separation was not known. Some officials speculated that flight might have been in preparation for a manned flight on April 12—sixth anniversary of first manned space flight, 'by Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin. (Clark, NYT, 3/18/67, 11)
Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) challenged President Johnson’s budget priorities and attacked Administration plans to develop a nuclear rocket system for interplanetary space exploration. He told newsmen that it would be a much greater tragedy to limit school aid than to have a Russian cosmonaut welcome U.S. astronauts to Mars. “. . . We can’t be like the Roman Empire. They gave their people circuses when they needed bread. And that empire disappeared.” (upi, W Post, 3/4/67, A2)
Col. Maynard E. White (usaf, Ret.), former Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel, usaf Hq. in Europe, was appointed Director of Manned Space Flight Program Control, OMSF. (nasa Ann)
