National Radio Astronomy Observatory astronomers at Green Bank, W. Va., disclosed discovery of first pair of pulsars, near Crab Nebula, 6,000 light yr from earth. Through association with the decayed star, they might provide clue as to pulsars’ identity. (Cohn, W Post, 11/7/68, A4)
Cornell Univ. scientists reported pulsar lying in or near Crab Nebula with fastest pulse rate of pulsars discovered thus far was slowing pulse tempo at rate of one part in 2,000 a year. Discovery was made with 1,000-ft-dia antenna at Arecibo (Puerto Rico) Observatory. Walter Sullivan in New York Times said discovery encouraged view that astronomers “are penetrating an entire new realm of physics . . . physics of superdense matter (in the form of so-called neutron stars), magnetic fields far beyond anything observable in the laboratory and superpowerful gravity.” (NYT, 11/25/68, 53)
NASA 10th Anniversary: National Space Club presented special award to President Johnson at White House citing his legislative and executive leadership of national space program. At Space Club dinner in Washington, D.C., Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) presented retiring NASA Administrator James E. Webb award for his outstanding contributions to national space effort. In telegram tribute to Webb, President Johnson said, “The Nation is in his debt. He will be deeply missed but gratefully remembered as his dreams continue to become reality in the years ahead.” Telegram from Vice President Hubert Humphrey said, “The span of achievement which measures a decade of space progress is one which should be a source of pride to all of us. Now a new decade beckons, with new challenges, and new opportunities. And, such is the nature of the space age that we dare not become complacent about our rate of progress or the scope of our past accomplishments. It is unthinkable that we would allow ourselves to be surpassed in technology by any other nation. I have never questioned that space endeavors have contributed significantly to the strengthening and enrichment of our whole society, through a teamwork approach by private industry, our universities, and the Federal Government. By means of this program we have vitalized our economy, developed improved methods of management, stimulated our educational system, produced new goods and services, added to our store of scientific knowledge, and buttressed our national security.” Telegram from Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon said, “The space program must continue to be one of our national imperatives, and it must be supported at a level assuring efficient and steady progress.” Anniversary ceremonies also included open house and annual awards presentation at msfc Sept. 28—29. (nsc Newsletter; Texts; Marshall Star, 9/25/68,4) In anniversary statement issued by White House President Johnson said: “. . . not all of nasa’s accomplishments have been out of this world. Satellites have given us a new look at the world’s weather. . . . They have given us intercontinental television broadcasts, and broken down the technical barriers to worldwide communications. NASA has brought us advances in medical science, education, mapmaking, geology, transportation, and a host of other areas that promise a better life for us here on Earth. Its intensive research and development efforts have given us new materials, products and processes; raised our standards of reliability and advanced managerial techniques. These advances, together with the useful facilities it has built, will be lasting national assets long after the Moon landing is ancient history. . . . “In the years ahead—as in the past decade—our foremost motive is to make men wiser and life on earth more meaningful. And on the mile
In Washington Sunday Star, William Hines reported results of query of eight eminent scientists on most important single decision related to science and technology which faced President-elect Richard M. Nixon early in his administration. Consensus was: shaping of long-term science policy. Also cited were need for reexamination of priorities and goals, with firm decision on extent to which science and higher education should receive Government support; creation of Dept, of Science in cabinet or stronger Science-Government communication lines; reassessment of space funding and other “big science” projects, including proton accelerators; greater emphasis on social goals; vigorous antipollution efforts; and more imaginative use of science and technology as instruments of national policy. None of eight scientists advocated abandonment of space program after culmination of Apollo project. Alvin M. Weinberg, Director of Oak Ridge National Lab., said of space program, “This thing takes so very much money that it’s hard to get excited about any other decision in science until this one has been made. What should be its level in the 1970s? We have become accustomed to something like four or five billion dollars a year, but I doubt very much that this is a level the new President is likely to concur in.” (W Star, 12/29/68, C3)
NASA appointed m/g Daniel F. Callahan (usaf, Ret.), Manager of Florida Missile Operations for Chrysler Corp., to position of Deputy Director of Administration, Kennedy Space Center, vacated in October 1967 by Frederic Miller, who became Director of Installation Support, (ksc Release ksc—331—68)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced organizational changes: Dr. Seymour C. Himmel, Assistant Director for Launch Vehicles, was named Chief of new Special Projects Div. for jet noise and v/stol aircraft study and to new post of Assistant Director for Aeronautics. Newell D. Sanders, Chief of Chemistry and Energy Conversion Div., would assume additional duties as Assistant Chief of Special Projects Div. Milton A. Beheim, Chief of Aerodynamics Branch, Advanced Systems Div., was appointed Chief of new Wind Tunnel and Flight Div. Edmund R. Jonash, Chief of Centaur Project Office, was named Chief of new Launch Vehicles Div., which would include previously separate Centaur, Agena, and Atlas Project Offices. William R. Dunbar would become Project Manager for Centaur. H. Warren Plohr and Edward F. Baehr continued as Agena and Atlas Project Managers. (LeRC Release 68-29)
U.K. withdrew from $420-million European Nuclear Research Center project because of financial difficulties resulting from devaluation of pound Nov. 18, 1967. Officials said U.K. could not afford to contribute its $93.6-million share in proposed 300-bev European nuclear accelerator. U.K. withdrawal from European Conference on Satellite Communications had been announced April 16. (W Post, 6/21/68, A16)
New observations from U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station indicated distance estimates to pulsars had been 30 times too short. Observations from Australia’s Molonglo Radio Observatory had identified pulsar PSR 1749—28, believed to be three times more distant than 10 others observed to date. Despite great distance, its pulses were more powerful than those of all but one other. From these observations, Jodrell’s Dr. Graham Smith believed pulsars lay in distant halo, not in Milky Way. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/13/68, 74) Dr. Welsh said: “I would place high on the list of benefits those which flow from increased international cooperation in the field of space. . . . stimulated by the universal desire for knowledge [it] has brought somewhat closer together the peoples of the world. ... as the practical applications of space become more evident in the form of weather predictions, communications, and increased knowledge of the world’s limited natural resources, additional strength is added to the foundation for peace.” (Text) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of $1,000, made annually by International Academy of Astronautics in recognition of outstanding contribution to progress of space research and exploration over five-year period, was presented Oct. 18 at iaf Congress banquet to Dr. Zdenek Svestaka of Astronomical Institute of Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences. He was Chairman of Commission on Solar Activity of the International Astronomical Union, (iaf iaa Release 34; aiaa Release 10/13/68)	, Soviet scientist Prof. Leonid I. Sedov in news conference said U.S.S.R. was not in race to moon with U.S. “The question of sending astronauts to the moon at this time is not an item on our agenda. The exploration of the moon is possible, but it is not a priority.” Prof. Sedov said Soviet timetable for manned expeditions would depend on next series of flight tests using Zond rocket. Zond V was successful, he said, “because the capsule returned safely, which was the purpose of the flight.” Regarding U.S.—U.S.S.R. scientific cooperation, “its successful implementation is very much dependent on international relations.” At present, he said, close relations did not exist. (NYT, 10/15/68, 48) Informal meeting of international space scientists, organized by Northwestern Univ. ufo expert, Dr. J. Allen Hynek, in conjunction with iaf Congress, discussed advisability of world cooperation on UFOs. Several speakers urged international cooperation such as uniform ufo report forms, but it was agreed that no action should be taken until after appearance of Univ. of Colorado report expected later in year. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/16/68,12)	_ Dr. Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey astrogeologist, reported to iaf analysis of data from spacecraft that had orbited and crashed into or landed intact on moon had shown side facing earth was largely a basin similar to that of Pacific Ocean. It seemed more like earth than had been previously believed. Lunar interior had been molten. Deep cracks in its crust were lined with craters where molten material had erupted from below. Study of remains of giant crater in western Texas had shown features analogous to lunar craters with mountain in center. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/19/68,19)
Apollo 8 astronauts heading for moon would be “in far less hazardous position” than they would have been as crew for Columbus, NASA Director of Manned Space Flight Safety Jerome F. Lederer said in speech before Wings Club in New York. “Columbus did not know where he was going, how far it was, nor where he had been after his return. With Apollo, there is no such lack of information.” Nevertheless, mission would “involve risks of great magnitude and probably risks that have not been foreseen. “Apollo 8 has 5,600,000 parts and one and a half million systems, subsystems and assemblies. Even if all functioned with 99.9 per cent reliability, we could expect 5,600 defects. Hence, the striving for perfection and the use of redundancy.” (Text; NYT, 12/19/68, 56)
nasa Associate Administrator, Dr. Homer E. Newell, summarized Earth Resources Survey program at Fifth Symposium on Remote Sensing of Environment at Univ. of Michigan’s Institute of Science and Technology in Ann Arbor. Prospects in field were promising. Greatest use of satellites for earth survey to date was for meteorological data, including global cloud-cover photos, cloud motion, and ocean temperatures, but U.S. still lacked “much of the data essential for worldwide long-range weather forecasting,” such as data on three-dimensional fields of density, wind velocity, temperature, and water vapor within the atmosphere. Major contributions expected from research in other fields included: completion of geodetic programs which would permit determination of relative positions of any two points on earth with improved accuracy; monitoring of sea surface state, evaluation of marine biological resources, and surface observations of conditions of interest to oceanographers; and improved identification of spectral signature of various species for agriculture, forestry, and geology. (Text; SBD, 4/19/68, 280)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, told World Affairs Council in Pittsburgh, Pa.: “The U.S. space program was undertaken in 1958, and accelerated by three Presidents and six Congresses who considered it basic to our national strength and essential to our continued leadership of the Free World. It is . . . significant to note that this has been a bipartisan effort, with Republican as well as Democratic support. . . . Space expenditures contribute significantly to the national power of the United States in a world where military and economic security increasingly rest upon technology.” U.S. space program “has been deliberately oriented toward cooperation with other countries. It is providing opportunities for foreign scientists to contribute and develop their talents and, at the same time, gives other nations a chance to share not only in the published results of space research, but in the accomplishment of these achievements as well. . . .” (Text)
Eighth anniversary of NASA’s largest Center, Marshall Space Flight Center. It became operational July 1, 1960, with 4,400 employees and facilities valued at estimated $100 million. On eighth anniversary MSFC had 6,500 employees. Plant value was estimated at $400 million, with real property values accounting for $140 million and capital equipment for remaining $260 million. Achievements during first eight years included development and successful flight of Saturn I, Saturn IB, and Saturn V launch vehicles, (msfc Release 68-143)
Aerobee 150 MOD I sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Naval Research Laboratory experiment to 103.2-mi (166.1-km) altitude to photograph solar corona for streamers and to photograph interplanetary dust shadows using two externally occulated coronagraphs and one solar pointing control. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA Aerobee 150 A sounding rocket successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 300-lb payload containing two white rats to 89-mi (143.2-km) altitude in second of four experiments to study rats’ behavior in artificial gravity field and determine minimum level of gravity needed by biological organisms during space flight. During five minutes of free fall, rats selected artificial gravity levels created through centrifugal action by walking along tunnel runway in extended arms of payload. Data on their movement and position were telemetered to ground stations. Payload impacted 53 mi downrange in the Atlantic; no recovery was attempted. (WS Release 68—11; NASA Release 68—112; NASA Rpt srl)
Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics its report Managing the Environment. Subcommittee recommended development of national policy for environment, including: use of environment for benefit of all mankind; maximized productivity consistent with continued usage into very long-term future; systematic management of applied science and technology; incentives to industry, land developers, and local governments; international agreement on projects with widespread or longterm effects; assessment of new and extended applications of science; avoidance of speculative statements and emotional appeals; and increased education and information program in ecological principles. (Text)
Univ. of Minnesota scientists J. G. Sparrow and E. P. Ney reported in Science results of experiment on NASA’s Oso II Orbiting Solar Observatory designed primarily to measure zodiacal light and continuum air-glow. From February to November 1965, Oso II had been able to pick up and distinguish between such earth light sources as lightning, gas flares in Middle East oil fields, and nighttime lights of major U.S. cities. Most significant was recognition of 10 other satellites in low earth orbit. “In principle, each satellite could have been identified.” (Science, 8/2/68,459-60; W Post, 8/2/68, A10; SBD, 8/5/68,145)
NASA Honor Awards ceremony was held at Washington, D.C., with Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Acting Administrator, making presentations. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Research and Development) , was main speaker. ' Distinguished Service Medal, nasa’s highest honor, was presented to Secretary Flax; Edmond C. Buckley, former NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; Paul G. Dembling, NASA General Counsel; and Abe Silverstein, Director of Lewis Research Center. NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal went to LeRC’s G. Mervin Ault, Edmond E. Bisson, and John C. Evvard; Jpl’s Richard M. Goldstein, Alan Rembaum, Lewis D. Kaplan, and Conway W. Snyder; msfc’s Otto A. Hoberg and Hans H. Hosenthien; LaRc’s Mark R. Nichols; and arc’s William A. Page and John A. Parker. Exceptional Service Medal recipients were: Mac C. Adams, Walter Boone, Richard L. Callaghan, Arnold W. Frutkin, Alfred S. Hodgson, Mildred V. Morris, and Boyd C. Myers, NASA Hq.; Robert M. Crane (posthumous), William R. Schindlar, and Michael J. Vaccaro, arc; Robert J. Darcey, Herman E. LaGow, and Robert J. McCaffery, gsfc ; Philip Donely, Paul F. Fuhrmeister, and Harry H. Hamilton, LaRC; Robert C. Duncan, erc; Fred H. Felberg and Alvin R. Luedecke, JPL; Arthur Rudolph, msfc; and Hubert Ray Stanley, Wallops Station. Group Achievement Award went to Apollo 7 Flight Operations Team, Instrumentation Ships Team, Mariner Occultation Experiment Team, ogo Project Team, Sonic Boom Investigating Team, and Surveyor Team. (Program; msfc Release 68—267; Marshall Star, 11/13/68, 1; Pasadena Independent, 11/15/68; arc Astrogram, 11/21/68, 1)
mit physicist and radioastronomer, Dr. Bernard Burke, and teams of scientists using 140-ft “Big Dish” antenna at National Radio Astronomy Observatory began first radioastronomy test of Einstein’s general theory of relativity in attempt to discover gravity’s effect on universe. Among three basic tests proposed by Einstein to test his theory to account for action of all bodies under gravitational force was one to measure bending of light from distant source as it passed an energetic body like the sun. Dr. Burke’s experiment measured signals from newly discovered quasars to determine amount of bending they underwent in passing the sun. If light, in form of quasar radiowaves, was bent, Einstein theory would receive added support; if it was not bent as much as he predicted, or if astronomers were unable to detect significant bending, theory would remain intact until further proof was provided, (nrao Proj Off; Lannan, W Star, 10/1/68, A9)
nasa and France’s Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (onera) had agreed on cooperative research project on tilt-rotors for vertical-flying aircraft. Data were expected to assist in design of rotors and propellers for v/stol aircraft. NASA would provide rotors, hardware, and instrumentation for tests, minimum engineering support, and basic computations of structural strength; onera would conduct tests in Modane, France, wind tunnel at no cost to NASA. (NASA Release 68-104)
frc announced cuts in FY 1969 budget dictated closing out X—15 aircraft program in fall 1968. Major setback was Nov. 15, 1967, crash which resulted in death of pilot Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf). Main task in 191 flights to date had been study of problems of manned controls in high-speed, high-altitude aircraft. Remaining tasks concerned testing of atmospheric reentry conditions. As successor to X—15 —holder of speed record of 4,534 mph and altitude record of 354,200 ft —officials would consider aircraft capable of taking off from ground under own power, achieving earth orbit, reentering, and landing at virtually any point on earth. (AP, C Trib, 1/22/68)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Princeton Univ. Observatory experiment to 108-mi (174-km) altitude to obtain UV radiation of bright star in constellation Cassiopeia, using gyro-stabilized spectrograph, ACS, and recovery system. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. ACS stabilized rocket on target at star. Spectra were obtained on three exposures and payload was recovered in excellent condition. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Edgar M. Cortright, former nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, assumed duties as Director of NASA Langley Research Center. He succeeded Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, who was serving as Special Assistant to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Cortright had served at Lewis Research Center from 1948 to 1958 and at NASA Hq. since 1958. {Langley Researcher, 5/17/68, 1)
In Washington Post, Thomas O’Toole said Howard R. Hughes organization’s holding company, Hughes Nevada Operations, had requested public disclosure of alleged dod study by Harvard Univ.’s Dr. George Kistiakowsky and mit’s Dr. Jerome Wiesner and James Killian. Company claimed Special Report on Underground Testing concluded there was no reason for continued underground atomic tests, dod spokesman denied existence of study, while Science Adviser to President Johnson, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, said only that he had met with top physicists in November to discuss safety of underground testing. “We may make a public report on it. The subject seems to be of enough importance to warrant a public airing.” (W Post, 12/6/68, 87) Primary mission objective was to demonstrate flight operation to support two experiments provided by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and Univ. of Wisconsin for at least 30 days. Secondary objective was to obtain scientific data over a range of star magnitudes and wavelengths for at least 50 hr. Experiments would observe interstellar dust and extremely young hot stars in UV portion of spectrum not visible to human eye or earth-based observatories. Satellite would be able to collect six hours of UV data per day—twice as much as had been obtained in 15 yr from 40 sounding rocket launches. Through its complex ground-command spacecraft-attitude system Oao II would be aimed at individual objects in space with precision never before attained by an orbiting satellite. Information from experiments would be radioed to earth as digital data for analysis by experimenters. By Dec. 10 all spacecraft equipment bad been turned on and operated satisfactorily: satellite had been placed in its sunbathing mode with its solar panels oriented toward sun; its six star trackers had been activated; three of the trackers had been locked on to preplanned guide stars; and satellite had established three-axis stabilization. Smithsonian experiment initial power had been turned on. Wisconsin Experiment Package would be turned on Dec. 11. Oao II was second in series of four spacecraft in NASA’s OAO program to obtain precise astronomical observations of celestial objects above earth’s atmosphere. Oao I had been launched into almost perfect orbit April 8, 1966, but had failed because of power supply system malfunction and probable high voltage arcing in star tracker. OAO program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—186K; ksc Release KSC-68; upi, W Star, 12/8/68, A5; O’Toole, W Post, 12/8/68; AP, W Star, 12/9/68, A6; SBD, 12/10/68, 172; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 12/12/68, A5)
fro said two reports—one by Dr. Eldon E. Kordes, NASA Senior Staff Scientist, to American Society of Mechanical Engineers and one by Chief XB—70 Pilot for fro, Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., to Flight Safety Foundation—indicated NASA—USAF XB—70 test program was providing valuable information for operation of large supersonic commercial and military aircraft. Results from XB—70’s participation in national sonic boom research program had shown methods used to predict overpressure and extent of boom were generally adequate for aircraft of this size and speed under “standard day” conditions but indicated unusual weather conditions and other factors could affect these predictions. XB—70 program was attempting to define intensity of turbulence at higher altitudes. System to improve stability, lessen turbulence-induced accelerations, and improve passenger riding qualities while lengthening aircraft’s fatigue life was being tested. New methods of presenting flight and engine information to pilot had evolved from XB—70 program, including digital form for more precise readout. Special warning systems prevented exceeding operating limits and attitude indicator with changeable sensitivity for smoother flight control had been evaluated. XB—70 flight had demonstrated need for further research in basic stability and control characteristics of its class of aircraft. Actual cross-country flight experience had been gained with trip from Edwards afb, Calif., to Carswell afb, Tex., and return. Both reports emphasized that, although XB—70 was not passenger aircraft, it was similar in size and performance characteristics to proposed sSTs and was only operational aircraft approaching SST size and speed, (fro Release 28-68)
Cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for Cal Tech’s operation of Jet Propulsion Laboratory as a major NASA installation was renewed by NASA and Cal Tech through Dec. 31, 1971. Cal Tech staffed and operated JPL; property, facilities, and equipment were owned by Government. (NASA Procurement Off; NASA Release 69—2)
NASA’s Oao II, launched Dec. 7, photographed three unnamed stars in Draco Constellation 2,000 light years from earth, near Vega between Big and Little Dippers—to make first UV photos of stars. Photos were taken by telescopes of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory experiments aboard satellite and used UV radiation which did not penetrate earth’s atmosphere. They gave GSFC astronomers enough information to reconstruct fairly detailed images of stars, GSFC spokesman said, (ossa; upi, NYT, 12/15/68, SBD, 12/17/68, 208)	_
In Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial, Robert Hotz said: “The element of sharp competition between the U.S. and the USSR in manned space flight has unquestionably forced progress at a much more rapid pace than if either nation were going it alone. . . . Much has already been learned by these competitors from each other. It is a pity that the Soviets’ obsession with secrecy bars them from a more fruitful international exchange of technology. . . . “Events of the past month have put the space race into high gear again. With a lunar window opening in December, it is a strong possibility that both the U.S. and the USSR can launch a manned circumlu-nar mission as another step towards the ultimate lunar landing. With a Soyuz and an Apollo carrying the Hammer and Sickle and the Stars and Stripes, respectively, around the moon at about the same time, it would require a phlegmatic world indeed not to get excited at these extraterrestrial Olympics.” (Av Wk, 11/4/68,11)
Dr. Alan H. Barrett and Dr. William J. Wilson of mit reported in Science discovery of hydroxyl radio emissions from four infrared stars in Cygnus constellation, observed from National Radio Astronomy Observatory in West Virginia. They speculated that emissions indicated definite stage in stars’ evolution. (The older a star gets the hotter it becomes, until it has almost no oxygen and hydrogen.) Further studies, supported partially by NASA, would be conducted during next few years in attempt to determine how far young stars had progressed in process of evolution by observing hydroxyl emissions. {Science, 8/23/68, 778-9; Wilford, NYT, 8/25/68,19)
Harold D. Babcock, 40-yr member of Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar Observatory staffs, died. He was specialist in study of spectra of sunspots and discoverer of fact that magnetic field of sun reversed polarity periodically. (nas—nrc—nae News Report, 5/68, 10)
Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon issued policy statement, “The Research Gap: Crisis in American Science and Technology”: U.S. was “shortchanging” its scientific community and risking research gap between U.S. effort and that of U.S.S.R. “Faced with dynamic possibilities for science, the current Administration is hobbled by the static philosophy that technological potentialities are limited. . . . This attitude is particularly perilous in the realm of defense. ... In few areas of development is activity so intense and productive as in Soviet military research and development.” While U.S.S.R. graduated twice as many scientists annually as U.S., American scientific community was “demoralized” by wavering attitudes toward R&D. “Scientific activity cannot be turned on and off like a faucet. The withdrawal of support disperses highly trained research teams, closes vital facilities, loses spinoff benefits, and disrupts development momentum. . . . The United States must end this depreciation of research and development in its order of national priorities. ... It would be an urgent goal of my administration to devise effective means by which it could cooperate with industry and the academic community in an effort to make maximum use of scientific advances to help solve major national problems. . . . Our goal is to make the United States first again in the crucial area of research and development.” (Text; Walsh, Science, 10/18/68, 335—7)
Aerospace sales reached record high of $30.1 billion in 1968, an increase of almost $3 billion over 1967, Aerospace Industries Assn. President Karl G. Harr, Jr., told Washington, D.C., meeting of Aviation/Space Writers Assn. Commercial aerospace sales increased 39%, to record $6.4 billion; aerospace exports rose 32%, to $3 billion. Military space programs in 1968 rose 3%, from $1,088 billion in 1967 to $1,121 billion, reported AlA’s “1968 Aerospace Industry Review and Forecast,” which Harr released. N'onmilitary space sales declined 3.7%, from $4,202 billion in 1967 to $4,047 billion in 1968. Sales of products and services for use of aerospace technology in nonaerospace areas—such as marine science, water desalination, crime control, and rapid transit—increased from $2,579 billion to $2,726 billion. Harr predicted slight decline in total aerospace sales to about $29.6 billion during 1969 because of 25% drop in jet transport sales before deliveries of new high-capacity aircraft; continuing increase in helicopter, executive, and utility aircraft sales; modest increase in defense and nonaerospace sales; and decline in civil space sales. He noted that in third quarter of 1968 backlog of Government aerospace orders was less than that of other customers for first time since before World War II. (Text: aia Release 68—60; W Star, 12/19/68, A19)
NASA announced it had released tracking ship USNS Watertown from priority role of reentry support for Apollo missions, thus effecting reduction in operational costs required by budgetary curtailments. Manned Space Flight Network land stations in Pacific, Apollo tracking ship Huntsville, and Apollo range instrumentation aircraft would serve returning Apollo spacecraft landing in preselected Pacific area, (nasa Release 68—181)
Univ. of California scientist Dr. David Cudaback, in telephone interview, said rhythmic light flashes coming from one of newly discovered pulsars, which he described at nasa pulsar meeting May 21 in New York, had turned out to be rhythmic effect from his tape recorder. However, Kitt Peak National Observatory, which reported flashes at same meeting, still argued they seemed real. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/8/68, 32)
Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) criticized general public’s “let it wait” attitude toward science and technology in Dandridge M. Cole Memorial Lecture before aiaa Greater Philadelphia Section: Poll after poll showed “strong inclination to slow down or cut back r&d—particularly the space program- • . . Indeed, sentiment has grown that drastic cuts should be made in r&d to finance a variety of requirements—Vietnam to urban renewal. ... In April Senate turned down “by only two votes” move to .reduce DOD R&D budget half million dollars on top of committee cut of $240 million. In House, space budget was cut to $4-billion level, $1.25 billion less than 16 mo before. Technology seemed major factor in economic and social progress and was essential to maintaining international position, but it needed to be more responsive to urgent social problems. “A strong case can be made to continue supporting vigorous R&D efforts in the U.S., although directions and priorities must change to suit our needs from time to time.” (A&A, 7/68, 4-5)
Test pilot Map William j. Knight (USAF} was named winner of Harmon International. Aviator s trophy. In photo, he inspects connection between, external tank and rocket-powered X—15 No. 2, which he flew to record 4£2Q mph Oct. 3, 1967. Two tanks supplied additional engine propellant for increased speed. On Oct. 24, 1968, NASA test pilot William H. Dana took X—15 No. 1 on last flight of research program. Philadelphia, Boeing Co, Vice President John M. Swihart announced abandonment of swing-wing design for SST in favor of fixed-delta-wing aircraft with four independently mounted engines under triangular tail. Final detailed design would be given to FAA by Jan. 15, 1969, deadline. New design differed from delta-winged Anglo-French Concorde and Soviet Tu-144 in wider wing span and horizontal tail which, according to Boeing Vice President in charge of SST H. W. Witbington, made possible superior control at low speeds and compensated for more drag encountered with sweep-back angle of wing. Aircraft cost would be same as swing-wing, $40 million. It would carry same number of passengers, 280 or more, at same maximum speed, 1,800 mph. (Witkin, NYT, 10/22/68, 77; dpi, W Post, 10/22/68, All; AP, W Star, 10/22/68, A3)	...	. Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, received $5,000 AIAA Louis W.	Hill Space Transportation Award “for devising, developing and supervising significant space and satellite programs for military and civilian agencies of the United States Government.” arc Director H. Julian Allen was named Honorary Fellow of AIAA, highest membership award given by Institute. It was presented annually to two Americans and one foreign national. Other 1968 recipients were James S. McDonnell, Chairman of Board, McDonnell Douglas Corp., and England’s Sir Frank Whittle, often called father of jet engine, (aiaa Releases; arc Release 68—15; arc Astrogram)
Japanese astronomer Minori Honda of Kurashiki Astronomical Observatory, Okayama, discovered new comet south of Capella in Auriga constellation. Tokyo Astronomical Observatory said July 14 discovery had been confirmed by three American observatories. Comet was named Honda Comet No. 6. (AP, C Trib, 7/15/68)
Harold T. Luskin, chief advanced design engineer at LockheedCalifornia Co. and former AIAA President, was named NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Technical), effective March 18. Luskin would be responsible for ensuring technical excellence and would share responsibility for overall planning and direction of Manned Space Flight Program with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight and his other deputies, (nasa Release 68—39)
F—111 A aircraft crashed near Edwards afb, Calif., on test flight. Crewmen, Col. Henry W. Brown (usaf) and L/Col. Joe B. Jordon (usaf), parachuted to safety in escape compartment. Crash was fourth for F—111; one F—111B and two F—lllAs had crashed previously. (AP, NYT, 1/4/68, 74)
Soviet economist Dr. Viktor A. Cheprakov had published in Izvestia what appeared to be rebuttal to prognosis by Soviet nuclear physicist Prof. Andrey D. Sakharov of convergence of communism and capitalism by year 2000 [see July 22]. In “Problems of the Last Third of the Century,” translated by New York Times, Dr. Cheprakov foresaw sharpening of struggle between the two ideologies and discussed role of science. “Science and technology are endowed with tremendous possibilities. ... a new achievement ... is being recorded every 25 seconds. We have figures on what and how much can be extracted from the earth, on the benefits to be derived from new methods of food production . . . and on the undoubtedly vast prospects of using the resources of seas and oceans. But the realization of all these potentialities will require the victory of socialism . . . for only socialism makes it possible to funnel vast funds into scientific research and into the practical use of its results in the interest of the peoples.” (Anderson, NYT, 8/19/68,1)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Lewis Research Center Director, received one of six $10,000, 1968 Rockefeller Public Service Awards—highest privately sustained honor for Federal career service—in Washington, D.C., ceremonies. (Causey, W Post, 12/5/68, A22)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Dudley Observatory payload to 95.8-mi (153.2-km) altitude to determine particle flux during quiet period preceding Geminid meteor shower (Dec. 13—14). Launch was first in series of two; second would be launched Dec. 14. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. All collection trap functions occurred as programmed. Payload was tracked visually during descent and sucessfully recovered. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology James M. Beggs dedicated new $3.5-million Flight Control Research Facility at LaRC. Facility, connected to LaRc’s data analysis and computation center, would be used for guidance and control research in support of manned flight. During ceremony, Center’s Digital Computer Complex Group received LaRC Group Achievement Award for “outstanding performance and dedicated efforts in combining unique concepts in computer organization and operating systems” contributing to “one of the most outstanding research computer installations in the United States.” (Langley Researcher, 7/26/68, 1, 4)
Demonstrated success of lunar module’s (lm) initial unmanned test flight in earth orbit Jan. 22 and of subsequent ground test analysis by NASA Manned Space Flight Safety Office had eliminated need for second unmanned lm flight, NASA announced. First manned lm flight using Saturn V launch vehicle was planned for late 1968. (nasa Release 68-50; upi, W Star, 3/17/68, A4)
Lawrence A. Hyland, Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., received naa’s Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1967 on behalf of Hughes Surveyor Program Team, JPL, and other companies and organizations involved in project which citation said, had “put the eyes and hands of the United States on the Moon.” Award was presented by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey for greatest annual achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in U.S. In ceremonies at Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum, Humphrey called U.S. space program “a splendid challenge and a noble mission . . . one whose practical benefits for today are exceeded only by its promise for tomorrow. “I urge every American to support the future development of our space program, and I . . . shall do so with pride and vigor.” Humphrey said Nation had decided to commit resources “to venture in space for one primary reason: We believe that this mission to the far-out will produce many down-to-earth benefits for men. ... In fact . . . the nation that is first in science and technology has a chance to be the first to overcome some of the perplexing problems that have beset mankind since the beginning of civilization.” Space research “has vastly expanded our capabilities in navigation, communication and meteorology. It has given us new products and processes in such fields as agriculture, photography, metallurgy, and oceanography.” Techniques “that are going to put a man on the moon are . . . exactly the techniques that we are going to need to clean up our cities . . the systems analysis approach ... is the approach that the modern city of America is going to need if it’s going to become a livable social institution. “So maybe we’ve been pioneering in space only to save ourselves on earth . . . maybe the nation that puts a man on the moon is the nation that will put man on his feet first right here on earth. . . . “I think a certain extravagance of objectives—a will to push back
Washington Evening Star said U.K. and Australian governments had drawn up joint plans for largest telescope in Southern Hemisphere, 150-in optical telescope at Siding Spring Mountain Observatory of Australian National Univ. It would cost $10.5 million. (W Star, 11/21/68, A6)
Charles W. Mathews, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, addressed Society of Automotive Engineers Space Technology Conference in Washington, D.C.: “A major goal of the Apollo Applications Program is to accelerate the evolution of the utility of space flight using the very major capability that has been developed in the Apollo Program. . . . First, our experience to date leads to the conclusion that the utility of space flight will be greatly enhanced by the participation of men onboard the spacecraft. Second, in manned space flight our ability to maintain operations for durations considerably in excess of those now obtained is necessary for efficient operations. . . . The initial step in this approach is the establishment of a workshop in earth orbit.” Saturn IB orbiting workshop, manned after launch by three-man crew, would be followed by manned Apollo Telescope Mount, which would dock with workshop for 56-day mission to study solar phenomena—“first application of man in space to conduct advanced scientific experiments.” Features and operating modes of Saturn V workshop, to follow, would be based on information gained from Saturn IB workshop. (Text)
Engineering mockup of Saturn l orbital workshop readied for crew station review at Marshall Space Flight Center. Space-sidled astronaut leaves full-size model of Saturn S—IVB rocket stage which will contain individual sleeping rooms, kitchen-dining area, laboratory work spaces, and waste-management area. hope that the conquest of space can contribute to the establishment of peace.” (Text)
In policy statement on science New York Governor Nelson B. Rockefeller, campaigning for Republican presidential nomination, had recommended that U.S. postpone manned space program after Apollo. He warned against treating space program as contest between U.S. and U.S.S.R. and advocated use of unmanned satellites for direct benefits on earth, to explore planets, and to study sun. Gov. Rockefeller said if he were President he would appoint commission “to review the whole field of government science.” He recommended President make annual report to Congress on science and technology. (SBD, 8/6/68,149)
Command module for Apollo 7, first manned Apollo flight, left North American Rockwell Corp.’s Downey, Calif., plant enroute to Kennedy Space Center. Service module had arrived at ksc May 17. (nasa Release 68—100)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told National Space Club in Washington, D.C., unique conditions in space suggested use of orbiting space stations for certain manufacturing processes. “For instance, liquid floating in a weightless environment takes the shape of a perfect sphere. Thus, it is conceivable that metal ball bearings could be manufactured in space to tolerances impossible on earth, yet at a cost, including transportation, less than we can now achieve. Perfect bearings would reduce friction and noise levels to the vanishing point. Free-fall casting techniques could be utilized to cast large flawless optical blanks for telescopes and by proper combinations of spinning and electrostatic forces we should be able to shape the surface as well.” Stable foams for mixtures of liquefied materials and gases, impossible to produce satisfactorily on earth, could be produced in weightlessness, resulting in “a steel foam almost as light as balsa wood with many of the properties of solid steel.” Composite materials like steel of different densities and properties and glass also could be produced. (Text; Schmeck, NYT, 11/27/68, 48; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/27/68, A6)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc experiment to 100.2-mi (161.2-km) altitude to test flight models of impedance measuring instruments to be flown on RAE—A satellite. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt srl)
nasa successfully completed month-long laboratory test of Biosatellite capsule which would maintain primate in space for 30 days in 1969. Fully instrumented, 15-lb, pigtailed monkey which made simulated space flight was alert and responsive when removed and was undergoing postflight examination and physiological measurements identical to those planned to follow actual flight. Test had been terminated after 28 days when biomedical instrumentation measured less urine than monkey would normally secrete. Biosatellite D primate flight would duplicate most routines of manned flight to provide data on effects of prolonged weightlessness. During simulated flight, monkey ate pellets, drank water, and performed two 30-min tasks each day. Test was conducted by Biosatellite experimenters at UCLA with support from NASA and General Electric Co. arc was managing project, (nasa Release 68-142; AP, B Sun, 8/29/68, A4)
Second stage of vehicle expected to be first manned Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle was shipped from Kennedy Space Center launch site to Mississippi Test Facility for cryogenic proof pressure test by North American Rockwell Corp. personnel. Test, scheduled for June, would further certify integrity of stage’s liquid-hydrogen tank and would be conducted on all 2nd stages for manned Apollo Saturn missions. Stage would be reshipped to ksc about July 1. (msfc Release 68—93)
President Johnson transmitted to Congress his annual report, United States Aeronautics and Space Activities, 1967. “The fruits of . . . technology have not been limited to space exploration alone. The knowledge built through our space program has benefited our earthbound lives. It has: revolutionized communications throughout the world; given us better weather information and more accurate navigational and geographic data; brought improved medical instruments and techniques, advanced education, and added to our store of scientific knowledge; spurred the development of more sophisticated aircraft and improved flight safety; [and] strengthened both the security of this nation and our leadership in the search for a peaceful and secure world.” The President was heartened to see that the space program had “moved forward in a spirit of international cooperation, giving new
Harvard College Observatory scientists Dr. George R. Huguenin and Dr. J. H. Taylor became first U.S. scientists to identify a new pulsar when they discovered HP 1506 in northern sky near Little Dipper. Pulsar, similar to four pulsars discovered in 1967 by U.K. scientists, had pulse rate of one every 0.7397 sec, each lasting 0.020 sec. Pulse rate of other four pulsars ranged from 0.25 to 1.4 sec, with each pulse lasting 0.020 sec. Harvard scientists used National Radio Astronomy Observatory antenna at Green Bank, W. Va. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/19/68, 20)
Honored at Chicago’s National Conference on Industrial Research as Man of the Year in research by Industrial Research magazine, JPL Director, Dr. William H. Pickering, told press at Illinois Institute of Technology, “The United States has superiority in space exploration but the Congressional cutbacks may enable the Russians to get well ahead of us.” (Kotulak, C Trib, 1/24/68)
LaRC was conducting operational research program at NASA Wallops Station to evaluate runway grooving as a means of reducing aircraft hydroplaning, loss of friction during high-speed landing because of water or slush film. Aircraft landed on specially prepared runways with grooves % in wide, % in deep, and 1 in apart and braking effectiveness was recorded by instruments on aircraft and on ground. Research indicated grooving helped to alleviate all known phenomena which resulted in low tire-ground friction, but scientists were concerned that undesirable vibrations might be introduced into aircraft. (Langley Researcher, 5/17/68,4)
nasa announced award to Bendix Corp. of $1,567,550 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for development, test, and delivery of one prototype and five flight-model atm star trackers in 15-mo period, atm, part of Apollo Applications program, would be launched into earth orbit and docked with Saturn I Workshop being developed by msfc for 28- to 56-day astronaut stays in space. Astronauts would use atm to study sun from above earth’s atmosphere, (msfc Release 68—196) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, asserted U.S. could afford multibillion dollar space program; “at least as much as President Johnson proposed this year—nearly $7,000,000,000—and perhaps an appreciable amount more.” (Figure included all Government spending, not just NASA funds.) Persons advocating big cuts in space program were “doing this country a disservice.” Much of high U.S. gross national product was result of prior investment in r&d. “This Nation invests more per capita in research than any other nation in the world and that is a major reason why we have a higher standard of living. The space program is the most active, economical, and productive stimulus to research and development in history. We cannot afford to slow it down . . . unless we think we can afford less investment in the elimination of poverty, less expenditure for health improvement, less income for an expanding population, and less readiness in the realm of national security.” Space program cost, though large, was “not really so expensive when we figure that we are spending less than 1% of our Gross National Product for a technological capability that increases the rate at which this Nation becomes wealthier and more powerful by many times 1%.” (Text; B Sun, 8/29/68, A5; AP, LA Times, 8/29/68) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Library of Congress Research Specialist, said U.S.S.R. was launching more military espionage satellites than any other spacecraft and therefore had softened complaints about U.S. espionage satellite activity. Tracing political and social implications of Soviet space program, Dr. Sheldon said U.S.S.R. accepted “importance of basic research on the cosmic scale” and vigorous exploitation of space applications for civil purposes was definite goal. In long-term outlook, U.S.S.R. talked of “future automated, cybernetics-aided industrial state ... in which space applications, space travel, and use of extraterrestrial resources play a vital part.” He also credited NASA program of international cooperation with some influence on recent Soviet shift toward increased cooperation within and without Soviet bloc, though joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. program for space exploration would probably prove inoperable even if it could be established. (AIAA Paper 68-900; AP, NYT, 8/30/68, 7) m/g Jewell C. Maxwell (usaf) , director of faa sst development, said cost of designing and developing two prototype commercial SSTs would amount to $1,587 billion. Government share in total spending from 1963 through 1972 would be $1,239 billion, or 78%. Contractors, Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., would pay $287.8 million, or 18%, and customer airlines would contribute $59.5 million, or 4%. Principal problem in financing, he said, was protection of manufacturers against catastrophic failure. This would require “some limitation of recourse of creditors ... in event of program failure.” In addition, Gen. Maxwell forecast $2.5-billion to $5-billion market risk for period starting in 1972 and $15 billion commercial risk for period between start of sales and end of century. (AIAA Paper 68—916; AP, NYT, 9/1/68,22)
NASA announced completion of X—15 flight research program [see Jan. 21]. On final flight Oct. 24—199th in series which began June 8, 1969—nasa test pilot William H. Dana flew rocket-powered aircraft to 255,000-ft altitude. Attempt at 200th flight Dec. 20 was canceled because of adverse weather conditions. In nasa—usaf—usn program initiated in 1954, flights by three X—15 aircraft manufactured by North American Rockwell Corp. had included more than 82 min of flight at speeds exceeding mach 5 and total flight time of more than 30 hr. Peak altitude reached was 354,200 ft (67.04 mi) and top speed was 4,520 mph (mach 6.7)-—speeds and altitudes never before attained by any vehicle fully controlled by pilot from launch to landing. It had set two official world altitude records of 246,740 ft and 314,750 ft previously. X—15 flight program provided knowledge applicable to design and development of future spacecraft and commercial supersonic aircraft and data on aerodynamic heating in high-speed flight, which could cause deterioration of aircraft structural integrity. X—15 remained only aircraft capable of studying phenomena at hypersonic speeds, space-equivalent flight, and reentry flight.	“ It also had served as test bed for new components and subsystems, subjecting them to hypersonic flight environment. In 1962 four X—15 pilots received Robert J. Collier Trophy from President Kennedy for “the greatest achievement of aeronautics or astronautics in America, with respect to improving the performance, safety, or efficiency of air and space vehicles.” (nasa Release 68-221; NASA SP-60; nasa EP—9; AP, NYT, 12/21/68, 73; SBD, 12/23/68, 236)
Dr. Henry J. Reid, former Director and Senior Staff Associate at nasa Langley Research Center, died in Gloucester, Va., after heart attack at age 72. He had become LaRC Director in 1926 and retired in June 1961, after 34 yr continuous service. (AP, W Post, 8/1/68, B10) During July: Ralph Kinney Bennett in Data scored U.S. complacency in year which might “see some of the greatest Soviet space spectaculars of the decade.” In U.S., he said, early glamour of space race had faded and NASA projects were neither as ambitious nor as well-funded as they once were. In contrast, he noted, U.S.S.R. showed signs of “a new spurt of activity, new technical accomplishments above our planet, an accelerated assault on the moon and dark rumblings of advanced military uses of the threshold of space. The time for a Soviet resurgence could hardly be better. “. . . Soviets are badly in need of a great techno-propaganda feat to reassert their influence on world public opinion. . . .” Soviet hold on European satellite nations had shown evidence of advanced erosion. “Their position in relation to the rest of the communist world is no longer clearly defined.” U.S.S.R. was spending estimated $9 billion a year on space and half that sum went toward military applications of space technology. “There is an American attitude ... of waiting until you get burnt before you shed complacency. When Sputnik I burnt us, we came back with a vengeance. Now complacency has set in again. Perhaps we will feel the fire from the Soviets in space before this year is out and react accordingly. But in space technology . . . it’s a tough way to play the ball game.” (Data, 7/68)
India’s Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls) was dedicated as international facility by Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi. nasa was represented by Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin, Director of Space Applications Programs Leonard.Jaffe, and nasa Wallops Station Assistant Chief of Flight Test Div. Robert T. Duffy. Duffy had served as advisor, and Wallops had assisted by helping to develop range, training scientists and engineers, and lending launching and tracking equipment. Teels had been established Nov. 21, 1963, by Indian National Commission for Space Research (incospar) and to date had launched 52 rockets: 17 American Nike-Apaches, 29 American Judi-Darts, and 6 French Centaures. Rockets launched as part of dedication included two Nike-Apaches, one Judi-Dart, and one Centaure. Payloads contained experiments involving French, Soviet, and American collaboration with India. India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy planned Centaure manufacturing unit at terls, and incospar would build space science and technology center at Veli (near terls) to design and develop space research systems, including vehicle, payload, instrumentation, and ground support. Mrs. Gandhi said: “This center represents only one facet of the tremendous industrial and technological revolution in which we are involved. . . . Technology is a key. It is a key to knowledge that opens the door to plenty as well as power. In a sense it is a key to independence, for it was the failure to advance technologically which made Asia and Africa dependent and poverty-stricken.” (nasa Release 68-14; WS Release 68—1; India News, 2/2/68, 4; LA Times, 2/3/68; B Sun, 6/30/68)
Aerospace Industries Assn, released its 1967 Annual Report, reviewing “industry’s continuing pattern of growth”: 11% increase in sales over 1966, to $27.2 billion; maintenance of 1,400,000-man work force, making aerospace industry largest U.S. manufacturing employer; and $575-million increase in exports, to $2.2 billion, including 42.9% increase in civilian aircraft, to $789 million. (Text)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded ibm’s Space Guidance Center $1,303,758 contract for spare parts and logistics support of instrument units that guided Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles, (msfc Release 68—63)
nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz announced William W. Rubey, professor of geology and geophysics at Univ. of California at Los Angles had been named Director of Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex. NAS had accepted interim responsibility for operation of Institute until consortium of universities could be formed to assume its direction. Formation of Institute had been announced by President Johnson March 1, 1968, to provide base for academic scientists participating in lunar exploration program, working in Lunar Receiving Laboratory, or using other facilities of Manned Spacecraft Center devoted to study of the moon. It was to serve also as center for analysis and study of lunar data obtained from NASA unmanned missions, (nasa Release 68—191; NAS Release) October 31—November 1: Soviet academician and aerospace scientist, Prof. Leonid I. Sedov, visited Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute during AlAA-sponsored tour of U.S. At press conference he said U.S.S.R. would reach moon from orbital station but this was not crux of Soviet effort in space. “Other planets are just as important.” Zond-type satellites would circumnavigate other planets and return. In question and answer period following lecture he said U.S.S.R. would not conduct manned lunar space operation within following six months. In lecture, Prof. Sedov said it was “obvious that space technology and the associated research have a pronounced stimulating effect on the development of the technological fields . . . essential for large-scale progress—particularly in the development of automatic control systems; in radio engineering, television, and telemetry; in computer technology; in the preparation of new materials and new devices; in miniaturization and minimum-weight design; in problems associated with accuracy and reliability of automatic systems. . . It was clear that “space technology has become pivotal in modern industry in the broadest sense of the word.” Dr. G. G. Chernyi, Moscow Univ. professor, also participated in seminar. (Transcripts; Aero Daily, 11/7/68,29) During October: Soviet Science in the News, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., publication, said review of Soviet technical press indicated U.S.S.R. would attempt to orbit manned space station within the year and that it possessed “well-devised and thoroughly realizable designs.” First “rooms” of station would comprise Cosmos or Proton booster joined with Soyuz spacecraft. Additional rooms would combine solid and inflatable elements like polyethylene. Tests of water recovery systems in Pacific indicated broadening of Soviet techniques. Six vessels had been completed for ocean recoveries of spacecraft. Conclusion of Soviet scientists that weightlessness had adverse effect on human skeletal composition seemed to indicate space station would use artificial gravity. ‘Rotation of space station of from 40 to. 60 meters in diameter would generate sufficient artificial gravity to allow large number of scientists to work in space.” (SSN, 10/68, 1; Aero Daily, 10/16/68)
Library of Congress had acquired from former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., The John Glenn Papers, 90,000 items representing national and international response to his first manned space flight, Feb. 20, 1962. Majority of letters covering 1962—64 were from ordinary citizens, largely elementary school children. Other items included subject files, space manuals, news clippings, scrapbooks, invitations, certificates, awards, maps, and charts which Library’s Information Bulletin said “reflect the contemporary need for a popular hero—one who can be held up to the young and who at the same time must undergo the rigorous pressures brought about by ‘instant’ fame and worldwide recognition.” Papers provided “many insights into contemporary social history.” Glenn had been asked for his opinion on every conceivable topic. (Sifton, LC Info Bull, 8/29/68)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences he was greatly concerned about future of entire space program without propulsion capability of nuclear rocket program. Nuclear propulsion was “a must for our future space needs.” Failure to proceed into development phase would result in “losses of experienced personnel and cost-increase effects on the total program. ... A one-year delay in funding could result in as much as two years delay in having an operational nuclear engine.” Nuclear vehicle as 3rd stage on Saturn V could significantly improve payload and mission versatility, and improved capability could be utilized “to improve mission effectiveness, to increase the mission and payload reliability, and to extend the spectrum of potential missions in the late 1970’s and the 1980’s. Equally important . . . for high energy missions requiring the launch of two or more Saturn V’s, with subsequent rendezvous in earth orbit, we will be able to reduce the number of Saturn V’s needed through the utilization of a nuclear vehicle,” at substantial cost savings. In response to questions by Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.), Dr. von Braun said space program was “cutting edge of our technology advancements and of many advances in the applied sciences . . . [because] no other program . . . involves so many branches of technology and science.” Reduction in NASA’s S60-million NERVA request to $11 million recommended by House would be disastrous because to make manned space operations useful, “plenty of payload” was required. AEC funding for NERVA had been approved, hut if cuts were made in NASA funding, program would be nonexistent. (Testimony; Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 5/1/68, A3)
Survey by AIA predicted decline in aerospace industry employment from l,43l million in March to 1,400 million by December because of continuing decline in space program and leveling off of employment requirements in aircraft production and R&D programs. Employment was expected to remain at December level through March 1969. Aircraft production and R&D employees were expected to decline from 854,000 to 833,000, or by 2.5%. Missiles and space employment was expected to drop from 517,000 to 507,000, or 1.9%. Scientists and engineers would continue to form 16% of aerospace employment, with technicians making up 6% of aerospace industry employment, (aia Release 68-56)
Cone-shaped instrumented payload of French Veronique rocket released at 114-mi altitude fell into Atlantic 164 mi off French Guiana and was swept away by currents, French National Space Center announced. (Reuters, W Post, 7/31/68, A14)
Apollo 8 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., William A. Anders, and Frank Borman—scheduled to begin lunar orbital mission Dec. 21—• held preflight press conference at MSC. Borman, comparing mission to “a combat tour in Vietnam,” said: “The risks we take are acceptable ones. . . . We have to accept them if we believe it’s worthwhile. If I ever feel it’s not worthwhile, I’ll quit.” Describing the magnificence of space flight, Borman said, “When you’re finally up at the moon and looking back at the world, the nationalities blend. . . .You get the concept that this really is one world and wonder why ... we can’t live together like decent people.” Anders said crew “might use the opportunity [of being in lunar orbit ChristDeoember 7-10: NASA’s' Oao-II 21-foot-wu!e, 4,400-pound Orbiting Astronomical Observatory carried 11 telescopes into orbit to seek answers to questions on origin, evolution, and future of universe. Photo was made in final flight qualification testing. mas Day] to express to all peoples of the world our purposes and the benefits we can expect from space exploration.” (Lannan, W Star, 12/8/68, A4; AP, KC Star, 12/8/68; AP, M Her, 12/8/68)
Tenth anniversary of Explorer I [see Jan. 31] was commemorated by JPL and Cal Tech with two-day program including symposium on First and Second Decades of Space Research and JPL open house. JPL Director, Dr. William H. Pickering, leader of first Explorer scientific task force, was chairman. Speakers included Dr. James A. Van Allen of State Univ. of Iowa, who had verified radiation belts bearing his name; l/g Austin W. Betts (usa), Army Chief of Research and Development; Dr. John W. Findlay, NASA Lunar and Planetary Missions Advisory Board Chairman; and Dr. Joseph Kaplan of ucla, U.S. Chairman of igy when Explorer I was launched Jan. 31,1958. In next 10 yr, “as an increasingly important area of scientific and technical research a balanced program in space must certainly be part of the activities of our Nation,” Dr. Kaplan said. “No more noble and useful service can be conceived than one which gives strength to . . . cooperation among the nations of the earth. Space certainly qualifies for such a role.” Dr. Findlay outlined possible missions “of strong scientific interest” to Mercury, Venus, Mars, and Jupiter in next decade. Gen. Betts voiced concern about attitudes toward exploratory efforts; he was “not convinced that we remember, the lesson” of Sputnik /. “Only some two weeks” after its launch, numerous programs were proposed for U.S. satellite—possible only because “far-sighted technical people had been planning for various applications of space for some time, and even though firm military requirements were not available.” (jpl Releases, 1/22/68, 1/31/68; Texts; Wilford, NYT, 2/2/68, 4; SBD, 1/26/68, 38)
Soviet test pilot Eudard V. Yelyan test-flew Tu-144, U.S.S.R.’s delta-wing supersonic transport, on successful 38-min maiden flight from airport near Moscow. Tass reported “the equipment on board the airliner operated normally.” Aircraft was designed to carry 120—135 passengers at speeds to 1,600 mph over 4,000-mi range. It was equipped with four Kuznetsov N.K.—144 turbofan engines. Tass said sonic boom “is almost not felt” on earth because Tu-144 reached maximum speed at high altitudes. Later, New York Times editorial commented: “The long international debate about supersonic airliners is sure to be stepped up in the wake of the news that the Soviet entry, the TU—144, has made its first flight. Since it has not been claimed that this initial trial reached supersonic speeds, the likelihood is that the TU—144 was kept subsonic on its first outing. But Soviet airplane designers and builders have manufactured enough supersonic military planes to suggest that on a subsequent flight the TU—144 will fly faster than the speed of sound. ... In this country, the Soviet first will undoubtedly spur those who want to pour still more Government funds into the Boeing project to build an advanced supersonic plane that is faster and larger than the TU—144. Fortunately, this country’s technological prestige is now higher than ever in the wake of the Apollo 8 moon journey. That fact should help the incoming Nixon Administration to see that there are better uses for the nation’s scarce resources than to engage in a supersonic plane race whose economics are dubious and whose product’s contribution to noise pollution is all too loud.” (Shabad, NYT, 1/1/69, 1; UPl, W Star, 1/1/69, A7; Winters, B Sun, 1/1/69, Al; NYT, 1/2/69, 30)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics decided on $153-million cut in NASA’s authorization request of $4.37 billion for FY 1969. Reductions included cut from $48.3 million to $11.7 million for nuclear rocket program [Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee had recommended cut of entire $48.3 million], $36.5 million from unmanned space program, and $60.3 million from request of $2.8 billion for manned space flight program. (AP, W Star, 3/2/68, A3; W Post, 3/2/68, A10; HR 1181, 3/19/68)
Apollo 7 editorial comment: Washington Post: “. . . as the men in the space program go over the data on Apollo 7 and consider the alternatives of manned or unmanned flight on Apollo 8, they must not allow anyone’s desire to heat the Russians, or to get around the moon by the end of 1968, or to fan public interest in the future of space exploration to enter into their calculations. Only if they are convinced that our knowledge is sufficient, our spacecraft is totally adequate, and our men are ready should they give the go to Astronauts Borman, Lovell and Anders for a Christmas trip into space.”(IF Post, 10/23/68, A24) Washington Evening Star: “To those who have made a close study of the space program, [Walter M.] Schirra is the astronaut’s astronaut; the man whose ability stands out in that company of the superable. To those in the know, Schirra is the mischievous perfectionist, the naval officer who lives by the book w'hen he isn’t too busy carrying out an elaborate practical joke. But Schirra will surely be remembered by the public as the astronaut who caught cold, who growled when the alarm clock rang, and who blew up when he was pushed too far. And it may be that Schirra’s greatest contribution to the space program is that he, the most superlative of the supermen, forcefully demonstrated to the world that his is completely and refreshingly human.” (W Star, 10/23/68, A20) Baltimore Sun: “The toting up and analysis of all the information brought home this time must be left to the teams of experts. So must the decisions as to what comes next, and the planning such decisions call for. The public is content to know that three men in a spaceship have added another brave and brilliant chapter to a history of which all of us are unreservedly proud.” (B Sun, 10/23/68, A6)
President Johnson released Noise—Sound Without Value, report of Federal Council for Science and Technology task force, and challenged industry, universities, and public authorities to attack noise in environment from many sources. He directed Federal departments and agencies to undertake or expand noise abatement programs. Among recommendations endorsed by President, report said: NASA should complete studies of community response to airport noise, in addition to hew, dot, and hud studies of effects; nasa and dot should continue air transport noise abatement research; DOD and NASA should continue to study and set standards for noise in special situations; and DOT should develop sonic-boom-control standards. (Text; PD, 11/11/68,1575-6)
Formal establishment of Science and Public Policy Studies Group temporarily housed at mit became effective. Group was designed as focus of interest and information for scholars, universities, and government officials engaged in teaching and research in science and public policy. Any university with active teaching and research program in science and public policy could become affiliate. Some 50 had indicated interest. Funding for two-year period was from university contributions and matching Sloan Foundation grant. Prof. Eugene B. Skolnikoff of MIT would serve as chairman. (Group Ann)
Naval Research Laboratory scientists Dror Sadeh, Stephen Knowles, and Benjamin Au reported in Science observations made in two experiments in which an apparent decrease in frequency of radio or light waves was detected when optical path was in vicinity of a mass. Radio waves skirting earth and sun appeared to increase in wavelength, leading scientists to reason that all lights crossing portions of universe would be similarly affected by mass of objects along the way. Effect could account for part of “red shift” (shift in spectra of distant galaxies as they receded from earth), chief tool for measuring expansion rate of universe which, in turn, was used to measure age of universe. Thus, if observations by nrl scientists were confirmed, they could necessitate revision of long-standing estimates of age and expansion rate of universe. Experimenters, however, indicated their findings appeared inconsistent with results from “round-trip” experiments, such as those obtained during past year when radar impulses were bounced off Venus and Mercury. (Science, 8/9/68, 567—9; Sullivan, NYT, 8/10/68, 27)
President Johnson sent to Congress Marine Science Affairs—A Year of Plans and Progress; The Second Report of the President to the Congress on Marine Resources and Engineering Development and reported on FY 1969 budget, which included $516 million for marine science and technology programs. Increased funding was requested for program on application of spacecraft technology in oceanography and improved observation and prediction of ocean environment. (PD, 3/18/68, 489-90)
British Minister of Technology Anthony W. Benn announced in House of Commons that U.K. would underwrite production of Anglo-French Concorde supersonic aircraft with $180- to $240-million loan for working capital, bringing total U.K. commitment to more than $1 billion. He later revealed first test flight would be delayed until summer 1968. First flight of U.S. sst had been postponed until 1972 [see Feb. 22]. (Lee, NYT, 2/28/68, 5)
Radar map of planet Venus had been produced by Cornell Univ. scientists from computer-assembled data. Radar-astronomy data had been gathered by world’s largest radiotelescope at Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory in Puerto Rico. Principal scientist Raymond F. Jurgens said map was equivalent to what largest optical telescope on earth could obtain were it not for thick cloud cover obscuring Venusian surface. Measurements had been made in 1964 and 1967 when Venus was nearest earth, 26 million miles away. Cornell’s Center for Radiophysics and Space Research Director Thomas Gold concluded from measurements that Venus’ surface material was denser than moon’s. Scientists confirmed that Venus rotated with same face toward earth each time it passed nearest earth. Radar observations revealed rough areas near planet’s equator and probable steep mountain range in southern hemisphere. One-third of Venus had already been mapped; data needed for map of almost entire planet were available. (AP, NYT, 2/13/68, 30)
In interview published in New York Times, Dr. Lee A. Du-Bridge, science adviser-designate to President-elect Richard M. Nixon, said problem facing Government was not “Shall Government support and use science and technology, but how shall it do it. What are the priorities. . . .” Fundamental to use of science was knowledge; therefore, “one must have in any modern society a very important and extensive free basic research enterprise establishment, largely in universities, so that new areas of knowledge will be explored.” Basic research budget of country should increase at least 10% annually for next few years. When it came to using this knowledge, “the Government can, and somebody must, direct, set up the goals.” On space program, Dr. DuBridge said that “the astonishing discoveries” made by launching instruments into space justified further exploration from scientific point of view. When man entered picture as “another piece of the instrumentation that is needed for the exploration,” first effect “is that the costs get large. . . . Apollo landing of a man on the moon is vastly more expensive . . . than the Surveyor landing. ... By the same token, the information returned will be much greater, too. However, as the technology of the spacecraft improves, and our instruments need to get more complex, heavier, or longer lasting, there may very well be a time when putting a man up will actually be cheaper than trying to use automated instruments.” (Sullivan, NYT, 12/17/68, 1).	_
Special Assistant to President for Science and Technology, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, on receipt of first Mellon Institute Award at Camegie-Mel-lon Univ. for “the application of science to the betterment of mankind,” discussed “A Crisis for Science.” After two decades of progress, “Congress and the public ask whether we can afford it after all. We now find ourselves pulling back from the exploration of space, slowing down on the development of universities, and even holding back on health research.” Scientific community, however, had “done much to alienate itself from the society which supports it.” (Text; Science, 7/19/68,248)	j
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, addressed International Meeting of American Nuclear Society in Washington, D.C. In past decade NASA had developed “impressive capability” in “competent and creative people who make up our government-university-industry team.” It was “prepared to accomplish any goal in space exploration which the new administration may establish.” NASA future included “broad, balanced, Planetary Program” emphasizing Mars but examining other planets like Mercury and Jupiter; major lunar exploration program in 1970’s; astronomy program covering optical astronomy, x-ray and gamma ray fields, and low-frequency radio astronomy; and increased emphasis on space applications programs, with maj or efforts toward surveying earth’s resources from space and continuing developments in meteorology and communications. (Text)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Harvard College Observatory experiment to 111.9-mi (180-km) altitude to scan sun in 1,400—1,875 A spectral region using photo-electronic detector and BB solar pointing control. Solar pointing control malfunctioned, changing signal on experiment detector, (nasa Rpt srl)
msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun, addressing National Capital Area Chapter of American Society for Public Administration, praised U.S. space program for “unequaled competence and unlimited opportunity.” After 10 yr in space, he noted, U.S. had launched 514 spacecraft into earth orbit and 28 to moon and other planets. “The moon has been completely mapped, the composition and texture of its soil analyzed, and sites . . . selected for manned lunar landings. Our scientific knowledge of Mars and Venus . . . has been advanced tremendously by . . . unmanned, instrumented probes. . . . American astronauts, who have a total of almost 2,000 hours in space to their credit in the Mercury and Gemini Projects, will begin the third phase of manned space flight this year with the first manned launches in Project Apollo. These achievements in space, fruits of the advanced science and technology of our times, mark the first decade of the Space Age as one of the finest periods in American history. And they are forerunners of even greater discoveries and widespread applications to come during our second decade in space.” Dr. von Braun credited nasa Administrator James Webb’s direction with adaptation of systems approach to space research without which “we would never be able to go to the moon.” Approach, Dr. von Braun believed, could also be tested on river pollution and satellite communications. (Text; W Post, 3/21/68, H14)
Boosted Areas II sounding rocket launched by nasa from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Uppsala (Sweden) Ionospheric Observatory payload to 65.2-mi (104.3-km) altitude. Objectives were to measure electron density profile, distribution of positive and negative ions and secondary x-rays in D region and lower E region of ionosphere during auroral glow, quiet arc, and violent and pulsating auroral conditions and to study its effects on radio wave propagation. Rocket was launched in conjunction with three others. Rocket performance was 12% below predicted. Experimental results were successful, (nasa Rpt srl)
Westinghouse Defense and Space Center engineer Paul J. Kiefer had received AIAA annual award for “outstanding contribution to aerospace sciences or technology” for overall mechanical design and development of Gemini rendezvous radar system and for development of lunar TV camera for use in Apollo series. (Westinghouse Release; AP, W Star, 7/5/68, A3)
New comet of undetermined size had been discovered by amateur astronomers John Bally-Urban and Pat Clayton, who were attending Southwest Astronomical Conference at New Mexico State Univ. Using 10-in telescope, they made discovery while observing comet Honda. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had confirmed sighting of comet, which had been given official name of Bally Clayton comet. (AP, W Star, 8/26/68, A2)
Cosmos CCXV, launched by U.S.S.R. April 18, had carried telescopes to observe stars without interference from earth’s atmosphere, Pravda announced. Orbiting astronomical observatory had trained its eight mirror telescopes and one x-ray telescope on specific hot stars long enough for adequate study, partially by slowing satellite’s rotation to 0.01 usual rate with magnetic anchor that fixed itself on earth’s magnetic field. Data received in 150 radio sessions was being processed by computer. Satellite reentered June 30. (Anderson, NYT, 6/10/68, C14; Reuters, W Post, 6/10/68, A3; SBD, 6/11/68, 199; GSFC SSR, 7/15/68)
Republican Coordinating Committee report charged “technology gap” existed between U.S. and U.S.S.R. Military space systems emphasis had been on passive satellites until approval of Manned Orbiting Laboratory program—delayed for years. Administration, “fearful lest new developments might provoke undesirable Soviet reactions,” had failed to exploit boldly new concepts in science and technology. U.S. R&D had not been aggressively pursued, with consequential slowdown in new weapons development. (Text; AP, NYT, 5/27/68, 8; Golden, P Inq, 5/27/68)
NASA announced millions of home TV viewers in U.S., Europe, and Japan would see live pictures taken by Apollo 8 crew with cigar-box-size camera similar to that carried on Apollo 7 mission. They would be beamed to earth from spacecraft six times during Apollo 8 mission, including twice while spacecraft was in moon orbit. Manned Space Flight Network stations near Madrid, Spain, and Goldstone, Calif., would convert slow-scan signal into TV picture. Still photos would be taken of TV monitor during live transmission and pictures released in Los Angeles, Madrid, and Canberra, (nasa Release 68—214)
Eugen Sanger Medal of German Society of Aeronautics and Astronautics was awarded to U.S. X—15 research aircraft team in Bonn, West Germany, for X—15 program’s contribution to advancement of space flight. Medal honored German rocketry leader, Dr. Eugen Sanger, first to define potential of hypersonic rocket aircraft, who died in 1964. John V. Becker of LaRC accepted award on behalf of NASA—USN—USAF team, (nasa Release 68—206)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by nasa from WSMR carried Naval Research Laboratory experiment to 109.2-mi (174.7-km) altitude to obtain stellar spectra in Scorpius in 1,000—1,600 A far UV range and photometric data on stellar fluxes. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific objectives were not achieved because attitude control system (acs) malfunctioned and vehicle failed to capture and point at desired targets. Experiment performed as expected, but because of ACS malfunction no film was advanced by spectrograph or aspect camera. Some photometric data were obtained by Geiger tube photometers. (NASARptSRL)
MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, discussed “The Outlook for Space Exploration” addressing National Space Club’s Goddard Memo
In major organizational changes at Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. W. R. Lucas, Director of Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory, was named Director for Program Development, effective Dec. 16; Dave Newby was named Director of Center Operations; and Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Space Sciences Laboratory, was named Associate Director for Science. All were new positions, msfc Research and Development Operations would become Science and Engineering, with Hermann K. Weidner remaining Director; Industrial Operations would become Program Management under same director, E. F. O’Connor. Dr. Wemher von Braun, msfc Director, said major function of new Program Development organization would be to “harden” complete package plans for new programs, such as space station. Director for Program Development would “help chart the course for this Center in the post-Apollo period, keeping in mind our Apollo program requirements and aap obligations.” (msfc Release 68—276; Marshall Star, 12/11/68,1)
USAP-Lockheed C-5 Galaxy, world’s largest aircraft, takes of} from Dobbins afe on first test flight. C—5 reached 230 mph and 10,000-foot attitude on 94-minute flight, not attempting maximum speed of 350 mph. (afsc photo) commercial plane of this size.” (AT5C Neimreview, 6/68, I; Witkin, ATT, 7/1/68, 1; AP, W Star, 7/1/68, 1; AFHF Newsletter, 8/68, I) * Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of gsfc Institute for Space Studies, reviewed Arthur C. Clarke’s The Promise of Space. Clarke had described chronology of Apollo decision as “politics and astronautics combined” and had written: “The verdict of history may well be that the United States made the correct decision even if from dubious motives.” Dr. Jastrow said Clarke “seems to betray a point of view that the primary purpose of the space program is, or should be, the exploitation of its scientific potential and the search for knowledge in the space around the earth and on the other bodies of the solar system. “My own view is that he is mistaken. Spacecraft have yielded important scientific discoveries , , . but it seems clear to me that preservation of national security, and not scientific research per se, was the motivation for the Kennedy proposal. Kennedy acted out of a deep gut instinct, shared by the Congress and the American people, that the United States had been presented with a major challenge to which it must respond effectively or pay a heavy penalty. The decision on the expanded space program may have been accelerated by the events of the spring of 1961, but the Soviet challenge . . . was permanent.” Dr. Jastrow saw promise of space as “dollars-and-cents return in increased productivity in the U.S.” To Clarke it was “the universe—or nothing.” (W Post, Book World, 6/30/68, 1; CR, 7/9/68, E6290) During June: Last of 11 JC—130 Hercules turboprop aircraft left Patrick afb, Fla., to be replaced by larger, high-speed jet EC—135N Apollo Range Instrumentation aircraft. With complex electronic instrumentation, Air Force Eastern Test Range Hercules had supported hundreds of Cape Kennedy space and missile launches, including Atlas, Titan, Polaris, Minuteman, Saturn, Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo. When fully operational in 1961, they had replaced earlier C—54s. (afsc Newsre-view, 6/68, 4)
New York Times article said at least eight nations, including U.S. and U.S.S.R., were building astronomical observatories in Chile, which had been termed ideal site because of its latitude, near 30° South. Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc. (aura) , dependency of NSF, had invested $19 million thus far in observatory of Cerro Tololo. Other groups were European Southern Observatory (eso, consortium of West Germany, France, Holland, Belgium, Sweden, and Denmark) and Soviet Astronomical Mission. A 36-in-telescope at U.S. observatory already had photographed powerful ray-emitting star whose existence previously had been only suspected. (NYT, 11/24/68, 27)
NASA Aerobee 150 A sounding rocket successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 300-lb payload containing two white rats to 101-mi (162.5-km) altitude in third of four experiments to study rats’ behavior in artificial gravity field and determine minimum level of gravity needed by biological organisms during space flight. During five - minutes of free fall, rats selected artificial gravity levels created through centrifugal action by walking along tunnel runway in extended arms of payload. Data on their position and movement were telemetered to ground stations. Payload impacted 69 mi downrange in the Atlantic, (ws Release 68—21)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Dudley Observatory experiment to 95.8-mi (154.3-km) altitude to determine micrometeoroid flux in absence of an active meteoroid shower from comparison with data from Aug. 12 launch during meteoroid shower. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Payload was recovered undamaged, (nasa Rpt srl)
At NASA Pasadena (Calif.) Office third annual awards ceremony, Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, said: “During the next few years . . . our efforts in astronomical observations, in space applications and in planetary exploration, should receive priority. ... In astronomy, perhaps more than in any other scientific discipline, major progress has been achieved when a new observing technique is used. In the next several years we will provide our astronomers with such new observational tools—telescopes and detectors in space above the absorbing and obscuring effect of the earth’s atmosphere. ... we envision a complementary program using both manned and automated observational platforms leading to permanent observatories in space in the next 10 to 15 years. On the other hand, OAO, oso, and the small astronomy satellite will carry the burden of automated observation, while the Apollo Telescope Mount provides us with early experience in the contribution man can make in astronomy. Before very many years, it should be possible for us to move into astra-type systems in which we combine the best of both techniques, i.e., long-term automated instruments in orbit of a cost and complexity which justify their being serviced and maintained by man. . . . “Although . . . post Apollo plans are much more modest than previously announced, even at these reduced levels, it should be possible to carry out some important near-earth and extended lunar missions following the Apollo landings. However, there remains no clear picture as to the future of manned space flight beyond the use of the launch vehicles and rockets left over from Apollo. The resolution of the future goals of manned space flight must await the . . . next administration.” (Text)
Ham, first chimpanzee successfully launched on space flight [Jan. 31, 1961], and now 11 yr old, was among five great apes at National Zoo who reacted positively to tuberculosis tests, according to zoo veterinarian, Dr. Clinton W. Gray. Animals were under treatment and expected to be fit for exhibiting again within 60 to 90 days. (Schaden, W Star, 11/6/68, B2; Elsberg, W News, 2/14/69, 5)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, in statement before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, pointed to “establishment of a Manned Space Plight Safety Office ... to focus all our safety activity at the highest level of management.” NASA, he said, was ensuring “that quality assurance and reliability officials have direct access to contractor management and nasa management.” (Testimony)
Dr. Ernest Harry Vestine, expert on geomagnetism who had joined RAND Corp. in 1957 after 20 yr with Carnegie Institution, died in Santa Monica, Calif., of heart attack at age 62. He had been an originator of 1957—58 International Geophysical Year and had served as consultant to DOD, NASA, and Dept, of Commerce. He had been one of leaders of 1933 International Polar Year expedition, which established observatory to measure earth’s magnetic field. (W Post, 7/19/68, B6)
nasa launched two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets from wsmr. First carried Princeton Univ. Observatory payload to 106.4-mi (171.2-km) altitude to point two spectrographs toward hot stars in Scorpius to study their EUV radiation with 1 A resolution and 0.3 A resolution. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Second Aerobee 150, launched 30 min later, carried Columbia Univ. experiment to 2.1mi (3.3-km) altitude to search for x-ray emission Irom known extragalactic objects in radio galaxy M—87 and in quasi-stellar object 3C273. Rocket performance was unsatisfactory because sustainer did not ignite. Instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt SRL)
San Francisco Chronicle said: “In their meteoric flitting about the skies the crew of the Apollo 8 did more than thrill their fellow Americans and pump up the national ego. They drew commendations from directors of the Soviet space project whose considerable achievement they had outstripped.” They made believers of “informed skeptics such as Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Observatory, who had more than ever scoffed at the value of the moon venture. (They also drove the stubborn adherents of the flat-earth theory into confusion.) All this they accomplished in faultless style.” (SF Chornicle, 12/27/68, 30)
In National Observer, Peter T. Chew criticized Americans as “uncertain, timid farers in space.” During “19-month interregnum in manned space flight” occasioned by Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire, “Americans have become obsessed with the race question at home and the Vietnam Wai abroad. ... If some doomsayers are to be believed, the vast U.S. space science and technology establishment put together during the last decade will be systematically dismantled once the manned Apollo landing has been accomplished because nasa has ‘no clear mandate’ to go on; cornfields will reclaim the great rocket and spacecraft-testing sites . . .; the solar system will become the exclusive playground 'of Soviet cosmonauts.” Yet NASA’s mandate to explore space “for the benefit of all mankind” had been set down in legislation establishing the agency and did not end with the moon. If anything, “the moon is the first stepping stone.” Dr. Wernher von Braun “stands almost alone among the country’s leaders in his ability to express in understandable terms just why we are going to the moon—and beyond. ... To critics of the space program he replies, ‘Man was born with an insatiable nosiness about his natural environment. ... it seems to pay off handsomely, but often in the most unexpected way, to keep satisfying his curiosity about the world around him.” (Natl Obs, 10/7/68)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by nasa from wsmr carried 115-lb Dudley Observatory payload to 95-mi (152.4-km) altitude to collect micrometeoroid particles during meteor shower and recover payload for analysis and flux determination. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; good data were obtained from telemetry. Payload parachuted successfully but early efforts at recovery were not successful. (NASA Rpt SRL)
AEC refused comment on Science and Citizen report U.S. had set off 3 and U.S.S.R. 22 undisclosed underground atomic tests in 1964 through 1967, bringing total underground tests to 168 for past three years. Magazine, published by Committee for Environmental Information in St. Louis, Mo., said source of information was publication of Research Institute of Swedish National Defense and that three undisclosed U.S. tests had occurred in 1964. All subsequent U.S. tests had been reported. {W Post, 5/7/68, 7)
President Johnson sent message to Apollo 7 crew: “Everything in the Presidential office came to a halt as Foreign Minister Debre of France and I watched with mounting excitement the magnificent launch of the Saturn. . . .” Message was relayed from Air Force I as President flew from Washington to visit former President Harry S. Truman. On second day Schirra told ground controllers crew was too busy to set up portable camera for live TV coverage because of minor but time-consuming difficulties. Astronauts had to pump waste water manually from spacecraft, Schirra and Eisele had trouble with their biomedical harnesses, Schirra had head cold symptoms, spacecraft evaporator system required maintenance, and hatch windows blurred and were bordered by mysterious “small hairs like fuzz.” Crew fired sps engine for 10 sec and 8 sec to set up rendezvous and maneuvered csm to within 70 ft of tumbling spent 2nd stage, simulating techniques to be used on future flights if LM were to become disabled in lunar orbit. Crew took close-up photos of lm adapter attached to 2nd stage. S—IVB reentered earth’s atmosphere Oct. 18 and splashed into Indian Ocean. On third day crew, which had already accomplished half its objectives, photographed clouds and earth and continued checking out spacecraft systems. Power failure in spacecraft’s Ac electrical system was quickly restored, but overloading prompted officials to reschedule third SPS burn 20 hr sooner than planned. Burn positioned and sized ellipse for CM reaction control system deorbit in case of emergency and set up auxiliary gaging system test. Astronauts, all with head colds, appeared on national TV for 7 min for first time live from space. Crew displayed hand-printed signs bearing greetings from “the lovely Apollo room high atop everything.” Second live telecast for 11 min Oct. 15 showed closeups of spacecraft interior and astronauts so clear that observers could read astronauts’ lips. Third TV appearance Oct. 16, which included nine-minute tour of spacecraft, won astronauts honorary membership in American Federation of Television and Radio Artists. Later, crew successfully fired sps engine for fourth burn, demonstrating 20,500-lb-thrust engine’s minimum impulse capability. As spacecraft passed over Hurricane Gladys in Gulf of Mexico, astronauts photographed storm and relayed data to Weather Bureau hurricane center. They also took pictures of “long plume” of air pollution. Crew continued spacecraft checkout, guidance and navigation procedures, and TV operations on seventh day, but fourth telecast was smudgy. Successful 67-sec fifth SPS burn—longest to date—was performed out of plane to test auxiliary gaging system and readjust ellipse for lifetime and CM reaction control system deorbit. On ninth day astronauts showed viewers exceptionally sharp pictures of main control panels in fifth TV broadcast and performed close-order drill to demonstrate movement in weightless environment. Sixth SPS burn, essentially duplicate of fourth minimum impulse test burn, was successfully conducted. Seventh burn, on following day, adjusted time phasing for backup sm reaction-control-system deorbit burns. At 259:39 get astronauts fired sps engine for eighth time, to deorbit csm for reentry, cm/sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal, and spacecraft splashed down in Atlantic eight miles north of recovery ship U.S.S. Essex at 7:11 am edt Oct. 22 after completing 163 revolutions. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. All primary Apollo 7 mission objectives were achieved, as well as every detailed test objective and three not originally planned. Crew comfort and safety were enhanced by change in cabin atmosphere to 100% oxygen in flight, hot meals, and relatively complete freedom of motion in spacecraft. Engineering accomplishments included live TV from space and drinking water produced as by-product of fuel cells. NASA’s Ats III applications technology satellite relayed TV pictures to Europe. Service module sps main engine, largest thrust engine to be manually thrust-vector controlled, proved itself by accomplishing longest and shortest manned SPS burns, and largest number of inflight restarts. Manual tracking, navigation, and control achievements included full optical rendezvous, daylight platform realignment, optical platform alignments, pilot control of launch vehicle attitude, and orbital determination by sextant tracking of another vehicle. Mission also accomplished first digital-autopilot.controlled engine burn and first manned S-band communications. All launch vehicle systems performed satisfactorily; spacecraft systems functioned with some minor anomalies, countered by backup subsystem, change in procedures, isolation, or careful monitoring so that no loss of systems support resulted. Apollo 7 spacecraft had been redesigned for safety. Original two-piece side hatch had been replaced by a quick-opening, one-piece hatch. Flammability within cm had been reduced by extensive materials substitution, and systems redundancy had been expanded to reduce single failure points. Saturn IB launch vehicle carried less telemetry and instrumentation equipment, to lower weight and increase payload capability. New propellant lines to augmented spark igniter had been installed in J—2 engine to prevent failure which had occurred on Apollo 6. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives and had been recovered in excellent condition. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68-^168K, 68—179; MSC Historical Off; W Post, 10/12—23/68; B Sun, 10/12/68; 10/23/68; W Star, 10/13-19/68; PD, 10/21/68,1492)
NASA and Univ. of Texas dedicated world’s third largest telescope, 107in, 150-ton instrument at McDonald Observatory, Mount Locke, Tex. Observatory Director, Dr. Harlan J. Smith, said it had been booked a year in advance. The $5-million observatory would emphasize studies of moon and other planets. Government scientists hoped for information to help them design planetary spacecraft, (upi, NYT, 11/27/68, 26)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCII entered orbit with 456-km (283.3-mi) apogee, 211-km (131.1-mi) perigee, 91.2min period, and 48.4° inclination and reentered March 24. Cosmos CCIII entered orbit with 1,203-km (747.5-mi) apogee, 1,186-km (736.9-mi) perigee, 109.2-min period, and 74° inclination. Both satellites performed satisfactorily, (upi, P Inq, 2/21/68; SBD, 2/21/68, 294; 2/23/68, 300; gsfc SSR, 2/29/68; 3/31/68) *	NASA announced Apollo 6 would be launched no earlier than March 21 in second unmanned test flight of command and service modules on Saturn V. First Saturn V had been launched successfully Nov. 9, 1967. Ten-hour, earth-orbital mission would include (1) 5y2-Jnin second burn of 3rd-stage engine to provide 279,000-mi flight into space on 16-day elliptical earth orbit; (2) separation and flight of Apollo spacecraft to 13,824-mi altitude, using 4-min retro-burn of spacecraft’s main propulsion system; and (3) high-speed spacecraft reentry into earth’s atmosphere simulating lunar mission return, (nasa Release 68—37) *	Surveyor VII, on the moon, stopped operating 22 hr before nominal sunset time. Spacecraft, launched Jan. 7, had responded to turn-on commands Feb. 12, transmitted 45 200-line TV pictures, and obtained 22 hr of useful data from alpha-scattering instrument, but performance before signal loss indicated that appreciable functional degradation had occurred during preceding lunar night, (nasa Proj Off; AP, B Sun, 2/22/68, A5) *	Explorer XXXVI (Geos II), launched Jan. 11, became fully operational, having achieved orbit well within specifications. With launch of this spacecraft, Thrust-Augmented Delta had accomplished record 23rd consecutive, successful launch. Spacecraft would support 128 global observation stations which used both electronic and optical geodetic instrumentation. (nasa Proj Off)
National Science Foundation released Research and Development in Industry, 1966. Total 1966 industrial r&d expenditure was $15.5 billion, with industry accounting for 70% of nation’s R&D performance. Federal Government R&D performed in industry reached $8.3 billion, 53% of industrial total. In January 1967, 163,900—30% of total—industrial scientists and engineers were engaged in R&D directly supported by Federal Government. In 1966, NASA and DOD financed work of 89% of R&D scientists and engineers employed by industry on Federal projects, with 54,000 working on NASA projects, an increase of 50% over 1963. DOD-financed scientists and engineers decreased 23% in same period. (Text)
In New York Times, Walter Sullivan said President-elect Richard M. Nixon’s entourage had discussed creation of Cabinet post for science and technology. “The science adviser, in the view of the Nixon entourage, has been unable to streamline the machinery for making science policy. Science, and the problems relating to it, has outgrown its old boundaries. The big problems are interdisciplinary. Their solution requires expertise in many fields, and the cooperation of many departments of government. This has led to a proliferation of interdepartmental committees.” However, “because the creation of a Cabinet post would have major repercussions within the scientific establishment, it is unlikely that such a step will be taken until there has been an extensive study, lasting perhaps a year or more.” (ATT, 12/8/68, 3E)
nas published report of NASA-sponsored two-year study of planetary astronomy by nas-nrc Space Science Board’s 16-scientist panel headed by Dr. John S. Hall, Director of Lowell Observatory, Ariz. Planetary Astronomy: An Appraisal of Ground-Based Opportunities recommended assignment of high priority to erection of 60-in optical telescope in mountains of northern Chile, where atmospheric conditions permitted favorable view of Mars, in time to observe planet’s closest approach to earth in almost 50 yr, August 1971. Also recommended were construction of large dish antenna in U.S. for planetary radar astronomy; two large radiotelescope arrays in California and West Virginia, plus third planetary radio facility to pick up signals at short wavelengths; and 120-in infrared telescope in desert region where vapor would be less likely to interfere with infrared radiation. (Text; Wilford, NYT, 9/20/68, 29)
Yomiuri of Tokyo said of Apollo 8: “This splendid voyage is hailed around the world as ‘mankind’s greatest feat’ and ‘a symbol of hope for the future’. ... For the U.S. and the Soviet Union, it may be a matter of serious concern as to which puts men on the moon first. . . . This aspect is not important for mankind in general. The two superpowers should regard space exploration as a project of the human race and not a narrow issue of national prestige.” (Yomiuri, 12/29/68, 2) .
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told British Interplanetary Society in London: “I believe that the exploitation of space is limited in concept and extent by the very high cost of putting payload into orbit, and the inaccessibility of objects after they have been launched. Therefore I would forecast that the next major thrust in space will be the development of an economical launch vehicle for shuttling between earth and the installations, such as the orbiting space stations which will be operating in space.” Dr. Mueller said efficient earth-to-orbit transportation system would be needed to shuttle thousands of tons of material in and out of space, operating in mode similar to that of large commercial air transports and compatible with airports. Same technology could be applied to terrestrial point-to-point transport. (Text)
NASA scientists working with Deep Space Network (dsn) had quadrupled distances over which signals from three Pioneer spacecraft currently in interplanetary space could be heard. Pioneers could view sun from every side. Improvements in DSN receivers so far had allowed return of 50% more of their data than had been planned. All three Pioneers— now 29, 116, and 182 million mi from earth—could be heard through DSN antennas, ensuring return of data until they wore out. Together they had, to date, amassed 55 mo in orbit, measuring particles and fields of sun’s atmosphere and returning seven billion bits of data. Change of polarization of tracking antennas from circular to linear had doubled received signal power, (arc Release 68—13; ARC Astrogram, 8/29/68, 1)
Clifford C. Furnas, President of Western New York Nuclear Research Center and member of nae, was appointed to newly created position of Vice Chairman of National Research Council (nrc), in which he would “assist the Chairman, nas President Frederick Seitz, in the general administration of the nrc and help coordinate activities” between nae, nas, and nrc. (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 3/68,5: nas pio)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried Dudley Observatory, Albany, N.Y., payload to 96.5-mi (155.2-km) altitude to collect, recover, and evaluate micrometeoroid particles during approximate maximum of Perseid meteor shower. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and telemetry data were obtained during entire flight time. Preliminary data indicated excellent experimental results. Payload was not damaged and was recovered within one hour, (nasa Rpt srl)
At closed meeting at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. in July, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, had said contractors’ disregard of planned delivery dates for Apollo equipment amounted to a “disease” in the project, New York Times reported. Apollo Program Director l/g Samuel C. Phillips was quoted as saying, “The lunar landing next year is within our grasp, but we don’t have a hold of it because of the disease Dr. Mueller cited.” Project was running two years behind schedule, with first manned Apollo flight expected no earlier than mid-October and earliest lunar landing in a year. Dozens of contractors in $24-million program, urged to meet tough specifications for mission safety and success at same time, were obsessed with checking and double checking all systems as result of Jan. 24, 1967, Apollo fire. Lunar module (lm) regarded as pacing item of project, had undergone only one flight test. First lm for manned flight had developed problems in rendezvous equipment. Dr. Mueller had said rate of changes in lm was three times that of Apollo command module, whose rate of changes, in turn, was four times that of Saturn V rocket. He said changes placed added burden on technicians who should be concentrating on launching operations, not on vehicle modifications. (Wilford, NYT, 8/15/68,16)
Washington Post editorial praised “magnificent achievement” of U.S.S.R.’s Zond V: “In its own way, Zond-5 should serve to shake this Nation’s complacency once again. Our national goals in space exploration are fuzzy, our hopes have been out of line with our commitments. From President Kennedy’s glowing picture of Americans in space we have slipped into a program put together in fits and starts—fits brought about by a realization of how much it would cost to do it right and starts caused by a basic desire never to be second to anybody. Because of this, there is no use in seizing upon Zond-5 as a reason to go all-out to beat the Russians in a race for men on the moon. Our program . . . ought to move at its own pace. If that pace is sufficiently rapid to bring American astronauts to the moon first, fine. If it is not, so be it. The Russians will deserve the honor and praise they will win if their men make the first landing. In space exploration, it is more important to do things right than to do them first.” (W Post, 9/24/68, A16)
Dr. Robert H. Guest, professor of organizational behavior in Amos Tuck School of Business Administration, Dartmouth College, was sworn in as consultant by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Acting nasa Administrator. Dr. Guest would serve on Management Advisory Panel, (nasa Release 68—220) At 10:42 am est 3rd stage burned for second time, injecting spacecraft into lunar trajectory, and astronauts began journey to become first men to leave earth’s gravitational field. Stage and instrument unit separated as planned and service module propulsion system was fired to increase separation distance from 3rd stage, which was trailing 500—1,000 ft behind spacecraft, spewing unused propellants. Crew fired service propulsion system (sps) engine for 2.4 sec, correcting trajectory and increasing velocity by 25 fps. Second midcourse maneuver, scheduled for second day, was canceled because trajectory was already so accurate that burn would have required velocity change of only 0.7 fps. Borman reported illness, apparently from 24-hr intestinal virus or from reaction to sleeping pills being used during space flight for first time, and Lovell and Anders reported nausea. Crew took navigation sightings and conducted first TV transmission, showing spacecraft interior and earth from 138,690-mi altitude and demonstrating food preparation and movements in weightlessness. Signals were received at ground stations and transmitted to NASA Mission Control Center in Houston before release live to commercial networks. Second TV transmission, on third day, showed excellent pictures of earth from 201,365-mi altitude, including view of Western Hemisphere in sunlight. Crew pointed out North Pole, South America, Cape Horn, and Baja California and noted that U.S. East Coast was very cloudy. Earth, they said, was beautiful; water looked royal blue, land areas brown, and clouds bright white. Reflection off earth was much greater than off moon, sm reaction control system’s four rockets were fired for 12 sec to reduce velocity by 2 fps and to make approach to moon closer to 60 mi at nearest point. On fourth day, Christmas Eve, communications were interrupted as Apollo 8 passed behind moon and astronauts became first men to see moon’s far side, sps engine was fired for 4 min 2 sec, reducing speed by 2,994 fps and placing spacecraft in lunar orbit with 193.6-mi (310.6-km) apolune and 69.1-mi (111.2-km) perilune. In third telecast Anders described lunar surface as “whitish gray, like dirty beach sand with lots of footprints on it. Some of these craters look like pick-axes striking concrete, creating a lot of fine dust.” After spacecraft passed behind moon at end of second revolution, SPS engine burned for 10 sec to reduce speed by 135 fps and to circularize orbit with 70.0-mi (112.6-km) apolune and 69.6-mi (112.0-km) perilune. Lovell said astronauts had “a grand view” of the lunar surface and confirmed that prospective landing sites were satisfactory. He reported that at about two minutes before sunrise a fan-shaped white haze appeared just behind moon’s limb. Crew continued landmark sightings and named numerous unnamed lunar features after other astronauts, NASA officials, and friends. They conducted communications experiment which showed that radio signal from earth to Apollo 8 and back to earth took three seconds to make 460,000-mi round trip. Third TV transmission during ninth revolution showed heavily impacted mountains described by Anders as “a vastness of black and white, absolutely no color. The sky up here is also rather forbidding, foreboding extents of blackness with no stars visible when we’re flying over the moon in daylight. You can see by the numerous craters that this planet has been bombarded through the eons with numerous small asteroids and meteoroids, pock-marking the surface of every square inch. And one of the amazing features of the surface is . . . that most of the craters . . . have a round mound type of appearance instead of sharp jagged rocks. All, only the newest of features have any sharp definitions to them, and eventually they get eroded down by the constant bombardment of small meteoroids.” The moon is “a very dark and unappetizing place. . . .” Crew read verses from first chapter of Genesis and wished viewers “good night, good luck, a Merry Christmas and God bless all of you—all of you on the good earth.” On fifth day, Christmas Day, while spacecraft was behind moon completing its 10th revolution, SPS engine was fired for 3 min 23 sec, increasing spacecraft velocity by 3,523 fps and propelling Apollo 8 back toward earth. Spacecraft left lunar gravity at 201,807 mi above earth. At 104 hours mission elapsed time 14-sec reaction-control-system burn increased velocity by 5 fps. Fifth TV transmission showed spacecraft interior, controls, and food preparation. Data analysis revealed sixth midcourse correction would not be necessary because of accuracy of course. Astronauts reported they had slept well and were in “very good shape.” Sixth TV transmission showed earth from 112,125-mi altitude. On sixth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from cm on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events were nominal and Apollo 8 splashed, apex down, in Pacific about 5,100 yd from recovery ship U.S.S. Yorktown at 10:51 am est Dec. 27, 147 hr after launch and precisely on time. According to prior planning, helicopters and aircraft hovered over spacecraft and pararescue personnnel were not deployed until local sunrise, 50 min after splashdown. Crew was then picked up and reached recovery ship at 12:20 pm EST. All primary ApoUo 8 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved and, in addition, five not originally planned. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan. Engineering accomplishments included use of ground network with onboard navigational techniques to sharpen accuracy of lunar orbit determination and successful use of Apollo high-gain antenna, four-dish unified S-band antenna that deployed from SM after separation from 3rd stage. Mission proved capability of Apollo csm and crew, as well as ground support and control systems, to operate out to lunar distances and return through the earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 8 was fifth Apollo mission to date, second manned Apollo mission, first manned mission on Saturn V launch vehicle, and first manned operation of Apollo system under conditions for which it was designed. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with the spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 Oct. 11—22, had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—208; NASA Special Releases; W Star, 12/21/68, Al; W Post, 12/21-28/68, Al; NYT, 12/21-28/68, 1; B Sun, 12/21-28/68, Al; MSC Roundup, 1/10/69, 3) December 21: President Johnson sent congratulatory message to Apollo 8 astronauts: “I am confident that the world’s finest equipment will strive to match the courage of our astronauts. If it does that, a successful mission is assured.” {PD, 12/30/68,1738)
usn Aquanauts Fernando Lugo and Don C. Risk, wearing standard neoprene wet suits and Mark VIII breathing apparatus, dived to record 1,025-ft simulated ocean depth and, with three other aquanauts, accumulated record 48 hr each at 825-ft depth during tests at Washington, D.C., Navy Yard. Experiment was in preparation for usn’s 60-day Sealab III experiment in underwater living scheduled to begin in fall 1968. (dod Release 180—68) *	r/a John E. Clark (usn, Ret.), former Commandant of Twelfth Naval District in San Francisco, became JPL Deputy Director. He had been Commander of Naval Air Missile Test Center (1954), arpa Deputy Director (1958—61), and Commander of pmr (1961—65). (JPL LabOratory, 2/68, 3) *	Jodrell Bank Observatory Director, Sir Bernard Lovell, claimed explosion of Soviet spacecraft in orbit during 1962 Cuban missile crisis led U.S. to believe U.S.S.R. was launching massive icbm attack and warned that World War III could be triggered by misidentified space debris falling to earth. (JV News, 2/20/68, 3; SBD, 2/20/68, 281) *	U.S.S.R. was closing its missile gap and could equal U.S. 1,054-icbm force by mid-1969, according to dod sources. Between October 1966 and October 1967 Soviet icbm force had increased from 340 to 720 missiles; currently, U.S.S.R. had more than 720 icbm sites in operation and about 280 under construction. In addition, U.S.S.R was reportedly developing new 16-tube nuclear submarines, missiles that could travel long distances underwater, mach 3 interceptor aircraft, and mobile, solid-fueled icbms. (Beecher, NYT, 2/19/68, 1; 2/20/68, 18; Wilson, W Post, 2/20/68,1) * Preliminary to joint NASA—USAF flight testing, X—24 manned lifting-body vehicle built by Martin Marietta Co. had been sent to arc for full-scale wind-tunnel tests, to begin Feb. 26, FRC announced. Prime purpose was to verify aerodynamic predictions obtained from small-scale model tests, (frc Release, 5—68)
Nearly 1,000 scientists and educators attended “crisis” meeting called by New York Academy of Sciences to demand science be declared “disaster area” because of threatened $6-billion Federal budget cut. Federal R&D funding, after decade of average 22% annual expansion, had risen only 2.5% annually since 1964, while number of scientists had risen 20%. It was feared resulting crush would damage U.S. leadership in science and technology. MIT Provost Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner said, “If the Congress continues to do what it is now doing we’ll wake up with another sputnik in a decade.” Federal R&D funding had risen from $74 million in 1940 to $16.9 billion in 1968 with October 1957 “shock of Sputnik” giving greatest impetus. Cut of $6 billion would mean “we’re going to cut not only into the fat, but into the flesh of lots of areas,” Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President’s Science Adviser, said. NASA’s sustaining university program had been one of chief casualties of recent cutbacks with budget slashed from $45 to $10 million yearly, forcing drop from 1,300 to 50 training grants which had produced more than 1,000 Ph.D.s since 1961. Government officials had chided scientists for being ill-prepared for leveling of Federal support and for alleged detachment from political realities. (Reinhold, NYT, 6/21/68, 1)
In joint communique, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, and Alexandra Birlandeanu, member of Romanian Politburo touring U.S. scientific institutions, announced agreement to broaden scientific and technological ties, including exchange of scientists and possible collaboration in atomic energy field. Romania had asked U.S. for technical and financial aid toward construction of its first nuclear power plant by 1973. (Grose, NYT, 7/9/68, 1)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, addressed joint meeting of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) and Canadian Aeronautics and Space Institute (casi) in Montreal: Systems engineering concept applied to management “was pioneered and developed in aerospace programs and is being increasingly applied as a powerful tool in the management of other major enterprises.” In NASA most extensive application was in Apollo program. Factors unique to manned space flight had contributed to management approach, including “sheer size of Apollo program, larger in . . . lead time, money, organization and technological development than any previous program.” Special feature was high reliability and safety required. And space program had been executed under scrutiny of press, public, Congress, and scientific community. Weight and volume budgeting were critical. High cost of flight-testing space vehicles made maximum ground testing necessary, as well as all-up (concurrent rather than sequential) flight testing. Vehicle was as complete as practicable for each flight, to obtain maximum information from minimum number of flights and provide earliest possible system readiness. Open-ended mission concept was used to accomplish as many flight objectives per vehicle as consistent with safety and mission success. Review of status throughout mission determined length of mission. Redundant, or alternate, means of operation reduced ability of single failure to endanger crew or mission. Prime design consideration in all manned space flights was safety. (Text; UPl, H Chron, 7/10/68)
nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, oart, Charles W. Harper, in statement before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, explained NASA’s increased emphasis on aeronautics. Air transportation “has grown to dominate the long range transportation systems” and “has created an industry of great importance to the economic strength of the nation,” showing $850 million in export value in first 10 mo of 1967, more than any other product, according to Dept, of Commerce. NASA planned to direct major effort at providing noise suppression, increasing aerodynamic and propulsion efficiency and advanced avionics, while avoiding “major new airport complexes” by increasing development efforts for v/stol aircraft. Harper presented FY 1969 aircraft technology budget: $91.3 million for r&d, $20.6 million for “other NASA support applicable to aeronautics,” and $54.5 million for administrative operations (AO) (for both OART and non-OART). He said, “A large part of the most fundamental aeronautics research is carried out by nasa scientists using nasa facilities. . . . Without this continued support the foundation of the whole program is in jeopardy and the research supported by R&D funds is much less effective.” (Testimony)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X—15 No. 1 to 209,600-ft altitude and 3,545 mph (mach 5.05) from Edwards afb. Purposes of test flight were to check Saturn insulation horizon scanner and fixed ball nose. (nasa Proj Off)
Dr. Stephen B. Sweeney, governmental administration professor at Univ. of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School and Executive Director Emeritus of Univ.’s Fels Institute of Local and State Government, and Dr. Harold Asher, manager of General Electric Co.’s tempo section and former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, had been sworn in as consultants to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Dr Sweeney would specialize in university affairs, public administration, and application of science and technology to urban problems. Dr. Asher would review and analyze NASA’s systems for resource management. (NASA Release 68-124)
nasa announced personnel changes effective May 1: Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Edgar M. Cortright would become LaRC Director, replacing Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, who would serve as Special Assistant to the Administrator until his retirement Nov. 25 at age 70 and would then serve as part-time consultant. Cortright would be replaced by Charles W. Mathews, Director of Apollo Applications Program. Harold T. Luskin, who would serve as Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Technical) until May 1, when he would succeed Mathews, would be replaced by LaRC Deputy Director Charles J. Donlan. (NASA Release 68—51)
Dr. Frank D. Drake, Director of Cornell Univ.’s Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory in Puerto Rico, said he had detected first distinct pattern to radio signals from two pulsars. He told radioastronomy seminar at National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., pulse rate could be explained only if source were star of extraordinary density spinning at incredible speed—such as neutron star. If correct, findings would be first scientific proof that hypothetical neutron stars actually existed. (Wilford, NYT, 10/2/68; Lannan, W Star, 10/2/68, A20)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart were scheduled to be launched on Saturn V in second manned Apollo space flight. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 with Saturn IB booster, would carry Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham into earth orbit in third quarter of 1968. (nasa Release 68-81; W Star, 4/28/68)
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory dedicated multipurpose astronomical station at Mount Hopkins, Ariz. Station, supported by nasa Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition and Office of Advanced Research and Technology, would be site of experimental series on laser communications to be conducted by NASA and Smithsonian. (Smithsonian pao)
Rare photographic zenith tube, pzt, which provided almost exact measurement of astronomical time, had been installed at Dominion Observatory, Priddis, Alberta, Canada. It would be used in conjunction with another pzt at Royal Greenwich Observatory near Herstmonceux, U.K., to study continental drift by establishing exact measurements between two points on same latitude and observing whether distance changed with time. (Can Press, NYT, 6/15/68, 20)
Harold T. Luskin, Director of Apollo Applications in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, died in Bethesda, Md., of respiratory illness. He had joined NASA in March 1968 and had become Apollo Applications Director in May. He was past president of aiaa and had been associated with Douglas Aircraft Co. for 20 yr and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for 9 yr. He had held engineering and management positions in connection with Agena space vehicle, USAF Manned Orbiting Laboratory, X—3 supersonic research aircraft, and DC—8. (NASA Ann, 11/26/68; W Post, 11/27/68, C3; Marshall Star, 11/27/68,1; W Star, 11/27/68, B4)
Guidance and control equipment used during Gemini XI reentry Sept. 15, 1966, was being flight-tested at nasa Wallops Station to set up system performance requirements for automated landing for v/stol aircraft. Tests were part of long-range NASA research program to develop all-weather aviation electronics systems for v/stol aircraft, (erc Release 68—12; WS Release 68—14; Marshall Star, 8/14/68, 2)
nasa successfully launched two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets from WSMR. First rocket carried Naval Research Laboratory and Univ. of Maryland payload to 111.3-mi (179-km) altitude to flight-test flight design verification unit (fdvu) of high-resolution spectroheliograph planned for use on Apollo Telescope Mount-A. Second rocket carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., payload to 93.7-mi (151-km) altitude to obtain high-resolution x-ray pictures of active region of sun during solar flare and general x-ray emission of solar corona. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, but payload of first rocket failed to separate, preventing functioning of parachute recovery system, (nasa Rpts srl)
NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications Oran W. Nicks described applications of Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter techniques to Mars exploration before aiaa meeting in Washington, D.C. Two 1971 Mariner Orbiter missions would provide new tools for survey of dynamic Mars, arriving when most striking seasonal changes were evident in Southern Hemisphere. Their combined orbits and life expectancies would allow observations of dynamic changes in clouds and surface features over several months. In 1973, two additional orbit-ers would survey Mars from different orbits during different seasons, with support of landing mission as prime requirement. Also planned for 1973 was survivable landing spacecraft to make local measurements of environment, photograph surface and topography, and analyze soil. “Burning question of immediate concern to you and me will be addressed by use of our new tools,” Nicks said: “Is there life elsewhere? Has life existed on nearby planets and disappeared for any reason? Can nearby planets be made suitable for life?’ Together, orbiters and landers form a powerful team for the study of Mars and for seeking answers to these questions. Together, they will continue to extend our capabilities in what is probably the most challenging, open-ended arena for expansion of science and technology in the decade ahead.” (Text)
nasa announced that H. Julian Allen, who joined naca in 1936, would retire as Director of Ames Research Center Nov. 15. arc Associate Director John F. Parsons would serve as Acting Director. Leading authority on supersonic and hypersonic wind-tunnel design, Allen had originated concept of bluntness for reentry shapes—as used in Apollo spacecraft—and had received naca’s Distinguished Service Medal, NASA medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement, aiaa Sylvanus A. Reed Award, and Air Force Assn.’s Air Power Trophy. After his retirement Allen would be available to NASA as a consultant, (nasa Release 68-183; SBD, 10/28/68, 272; nasa Ann)
FAA published report, SRDS Program Goals, Achievements and Trends, on 50 Systems Research and Development Service projects undertaken in FY 1968. Beacon tracking level of terminal automation would provide aircraft identity, altitude, and computed ground speed on air traffic control radarscopes. Over three years, automated radar tracking system ARTS ill would be installed at 62 busiest airports. Computer-aided approach spacing (caas) system would give more consistent spacing of landing aircraft, r&d eventually would lead to Category III all-weather landing systems (awls) at major airports, permitting aircraft to land with zero ceiling and runway visual range, (faa Release T—68—39) October 11: Cosmos CCXLV11 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 343-km (213.1-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 19. (gsfc SSR, 10/15/68; 10/31/68)
President’s Office of Science and Technology released National Atmospheric Sciences Program—Fiscal Year 1969, report describing total $200-million Federal investment in atmospheric science in terms of priority areas and programs of 10 participating Federal agencies. Report was prepared by Interdepartmental Committee for Atmospheric Sciences of Federal Council for Science and Technology. Planned NASA share of funding for FY 1969 was $84,573, dropping from $123,406 in FY 1968. Allocation included $50,594 for meteorological studies; $4,313 for aeronomy, including ionospheric physics atmospheric chemistry, rocket and satellite instrumentation; and $29,666 for study of planetary atmospheres. During past year efforts had increased on weather modification and space environmental forecasting. Special effort had been made to increase support of university research groups in connection with U.S. participation in Global Atmospherics Research Program, essa and nsf had increased meteorology program slightly, essa, dod, and nsf had increased solar-terrestrial research. (Text: ost Release, 5/1/68)
Univ. of Virginia announced it would use $100,000 NASA grant to finance construction of 40-in astrometric telescope at its observatory south of Charlottesville, Va. Additional funding would come from estate of Leander McCormick, who provided funds for its 26-in telescope built in 1882. (AP, W Star, 7/3/68, A20)
National Science Foundation released Federal Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities: Fiscal Years 1967, 1968, and 1969. Federal obligations for basic research, applied research, and development (plant excluded) totaled $16.5 billion in FY 1967 and were expected to total $16.2 billion in FY 1968, first drop since 1955. Obligations had been expected to total $17.3 billion in FY 1969, but, because of appropriations and apportionment actions, probably would be even less than in 1968. Basic research obligations totaled $2.0 billion in FY 1967 and were expected to be $2.1 billion in 1968. Applied research obligations totaled $3.3 billion in FY 1967, with $3.3 billion estimated for 1968. Originally expected increases in FY 1969 obligations, to $2.4 billion for basic research and $3.6 billion for applied research, probably would not occur because of cutbacks in FY 1969 budget. Development obligations were $11.3 billion in 1967, highest ever reported, but were expected to drop to $10.8 billion in 1968. Originally expected rise to $11.3 billion in 1969 probably would not be achieved. In FY 1967, obligations for r&d plant totaled $620 million, with estimated $517 million for 1968 and $777 million for 1969. dod, nasa, and aec provided bulk of r&d funds, with 90% average share during 1960—66 and 85% during 1967—69. dod, NASA, and aec together supported 60% of Federal research total and more than 95% of development total in 1968. During 1967—69, 80% of Federal R&D funds were scheduled for extramural performers, chiefly U.S. industrial firms. In 1968 they received 60%. (Text)
Pig-tailed monkey was in good health after May simulated test flight, with 15-day medical countdown and 5-day postflight monitoring. Monkey, identical to one scheduled for 50-day orbit of earth on NASA’s Biosatellite D in 1969, had been instrumented with two dozen sensors. In photo, primate is seated in test fixture. maintain highest safety standards possible in national aerospace program by solving technical safety problems and providing NASA and its contractors with current information on safety data and procedures. Institute would be directed by I. Irving Pinkel, consultant on aircraft safety to usaf and faa and former ApoUo 204 accident investigator and consultant, (nasa Release 68—79; LeRC Release 68—32)
essa was studying solar flare prediction technique and ground observatory support for NASA’s Apollo Telescope Mount flight scheduled for 1971. NASA had transferred $30,000 to essa for six-month investigation to enable astronauts to know when and where solar flare would occur within accuracy of 1,000 mi out of 860,000-mi-wide face of sun. essa also would study data required for maximum results from atm mission and examine existing data collection networks and observing procedures. Effort would be monitored by atm Project Office and Space Sciences Laboratory at msfc. (msfc Release 68—103; SBD, 5/15/68, 73)
Two-volume Review Board report, Status of Actions Taken on the Apollo 204, was submitted to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ kasa Oversight Subcommittee by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller. According to report, major changes made in Apollo project included: installing quickopening hatch; eliminating most combustible materials in cabin; remaking spacesuit, primarily of glass fiber instead of nylon; equipping and training launch pad workers for fire fighting; placing metal shielding over exposed electrical wiring; and replacing aluminum oxygen pipes with more-fire-resistant stainless steel pipes. NASA reported spacecraft had been modified by North American Rockwell Corp. so that it could use ordinary air or oxygen-enriched air, as well as 100% oxygen, while on launch pad. (Text; Wilford, NYT, 1/20/68, 1)
NASA’s Apollo 6 (AS—502) was successfully launched from ksc Complex 39A at 7:00 am est on mission to qualify Saturn V launch vehicle for future manned space flights. Primary objectives were to demonstrate structural and thermal integrity and compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft; confirm launch loads and dynamic characteristics; demonstrate S—II/S—IC and S—IVB/S—II stage separations; verify operation of propulsion (including S—IVB restart), guidance and control (optimum injection), and electrical systems; evaluate performance of emergency detection system (eds) in closed-loop configuration; and demonstrate mission support facilities and operations required for launch, mission conduct, and command module (cm) recovery. Launch Vehicle lst-stage performance was near nominal, but two of five 2nd-stage J2 engines shut down prematurely, causing remaining 2nd-stage engines and 3rd-stage engine to burn longer than planned. As result, spacecraft and 3rd stage entered elliptical parking orbit with 223.1-mi (395.1-km) apogee, 107-mi (172.1-km) perigee, and 89.8-min period instead of planned circular orbit of 115-mi (175-km) altitude. When 3rd stage failed to reignite on command after two orbits as planned, NASA switched to alternate mission, firing service propulsion system (sps) to place spacecraft into trajectory with 13,823-mi (22,225.4-km) apogee. Since insufficient propellant remained after extended burn, second sps bum was not attempted and cm reentered at 22,376 mph, just under planned 25,000-mph rate. Spacecraft splashed down 50 mi off target in Pacific 9 hr 50 min after launch and was recovered in good condition by U.S.S. Okinawa. Preliminary assessment indicated four of five primary objectives were attained, even though launch vehicle performance and S—IVB restart and guidance control (optimum injection) were not fully successful [see April 11 and 24], Apollo 6 was second flight for Saturn V launch vehicle and boilerplate lunar module (lm) and fourth for operational Block I command/serv-ice module (csm). Spacecraft had been modified to include Block II heatshield and instrumentation for unmanned configuration, delete crew provisions, incorporate new unified quick-operating hatch and movie camera to record launch escape system (les) jettison and reentry conditions, and relocate sequence camera for earth landmark photography. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn launch vehicle development, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—54K; W Post, 4/5/68, A18; upi, W Star, 4/5/68, A3)
Pravda released description of preparations for launching of Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin in history’s first manned space flight April 12, 1961. Songs by 110-member folk music choir—instead of one man’s voice—had been selected for radio tests to avoid arousing rumors that U.S.S.R. had put a man into orbit. Pravda reports were excerpts from The First Four Stages, book recognizing leading role in Soviet manned space flight of Sergei P. Korolev. U.S.S.R. acknowledged malfunction had occurred during first unmanned test of Vostok spacecraft launched May 15, 1960, as Sputnik IV. Because of improper alignment, spacecraft was hurled deeper into space when retrorockets fired instead of braking for reentry. (Anderson, NYT, 1/25/68; A&A, 15-60, 123, 147)
Washington Sunday Star commented on resignation of NASA Administrator James E. Webb: “The abrupt announcement, which was notably lacking in the customary ceremonial niceties, was the final confirmation that NASA’s honeymoon is definitely over. The relationship between the space agency and Congress must rank as perhaps the longest, and in many ways the happiest, official honeymoon on record. For six years, hardly a frown or a cross word came between the blossoming agency and the guardians of the nation’s treasure. The amiable and loquacious Webb proved himself an able administrator who knew his way around in the bureaucratic jungle. Through Mercury and Gemini programs, NASA virtually had only to ask, and Congress was ready to give. Then came the Apollo tragedy.” But Jan. 27, 1967, fire did not cause the change of heart. “It was ... a catalyst that speeded the process. But a growing coolness was bound to develop . . . for the basic economic fact is that America simply cannot continue to meet NASA’s ever-expanding economic demands—not, at least, without a critical weighing of those demands against the nation’s existing domestic, diplomatic and military obligations. . . . “Long before the tragedy that threw the timetable into a shambles, the conflict between America’s technical ability to move men into space and America’s ability to pay the freight could be seen by those who cared to look ahead. . . . Congressional reluctance to commit the nation to further, open-ended expenditures in manned space flight is therefore inevitable. But equally inevitable is the dismay—and in some cases the bitterness—of NASA officials. Webb and his lieutenants can take justifiable pride in what has been accomplished in the brief span of the space age. . . . They have solved problems quickly and accurately that men have never faced before. In the process, they pulled together a scientific and technical team unequalled in the peacetime history of this country. Now they are watching that massive army disband. . . . “Man will someday go to the planets and beyond. But that day must wait until the breakdown of nationalistic barriers makes possible a truly united world space program. Meanwhile, the United States should concentrate on the development of more sophisticated machines, less costly rocket systems and closer cooperation between the military and civilian space programs to avoid wasteful duplication. America’s space effort must not end with the Apollo program. It must be diverted into equally exciting and frequently more rewarding channels of unmanned space exploration.” (W Star, 9/22/68, Cl)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), former afsc Commander, delivered Dr. Robert H. Goddard Lecture to National Space Club in Washington, D.C. He warned the U.S.S.R. had moved forward steadily with new and more diversified strategic threat highlighted by development of orbital missile and sophisticated space systems. U.S. comparative missile strength, he noted, was declining steadily, with emphasis still on updating existing force. “What is missing so far in our military space program is the necessary high priority research and development aimed at protecting us in the high ground of space. In space, as elsewhere, the Soviets say one thing—even sign agreements—but consistently do whatever is in their own self-interest. The orbital missile is merely the latest example of their policy. In light of their development of an orbital missile, it would be totally irresponsible ... to assume that we do not need to initiate any r&d to prepare us to meet a Soviet space threat.” Attributing loss of endorsement of national space program to change in national value scale because of Vietnam and domestic problems, Gen. Schriever said: “The old criteria, national security and national prestige, are no longer the only justifications for our space efforts, important though they are.” If public understood “the practical, dollars and cents worth of the program to this country and to the world,” they would support it. U.S. was on verge of receiving annual return larger than its annual investment in space, and within one decade, “those returns should be several times our annual investment.” (Text; Aero Tech, 3/11/68, 16)	.
Scientific team headed by Nobel Prize winning physicist, Dr. Charles H. Townes, announced discovery of ammonia molecules in direction of Sagittarius toward Milky Way center, 30,000 light years away from earth. Finding was made through spectrographs at radioastronomy observatory of Univ. of California at Berkeley during studies supported by nasa, Office of Naval Research, and nsf. Ammonia was considered chemical ancestor of organic compounds and necessary step toward origin of life. Team said discovery “marks the first time that a relatively complex molecular compound has been definitely identified in the vast regions between the stars.” It would spur intensified search for additional combinations of life-essential elements detected in space. Former mit provost and inventor of maser, which led to development of laser, Dr. Townes had been named Dec. 3 to head President-elect Richard M. Nixon’s task force to make recommendations on space program. Report would be published in Physical Review Letters of American Institute of Physics, (upi, NYT, 12/16/68, 93; AP, W Post, 12/16/68, Al)
Dr. Frank D. Drake, Director of Cornell Univ.’s Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory (Puerto Rico), told meeting of Council for the Advancement of Science Writing at Evanston, 111., that pulsar discovered Nov. 14 near Crab Nebula was almost certainly a neutron star. It was second discovery during week [see Nov. 6] and was located by Arecibo radio dish telescope. (Randal, W Post, 11/16/68, A5; Sullivan, NYT, 11/20/68, 31)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced appointment of Dr. Robert V. Meghreblian, Manager of jpl Space Sciences Div., to newly established post of Deputy Assistant Laboratory Director for Technical Divisions. Dr. Donald P. Burcham, Deputy Manager of Space Sciences Div., would succeed him. ( jpl Release)
Surveyor Project Office at jpl officially closed after directing one of U.S.’s most successful space exploration programs. Program director, Howard H. Haglund, recipient of 1968 Astronautics Engineer Award, had been accepted as Alfred P. Sloan Fellow and would attend Stanford Univ. (jpl pio; SBD, 7/8/68, 10)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President Johnson’s Special Assistant for Science and Technology, would join Eastman Kodak Co. in “executive capacity” in early January, Science reported. He would also become professor of chemistry at Univ. of Rochester. (Science, 11/22/68, 881)
Sen. Gaylord Nelson (D-Wis.), member of Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, on Senate floor praised Construction of Wisconsin Regional Space Center as “a place where the layman can acquire information about the developments and our accomplishments in the space age.” He inserted in Congressional Record article by Barbara E. Kocjan, stenographic coordinator of projects for Center, describing Center as “a highly effective teaching laboratory that can readily be tied into the on going programs of tens of thousands of elementary and secondary schools and hundreds of colleges and universities.” (CR, 3/22/68, E2151)
Global military expenditures ranked first in world public expenditures. They had risen from $132 billion to 1964 to $138 billion in 1965, $159 billion in 1966, and estimated $182 billion in 1967—record high level. Preliminary data, said U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Report, World Military Expenditures 1966—67, said current military spending exceeded by 40% world’s expenditures on education by all levels of government and was more than three times worldwide public health expenditure. (Text; Shackford, W Post, 1/24/69, A21) During 1968: In 1968 U.S. orbited 64 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 74. U.S. total included 43 launched by DOD. NASA’s 21 included satellite orbited as secondary payload. Highlight of NASA’s 10th anniversary year was success in carefully planned series of Apollo missions—including first two manned flights in Apollo lunar landing program. Unmanned Apollo 5 and Apollo 6 completed inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. First manned mission, Apollo 7, carried three astronauts around earth for 11 days, verifying spacecraft operation before splashing down precisely on target. Mission included live TV transmission from space, largest number of inflight restarts of sps to date, and new record of 781 manhours in space. Apollo program climaxed Dec. 21—27 with highly successful six-day Apollo 8 mission on which three-man crew demonstrated operation of spacecraft systems in lunar environment while world watched live TV coverage via satellite. Spacecraft orbited moon 10 times, providing man with his first trip out of earth’s gravitational field and first look at moon’s far side and proving capability of crew, spacecraft, and support and control systems to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar-return velocity. Unmanned Surveyor VII, NASA’s first launch in 1968 and last spacecraft in Surveyor series, softlanded on moon, conducted on-site analyses of lunar soil, and took part in laser-detection communications experiment. Applications satellites launched included Intelsat—III F—2 comsat for ComSatCorp and Essa VII and VIII meteorological satellites for essa. Scientific achievements included orbiting of NASA’s Ogo V, Aao II, Explorer XXXVI, XXXVIII, XXXIX, and XL satellites and Naval Research Laboratory’s Explorer XXXVII. Oao II—heaviest and most complicated U.S. automated spacecraft ever launched—took first UV photos of stars, returning previously unobtainable data. Explorer XXXVI was successfully used by gsfc as target in first daylight operational laser tracking. Pioneer IX, launched into solar orbit, carried Tetr II pickaback and ejected it into earth orbit where it served as tracking target for nasa’s Manned Space Flight Network. Some 157 meteorological sounding rockets and 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—II spacecraft was launched on suborbital mission to obtain data on radio attenuation during reentry. X—15 rocket research aircraft made 13 flights, ending its flight program with 199 missions, including 154 at mach 4 or greater, 109 at mach 5 or above, and 4 at greater than mach 6. NASA—usaf flight research continued with 13 flights of XB—70 supersonic aircraft, usaf’s C—5A, world’s largest military cargo aircraft, made its maiden flight and three of the aircraft completed 31 flights for 88-hr total flying time. Design of sst was reevaluated and program was delayed until new fixed-wing design was selected, with prototype construction expected to begin in 1969. nasa’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 12 successful glide flights and first powered flight. dod space program included orbiting of 8 IDCSP comsats, 1 Lincoln Experimental Satellite, 5 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, and 2 environmental research satellites; static test-firings of Titan III—M 1st stage; and near completion of mol launch complex at Vandenberg AFB. In joint NASA—aec effort, propulsion technology highlights included power tests of Phoebus 2A nuclear reactor, first tests of cold-flow test engine in flight configuration in new test stand, and first test-firings of Pewee 1 fuel element test-bed reactor. U.S.S.R. launched 74 payloads, including 64 Cosmos satellites, 1 Luna, 1 Proton, 3 Zond, and 2 Soyuz spacecraft, and 3 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz III rendezvoused but did not dock with unmanned Soyuz II launched one day earlier. Unmanned Zond V and VI completed circumlunar flights and were recovered. Zond IV circled moon and apparently crashlanded. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully made 38-min maiden flight. (Pres Rpt 68; NASA Release 68-219; B Sun, 1/18/69, 28; Shabad, NYT, 1/1/69, 1; upi, W Star, 1/1/69 A7)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Dudley Observatory payload to 98.9-mi (159.2-km) altitude to collect micrometeoroids during peak of annual meteor shower. Particles would be studied to determine chemical composition, size distribution, ■ numerical density in upper atmosphere, and crystal structure. Control experiment had been launched successfully Dec. 5. Although two doors failed to operate properly, scientific objectives were accomplished and payload was recovered. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Effects of manned space flight program on communities surrounding NASA space flight centers were discussed in Monthly Labor Review. South had gained most from 1967 decision to proceed with Apollo Program. Total civil service and contractor employment increase of 66,000 in five states bordering Gulf of Mexico was about 5% of area’s increase in total nonagricultural employment. However, economic significance of program had not been uniform. Employment at Mississippi Test Facility exceeded half of total employment in Hancock County in 1966, while space employment in Houston, Texas, was less than 2% of total employment. Space employment accounted for slightly more than 7% of total employment growth in Alabama, Louisiana, and Mississippi since 1961. Employment growth brought population growth, caused expansion of school facilities and faculties, raised per capita income, and increased retail sales. Beginning decline of employment in program in 1966 had moderated economic growth, and if funding continued to decline after 1968 communities would have to adjust to sharply contracting employment. (Holman, Konkel, Monthly Labor Review, 3/68, 30—6)
Cleveland Plain Dealer editorial: “Those who argue that the country should be spending more money on important domestic programs are correct. But these increases should not have to come at the expense of American space exploration and newly-won world prestige. NASA’s needs deserve high priority. There should he no lost opportunities. When the first American sets foot on the moon next year, his accomplishment should symbolize a beginning, not an ending.” (C Plain Dealer, 12/30/68)
Committee on Resolutions of 1968 Republican National Convention meeting in Miami Beach, Fla., proposed platform plank on science: “In science and technology the nation must maintain leadership against increasingly challenging competition from abroad. . . . We regret that the Administration’s budgetary mismanagement has forced sharp reductions in the space program. The Republican party shares the sense of urgency manifested by the scientific community concerning the exploration of outer space. We recognize that the peaceful applications of space probes in communications, health, weather, and technological advances have been beneficial to every citizen. We regard the ability to launch and deploy advanced spacecraft as a military necessity. We deplore the failure of the Johnson-Humphrey Administration to emphasize the military uses of space for America’s defense.” (NYT, 8/5/68, 25)
nasa’s 10th anniversary was celebrated with appropriate fanfare, but the 11th anniversary of the Space Age, which came during the same week, slipped by with barely a nod of recognition,” James J. Haggerty, Jr., charged in Armed Forces Journal. “It should have been given more attention. The U.S. needs a continual reminder that we were dragged kicking and screaming into space exploration, that the U.S. space program was born only out of reaction to the accomplishments of another nation. . . . “The summary for 11 years of space launchings shows a total of 881 launches through the Oct. 4 anniversary date. About 400 of all the spacecraft launched still are in orbit. “The U.S. enjoyed a considerable quantitative lead at the end of the 11-year period. It sent into orbit 564 spacecraft, or 64% of the total, compared with 298 spacecraft, or 33%, for the USSR. . . . “Manned flights, of course, were confined to the U.S. and the USSR. Through the anniversary date the U.S. had launched 14 flights involving 24 astronauts and 1,993 man-hours; the USSR had made nine flights with 12 cosmonauts piling up 532 man-hours.” (AFJ, 10/12/68, 13)
Astronomers reported in Science conclusion neither NASA’s Mariner V (launched June 14, 1967, for flyby of planet Venus) nor U.S.S.R.’s Venus IV (launched June 12, 1967) had reported atmospheric conditions near level of mean surface of planet. Von R. Eshleman and Gun-nar Fjeldbo of Stanford Univ., John D. Anderson and Arvydas J. Kliore of JPL, and Rolf B. Dyce of Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory (Puerto Rico) had made new determination of radius of planet, based on concurrent ranging from earth to Mariner V near encounter and to surface of Venus. Extrapolations of measurements had given surface values for mid-latitudes of close to 100 atmospheres pressure and 700°K temperature (within 100°), rather than Soviet values of 19±2 atmospheres and 544° ±10°K. Soviet probe apparently was not designed to work through such thick atmosphere. Simple ambiguity (times two) in Venus IV altimeter reading could explain supposition that probe reached Venus surface, “since this would bring all other data into excellent agreement.” (Science, 11/8/68, 661—5)
Charles J. Donlan was named Acting Director, Advanced Manned Missions Program, NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, replacing Edgar M. Cortright. He would serve in addition to his duties as Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Technical). (nasa Ann)
A 15-lb pig-tailed monkey, like one scheduled to orbit earth for 30 days on board Biosatellite D in 1969, had successfully completed simulated space flight fully instrumented with some two dozen separate biological sensors. Test, first joining of instrumented primate and its complete array of biological instrumentation with flight-type spacecraft, met all objectives, including 15-day medical countdown, 3-day simulated flight, and 5-day monitoring, (nasa Release 68—76; W Post, 4/26/68, A19)
Ten years ago Vanguard I, second [/A. satellite, was launched from Cape Canaveral (now Cape Kennedy) into orbit expected to last another 200 years. Satellite, 6Va inches in diameter, proved earth was pear shaped and continued transmitting until May 1964. (Official US. Navy photo) transmitting in May 1964, but was expected to remain in orbit at least 200 yr ionger. (ksc Release 63-68; AP, M Her, 3/17/68) radar tracking difficulties. Measurements taken by rocket-borne experiments, furnished by gsfc and Univ. of Michigan, would be compared with those taken by radiotelescope at Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory in Puerto Rico, and by Canadian Alouette II satellite during overpass for three-way comparison of rocket, satellite, and observatory data. (WS Release 68—7)
Scientists from Stanford Univ. and Univ. of California, using telescope at Lick Observatory atop Mt. Hamilton, Calif., and telescopes on Kitt Peak, Ariz., had found one of four recently discovered pulsars flashed visible wavelengths of light at half the rate of its radio pulse. Discovery was disclosed by Univ. of California at Berkeley astronomer, Dr. David Cudaback, at pulsar meeting in New York sponsored jointly by NASA Institute for Space Studies and Belfer Graduate School of Science, Yeshiva Univ. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/21/68, 14; 5/22/68, 24; 5/26/68, 12) .
Goddard Space Flight Center fired its 1,000th sounding rocket. Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr carried Lockheed Missiles & Space Coi payload to 97.9-mi (160.5-km) altitude to obtain quantitative measurements of spectrum and intensity of solar x-ray flux in 2- to 30-kev interval with eight proportional counter x-ray sensors, solar aspect sensors, and yo-yo despin unit. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa RptSRL; GSFC Historian)
Dr. Arthur Rudolph, Saturn V Manager at msfc for past 4)/, yr, was retiring after 38 yr in rocketry, MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, announced. He would be succeeded by Lee B. James, Deputy Director of Apollo program in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, (msfc Release 60-106; AP, NYT, 5/15/68,5; AP, W Star, 5/15/68, A2)
New York Times editorial commented on award of all 1968 Nobel Prizes in science and medicine to U.S. citizens: “. . . there are real and important roots of American scientific prowess which need to be understood and fostered so that future achievement may match or excel that of the past. This country’s hospitality to refugees from political tyranny and to those seeking to better themselves economically has brought rich rewards particularly in science and technology. The nation’s huge investment in education has permitted able young people to develop their talents. Generous Government support of basic research has given the nation’s scientists the tools and the material security needed for the realization of their potential excellence. The abundant returns from these policies provide good reason for maintaining them so that American science can continue to flower.” (NYT, 11/4/68, 46)
Recorded aircraft highjackings had totaled 14 in past year, with 13 U.S. airliners over southern U.S. forced to land in Cuba, Andrew Wilson of London Observer reported. (IP Post, 8/14/68, A3) August 14^-27: At U.N. Conference on Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space held in Vienna and attended by 500 delegates from 74 nations, Soviet Premier Alexey N. Kosygin announced U.S.S.R. and “other Socialist countries” would establish comsat network “Intersputnik” to compete with Intelsat. Draft agreement had been submitted in New York to U.N. Secretary-General U Thant by U.S.S.R., Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Mongolia, and Cuba. Vladimir Minashin, head of comsat div. of Soviet Ministry of Communications, said Intersputnik satellite would have same synchronous orbit used by the four U.S.-provided Intelsat satellites. U.S. Dept, spokesman said U.S. had no need to join U.S.S.R.-sponsored system; Intelsat, with 62 member nations, was already operating successfully, handling 95% of total international telecommunications traffic. U.S. was not opposed to Soviet proposal for political reasons, but on grounds there would be economic problems in creation of two worldwide comsat systems. (W Post, 8/14/68, 12; O’Toole, W Post, 8/15/68, A21; Hamilton, NYT, 8/15/68, 18; 8/20/68, 18; WSJ, 8/15/68, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 8/15/68, 1) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, at Vienna conference discussed three results of U.S. manned space flight program to illustrate contributions to space exploration. Program had proved man could live in space and man could do useful work in space and it had created technology to make these possible. In first category, nasa, nas—nrc Space Science Board, nsf, arpa, dod groups, universities, and others had conquered problems of weightlessness in space, heavy acceleration and deceleration forces, air supply and pressure required for breathing in space, psychological problems presented by isolation, and problem of radiation. Successful termination of Mercury and Gemini programs had proved man capable of existing in space. His capability to do useful work in space had been proved by successful rendezvous and docking of spacecraft, by space photography, and by extravehicular activity. Pervasiveness of space technology had been demonstrated by range and variety of thousands of products, including Saturn V launch vehicle, world’s largest flight vehicle, and integrated circuit, one of world’s smallest manufactured items. Dr. Mueller said: “Our civilization has been built upon our accumulated knowledge of the natural laws of our environment. All of our inventions have been the result of the application of these natural laws. Advances in our civilization have always followed after discovery of some one of the missing links in our chain of knowledge. ... We know that many of the missing links . . . will he supplied ... as we move man with his accumulation of experience and his sophisticated equipment for exploration, into a new laboratory . . . the laboratory of the moon and outward to our solar system. ... If all of us, from all nations, are sufficiently creative, abundantly inventive, and freely adaptive, we have it within our power to improve the lives of every man, woman, and child.” (Text) U.S.S.R. Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov at Vienna conference proposed Aug. 15 that Ocean of Storms, prominent feature of lunar landscape, be renamed Ocean of Gagarin in honor of Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gargarin, who made first manned earth orbit April 12, 1961. Leonov, who took man’s first walk in space in 1965, read Gagarin paper which emphasized similarity between experience of Soviet astronauts and that of crews of deep-sea exploratory craft. He said all actions taken in Soviet space vehicles were tried first in underwater craft. Large Soviet exhibit at conference showed full-scale model of original Soviet spacecraft and listed Soviet space firsts. U.S. exhibit, small because of cut in nasa funds, depicted benefits space exploration would produce for developing countries. (Hamilton, NYT, 8/16/68) J. L. Blondstein of British National Industrial Space Committee told group meeting at conference Aug. 20 that production of U.S. military satellites capable of direct TV broadcasts to military units was “imminent.” He said U.S. had spent between $80 million and $100 million on development but denied information was being withheld for military security reasons. DOD spokesman in Washington had said he knew of no plans for direct TV broadcasts by military satellites. (Hamilton, NYT, 8/21/68, 3) W. T. Pecora, Director, U.S. Geological Survey, said Aug. 23 that worldwide volcano and earthquake monitoring network might be provided within a few years by space satellites carrying cameras and sensing devices to give up to one hour advance notice of strong earth shocks. (AP, C Trib, 8/23/68)
nasa selected Computer Sciences Corp., Lockheed Electronics Co., Computer Applications, Inc., and Service Technology Corp. (ltv) , for competitive negotiations on $1-million one-year renewable contract to provide computer support services at Electronics Research Center, (nasa Release 68-99)
NASA said one mile of coaxial cable had been laid in two-foot-deep trench across Ascension Island in South Atlantic Ocean to link two antennas—30-ft-dia parabolic reflector for contact with Apollo spacecraft and 42-ft-dia dish to link with Intelsat 11—C—as part of chain of Manned Space Flight Network (msfn) tracking, telemetry, and voice communications facilities. Also integrated in NASA communications circuits were Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan) facilities for scientific satellites and Deep Space Network (dsn) facilities to support .lunar and planetary probes. Ascension Island cable was “final link” in two million miles of NASA Communications (nascom). (nasa Release 68—1)
Aerospace Daily survey showed most experts considered military r&d funds prime candidate for budget cuts. Services had been told to slash $900 million from FY 1969 requests as their part in $6-billion reduction demanded by Congress, which exhibited little support for either Manned Orbiting Laboratory program or Sentinel abm system. Federal Contract Research Center also was likely to be cut, though Pentagon sought $48 million, $3 million less than FY 1968. Government was spending estimated $17 billion annually on research and there was “rising general Congressional reluctance to approve more funds or even to provide additional money merely to keep pace with the inflation of the economy.” (Aero Daily, 5/27/68, 26)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of Lewis Research Center, was announced winner of Rockefeller Public Service Award in science category. He had supervised plans for rocket installation on Lunar Orbiter and Surveyor spacecraft. Dr. Silverstein had been first Director of Space Flight Programs in NASA Hq. in 1958. Under his leadership first U.S. man-in-space program, Project Mercury, had been planned and groundwork laid for Gemini and Apollo programs. He had joined naca at Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in 1929 and helped design and later was in charge of Full-Scale Wind Tunnel. He was transferred to Lewis Laboratory in 1943, where he was responsible for conception, design, and construction of first U.S. supersonic propulsion wind tunnels. After serving in Washington, D.C., three years he returned to LeRC as Director in 1961. Leonard C. Meeker, State Dept, legal adviser, won award in foreign affairs and international administration for his work on 1967 space law treaty. (W Post, 11/14/68, B7; lerc Biog, 4/67; Lewis News, 11/22/68,1)
Newsweek commented on break-up of European Launcher Development Organization: “The seven-nation . . . [ELDO] which never really got off the pad, will be buried early in October. Efforts to get Britain to remain only made clear the reason for her withdrawal: France refused to accept Britain as a member of Euromart and the British pulled out. The Netherlands backs Britain’s move in the face of De Gaulle’s stubbornness, and Italy has already expressed reservations about the project. If Western Europe wants launchers for scientific space exploration in future, it will have to buy them from the U.S.” (Newsweek, 9/30/68, 20)
Senate Report No. 957, Aeronautical Research and Development Policy, sponsored by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, concluded NASA should increase its aeronautical effort, particularly in the development phase, and carry it on to “proof-of-concept testing as a means of providing a larger variety of options to aircraft designers and systems engineers.” Report called for NASC to act as focal point for development of more comprehensive and better coordinated aeronautical R&D policy and recommended that NASA’s aeronautical activity be upgraded to major office level and directed by an Associate Administrator. (Text)
Times of India termed Apollo 8, “the most magnificent achievement in space to date.” It was “by any reckoning a tremendous achievement of science and technology” and “decidedly the most daring adventure man has ever undertaken.’ (Times of India, 12/26/68, 8)
In Baltimore Sun William J. Perkinson warned against “A Czechoslovakia In Space.” He said experts explained U.S. and other free-world nations “must insure that future Russian leaders will never be able to blackmail nations or whole continents of nations into submitting to the will of such Soviet leaders the way the leaders of the Kremlin forced Czechoslovakia to yield through the invasion of that country on the night of August 21.” By marrying technology of “spook,” or hovering, satellite with that used to produce mirv and by use of more powerful rockets, “it would be possible to launch truly ‘orbiting men-of-war’ that could be used far more effectively to cow any nation than the most powerful of gunboats were able to do in the days of ‘gunboat diplomacy.’ ” Blackmail might not occur, if arms limitation treaties granted each nation right to board and inspect all heavy satellites in orbit. “But even that right would have to be backed up by means of spacecraft and spacemen capable of exercising that right. That ... is why the invasion of Czechoslovakia is certain to spark new interest in manned space flight.” (B Sun, 9/1/68, 3)
nasa awarded $25,847,000 one-year, cost-plus-fee contract to Ben-dix Field Engineering Corp. for continued maintenance and operation of major portion of NASA’s Manned Space Flight Network, including 11 facilities of 14-station unified 8-band network for Apollo. Contract extended original two-year agreement containing three options. (NASA Release 68-82)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station carried Physical Research Laboratory experiment to 93.2-mi (150-km) altitude to measure absolute flux and energy spectrum of x-rays from sources in constellations Scorpius, Taurus, and Centaurus and time variation of x-ray fluxes from Scorpius and Centaurus sources. Experiment also would survey southern sky for undiscovered x-ray sources. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Good x-ray data were reported. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA selected Nortronics Div. of Northrop Corp. and Fecker Div. of Owens-Illinois Co. for competitive negotiations for $2.5 million cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to design, build, and install 36-in aperture infrared telescope in NASA’s high-altitude observatory aircraft. Aircraft, modified Convair 990 jet transport, was operated by arc as national facility for astronomers and other scientists. Telescope would provide information on planets, comets, asteroids, solar surface, stars, nebulae, and galactic phenomena. Above interference of most of earth’s atmosphere, it would gather information in infrared portion of spectrum not available from ground observatories, (nasa Release 68—144)
nasa announced organizational change effective May 19. Functions and personnel of Procurement Management Div. of Management Operations Directorate, Office of Manned Space Flight, was transferred to Office of Industry Affairs. Procurement Office would become Program Support Div. (omsf), reporting to Director of Procurement, (nasa Ann)
Rep. George P, Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman, of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, reads citation on Goddard Trophy which President Johnson (right) presented to Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. (center), former NASA Deputy Administrator. rial Dinner in Washington, D.C. “The public’s knowledge and understanding of space exploration have been broadened by the remarkable achievements of the first decade of the space age, hut a great many people in the space program are deeply concerned about an apparent decline in popular support of space activities.” Space achievements had been well publicized but “the capability that made these feats possible, the underlying science and technology, the inherent value of delving deeper into the mysteries of the atmosphere and space, and the mechanism by which increased scientific knowledge enhances economic and social progress are apparently little understood or appreciated on a wide basis. “Up to now we have had to devote our full energies to working on the means by which we reach into space. Now that the pipelines are filling with space hardware, more and more of our preoccupation is turning toward the question of what can be done to assure that the people who have supported our program . . , receive the full range of benefits which can be derived from space exploitation.” (Text; CRS 3/12/68, E1769) * Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee, told Sixth Goddard Memorial Symposium in Washington, D.C., he saw “grave danger to our economic and social progress, as well as to our position in the world, if ‘let technology wait’ attitude becomes too prevalent.” He advocated building sound foundation for economic growth by longterm investment in science, technology, and education and by maintaining technological leadership “as a necessary basis for our national security and economic strength.” He called for “a space program better balanced between scientific, exploratory and economic payoff missions.” (Text; Clark, NYT, 3/6/68, C33; SBD, 3/6/68,25)
Aerospace industry sales in 1967 totaled $27.3 billion, 13% increase over 1966 sales, Aerospace Industries Assn, reported. (W News, 1/9/68, 38) Landing sequence began when Surveyor VII shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket. Triggered by radar, main ret-romotor slowed spacecraft to 3y2 mph; retromotor then ejected. Vernier engines cut off at 13 ft above lunar surface and spacecraft landed. First photos transmitted showed Surveyor VII was resting in rock-strewn area. Later photos consisted of wide and narrow angle surveys, panoramas, and special area surveys of spacecraft and landing area, including closeups of rocky debris on rim of Tycho crater and rugged landscape with prominences and boulders estimated to be three stories high. Stereo pictures were obtained with special mirrors; polarization pictures were taken of lunar surface, geologically interesting rocks, and earth; and photos of Jupiter and earth were obtained. Camera also photographed laser beams directed at spacecraft from Table Mountain, Calif., and Kitt Peak, Ariz., observatories, two of six U.S. stations which directed laser beams. Test, first use of light to communicate over such great distance, was considered highly significant for future use of lasers in communications and measurements in space and on earth and was expected to permit distance between points on moon and on earth to be measured with accuracy of six inches. Special surveys of dust-detection mirrors showed no accumulation of dust. Footpad magnets did not show a significant adherence to particles, but material did accumulate on surface sampler scoop magnet. Only flaw in mission occurred Jan. 10 when alpha-scattering instrument failed to contact lunar surface after command to deploy had been issued. Photos revealed that although release squib had fired, instrument had remained in background count position. Efforts to dislodge it by rocking solar panel were unsuccessful. After satisfactory bearing-strength data had been obtained, engineers positioned surface sampler on top of alpha-scattering instrument, applied downward force, and successfully released instrument without damage. Alpha-scattering instrument, moved by surface sampler to its initial position over soil, to second position' over rock, and to third position over one-half-inch-deep trench, obtained data for 63 hr 2 min. Surface sampler conducted six bearing-strength tests; excavated several trenches, including one 16 in long and over 6 in deep; turned over large rock for examination by TV camera; and attracted gravel-size rock with its magnet. On Jan. 22, communications with spacecraft were halted to preserve battery power during cold of lunar night. Performance of Surveyor VII, final mission in NASA’s Surveyor program to analyze lunar surface, was excellent. Surveyor I (launched May 30, 1966), Surveyor III (launched April 17,-^1967), Surveyor V (launched Sept. 8, 1967), and Surveyor VI (laynehed Nov. 7, 1967) had all softlanded successfully and transmitted'I'pfiptos to earth. Surveyor II (launched Sept. 20, 1966) had failed to softland because of an ignition failure. Communications with Surveyor IV (launched July 14, 1967) were lost seconds before spacecraft was scheduled to softland, and its condition could not be determined, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-316K; AP, W Post, 1/10/68, Al; upi, W Star, 1/10/68, A3; AP, B Sun, 1/11/68, Al; SBD, 1/11/68, 56; Hill, NYT, 1/12/68, 4; W Post, 1/13/68, A5; Clark, NYT, 1/22/68, 17).
Report called 2% for planetary exploration out of NASA FY 1969 budget “totally inadequate.” It recommended diversion of funds from manned missions to instrument exploration, including biennial flights to orbit Venus and Mars until 1975; dropping capsule on Mars in 1973 to detect life signs and a major lander later, perhaps in 1975; multiple-drop probe of Venus’ surface in 1975; Mercury flight in 1973; and priority Jupiter flybys in 1972 and 1973. Panel advocated pursuit of planets in economical way: use of existing Pioneer spacecraft in Venus and Jupiter missions, elimination of second spacecraft in all missions unless “clear gain . . . will result from such double launches,” and use of single launch for both Venus and Mercury missions by scheduling them when planets were in alignment (same technique could be used for “Grand Tour” of major planets in 1977, when they would be aligned in space). Referring to U.S.S.R. exploration, report said, “We certainly believe we cannot abandon this broad area of space activities to our competitors.” Report also recommended strong support for radioastronomy, including development of major new observatory primarily for planetary study, and continued support of ground-based optical planetary astronomy. It proposed coordinated, informal contact with Soviet scientists on possibility of joint planning of planetary exploration. (Text; NRC Release; Lyons, NYT, 8/15/68, 17; O’Toole, W Post, 8/15/68, Al; Lannan, W Star, 8/15/68, C8; Carter, Science, 8/16/68,671—3)
nasa Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, accepting 1968 Veterans of Foreign Wars Space Award in Detroit, Mich., said: “The long-term outlook for space is good. I have just returned from the first UN Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space. There has been a world-wide increase in awnreness of the values and practicality of space flight. The nations of the world have become more conscious of the economic benefits of the space program, and the public is becoming increasingly aware of the values derived from space technology. With the increase in public awareness of the importance of space technology to the future well-being of the Nation, I believe that the new Congress and the new President will and must reaffirm support for a dynamic U.S. Space Program. . . . Man will prevail in space. On that there can be no serious question. The only question is whether this Nation will prevail in space.” (Text)
Tenth anniversary of first US. satellite, Explorer I, shown in 1958 photo with jpl scientists before abma—jpl launch. Still in orbit, 30.8-lb 80-inch assembly of instrumented tipper section and final-stage solid-propellant rocket had traveled 1bi billion miles. Left to right are John Smell; the late Dr. /, E. Froelich, jpl project director; Dr. Albert R. Hibbs; Karl IE. Linnes; and Robert Victor. (U.S. Army photo) American and Soviet space statistics: “The U.S, has placed about 500 vehicles in Earth orbit to 250 for the USSR. We have had 13 successful missions to the Moon, the USSR 8. Our reconnaissance spacecraft have obtained about 100,000 high-resolution photographs of the Moon; USSR craft have returned about 100. The U.S. has had three successful missions to the near planets in five attempts. Russia has successfully landed an instrumented package on Venus after an estimated 19 planetary attempts. We have accumulated nearly 2,000 hours of manned space flight time, compared with about 530 for the USSR. Our astronauts have performed multiple rendezvous and docking operations; the Soviets have demonstrated one automatic docking. We have logged over 12 hours of extravehicular activity; the USSR shows 20 minutes.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, critical of cuts in NASA budget, noted: “nasa has not been able to plan for post-Apollo projects with any degree of certainty. NASA has attempted production of the Saturn IB and Saturn V at the rate of two each per year. Frankly, this rate is too low to maintain the progress and momentum so painstakingly acquired in the space program over the past decade. “The dismantling of the high competence built up over the years at jpl and [msfc] has already begun. Both organizations are already losing valuable, highly trained people because of the insecurity and the lack of challenging work for them to do. And we face the grim reality of even further reductions and cutbacks. . . . The exploration of space has proven its worth, and has become deeply ingrained into the everyday fabric of our society. . . .” Space program would be examined closely by Congress, Dr. von Braun said, but “NASA’s record of accomplishments and the ability of its management will bear up well under the scrutiny. In determining what our space program should be during the coming years . . . members of Congress . . . [should] give careful consideration to where we are today in space, at the end of our first decade, and where we could be ten years from now, by building on the accomplishments of the past.” (EH; Texts; msfc Release 68—14; Clark, NYT, 2/1/68, 15)
Malfunction in test equipment apparently caused failure of two modified Apollo drogue parachutes during flight test at usn’s aerospace research facility, El Centro, Calif. Test objective to demonstrate structural integrity of parachutes to slow and stabilize spacecraft before main parachute deployment was not realized; MSC announced repeat of flight test would be made Feb. 5. (Aero Tech, 1/29/68,10)
Space Activities and the National Well-Being” were discussed in speech before Detroit’s Economic Club by Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. “It is a measure of how far we have come in space in 10 years,” he said, “to consider that, with the flight of the Apollo-Saturn V last November, and the flight of the lunar module on January 22, we have now successfully flight-tested and proven every piece of the Apollo-Saturn space vehicle, the vehicle the United States will use . . . for the exploration of space for years to come.” He warned that while U.S. was decreasing its rate of investment in space activities, “Soviets are spending 50 per cent more in terms of real purchasing power than we are. In percentage of gross national product, they are spending 2 or 3 times as much as we are.” He noted that “when we launched our first satellite, Explorer I, the cost was several millions of dollars per pound of payload to get it up in orbit. With the Saturn V, we are now able to put payloads into orbit for only about $500 per pound. Considering that reduction from millions of dollars per pound to hundreds of dollars per pound in orbit over a period of only 10 years, one can foresee reducing the cost to $50 per pound or even $5 per pound for getting into and out of orbit.” Saturn V development should move U.S. ahead during next year, but U.S.S.R. would soon surpass U.S. “as the full impact of the resources they are putting into their space program at this time becomes evident. And I would expect that by 1971 or 1972 we will be significantly behind them in terms of all of the aspects that we now know will be characteristic of space flight.” (Text)
Model of wheel-shaped planetary landing craft, sterilized by heat and dropped from 250-ft altitude by Jet Propulsion Laboratory, operated successfully after impacting dry lake in Mojave Desert at 80 mph—major step in demonstrating feasibility of sending lightweight scientific landing capsule to Mars. Craft’s radio transmitter turned on 30 sec after craft struck surface and operated 20 min. Anemometer deployed automatically 3 min after impact, to measure wind velocity. Following mission profile identical to projected Mars surface operations, radio turned on again 22 hr after initial transmission (when earth would again be in view). Signals from three-watt transmitter were received for another 40 min to conclude test. Craft was powered by 12-cell, silver-zinc battery, first known to survive both heat sterilization and high-velocity impact, (nasa Release 68-69; jpl Release 473; jpl pio)
Lockheed-Georgia Co. test pilot Leo J. Sullivan successfully flew C—5 Galaxy, world’s largest aircraft, on 94-min first test flight from Dobbins AFB over Georgia countryside at speeds ranging from 143-mph takeoff to 230 mph and reaching 10,000-ft altitude. No attempt was made to reach maximum speed of 550 mph. C—5, powered by four TF—39 turbofan jet engines, each delivering 41,000 lb of thrust, could carry 265,000-lb payload over 2,875-mi range or 100,000-lb payload over 6,325-mi range at cruising speed of 506 mph. Military version would carry 350 fully equipped troops, usaf had ordered 58. “We like to talk about a commercial plane similar to the C—5 which could carry nearly 1,000 passengers,” said Lockheed-Georgia President T. R. May, but he found idea of carrying both passengers and freight attractive. “We have preliminary plans for airplanes weighing over a million pounds. But it is fairly clear that the world is not quite ready for a
New York Times said article in December issue of Australian Quarterly by Australian National Univ. lecturer Robert Cooksey had suggested U.S. “space research facility” at Pine Gap near geographical center of Australia might be station designed to guide orbital missiles fired from U.S. to targets in Communist China. Article had caused flurry of questions about base in Australian press. Later New York Times story said U.S. officials in Washington had denied suggestion and said Pine Gap installation was joint U.S.-Australian space research facility established by agreement in 1966. (Trumbull, NYT, 12/29/68, 30)
NASA established Office of Facilities, merging facility functions and applicable staff elements of Office of Manned Space Flight, Office of Space Science and Applications, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, and Facilities Management Office. New office, under direction of m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), would encompass planning, design, acquisition, construction, repair, alteration, maintenance, operations, utilization, and disposal of facilities including land and collateral equipment. It would report to the Assistant Administrator for Administration. (NASA Ann)
Naval Research Laboratory scientist, Dr. Richard C. Henry, speaking at dedication of nrl’s new E. 0. Hulburt Center for Space Research in Washington, D.C., presented data strongly supporting closed universe concept. Aerobee sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range Sept. 7, 1967, carrying soft x-ray detector, had detected radiation from large, unexpected amount of thinly spread intergalactic hydrogen gas, evidence of existence of intergalactic matter previously supposed but undetected. Amount detected indicated presence of 100 times as much matter between galaxies as in all stars in universe— enough to fill up all space and satisfy all theoretical requirements for a closed universe. (Text; Cohn, W Post, 4/18/68, 1)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, and JPL Director William H. Pickering had been named cowinners of American Astronautical Society’s 1967 Space Flight Award for outstanding achievement in advancement of space flight and space science. (AP, W Star, 4/21/68, A5)
NASA’s six-week 1968 Airborne Aurora Expedition had accomplished most intensive studies ever made of northern lights and had proved dramatically value of high-altitude observatory jet transport aircraft to “stop time” near poles [see Jan. 18]. Expedition, based at Fort Churchill, Canada, with cooperation of National Research Council of Canada and managed and directed by arc’s Louis C. Haughney, had ended in mid-March. Convair 990 jet transport, carrying 13 experiments, followed underneath auroras at 550 mph, making frequent trips to north magnetic pole, north of Greenland; took 40,000 auroral photos; and recorded instrument readings on 180,000 ft of magnetic tape. Jet aircraft canceled out speed of earth’s rotation by flying against it and holding constant position on night side of earth opposite sun at latitudes above 60° north. Aircraft on three occasions crossed same spot on arctic north pole end of earth’s magnetic field as did NASA’s Ogo IV satellite at south pole end, in 400-mi-altitude orbit over Antarctica. Measuring instruments on both satellite and aircraft were nearly identical. In another aircraft-satellite combination, on six passes aircraft measured group of auroras from below at 40,000-ft altitude while Ogo IV measured same group from above, (nasa Release 68—45; arc Release 68—8)
Retirement of H. Julian Allen as Director of Ames Research Center, announced Oct. 25, would be deferred, NASA announced. Allen would be Special Assistant to Associate Director, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, and would serve as Acting Director of arc for indefinite period. ARC Associate Director James F. Parsons, named to be Acting Director after Allen’s retirement, had become seriously ill. Parsons died March 2, 1969. (nasa Ann, 12/2/68; arc Memo from Director to Staff, 3/3/69)
ComSatCorp had notified fcc of its intention to award $270,000 fixed-price contract to Hughes Aircraft Co. for installation, operation, and maintenance of transportable earth station in California to transmit, via Intelsat II satellite, TV coverage of Mexican Olympics to Pacific area in October. (ComSatCorp Release 68—45) During August: In Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial AIAA President Floyd L. Thompson heralded U.N. Conference on Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in Vienna, August 14-27. Against background of new developments in arms control, it would emphasize practical benefits of space exploration, especially as to how they could aid developing nations. “This action by the UN points up the continuing concern of many about the need for cooperation among nations in the exploration of space. It recognizes that space represents an important element of national power, a force for growth, particularly in advanced technology and education.” (A&A, 8/68, 17)
NASA announced retirement, effective Nov. 1, of Werner R. Kuers, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center’s Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory since 1961. (msfc Release 68—257; Marshall Star, 10/30/68, D '	...
Astronomer Dr. Gerritt L. Verschuur, with aid of National Radio Astronomy Observatory, had measured for first time strength of Milky Way’s magnetic field as it existed in far reaches of the galaxy, to help explain theories of star formation, radio wave propagation, and cosmic ray acceleration unprovable previously. (W Post, 9/10/68, A10)
Addressing Women’s National Democratic Club in Washington, D.C., Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “. . . we must not seriously impair or hamper our progress in space because we cannot foresee immediate payoffs to offset the investment we are making.” He urged that U.S. “come to grasp the unlimited opportunities and the promise of space exploration.” (Text; SBD, 4/26/68, 321; W Post, 4/26/68, C3)
Iowa State Univ. scientist Dr. James A. Van Allen said that although he was not outright opponent of manned space flight, so far man had done nothing in space but survive—although “that is not unimportant.” He advocated Jupiter exploration using unmanned flyby, which he said could be accomplished in 1972. He felt there was little chance Jupiter could have life forms of any sort, but he wanted this large planet (10 times diameter of earth) “put on an equal footing with Mars and Venus in U.S. exploration.” His opposition to man in space was based on dominance of manned flight in national funding to detriment of unmanned missions that could have returned major scientific benefits. (Miles, LA Times, 2/29/68)
In letter to President Johnson, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), Chairman of House Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development, urged reorganization of environmental science activities of Federal Government and asked that responsibility for development of weather modification programs be given to Environmental Science Services Administration (essa). His committee, originator of NSF Amendments Act of 1968 which became effective July 18, was interested in implementing section which relieved NSF of that responsibility as of Sept. 1. Rep. Daddario stated three beliefs: “1. The weather modification program involves the development of environmental understanding which is crucial to the protection of our planetary resources; it should be supported and pursued without significant hiatus. 2. In light of the nature of the program and the present administrative organization of the executive branch, it seems clear that weather modification should become part of the portfolio of the Environmental Science Services Administration. 3. At the same time, there is considerable doubt whether the Environmental Science Services Administration should remain part of the Department of Commerce; therefore consideration should be given to executive reorganization which might either relocate the Administration or give it independent status.” (Text; W Star, 8/23/68, A4)
Eleventh Saturn IB booster was successfully static fired at Marshall Space Flight Center at 1.6-million-lb thrust for 145 sec by Chrysler Corp. personnel. It would be returned to Michoud Assembly Facility for post-static checkout, (msfc Release 68—85)
Interview with Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Science Adviser to President Johnson, appeared in New York Times. Dr. Hornig said problem facing his successor, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, was finding funds for science and technology, to preserve “the vitality, the creativity and the entrepreneurial surge of the establishment.” Next science adviser would have to orient new administration to give science proper place in overall scheme. One of America’s great strengths was recognition that science, like economics, was part of everything. New administration would have to set course for space program after manned lunar landing. It would have to decide how to improve nation’s health care, deal with environmental pollution, and face technological problems of keeping world free of nuclear war. Particularly important task would be advancing vitality of basic science enterprise—research devoted to quest for knowledge with no immediate applications in mind. (Schmeck, NYT, 12/5/68, 28)
Defense Projects Support Office (dpso) was established in Special Programs Office at nasa Hq. to manage specialized tasks where nasa’s unique capabilities could provide needed support to a limited number of dod projects. M. J. Raffensperger, Director of Advanced Manned Missions Planning and Operations, Office of Manned Space Flight, was appointed Deputy Director of Special Programs Office and Acting Director of dpso. (nasa Release 68—66; nasa Ann, 4/17/68)
