Retirement of Dr. Abe Silverstein, LeRC Director, was announced by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator. He would be succeeded Nov. 1 by OART Acting Administrator Bruce T. Lundin. In requesting retirement, Dr. Silverstein wrote: “As NASA engages in its second ten-year program, it may be important that the men whose decisions initiate the new long-range projects be available to complete them. Since I do not think I can stretch my 40 years of service into 50, it is perhaps best ... if I bow out now.” Few have made so great a contribution to our national space effort,” Dr. Paine said. Dr. Silverstein had been first Director of Space Flight Programs in NASA Hq. in 1958. Under his leadership first U.S. man-in-space program, Project Mercury, had been planned and groundwork laid for Gemini and Apollo programs. He had joined NASA at Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in 1929 and helped design and later was in charge of Full-Scale Wind Tunnel. Transferring to Lewis Laboratory in 1943, he was responsible for conception, design, and construction of first U.S. supersonic-propulsion wind tunnels. After three years with NASA Hq., 1958—1961, he returned to LeRC as Director. Lundin had served NASA since 1943, when he joined staff at Lewis. In 1961 he was appointed Associate Director for Development. In May 1968 he went to NASA Hq. as Deputy Associate Administrator for oart. (nasa Release 69—145; LeRC Release 69-61; LeRC Biog 4/67)
Reporting findings from four months of Oao II data to 129th meeting of American Astronomical Society in Honolulu, Univ. of Wisconsin astronomer Dr. Arthur D. Code said: “It puzzles me to see so much ultraviolet light from the Andromeda galaxy (M31) and so little from M81 because they are rather old ‘garden variety’ galaxies. . . . There is a possibility that we might have discovered an old quasar a few million light years away.” Full impact of Oao II data would not be felt for couple of years. “Some theories on cosmology will have to be modified and others discarded. Practically all phases of optical astronomy will be affected.” Temperature figures assigned to young, hot stars with masses more than 15 times sun’s would require alteration. “These stars are considerably hotter than 20,000 degrees absolute. They are aging about twice as fast as we thought and are burning hydrogen at a very rapid rate.” OAO data thus far provided argument against steady-state theory of universe which maintained universe always looked same, from any point at any time, Dr. Code said. At same meeting, Joseph Purcell, oao Project Manager at gsfc, said Oao II’s observatory control system had exceeded its pointing accuracy requirement of one minute of arc by factor of two. “A subsequent oao will be 100 times more stable.” (nasa Release 69—51; Lannan, W Star, 4/4/69, A5)
nasa sponsored one-day meeting to review progress in its five-year research program on fog-shrouded airports. In one test during NASA-sponsored work by Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory in Project Fog Drops, small aircraft carrying 700 lbs of salt had opened wide path in dense warm fog in five minutes, (nasa Release 69—17; Transcript)
NASA acknowledged it was reviewing proposed orbital flight of monkey with transplanted heart. Project was one of two based on work of Dr. Christiaan Barnard, South African surgeon and heart transplant pioneer. Second Barnard-based study would deal with effects of space flight on mechanism of rejection of foreign tissues in living organisms. Both proposals had been submitted by General Electric Co. Reentry Systems Div. (W Post, 10/16/69)
Senate confirmed appointment of Dr. Lee A. DuBridge as Director of Office of Science and Technology. (CR, S1536—7)
NASA announced termination of joint NASA—dod XB—70 flight research program, for which it had assumed management responsibility in March 1967. Aircraft had been productive for studying sonic boom, flight dynamics, and handling problems peculiar to advanced supersonic aircraft. Of two XB—70s constructed by North American Rockwell Corp., one had been destroyed in June 8, 1966, midair collision. Remaining aircraft would be flown from frc to Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, where it would be delivered to usaf Museum. During 2,000-mi flight NASA planned to obtain data on its handling qualities and structural response to air turbulence. First flight of XB—70 was made Sept. 21, 1964. Top speed of mach 3 (2,000 mph) and peak altitude of 74,000 had been attained in four-year flight program, (nasa Release 69—10)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Associate and Deputy Administrator, delivered 1969 Minta Martin Lecture at MIT as 1968—69 Jerome Hunsaker Professor of Aeronau-• tical Engineering. Describing origins and development of U.S. space program as well as decision-making and implementation in commitment to manned lunar landing, paper would be presented also at Univ. of Maryland March 20 and at LeRC April 24. Citing need for set of national goals, Dr. Seamans defined national agenda for allocation of R&D that might be acceptable to man in street: understanding, forecasting, and controlling environment; supplying basic resources of food, fuel, minerals, and water; improving quality of life; improving transportation; improving communications; encouraging economic growth; and assisting international development and providing national security. Space program contributed to all categories. Studies of sun’s transmissions, of Mars and Venus atmospheres, of moon’s origin, and of earth itself contributed to understanding of environment for practical use of man. Space R&D might aid search for alternative basic resources; it could establish facilities for detecting available resources and speed communications to meet problems. Biological and medical investigations in space program held greatest promise in study of reactions of biological specimens, animals, and man. Impact on education had been cited by some as greatest value of space exploration. Program had required in-depth investigation of waste management, fire prevention, materials development, and microminiaturization. Space technology influenced new vehicles being tested for transportation—hydrofoil ships, surface-effect and air-cushion vehicles, high-speed trains, electric cars, vtol and v/stol aircraft, jumbo subsonic aircraft, and supersonic aircraft. Communications satellites, already in commercial use, ultimately could broadcast directly to home receivers. In international cooperation, NASA was working with 64 nations in space activity. Returns from NASA’s scientific satellites and communications satellites, development of manned space flight capability, and tracking facilities contributed to national defense. (Text)
In interview released by United Press International Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said he knew of nothing which could feasibly send man to the stars in the predictable future, nerva prototype, only working model of new-generation engine in U.S., was too bulky for flight. Refined version, scheduled for test flight in mid-1970s, was expected to land man on Mars. Beyond that all was conjecture. “There is no design concept and even the basic idea of a controlled thermonuclear reaction has not been demonstrated.” It was not known what thrust could be generated by fusion engine. U.S.S.R. had announced development of plasma-jet or ion-thrust engine which, as designed, would not be useful in deep space or close to earth. U.S. scientists had been working on plasma-jet theory and electric propulsion machine. Science fiction concept of space distortion or warp through which spacecraft could travel in “null space” where distances were shorter and speeds faster had some basis according to Einstein’s theory of relativity. In Univ. of Maryland experiments “presence of gravitational radiation has been tentatively discovered . . . [and] can be interpreted as the interaction of such a warp with the sensor used in the experiment.” Despite this, “there does not appear to be any possibility of utilizing such interactions as a space propulsion system.” (W Star, 12/1/69, A5)
National Telemetry Conference of Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc., presented award for telemetry achievements to NASA team responsible for directing, planning, engineering, implementing, and operating Manned Space Flight Network in support of Apollo program. At Washington, D.C., luncheon, award was accepted by GSFC Assistant Director for Manned Flight Support, Ozro M. Covington. (gsfc Release G—1—69)
Press conference on preliminary science results of Biosatellite III (launched June 28) was held at NASA Hq. Spacecraft, carrying male macaque monkey Bonny, had been launched on 30-day mission to investigate physiological problems during space flight but had been deorbited after 8% days when monkey’s condition deteriorated. John W. Dyer, Manager of Biosatellite Project Operations at arc, said all of automatically controlled functions performed “beautifully” after launch and spacecraft and instrumentation performed well throughout mission. “The animal was reported to be enthusiastically eating and drinking, and after four or five days, a routine operation capable of going the duration of on-board consumables was projected.” Clear data on Bonny and entire flight system were recorded at 16 stations in 180 intervals of 5 to 10 min each and good quality data were returned from onboard tape and film records recovered with capsule. Bonny remained alert until eighth day, providing much new information on cycles of sleep and wakefulness at zero g. Dr. W. Ross Adey of UCLA, principal experimenter, said one important discovery was alterations in circadian rhythms, daily rhythms in physiological functions. “At least it is clear that if there is not an actual prolongation of the rhythms there is a very significant phase shift so that the animal woke later and later each day.” Most interesting discovery about sleep patterns was that dream sleep, which constituted 20% of normal night’s sleep on earth and was characterized by rapid eye movements (rem), occurred in space. “It had never been clear in space whether man or animals have this REM sleep, and there is evidence that decreased gravitational inputs, or decreased inputs from the body will seriously disrupt it. So we were very interested to see that REM sleep in the monkey . . . that there was indeed a great deal of sleep of this rem type, and that it occurred in ... an intermediate stage of sleep.” One of first abnormalities noted in Bonny was pendular eye movement, swinging movement that occurred when vestibular mechanism in inner ear was disturbed. Fluid was moving in some fashion that might indicate pressure or cooling if it occurred on earth. “None of these conditions applied here. But the weightlessness would allow movements of the fluid which were probably unusual. . . . This is interesting because the Apollo astronauts who have now much more room to move around than in . . . the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft have . . . almost uniformly reported some degree of vestibular disturbances.” By eighth day, brain and body temperature and central venous pressure had dropped dangerously. Fluid loss by sweating and diuresis was high, apparently because of redistribution of blood in visceral pools from weightlessness. On recovery Bonny was semicomatose and his temperature was below 35°C. Immediate resuscitation measures with intravenous fluid were begun and monkey’s condition improved substantially. “The temperature came up to about 35.8, the heart rate stabilized, and the blood pressure came up. . . . And the animal was lifting his head . . . and making coordinated movements with all four limbs. And then quite suddenly, about twelve hours after recovery, a condition of ventricular fibrillation ensued. It came on very suddenly, and the heartbeat became totally disordered, And there was no recovery. This is a common occurrence in monkeys of this species when recovering from hypothermia . . . and death is almost a certainty.” Autopsy revealed 20% loss in body weight, much higher than 3%—8% reported for astronuats in early days of flights. Restraint, weightlessness, and decreased feedback from peripheral structures had decreased shivering response, and monkey had failed to respond to falling temperature with normal thermogenic response. Restraint and, particularly, weightlessness had led to pooling of blood in thorax and abdomen, raising central venous pressures and leading to loss of fluid through kidney and sweating. Dr. Adey said mission was “highly successful in revealing physiological effects of weightlessness in spite of the reduced duration of the experiment” and indicated “great value of carefully designed animal experiments in collection of important biomedical data relevant to manned flight.” Virtually every piece of information that could be drawn about manned space flight indicated similar changes in astronauts, though to smaller degree, he said. Scientists still did not know whether gravity was necessary for long-duration space flights. “Therefore, I think it is premature to consider the design of space platforms or the larger space stations until we know more from the biomedical point of view about what is absolutely necessary.” President’s Science Advisory Committee report to President Nixon, being printed, would say necessary biomedical basis for elaborate space platforms and space stations did not exist in NASA or in scientific community. (Transcript)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr with Naval Research Laboratory experiment collected data that led to discovery of x-ray pulsar in Crab Nebula. Sounding rocket carried several UV detectors and gas proportional counters to 103-mi (153.5-km) altitude to obtain x-ray spectra in Crab Nebula, region in galactic plane, region near cluster of galaxies, and region toward earth. All detectors gave good data and NHL scientists later reported pulsations were observed at frequency closely matching radio and optical pulsations with 5% of total x-ray power of nebula appearing in pulsed component. Pulsations included main pulse and interpulse separated by about 12 milliseconds. (NASA Rpt SRLj Fritz, Henry, Meekins, Chubb, Friedman, Science, 5/9/69, 709—12)
Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf) piloted usaf X-24.4 lifting-body vehicle on its first glide flight. The wingless craft, which depends on shape and speed for aerodynamic lift, was air-launched from a B-52 aircraft at 45,000-foot altitude and mach 0.66. Designed for maximum speed of mack 2 and altitudes to 100,000 feet, the X—24A was one of three wingless experimental vehicles in the joint usaf—nasa research program studying concepts for reusable and maneuverable reentry spacecraft.
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications published Future of the Bioscience Program of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Report concluded bioscientific experimentation on man and animals in first decade of space flight had been “relatively meager.” Scientific research on manned flight had been “minimal” and had not included biomedical experimentation of kind done in Biosatellite program. More research was urgently needed on biological influence of zero gravity and effects of change or elimination of rhythmic daily periodicity of animal and plant life on earth. Space technology now permitted advanced scientific research on these and related biological factors. While professors exchanged scientific theories freely, NASA representatives inclined toward “protecting jurisdiction authority and extending organizational power within the framework of their agency.” Complete information exchange should prevail, especially in bioscience, “which eventually may affect human life.” “Rivalry” between science and engineering was “real.” In NASA, science was “used” but “rarely accepted in its own right by the engineering management.” While knowledge from 14-day missions was adequate to proceed with planning of 28-day aap mission, it was inadequate to proceed safely with proposed 56-day flight or longer planetary flights without monitoring astronauts on 28-day mission in experiments “beyond any yet undertaken in manned flight.” Further biosatellite exploration with primates and instruments was “merited if not indeed prescribed.” Final evaluation of Biosatellite 111 would determine new mechanisms and improved monitoring of test mammals to be programmed. Subcommittee endorsed proposal of Dr. W. Ross Adey, NASA’s principal investigator for Biosatellite III, that basic measurements be required on all flight crews and recommended reinstitution of biosatellite experiments with animals in earth orbit, extension of bioscience research to planets when technologically feasible, uprating of science role as mission objective, and nasa and Congress delegation of “highest relative priority” to “bioscience programs which offer the most immediate return to the taxpayers through . . . medicine and physiology.” Subcommittee further recommended NASA examine and implement “to fullest practicable extent” recommendations of President’s Scientific Advisory Panel for “new level of biomedical research capability,” that OMSF conduct biomedical experiments on astronauts during 28-day aap missions, and that NASA’s scientific investigations be planned “with close and continued participation of the academic research institutions.” (Text)
Washington Post editorial: “There was a certain logic in playing down the purely scientific aspects of the Apollo program in the past since the effort was to land men on the moon before the Russians did. But that day is past. The scientists of space, as contrasted with its engineers and technicians, have been forced into the back seat of the manned space program. It is time now to make them the navigators. The choice of missions—for future flights to the moon and for future operations that will lead some day to a trip to Mars and eventually other planets— should be largely in their hands. They, far better than the men who created the hardware and the knowledge necessary to make space travel possible, know the areas most appropriate for exploration in terms of gaining knowledge.” (W Post, 8/8/69) Pac (Package Attitude Control) system, carried pickaback on Delta 2nd stage, was ejected into orbit with 340-mi (547.1-km) apogee, 300mi (482.7-km) perigee, 94.2-min period, and 32.9° inclination. Primary objective was to flight-test long-life, low-power, three-axis Pac earth-stabilized control system for Delta 2nd stage and to demonstrate feasibility of using stage as experimental platform. Oso VI was spin-stabilized, weighed 640 lbs, carried seven experiments, was designed with six-month lifetime, and had two main sections—wheel (lower), which carried nondirectional scanning experiments and basic support equipment, and sail (upper), which carried pointed experiments. It was similar to previous osos but had unique capability which enabled two sun-pointing telescopes to study in detail uv and x-ray spectra at any point on solar disc and would provide greater knowledge of solar atmosphere (chromosphere) as well as outermost layer (corona) visible only through special instruments or during total solar eclipse. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of preceding oso spacecraft, were provided by Harvard College Observatory, Naval Research Laboratory, Rutgers Univ., Los Alamos Scientific Laboratories, Univ. of New Mexico, Univ. of Bologna, and University College (London). Both tape recorders were operating at liftoff and were still operating satisfactorily. Spacecraft stabilized and acquired sun as scheduled shortly after entering orbit. By Aug. 15 all experiments had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily. Two minor anomalies— higher than planned use of current by motor that provided fine elevation pointing and lower than expected spacecraft operating temperature —were not expected to affect spacecraft operation adversely. Oso VI was seventh in series of eight oso spacecraft designed to provide direct observation of sun during most of 11-yr solar cycle. Oso I (launched March 7, 1962) and Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965) had surpassed their six-month design lifetimes and together provided more than 8,600 hrs of scientific information, oso—c (launched Aug. 25, 1965) had failed to reach orbit when booster malfunctioned. Oso III (launched March 8, 1967) and Oso IV (launched Oct. 18, 1967) continued operating satisfactorily, each providing 7% hrs of real-time data daily. Oso V (launched Jan. 22, 1969) had both tape recorders and seven of eight experiments operating satisfactorily after six months in orbit, oso program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Releases 69—112, 69—112A, 69—123; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Venus, “least understood of the inner planets,” should be U.S. space program priority target, Kitt Peak National Observatory physicist Dr. Donald M. Hunten and Harvard Univ. physicist Dr. Richard M. Goody said in Science. Some fundamental data were available; quantitative theories had been stated; questions about atmosphere could be answered by feasible missions; and geophysicists’ interest had been aroused and offered specialized knowledge needed to understand complex processes. But NASA had no present plans for investigation of Venus’ lower atmosphere. Uncertainty as to Soviet intentions had been cited as reason for giving Venus low priority. But until collaboration with U.S.S.R. and other European countries could begin, “we have no choice but to base our judgment upon our own scientific and technical abilities and desires.” (Science, 9/26/69, 1317—23)
President Johnson sent $195.3-billion FY 1970 budget request to Congress, including total space budget of $5,946 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $3,599 billion (plus $7.89 million for aircraft technology and $117 million in unobligated funds from prior years to be applied to 1970 program); dod would receive $2,219 billion; aec, $105 million; essa, $10 million; nsf, $4 million; Dept, of Interior, $6 million; and Dept, of Agriculture, $4 million. Total NASA FY 1970 budget request of $3,878 billion was below $4 billion for first time since FY 1963 request. Expenditures were budgeted to decline nearly $300 million from FY 1969 level of $4,250 billion, to $3,950 billion. Of budget request, $3,168 billion would go for r&d, $58.2 million for construction of facilities, and $650.9 million for program management. Slightly more than 50% of total FY 1970 authority—$2,008 billion—would be in manned space flight, including Saturn IB Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount. Space science and applications were allotted $558.8 million; advanced research and technology, $290.4 million. Larger proportion of NASA funds would go to research than to development in FY 1970 as Apollo costs declined. Increases would go to Apollo Applications (total $308.8 million in FY 1970), 1971 Mariner-Mars flight ($45.4 million), Viking project ($40 million), 1973 Mariner-Mercury ($3 million), Planetary Explorers ($8 million), Applications Technology Satellites ($44.2 million), and Earth Resources Survey program ($25.1 million). Aeronautical vehicle technology program, up from $74.9 million to $78.9 million, included $21.78 million for advanced research, $500,000 for general aviation, $11.25 million for v/stol, $16.19 million for subsonic aircraft, $20.9 million for supersonic aircraft, and $8.28 million for hypersonic aircraft. DOD space funding would include satellite development, certain portions of missile development and operating costs, mol (increased to $576 million), Titan III booster, and supporting R&D. In addition, aircraft r&d funds of $1.4 billion would include $500 million for new usn F—14A fighter to replace F—11 IB, $1 billion for series of advanced jet aircraft, $75 million for long-range bomber to succeed B—52, and funds for usaf F—15 fighter and usn vsx antisubmarine aircraft. aec space funding included amounts for nuclear rocket, propulsion technology and nuclear power sources for space applications, including production of isotopic fuels and aerospace safety. ESSA funds would support Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts) program research. nsf’s total request was up from $400 million in FY 1969 to $497 million. Of this amount, its $4-million space funds were for research in astronomy using rockets and satellite-borne observation instruments. Dept, of Interior would conduct experiments with data from erts spacecraft. faa’s r&d budget would increase from $49 million in FY 1969 to $59 million in FY 1970. Principal increases were for research on air traffic control and noise abatement. President Johnson requested no additional funds for sst program, (nasa Release, 1/15/69; bob Special Analysis Q; Dale, NYT, 1/16/69, 1; Schmeck, NYT, 1/16/69, 24; Lindsey, NYT, 1/16/69, 81; W Post, 1/16/69, A12)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and other top NASA officials testified on future space programs before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Introducing programs, Dr. Paine said: “The decade of the 1970’s and 1980’s should have a program as bold in concept and as productive as we have had in the decade of the 1960’s. ... we need to have clear objectives to focus our work and a commitment, subject ... to annual review, as to what these achievements will be. Our general goal area should be the continued exploration of the solar system while deriving the maximum scientific and practical benefits here on earth from the space program. There is no question that, at some future time, we will have the capability for manned planetary exploration and we need to face now some of the decisions that will not bear fruition for more than a decade. Although I do not believe that we will see manned exploration of the planets in the 1970’s in the United States ... I do think this could come in the 1980’s. It is by no means clear that for the Soviet Union the decision may not be made to mount a crash program and bring this in before the end of the decade of the 1970’s.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, described possible 1981— 1982, 12-man, 2-ship expedition to Mars [see Aug. 1]. Each spacecraft would weigh 1.6 million lbs at departure from earth orbit and would be 270 ft long, “smaller than what we are flying already to the moon.” nasa was using “concept of reusability” in planning, to improve and reduce cost of operating in space, Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told Committee. Reusability could be achieved “through the reuse of launch and space vehicles and . . . through the reuse of a mission module such as a space station” put into orbit and used over 10-yr or even 20-yr period. Space shuttles would be designed to run 100 or more flights. Modules and vehicles would be designed for multiple applications in earth, lunar, and synchronous orbits. Space tug would permit travel from space station to other spacecraft and back again—“general purpose . . . equipment.” In earth orbital operations, “it permits us to fly off from the space station over to ... an oao, orbiting astronomical observatory, either to repair or check the oao, or to bring it back to a space station where it can then be loaded on the space shuttle for return to earth and then brought back into orbit after repairs.” (Transcript)
Walter Rundell, Jr., of Iowa State Univ. Dept, of History described U.S. Government historical programs at National Convention of Southern Historical Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “NASA’s historical program began in 1959 under the leadership of Eugene M. Emme. Two years later Emme launched the official publications with his Aeronautics and Astronautics: An American Chronology of Science and Technology in the Exploration of Space, 1915—1960, This has been followed by similar annual chronologies and chronologies devoted to the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo projects. Since 1966 the office has published several monographs, some written under contract by private scholars, rather than being undertaken by the permanent staff. A good example is This New Ocean: A History of Project Mercury, by Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander.” (Text) During October: The Atlantic commented on Apollo 11: “We enthusiastically join the rest of human kind in applauding the feat of the Apollo 11 astronauts and their NASA sponsors. It is an achievement far greater, even, than the construction and successful launchings of The Brick Moon, which happened in these pages exactly one hundred years ago.” Story, by Edward Everett Hale, had told of group of New Englanders who had constructed artificial moon of bricks and launched it into orbit to provide perpetual navigation aid for seamen. “So far as we can determine, the launching of The Brick Moon provoked considerably less public interest than the latest American lunar expedition.” (Atlantic, 10/69, 3)
President Nixon authorized immediate $10-million increase in expenditure ceiling placed on National Science Foundation by Johnson Administration in 1968. He said: “The colleges and universities of this Nation provide a critical resource which needs to be fostered and strengthened. Our higher educational system provides the advanced training needed for tomorrow’s leaders in science and technology, industry and government, and also conducts the basic research which uncovers the new knowledge so essential to the future welfare of the country. It is essential that these programs of education and research be sustained at a level of high excellence.” (PD, 2/10/69, 224-5)
msc Deputy Director George S. Trimble announced his resignation, effective Sept. 30, after 2% yrs with NASA. He had been Director of Advanced Manned Missions Program in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight before appointment to msc post Oct. 13, 1967. (msc Release 69-70; W Post, 8/28/69, A8; NASA Ann, 10/13/67)
In NASA-funded project U.S. Bureau of Mines was seeking way to get water and air from lunar rocks, build underground lunar shelters like mines, weld and melt lunar materials, and mine planets like Mars and Venus which might bear substances more valuable than those on moon, Associated Press said. First lunar mining would occur during Apollo 13 mission in March. Astronaut would bore 10-ft hole in lunar crust to determine what lay beneath and to test drill designed for NASA by Martin Corp. Scientists at U.S. Bureau of Mines research center in Bruceton, Pa., and at six other locations had been studying since 1965 possible use of lunar materials to build and support manned lunar station. Project Director Thomas C. H. Hutchinson had said, “Even if we found pure platinum on the moon, it would cost too much to bring it back.” Goal was to establish manufacturing processes on moon to speed exploration of planets. (AP, W Post, 11/20/69, A78)
President Nixon’s amendments to proposed FY 1970 space budget would support post-Apollo manned flight at expense of unmanned planetary space flight, William J. Normyle wrote in Aviation Week & Space Technology. In effect, NASA had received “almost all it wanted for planning post-Apollo manned lunar exploration.” Argument was expected in House Committee on Science and Astronautics over relative apportionment. (Av Wk, 4/21/69, 16—7)
Lick Observatory scientists said at news conference they had measured distance between earth and moon to be 226,970.9 mi, based on data from Aug. 1 test in which laser beam successfully hit reflector on moon, lrl preventive medicine specialist Dr. Norman D. Jones remoon. Figure was accurate to within 150 ft and eventually might be pinned down to inches. (AP, NYT, 8/4/69, 13)
Study of possible Space Technology Applications and Research Laboratory (starlab), sponsored by NASA and American Society for Engineering Education, was completed at MSFC. Eleven-week design project focused space-developed technology on earth resources use, crop-maturity prediction, soil analysis, vegetation vigor, sea farming, and other earth problems. Final presentation in project, which had participation of 21 faculty members from 18 colleges and universities, was report on orbiting space laboratory illustrating systems approach that could be valuable in solving major earth problems, (msfc Release 69-179)
Apollo 10 astronauts would each carry out about two hours of head exercises early in mission in attempt to prevent motion sickness which plagued previous Apollo astronauts, msc Deputy Director of Medical Operations, Dr. A. Duane Catterson, said. Exercises—which included nodding, rocking, and twisting head—would be done to point just below threshold of illness until normal adaptation occurred. Since pilots who regularly performed drastic maneuvers in aircraft seldom suffered motion sickness, astronauts had flown aerobatic jet flights in barrel rolls and high-gravity maneuvers during week before launch. (Cohn, W Post, 5/18/69, A8) Launch events occurred as planned and spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot)—entered initial parking orbit with 118.1-mi (189.9-km) apogee and 114.6-mi (184.4-km) perigee. Checkout followed lunar trajectory insertion; then csm, code-named Charlie Brown, separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) and lm, codenamed Snoopy. Crew successfully transposed csm and docked with lm. Excellent quality color TV coverage of docking sequences was transmitted to Goldstone tracking station and seen on worldwide commercial TV. Crew extracted lm from S—IVB and conducted 1st sps burn. All launch vehicle safing activities were performed as scheduled and successful propellant dump provided impulse to S—IVB for slingshot maneuver to earth-escape velocity. On second day, first midcourse maneuver was not required. Crew conducted midcourse maneuver number two, which was so accurate that third and fourth maneuvers were canceled. Five color TV transmissions totaling 72 min and showing excellent views of receding earth and spacecraft were made during translunar coast. Spacecraft entered moon’s sphere of influence on fourth day, May 21, at 61:50 get. Crew conducted first lunar orbit insertion maneuver with 356-sec sps burn to reduce speed to 5,474 fps and place spacecraft in initial lunar orbit with 196.1-mi (315.5-km) apolune and 68.6-mi (110.4-km) perilune. Second loi maneuver, 13.9-sec sps burn, circularized orbit with 70.8-mi (113.9-km) apolune and 67.8-mi (109.1-km) perilune. Crew tracked lunar landmarks and transmitted 29-min color TV of lunar surface. Cernan transferred to lm at 81:55 get for two hours of housekeeping activities and communications test. On fifth day Stafford and Cernan entered lm and checked out all systems before firing sm reaction control system thrusters to separate csm and lm ahout 30 ft and again for 2.3-mi separation, lm descent propulsion system burn propelled lm to within 9.6 mi of lunar surface over landing site No. 2. Crew had no difficulty identifying landmarks and Stafford said, “It looks like all you have to do is put your tail wheel down and we’re there. . . . The craters [around No. 2 landing site] look flat and smooth at the bottom. It should be real easy” for Apollo 11 landing, lm crew took numerous photos of lunar surface and provided continuous commentary on their observations after cameras malfunctioned. Astronauts described volcanoes and light-colored craters that glowed as if lit by radioactive substance. Crew conducted lm radar test during low-altitude pass which indicated 47,000-ft pericynthian (lowest point in orbit), dps phasing burn raised apocynthian (orbital high point) to 218.6 mi (351.7 km). lm descent stage was jettisoned and Res separation maneuver and staging were accomplished. Anomaly in automatic abort guidance system caused lm ascent stage to undergo extreme gyrations. By taking over manual control, Stafford reestablished proper attitude. APS insertion maneuver burn at pericynthian established equivalent of standard LM insertion orbit of lunar landing mission (51.8 by 12.9 mi), where lm coasted for one hour. Concentric sequence initiation at apocynthian, constant-delta-height maneuver, and terminal maneuver were conducted. lm successfully docked with csm at 106:33 get, after eight-hour separation; and lm crew returned to csm. On sixth day lm ascent stage was jettisoned; its batteries burned to depletion and it entered solar orbit. Crew made 18 landmark sightings and took extensive stereo and oblique photos of moon. Two scheduled TV periods were deleted because of crew fatigue and crew rested and prepared for return to earth, sps burn at 137:36 get injected csm into transearth trajectory after 61.5 hrs (31 orbits) in lunar orbit. Maneuver was so accurate that two other scheduled midcourse maneuvers were not necessary. During return to earth astronauts made star-lunar landmark sightings, live color TV transmissions, star-earth horizon navigation sightings, and csm S-band high-gain antenna reflectivity test. Pictures of moon from receding spacecraft were spectacular. Scheduled 10- and 29-min color TV broadcasts of earth, moon, and spacecraft interior were later followed by unscheduled TV transmission, which provided beautiful pictures of earth and brought total color TV broadcasts to 19 transmissions totaling almost six hours. On eighth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from CM on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 10 splashed down in Pacific at 12:52 pm edt May 26, 3.4 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Princeton 192 hrs 3 min after launch and precisely on time. Crew was picked up and reached recovery ship at 1:31 pm edt. All primary Apollo 10 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor discrepancies, which were corrected. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits were continually evident. Accomplishments included evaluation of LM steerable antenna at lunar distances; demonstration of lunar landing mission profile; low-level evaluation of lunar visibility; inflight demonstration of Weslinghouse color TV camera; testing of landing radar in near-lunar environment; and manned navigational, visual, and photographic evaluation of lunar landing sites 2 and 3, and in addition other possible lauding sites in highland areas. Apollo 10 was seventh Apollo mission to date, fourth manned Apollo mission, largest payload ever placed in earth and lunar orbits, and first demonstration of lunar orbit rendezvous. Mission acquired major quantities of photographic training materials for Apollo 11 and subsequent missions and numerous visual observations and photos of scientific significance. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of manned LM to operate in space. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, M5FC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj OH; NASA Release 69-68; W Post, 5/19-27/69, Al; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 5/19-27/69, Al; W Star, 5/19-27/69)
NASA and Australian Dept, of Supply and Dept, of Education and Science announced that 210-ft-dia radiotelescope at National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Parkes, Australia, might be used to relay TV signals from moon during Apollo 11 lunar landing mission in July. Signals from Apollo 11 antennas were scheduled to be received by Goldstone Tracking Station. If mission were delayed and moon were not visible from Goldstone while TV was scheduled, signals would be received at Parkes, transmitted to Sydney, and transmitted to NASA’s Mission Control Center at Houston via Intelsat-III F—3 over Pacific. (NASA Release 69—72)
Saturn V (left) thrust Apollo 11 spacecraft toward the moon, watched by former nasa Administrator James E. Webb (below at left), former President Lyndon B. Johnson, and Vice President Spiro T. Agnew at Kennedy Space Center. In ksc Launch Control Center (above) mission officials relaxed after launch; left to right were Charles W. Matthews, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr, George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; and l/g Samuel C, Phillips, Apollo Program Director. was heading was in center of large, rugged crater with 5- to 10-ft-dia boulders. Consequently crew flew past crater to more suitable touchdown point by controlling attitude manually and adjusting descent rate and horizontal velocity. Officials later attributed change in course to malfunction in onboard radar and subsequent critical overload of computer, which caused warning alarms and could have aborted mission. lm landed on moon at 102:46 get (4:18 pm edt July 20) in Sea of Tranquility, 20,800 ft west and 4,000—5,000 ft south of center of planned landing ellipse. Landing-point coordinates were approximately 23,5°E and 0.64°N and site altitude was approximately 8,600 ft below moon’s mean radius. Armstrong reported: “Houston, Tranquility Base here—the Eagle has landed.” Mission Control replied: “Roger, Tranquility. We copy you on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We are breathing again. Thanks a lot.” Armstrong said landing area contained numerous boulders up to two feet in diameter, some apparently fractured by LM engine exhaust, and surface color varied from very light to dark gray. Crew immediately adapted to one-sixth (earth) gravity in lm and moved with ease. About two hours after landing astronauts requested and were granted permission to perform extravehicular activities (eva) on moon’s surface before sleep period—about 4Vs hrs earlier than originally scheduled. After postlanding checks, Armstrong opened LM hatch, descended lm ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera, which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Aldrin remained inside LM and recorded Armstrong’s descent with 16-mm Maurer camera. Armstrong took man’s first step on moon at 109:24 get (10:56 pm EDT July 20). Some 600 million viewers on earth—one-fifth of world population—watched live TV transmission and heard him describe feat as “one small step for a man—one giant leap for mankind.” Collins, orbiting moon alone in CSM Columbia, was unable to see landing and subsequent eva because csm was not equipped to receive TV transmission. Armstrong said moon had “stark beauty all its own"’ like desert in southwestern U.S. Lunar surface was “fine and powdery” and could be kicked up loosely- “It adheres like powdered charcoal . . . but I only go jn a small fraction of an inch. I can see my footprint in the moon like fine grainy particles.” Armstrong checked EM exterior and reported penetration of EM footpads into lunar surface was three to four inches and that strut collapse was minimal. Blast of descent engine had not formed crater in surface and about one foot of clearance remained between engine bell and lunar surface. He reported only problem was seeing his footing in darkness of lm shadow. He emplaced microdot containing messages from world leaders, collected contingency sample of lunar soil near lm ladder, and reported that, although surface consisted of soft loose material, material six or eight inches under surface was very hard and cohesive. Rocks were very slippery, apparently because vesicles (pores) were filled with powdery surface material. Armstrong photographed Aldrin’s descent to lunar surface at 11:15 pm edt and astronauts unveiled plaque mounted on strut behind ladder and read its inscription to tneir worldwide TV audience; “Here men from the planet earth first set foot on the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.*’ Armstrong then removed TV camera from MESA, obtained panorama, and placed camera on tripod 40 ft from LM to view subsequent EVA, Aldrin experimented to assess mobility on moon by walking, running, leaping, and doing twofooted kangaroo hops between LM and camera. He indicated some difficulty in maintaining balance but said that his agility was better than expected and that he was able to move with great ease. Mass of backpack affected inertia and caused “slight tendency ... to tip backwards, If I’m about to lose my balance in one direction, recovery is quite natural and easy. You’ve just got to be careful landing in die direction you want to go in.” Aldrin deployed solar wind composition experiment in sunlight north of LM and joined Armstrong in erecting three, by five-foot American flag on eight-foot aluminum staff. Astronauts saluted flag and then talked by radiotelephone with President Nixon at White House in what President called “most historic telephone call ever made from the White House,” President said: “Because of what you have done the heavens have become a part of man’s world. As you talk to us from the Sea of Tranquility, it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to earth. For one priceless moment in t	mn 1 rssi xh-e mi m First footsteps on H.-Kficn: TM* ■#* tLCtt UTI, EfMMK, JDIT H, I*, ’I.K JQTTWat LA UHIE GOHOIIi; 1g_ll*k u*w JtAVU *1 THE TIMES sS JMan takes first steps on the moon . |..rsn magnthg, r y«m\ && | ip- * l=ij s the whole history of man all the people on this earth are truly one— one in their pride in what you have done and one in our prayers that you will return safely to earth.” Astronauts saluted President and expressed honor and privilege of representing U.S. and world on moon. Continuing eva, Armstrong collected bulk sample of assorted surface materia] and selected rock chunks, inspected lm, deployed passive seismic experiment package and laser ranging retroreflector, and collected two core samples and 20 lbs of discretely selected material. Throughout EVA continuous black-and-white coverage of crew activity provided live documentation, with telemetered data and voice comments. Lunar surface photography included both still and sequence coverage using Hasselbtad, Maurer data-acquisition, and Apollo lunar surface close-up cameras. Astronauts completed eva, transferred film and samples to LM, reentered LM and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by Hl:39 get (1:11 am edt July 21). Armstrong and Aldrin rested inside LM seven hours and checked out systems. At 124:22 get (1:54 pm July 21) lm successfully lifted off moon, after 21 hrs 36 min on lunar surface. All lunar ascent and rendezvous maneuvers were nominal. Eagle reported to Mission Control: “Eagle TOUm 0EU5MDE, YLtEOIMWA. JULY Jl, BMHTHIfJ! [ISSl RMlflBM	jiebUwJ ^LV¥~l* J_—
House adopted conference report on H.R. 11271, FY 1970 NASA authorization, and sent it to Senate for further action. Report retained Senate’s $3.716-billion authorization—$280 million below FY 1969 NASA authorization and $285 million less than $3,966 billion passed by House June 10. It accepted House amendment requiring astronauts to plant U.S. flag on any planet visited for first time on U.S.-financed mission, Senate amendment requiring public disclosure of names and salaries of employees who exchanged positions between NASA and aerospace industry, and House provision withholding funds to any college which barred military recruiters. (House Rpt 91—609; CR, 11/6/69, H10679-84)
At New York meeting sponsored by Goddard Institute for Space Studies, msc, and Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, msc scientist Wilbur R. Wollenhaupt said Apollo 8 computer had erred in prediction of spacecraft’s position by 15,000 ft in range and 1,500 ft in elevation. Apollo 10 computer erred only 2,000 ft in range and 500 ft in elevation with programming of more accurate model of moon’s asymmetrical gravity field. Apollo 10 results made it likely Apollo 11 could be guided to extremely accurate landing in July. Dr. Richard Lingenfelter of ucla described study of meandering tracks across moon’s surface which showed evidence that at least 130 river-like rifles around large circular lunar mare had been formed by flowing water. Evidence was presented from gravity studies and magnetic observations in nearby space that moon’s interior was homogeneous rather than subdivided into heavy core surrounded by lighter mantle. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/7/69, 16)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from WSMR with VAM—20 boosters. Aerobee 150 carried Naval Research Laboratory payload to 124.0-mi (199.6-km) altitude to photograph images of sun and part of corona in 150-400 A and 400—650 A region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and excellent spectroheliograms were obtained. Aerobee 150 MI carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., payload to 112.5-mi (181-km) altitude to obtain high-resolution pictures of time development of solar flare in x-ray region of spectrum. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, photographing IB limb flare with appreciable x-ray emission that lasted throughout flight. (nasa Rpts srl)
nasa announced resignation of Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, effective Dec. 10. No successor was named and Dr. Mueller did not reveal his plans for future. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, nasa Administrator, said: “It is due to Dr. Mueller’s creative leadership of the magnificent manned space flight organization that the flight of Apollo 11 . . . achieved the national goal set in May, 1961.	. . . We regret that Dr. Mueller has made the decision to return to private life, but recognize that decision comes at a time when the task he accepted is complete and a sound foundation for our future national space program has been established.” Dr. Mueller, who had directed manned space flight program for six years, had received nasa Distinguished Service Medal, achieved early operational flight schedule in Gemini program, formulated concept for thorough and comprehensive ground testing permitting all-up flight testing and early operational availability of Saturn-Apollo hardware, introduced improved techniques that established efficient management of nationwide industrial complex for first lunar landing and return on schedule and within cost, and formulated low-cost space transportation and operations which were basis for space shuttle and space station programs. (NASA Release 69—151)
Inaccurate signals from controlling gyro mechanism had caused Sept. 17 destruction of AH—56A helicopter inside wind tunnel at arc, nasa announced. Investigation board, appointed by arc Director, Dr. Hans Mark, had determined accident did not result from malfunction of rotor control system or of wind-tunnel systems and equipment. Board recommended greater use of computers to analyze rotor systems before test, study of safety systems and hazards and procedures for windtunnel crews in emergencies, and addition of metal barriers to protect control room and sections near tunnel. It said visual close observation of tests should be minimized. AH—56A was under study for stability and control at USA request. (NASA Release 69-154)
Oso VI Orbiting Solar Observatory (launched Aug. 9) was adjudged successful by NASA. All spacecraft systems had operated satisfactorily and all primary objectives had been met. Spacecraft had been operating at slightly lower than expected temperatures and elevation motor current was higher than on previous flights. As result, elevation servo jitter was less than 2 arc secs, zero to peak, best achieved on any OSO flight, (nasa Proj Off)
McDonald Observatory in Texas successfully recorded its first hits on laser reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts at 9:30 pm cdt. Scientists said distance at that moment was 232,271.406 mi and moon was 131.2 ft farther from earth than previously believed. Lick Observatory in California had recorded first hits Aug. 1 and had estimated earth-moon distance to be 226,970.9 mi at that time. (AP, W Star, 8/21/69, A3)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs had common problem—what to do next in space exploration, Associated Press quoted Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov as saying in Moscow. Both countries understood need for new space exploration technology, “and we, as well as the Americans, are facing the choice of a new direction.” (AP, W Post, 11/14/69)	_	_
FRC announced award of $1.8-million NASA contract to North American Rockwell Corp. for construction of new supercritical aircraft wing. Wing, which utilized airfoil shape with flat top and rear edge curved downward, had been developed by Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb and tested at LaRC. Wind tunnel tests indicated new shape could allow highly efficient cruise flight at nearly 600 mph at 45,000-ft altitude. By increasing cruise speeds without increasing power, wing might significantly reduce operational cost of subsonic jet transport flights and allow faster travel, lower fuel consumption and costs, increased operational range, or increased payload. Wing would be mounted on modified Navy F—j fighter aircraft at frc for flight testing, (frc Releases 4-69, 15-69)
Leonard Mandelbaum in Science briefly examined history of U.S. decision to adopt Apollo program. “Cautious approach” to manned space flight gave way after impact of April 12, 1961, “Russian spectacular” —flight of Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin—and U.S. Cuban foreign policy fiasco, Bay of Pigs. “Congress acted without hearing testimony of compelling military need. The Apollo decision was made without reference to any comprehensive and integrated national policy designed to maximize the use of scientific and technological resources for social objectives. ... It was a typical Cold War reaction.” (Science, 2/14/69, 649)
msc announced Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had been cleared medically for return to space flight status following correction of inner ear disorder which had grounded him in 1963. (NYT, 5/8/69, 2; W Post, 5/8/69, A7)
President Johnson in message transmitting FY 1970 budget to Congress said major recommended decreases in budget authority from 1969 to 1970 included $235 million for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, which “will provide for a program level equal to 1969 when combined with prior year funds.” Major increases included “522 million for airway modernization, highways, and other activities” in DOT. Of estimated $11.6 billion increase in total budget outlays, $0.5 billion was for national defense, “largely for improvements in our strategic forces, modernization of our tactical air forces, and other increased research and development efforts needed to assure sufficient deterrent power in the future. These increases will be substantially offset by reduced outlays for Vietnam resulting from changing combat patterns and revised supply requirements. ... In keeping with national priorities, major social programs account for largest portion” of increase. President said: “The record of achievements of the past 5 years is an impressive one. We have witnessed a period of unprecedented economic growth, with expanded production, rising standards jof living, and the lowest rates of unemployment in a decade and a half. Our military forces today are the strongest in the world. . . . Last month saw man’s first successful flight to the moon. In domestic matters, the legislative and executive branches, cooperatively, have forged new tools to open wider the doors of opportunity for a better life for all Americans. “This Nation remains firmly committed to a world of peace and human dignity. In seeking these goals, we have achieved great military strength with the sole aim of deterring and resisting aggression. We have continued to assist other nations struggling to provide a better life for their people. We are successfully pushing forward the frontiers of knowledge to outer space and promoting scientific and technological advances of enormous potential for benefit to mankind.” {PD, 1/20/69, 70-90; CR, 1/15/69, S195-208)
Controversy was building up over astronauts’ future, Apollo program, and manned space flight generally, Harry Schwartz said in New York Times. Three major debates were over whether engineer-astronauts or scientist-astronauts should be sent on future Apollo missions; who should control mission schedules and astronaut activities, “nasa hierarchy” or ground-based scientists in NASA; and whether U.S. should emphasize unmanned probes or crash program to put men on Mars in early 1980s. “The fact that it is the scientists who have been resigning while astronauts with test pilot backgrounds have been receiving unprecedented public acclaim makes it evident where the balance of power lies for the moment within nasa. But the issue is far from settled, since NASA itself must and does use the prospect of scientific advances as a key argument in seeking appropriations for space activities. Hence the dissident scientists could have substantial leverage if they teamed up with Congressmen and others who oppose the space appropriations for other reasons. It would not be surprising ... if nasa sought to ease the scientists’ irritation by satisfying some of their demands.” {NYT, 8/17/69, D2)
Dr. Vesto M. Slipher, astronomer who headed team that discovered planet Pluto in 1930 and discoverer of aurora-like radiations of night sky, died at age 93. He had been director of Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Ariz., 1916—1954. (upi, LA Times, 11/10/69)
At confirmation hearing on his appointment as Director of Office of Science and Technology before Senate Labor and Public Welfare Committee, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge said he would place his energies on analysis of weapon systems, environment and effect of technology and pollution on environment, and utilization of science and technology by Government departments. He planned to concern himself with social problems and hoped to increase social scientists on President’s Science Advisory Committee from one to two. He hoped for increased funding for hud and dot, and regretted allocations for basic research were declining in dod, NASA, and aec because such agencies “will profit by good relations with universities.” (Nelson, Science, 2/14/69, 657)
Solid-fuel U.K. Falstaff rocket, carrying equipment to measure vibrations and temperatures, reached mach 5 after launch from Australian monorail launcher at Woomera, Australia, in joint U.K.-Australia research program. (Interavia, 11/69, 1751)
Terre Haute [Ind.j Star said: “In backing Columbus, according to Samuel Eliot Morison, historian, Queen Isabella had two motives: To make a buck in the spice trade, and to open new territories for her Catholic missionaries. It did not occur to her that she was about to change the history of mankind. That is the way of most turning points in human history. The Manhattan Project which resulted in the atomic bomb was basically a defensive move against the danger of Germany’s doing it first. It launched the atomic age. Johann Gutenberg found a way to print with movable type for the simple reason that he wanted more people to read the Bible. He had no idea that he was introducing mass literacy. These great human adventures had two things in common: They were done for practical reasons, and most contemporaries said, 'who needs it?’ The space program began for practical, everyday reasons. Russia’s Sputnik scared the pants off most Americans. The initial goal of catching up with the Russians has been achieved, and this is part of the reason why there is now a slowing interest. However . . . this country now has the potential of changing the world. . . . The U.S. should continue in the forefront of space exploration, with a well-funded and stable program. Space should continue to have a permanent, though not extravagant, position in the priority of national goals.” (Terre Haute Star, 5/29/69)
House Appropriations Committee approved full $95.9 million requested by President Nixon for continued sst development. (CR, 11/13/69, D1065; AP, B Sun, 11/14/69) At 42nd scientific session of American Heart Assn, in Dallas, Tex., Dutch scientist Dr. A. C. Arntzenius described application of jet propulsion principle—for every movement in one direction, there is an equal opposite movement—in experiments to increase blood pumped by animal heart without increasing heart action. With research team from medical faculty of Rotterdam he had strapped piglets and dogs to “frictionless” table that slid in synchronization with animal heartbeat. Movement made it unnecessary for ventricle to expend energy to accelerate blood as it left heart. When blood started toward animal’s head, table was moved in direction of its feet, forcing blood in opposite direction without adding to demands on heart, (tipi, W Star, 11/23/69, All; Am Heart Assn pio)
Specific objectives of lunar exploration were discussed in testimony by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Evaluation of natural resources on 14.6-million-sq-mi lunar surface would include minerals of yet undetermined nature and unique combination of high vacuum and gravitational field one-sixth as strong as earth’s. “On the results of our evaluation will depend our decision some years from now as to whether there is sufficient potential to justify establishing a lunar base.” NASA also would investigate use of moon as “island near our shores to which we can voyage ... to develop man’s potential to function as an explorer throughout the solar system.” (Testimony)
Testifying before Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Joseph B. Mahon, NASA’s Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, OSSA, said NASA planned to use Titan IIIC and Titan Centaur to carry out high-velocity Viking mission in FY 1970. They would provide capability for both orbital and lander scientific experimentation and would expand launch window. After proof test flight in 1972 of integrated Improved Centaur and Titan III, configuration would be flown in support of 1973 Viking mission and other planetary missions, as well as earth synchronous missions using 4,000- to 8,000-lb spacecraft. Titan IIIC also would be used on two synchronous-altitude missions, ats—f and ats—G. (Transcript)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station carrying Dudley Observatory payload to collect micrometeoroids. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight voted to add $230.5 million to $2.212-billion authorization requested by NASA for manned space flight in FY 1970. Of raise, $168 million was earmarked for development of scientific payloads for six manned lunar landings between 1970 and 1973 and $66 million for space flight operations to cover flying men in earth orbit for month at a time, in 1970 onward. Flights were to be forerunners of orbiting space stations. (CR, 3/26/69, D233; Committee member)
Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service published United States and Soviet Rivalry in Space: Who Is Ahead, and How Do the Contenders Compare? by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Senior Specialist in Space Transportation and Technology, Science Policy Research Div. By June 30, 1969, U.S. expected to have spent $50.6 billion on space. Because of greater weight of Soviet hardware, “one could assume that their program is at least of the same magnitude . . . and may be larger.” While “there is no reason to believe their total aerospace industry is as fully equipped as our own,” missiles in Moscow parades indicated existence of multiple design and development team for space work. Each country seemed adequately equipped with launch pads and ground support. While U.S. had worldwide tracking system supplemented by ships and electronics-carrying aircraft, U.S.S.R. accepted “certain constraints,” relying on ships to fill gaps in tracking system. U.S. launch vehicles ranged from those lifting 20 lbs to Saturn V capable of 285,000-lb lift to low earth orbit. U.S.S.R. still used basic icbm vehicle introduced in 1957, with upper stages added to improve performance. While NASA program was run on open basis, there was less “openness” in dod. U.S.S.R. “holds to a minimum advance notice of flights, limits information . . . but at least makes a prompt announcement, assigns a name, and gives orbital parameters” of successful launches. There seemed little difference between space programs “as to general purpose and direction.” Both placed emphasis on military, though little was known of Soviet organization pattern. All “reasonable analyses are fairly convincing that up to this time the Soviet Union has not placed nuclear bombs in orbit.” In space applications U.S. “has held a clear lead from the earlier days.” U.S.S.R. “has made a greater relative effort in . . . flights committed to lunar and planetary work than the United States” but “has not gained as good results.” In future programs, both nations “undoubtedly have to face hard budget choices before actual hardware can begin.” Soviet goal was “comprehensive exploitation of space technology including the exploration and settlement (where practical) of the planets, along the way exploring the Moon in great detail, and using Earth orbital stations for a host of practical purposes.” While large orbital station would be within NASA’s technical capabilities in late 1970s, beginning of such capability probably already existed in U.S.S.R., but “it would be risky to predict whether such a station will appear soon or only after some years.” Cooperation of U.S. and U.S.S.R. in space already existed in exchange of information, treaties, plans for trading space-collected weather pictures, plans for joint textbook on space biology, and joint efforts in geomagnetism, but no assessment could be made of future prospects. (Text)
Aerospace Industries Assn, released Annual Report 1968: Aerospace industry had gained “in virtually every major category”: sales reached record $30.1 billion, up 10.5% over 1967, with turbine-powered commercial aircraft sales accounting for $3.73 billion, up 211% over 1965. General-aviation aircraft sales reached 13,698 units valued at $426 million. Civil helicopter production increased to 528 units valued at $59 million, dod sales reached $16.9 billion, up nearly 7% over 1967; nonmilitary sales decreased 3.7%, to $4,047 billion. Backlog at end of third quarter was due primarily to commercial transport orders. (Text)
Ogo VI Orbiting Geophysical Observatory, launched into low-altitude polar orbit June 5, was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had completed first diurnal cycle and had provided data on global characteristics of neutral atmosphere; association of electric fields with ionospheric irregularities; airglow emissions associated with oxygen, sodium, and molecular nitrogen; and propagation of proton whistlers. Performance of Ogo VI subsystems had been excellent and instrumentation for 23 of 25 experiments was operational. Active three-axis stabilization had been maintained since initial acquisition and gas usage was consistent with one-year operation. To extend attitude-stabilized lifetime beyond one year, operations plan had been modified to include manual control of gas jet firing, (nasa Proj Off)
In ceremony at msc, NASA presented awards including 12 Distinguished Service Medals, recognizing contributions to Apollo 8 space mission by groups and individuals in NASA, dod, and industry. dsm, NASA’s highest award, was presented to Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, ksc; Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director, msc; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations, msc; George M. Low, Manager, Apollo Program Office, MSC; Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Rocco A. Petrone, Director of Launch Operations, ksc; l/g Samuel C. Phillips, NASA Apollo Program Director; Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, Deputy Director (Technical), msfc; Arthur Rudolph, Manager, Saturn V Program Office, msfc; William C. Schneider, Manager, Apollo Applications Program; Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director, MSFC. Exceptional Service Medals were awarded to 62 persons and Public Service Awards to 22. Group Achievement Awards went to U.S.S. Yorktown (CVS—10) and Embarked Air Group, Manned Space Flight Network, and NASA Office of Public Affairs. Public Service Group Achievement Award was presented to Apollo 8 Communication Network and Certificate of Appreciation was awarded to University-NASA Scientific and Technology Advisory Committee (stac). (nasa Special Release 1/13/69; NASA pao)
Systems approach was needed in applying “human and technological resources to domestic problems,” Space/Aeronautics said. Growth areas for aerospace industry spinoff included urban, environmental, surface-transportation, medical, and ocean systems. Lessons to be learned in dealing with these systems were: (1) massive problems required efforts on massive scale; (2) R&D cycle for civil system was always longer than political cycle being counted on to support it; and (3) even when system was built jurisdictional prerogatives could “make a mess of the implementation.” Aerospace companies should employ their capabilities “to assess their experience in high technology and their managerial skills” and apply experience “to new systems challenges.” (S/A, 1/69, 106-7)
History of Jet Propulsion Laboratory from 1936, “when the ‘crazy scientists’ under . . . Dr. Theodore von Karman lit off one of their rockets in the dry gulch called the Arroyo Seco,” to current time, when “jpl’s sights are set a little higher—and farther out,” was traced by John Lannan in Washington Sunday Star, jpl controlled NASA Deep Space Network with jurisdiction over space efforts 10,000 mi from earth and beyond, though its Goldstone facility also had participated with gsfc in support of Apollo 11. Its space flight operation facility was “actual directorate” for handling cosmic penetration flights. It was currently gearing for Martian orbiter series in 1971 and for 1973 Viking landers. Future held possibilities of developing and directing missions leading to Grand Tour of planets. JPL was owned by Federal Government and staffed and operated by Cal Tech. (W Star, 8/10/69, G3)
Copy of original tape recording of excited voices of astronomers as they discovered first optical pulsar on night of Jan. 15—16 had been deposited in Niels Bohr Library, American Institute of Physics Newsletter noted. Tape, made accidentally during moment when optical pulses from Crab Nebula were discovered, had been preserved by discovery team, W. J. Cooke, M. J. Disney, and D. J. Taylor at Steward Observatory, Univ. of Arizona, (aip Newsletter, 5/69)
Harvard Univ. biologist Dr. George Wald and mit physicist Dr. Bruno Rossi disclosed that some 251 nas members out of 806 had signed letter to President Nixon expressing continued opposition to deployment by U.S. of abm system. Letter said, “Russia is as well prepared to build such devices as we are. This can only introduce a new and perhaps disastrous spiral in the arms race. Our science and technology, rather than being used to add further to the present ‘balance of terror,’ needs to be redirected to solving pressing problems of poverty, malnutrition, control of population, and improvement of the human environment for our own people and people everywhere.” (AP, W Post, 3/22/69, A5)
NASA announced selection of RCA Service Co. to receive two-year, costplus^award-fee contract with one-year option for logistic support to Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan), Manned Space Flight Network (msfn), and nasa Communications Network (nascom). Contract was expected to exceed $17 million, (nasa Release 69-127)
U.S.S.R.’s supersonic transport, Tu-144, made second test flight. Of 50-min duration, flight did not achieve supersonic speed, according to Pravda. (Reuters, NYT, 1/11/69, 65)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said at press conference following tour of October I: nasa launched Boreas, European Space Research Organization satellite, to study the aurora borealis and polar atmosphere. In the photo the spacecraft teas prepared for launch on a four-stage Scout booster from the Western Test Range. jpl:	, the cities may benefit more from what’s happening right here at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory than they do from what’s happening in some community action agency. Now, I’m not downgrading the need to work closely with people . . . but I think it would be a desperate mistake ... to adopt an attitude that we do not challenge the unknown, we do not move forward simply because we can’t predict what we’re going to find.” Columbus “didn’t find what he went for but he found something even better. Maybe that applies to the situation with regard to the ultimate goal . . . about landing a man on Mars. . . . we may do something a lot better.” In reply to question, he said: “We will never reach a point where we’ll have enough money for . . . the problems of the cities and of the population. . . . we could spend every resource we have and forego any scientific exploration and forget the need to research and develop new techniques. ... I suppose you come down to the final determination that you’ve got to put some of your effort in the future and not all of it in the present. And I don’t think the lack of a focus in the space program would be a benefit at all to the future of the cities and the problems you mention.” (Transcript)
nas released Scientific Uses of the Large Space Telescope, report of ad hoc committee of nas—nrc Space Science Board appointed to consider scientific functions and practical feasibility of placing in earth orbit or on lunar surface diffraction-limited, optical telescope with 120—in aperture. Committee concluded lst would make dominant contribution to understanding content, structure, scale, and evolution of universe and provide important, decisive information in other astronomical fields; efficient space astronomy program would also require continuing series of smaller telescopes; and most effective utilization of powerful space telescope would require substantial increase in ground-based instruments. (Text)
President Nixon approved “Policy on Expanded Use of Federal Research Facilities by University Investigators” which directed Federal agencies to make equipment in Federal laboratories more readily available to qualified university scientists. He directed Dr. Lee A. DuBridge to monitor execution of policy with help of Federal Council for Science and Technology, which had recommended adoption. (PD, 3/3/69, 304)
Tass quoted unidentified Soviet space scientist, described as chief designer of automatic interplanetary stations, as saying U.S.S.R. favored manned space flight, but only in earth orbit “so far.” It would continue probing planets with automatic apparatus. (Reuters, B Sun, 5/19/69,
NASA announced selection of Heliodyne Corp. and Wolf Research and Development Corp. for final negotiations leading to one-year $1-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract with two one-year options to operate National Space Science Data Center at gsfc, (nasa Release 69-118)
Space Power Facility, with world’s largest high-vacuum chamber (100-ft dia by 120-ft height, containing 800,000 cu ft), and Spacecraft Propulsion Research Facility were opened officially at LeRC. Space Power Facility—to test large, space electric power generating systems and spacecraft—would first test Brayton cycle power system operated with nuclear isotope or solar heat. Facility could produce equivalent of vacuum in space 100 to 300 mi above earth. Propulsion Research Facility would be used first for development of Centaur, 2nd-stage rocket vehicle. (LeRC Release 69-54)
New York Times editorial: “Now it appears that the solution to the cosmic ray mystery may be intimately related to the explanation for the strangest astronomical phenomena discovered in recent years, if not all history, the pulsars.” Present favored explanation “views pulsars as neutron stars composed of matter packed so tightly that a mass the weight of the earth would be a sphere with a diameter of a few hundred feet. The extremely swift rotation of a neutron star, it is now theorized, produces both the periodic radio emissions of the pulsars and the super-energetic cosmic rays.” (NYT, 5/9/69, 46)
Members of Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of House Committee on Science and Astronautics visited msfc for inspection tour and hearings. Chairman Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) was ranking Representative. (msfc Release 69—72)
AH—56A helicopter, under development by Lockheed California Co. for USA, was destroyed when it broke loose and moved downwind inside wind tunnel at ARC. Flying debris punctured steel wall and injured two men in control room. (NASA Release 69—154)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, as Field Director of Space Station Studies for NASA, told Pasadena, Calif., press conference before addressing annual meeting of Chamber of Commerce there were five valid reasons for continuing space program despite high cost: (1) need for program that challenged U.S. in only way it could in time of peace, (2) educational impact of space technology in lower grades as well as among graduates, (3) scientific findings in space, (4) sheer quest and exploration, and (5) tendency of all countries to cooperate and perhaps realize earth’s fragility. Borman said, “I hope we can isolate successes and failures from funding because I think space exploration is an important phase of American life.” {LA Times, 5/28/69; Pasadena Star-News, 5/28/69)
In New York news conference, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said U.S. was (in danger of going “out of the manned spaceflight business” unless more funds were provided in Federal budget for projects beyond Apollo. He said U.S.S.R. probably would surpass U.S. in space exploration in 1970s. Current Soviet space expenditure was “about 50 percent greater than ours.” (Wilford, NYT, 1/29/69, 11; NY News, 1/30/69)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) introduced S. 3003, “to provide for more effective control over the expenditure of funds by the Department of Defense and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration for independent research and development.” Measure was referred to Senate Committee on Armed Services. (CR, 10/8/69, S12100)
Two photometers on board NASA’s Ogo V orbiting geophysical observatory (launched March 4, 1968) had successfully scanned Lyman-alpha radiation, nasa announced. Data were expected to provide new information on Lyman-alpha emission from Milky Way and to help determine what portion of observed radiation was from geocorona and what portion was from outer space. On Sept. 12 Ogo V had pointed at sun and spun slowly while scanning mirror in Univ. of Paris experiment rotated, covering 30° of celestial sphere. On Sept. 14 spacecraft returned to normal three-axis-stabilized operation, where it would remain until December when second series of maneuvers would be conducted to cover remaining portion of sky and provide first complete mapping of extraterrestrial Lyman-alpha radiation. Univ. of Colorado photometer, which provided broader coverage of Lyman-alpha radiation at 180° to Univ. of Paris experiment, would be used to confirm measurements and verify calibration levels. Ogo V had 18 of 24 onboard experiments still operating. It had provided first measurements of electric fields in earth’s bow shock and comprehensive data on particles and fields in earth’s magnetosphere. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69—137)
usaf’s Arnold Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn., had “brought much of the universe down to pocket-size” for scientists working on Apollo 10, Henry J. Taylor wrote in 1Washington Daily News. Tests to establish spacecraft’s ability to withstand lunar environment were under way in Center’s 216,000-hp wind tunnel, which produced 8,000-mph winds and was “largest hypersonic wind tunnel in the free world.” {W News, 5/14/69, 31)
Soviet astronomer Dr. Nikolay A. Kozyrev had revealed detection by Pulkovo Observatory of volcanic activity on moon, Space Business Daily reported. Two spectrograms of Aristarchus crater’s western side taken April I had shown “an unusual red spot of approximately 102 kilometers [63.4 mi]” which was “result of the emission of gases— molecular nitrogen and cyanogen.” Emissions, which had occurred one day after earthquakes in U.A.R. and Japan, affirmed link between tectonic phenomena on earth and moon and showed “that the moon had ‘responded’ to this terrestrial phenomenon.” (SBD, 5/15/69, 67)
MSFC announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. to receive 11-mo, $2,899,986 contract for preliminary design and planning for 12-man earth-orbital space station for possible mid-1970 launch. Station— initial element of large space base and means of investigating effects of long-duration space flight on man—would have 10-yr lifetime, subject to expendables resupply and crew rotation. Parallel effort' was being conducted by Msc and North American Rockwell Corp. (msfc Release 69-204)
In Bonn during European tour, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman addressed enthusiastic crowd of 1,500 students and government officials after film showing on lunar mission in Beethoven Hall: “I believe this research will teach us that we are first and foremost not Germans or Russians or Americans but earthmen.” Borman met West German Chancellor Kurt Georg Kiesinger at lunch and later discussed space research with Scientific Affairs Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg. He attended evening reception given by West German Air and Space Research Institute. (Falbe, B Sun, 2/12/69)
NASA’s alleged neglect of pure science research goals in favor of engineering pursuits and “glamor” had caused undercurrent of dissatisfaction among scientists, Science noted. When interviewed by Science Dr. F. Curtis Michel, Dr. Donald U. Wise, and Dr. Elbert A. King, who had resigned from NASA recently, declined to attribute their resignations directly to major dissatisfactions with nasa and denied that they had resigned to protest emphasis on engineering rather than scientific research. They did, however, express some dissatisfaction with role of basic science in space exploration and impatience with NASA’s management of scientific projects and admitted they were lured from nasa by prospects of new positions that offered more time for scientific research. (Science, 8/22/69, 776—8)
The Biomedical Foundations of Manned Space Flight: A Report of the Space Science and Technology Panel of the President’s Science Advisory Committee was submitted to President’s Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge: “In order to define an appropriate mix of manned and unmanned operations, NASA will need to ‘qualify man for space flight’ in the broadest sense. That is, NASA should pursue a biomedical program which explores the optimization of man’s role in space, the limitations on his effectiveness and means to circumvent those limitations ... a program to determine the best use of man as a space subsystem in interaction with automated subsystems. An effective program directed to this objective exceeds the present capabilities of NASA and involves resources not yet developed in the biomedical community.” Report criticized NASA for not implementing previous recommendations toward strong biomedical research capability. “Pressures for early and reasonably certain success led to placing primary emphasis initially on validation of the capability to construct, orbit, and recover manned spacecraft, with long-range, scientific goals in the biomedical field set aside as potentially interfering with flight objectives. Scientific requirements were thus deemphasized at the very time when development of basic scientific knowledge and a cadre of scientific talent should have been begun.” NASA was now faced “with the question of qualifying man for more complex tasks in space, for longer duration flights, and of evaluating man as an integral part of the spacecraft man-machine system, without sound biomedical foundation.” In particular, “decisions concerning development directions for the next generation of manned spacecraft systems for use in earth orbit must be made without an adequate basis of understanding.” NASA should plan overall biomedical program using resources, personnel, and experience of other Government areas, especially dod, and support multidisciplinary environmental medical laboratories within universities. Report favored international cooperation in space exploration for peaceful purposes, close communications with biomedical community, and broadened participation of biomedical scientists in space flight programs. NASA should affiliate biologically and medically trained astronauts with research components of NASA or qualified institutions. They should be assigned to msc flight-crew organization only when participating in specific missions. Report recommended that NASA consider separating space biomedical research from organization conducting space missions and from flight medical services. (Text)
Laser range-finding equipment was installed at afcrl’s Lunar Laser Observatory near Tucson, Ariz. Constructed largely with nasa funding, Observatory was built specifically for lunar laser-ranging experiments. (oar Research Review, 3—4/70, 31)
Astronaut promotion policy seemed “certain to discomfit someone after the end of Apollo 12 no matter whether it’s followed or ignored,” Washington Post said. President Johnson had decreed in 1965 that each military astronaut would get one spot promotion after his first space flight. Apollo 12 commander Charles (Pete) Conrad, Jr., and cm pilot Richard F. Gordon, Jr., had both received promotions to commander, usn. Apollo 12 LM Pilot Alan L. Bean, also commander, USN, now rated promotion to captain, but was junior crewman in age, service in grade, and space experience. Bean promotion might “irritate” others but would be fair to Bean. Promotion for all three astronauts would be “unfair to other astronauts who have flown twice or three times and only promoted once.” President Nixon might have to make “sticky” decision. (W Post, 11/21/69, A17)
NASA announced appointment of Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, as Acting Associate. Administrator for Manned Space Flight, replacing Dr. George E. Mueller. (nasa Ann)
Soviet scientist Dr. Valery A. Krasheninnikev and academician Dr. Aleksandr P. Lisitzin had returned to San Diego from 55 days with U.S. Deep Sea Drilling Project aboard drilling ship Glomar Challenger convinced their findings were “more important to man than the samples from the moon,” Associated Press reported. Concentrated drilling between Honolulu and Guam had produced rocks and sedimentary cores showing microorganisms in perfect state of preservation. They might provide history of earth’s creation. Project was cooperative venture of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Lamont Geological Observatory of Columbia Univ., Univ. of Miami Institute of Marine Science, and Univ. of Washington. [NYT, 8/10/69, 45)
In New York Times Magazine, Dr. Ralph E. Lapp, physicist, wrote: “. . . I would urge that we alter the U.S. space program as follows: First, make a firm decision to terminate the manned space program soon after the initial lunar landing. ... I would reserve the remaining Apollo craft for future unmanned missions to the planets and I would mothball the single-purpose manned space flight facilities. At the same time, I would continue a n.a.S.a. program of long-range space development aimed at advanced modes of propulsion, compact energy sources and improved long-distance communication. High priority would be assigned to the development of nuclear energy both for propulsion and for on-board power. “Second, greatly expand n.a.s.a.’s present program for exploiting applications of space science and technology. The potential of satellites for communications . . . needs to be enhanced by the development of new techniques. It should not be too difficult to develop orbital systems for the control of intercontinental air traffic. Perhaps the greatest benefits from satellites are to be expected in the survey and evaluation of earth resources, such as underground water, mineral deposits and plant-forest cover. . . . “Third, establish a high priority within n.a.S.a. for fundamental research using unmanned space vehicles ... 10 to 20 years in duration and . . . aimed at finding out more about our planet, the sun and the rest of the solar system. The most expensive—and probably the most dramatic—of these projects would be the planetary probes designed to fly by, orbit or land on the nearby planets.” (NYT, 2/2/69, 32—40)
usaf and Lockheed Georgia Co. jointly announced six-month delay in C—5A production schedule attributed to labor strikes and material shortages caused by Vietnam war. First aircraft would be delivered to USAF in December rather than June. Announcement followed successful test flight during which 250-ton aircraft reached complete stop on 1,500 ft of runway—44 distance required by conventional 85-ton airliners. (Lindsay, NYT, 2/26/69; AP, W Post, 2/27/69, A18)
Hot firing of twin RL-10 Centaur engines marked first use of LeRC’s new Spacecraft Propulsion Research Facility, B—2 stand, at Plum Brook Station, Ohio [see Oct. 7], and first Centaur tests at Plum Brook since structural tests in mid-1960s. Since then, Centaur, configured with 1st-stage Atlas, had launched seven Surveyor spacecraft to moon, two Mariner spacecraft to Mars, one oao, and one ATS. (LeRC Release 69-76)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced appointment of Dr. Robert J. Mackin, Jr., as Manager of Space Sciences Div., succeeding Dr. Donald P. Burcham. Dr. Burcham had been named Research and Advanced Development Manager for Space Science, JPL Office of Research and Advanced Development, (jpl Release 517)
nasa announced appointment of Robert N. Lindley, Vice President Program General Manager of McDonnell Douglas Corp., as Special Assistant to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, (nasa Ann)
Federation Aeronautique Internationale posthumously awarded its highest honor—Gold Medal—to nasa test pilot Joseph A. Walker for “his many enduring contributions to the advancement of aviation made during a 21-year flight research career marked by extraordinary perfection and valor.” . Award was received by his widow at Edwards afb ceremony. As FRC chief research pilot, Walker had flown X—15 to its highest altitude, 354,200 ft (67 mi); was first man to fly llrv astronaut training craft; was author of 20 technical papers and articles; and had taught Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong at frc. (frc Release 17—69)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried GSFCDudley Observatory payload to collect micrometeoroids during Perseid meteor shower and to study electric field. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and data were expected from all experiments. Data would be compared with data from Nike-Apache mission to be launched Aug. 22. (nasa Rpt SRL)
Lunar scientist Dr. Harold C. Urey discussed moon findings at San Diego, Calif., press conference after return from study of Apollo 11 lunar samples at lrl. There was “no evidence whatever” of life on moon and, “at present, no age of the rocks on the surface of the moon is known.” Fine dust on lunar surface consisted of 50% glass—10% in form of small beads, 40% as broken-up beads—and “something else” containing minerals similar to those in lunar rocks. Dust and rocks evidenced shock as though produced by “rather large collisions somewhere that dug up material considerably deeper in the moon than the few centimeters they have been investigating.” There was no evidence of water. Chemical analyses had shown high concentration of titanium in lunar samples characteristic of area where Surveyor V and Apollo 11 had landed. “No such . . . titanium concentration occurs anywhere that we know of on the surface of Earth.” No one had “anticipated what we are finding. And I believe that no one has a good explanation of how it got that way.” It would take “much more” than nine more Apollo manned landings to solve lunar mysteries. He saw no economic value in future lunar colonization but “an observatory on the moon would be a wonderful way to investigate the heavens, because the difficulties of the atmosphere would disappear.” (Space World, 12/69, 35—42)
At Apollo 11 splashdown party at Shoreham Hotel in Washington, D.C. —attended by Apollo 11 astronauts and wives—NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, announced new Apollo Achievement Award of lapel button and certificate. He presented awards to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller; former Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) ; and former Deputy Director of Apollo Program George H. Hage. (Beale, W Star, 9/10/69, FI)
gsfc scientists and Smithsonian Institution ecologist Dr. Helmut K.	Buechner planned to use female elk named Moe for first experiment in tracking animals by satellite, New York Times said. Wearing 23-lb instrumentation around neck, elk was expected to migrate from point in Wyoming to national elk refuge south of Yellowstone Park at Jackson Hole, Wyo.—100-mi distance. (Teltsch, NYT, 10/5/69, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, gave Invited Lecture Oct. 6 on Apollo program, space benefits, Apollo Applications program, and lunar exploration. Apollo Applications program would “study the earth through the use of a six lens multispectral camera installation. On Apollo 9 some of the rudimentary work was done using four lenses. 50% more kinds of information will be brought back by the crews of Apollo Applications. Because almost everything on earth has a different reflective quality, as distinctive as a signature or a fingerprint, results from this photographic exploration can be expected to yield rich rewards. Many of the earth sciences look to this kind of information for answers to previously unanswerable questions. Hydrologists are interested in discovering not only the depth, but also the temperature of the waters of the world, and these conditions can be ascertained from space. Warm water attracts certain species of fish, so fishermen are also interested in these experiments. “Agronomists believe that soil chemistry will reveal itself on a large scale in certain kinds of filtered photography. Agriculturists know that different crops, at different stages of their development and in different states of health, reflect distinctive amounts of light. They hope, using the photographs we will take, to get some measure of the world’s crop, as well as some knowledge of its condition. Geologists, who have found clues to mineral deposits in the Gemini and Apollo pictures, look to this more sophisticated photography for additional information, and for distinctions which will eventually permit certain kinds of prospecting from space. Cartographers and Geodesists are interested in everything from urban sprawl to continental drift.” Sun would be prime target for exploration in Apollo Applications program, with experiments conducted by astronaut-astronomers using Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) in orbit. “For the first time we will have a massive set of instruments with high resolution for looking in some depth and detail at the activities of the sun from beyond the veil of the earth’s atmosphere.” Program would consist of three missions into near-earth space, one of 28 days and two of 56 days each. First step would be establishment of Saturn V workshop in orbit, planned for March 1972 launch, followed by launches of solar panels, ATM, and crew of three for 28-day stay. Second manned mission was scheduled for launch about three months after first, with third to follow one month after return of second crew. (Text)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Wallops Station carrying Dudley Observatory payload to collect micrometeoroids. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj Off)
Aerobee 15Q A sounding rocket launched by nasa from NASA Wallops Station carried payload containing two white rats to 97.9-mi 157.6-km) altitude in fourth of four experiments to study rats’ behavior in artificial gravity field and determine minimum level of gravity needed by biological organisms during space flight. During free fall rats selected artificial gravity levels created through centrifugal action by walking along tunnel runway in extended arms of payload. Data on their position and movement were telemetered to ground stations. Last flight in series had been Nov. 21, 1968. (NASA Rpt srl; WS Release 69-10)
Time magazine said Astronaut Frank Borman had amused audiences during February 1969 European tour by claiming Apollo 8 astronauts deserved overtime pay because they had aged about 300 microseconds more than people on earth during moon mission. At NASA’s request, Univ. of Maryland physicist Carroll Alley had calculated effects on astronauts of phenomena described in Einstein’s relativity equations— time ran slower for object as its speed increased, and time accelerated for object as it moved away from body exerting gravitational force. Alley found Apollo 8 spacecraft speed was predominant factor when it was within 4,000 mi of earth; time slowed and astronauts actually aged more slowly. Beyond 4,000 mi, effects of earth’s gravity lessened as Apollo’s time passed 300 microseconds faster than earth’s. Despite Alley’s calculations, said Time, Borman’s claim was valid only for Astronaut William A. Anders, who made his first space flight on Apollo 8. Astronauts Borman and James A. Lovell had been crew-mates on Dec. 4-18, 1965, Gemini VII, when time dilation effect was dominant for entire two weeks. They had aged less than those on earth by 400 microseconds. Lovell’s time also had been slowed during four-day Gemini XII mission Nov. 11—15, 1966, by about 100 microseconds. “Thus,” said Time, “during all their missions in space, Lovell and Borman respectively spent 200 and 100 microseconds less time than was recorded on earth—which means they were paid for more time than they actually worked.” [Time, 3/7/69, 42)
Dr. Caryl P. Haskins, Carnegie Institution President, announced 40-in telescope of advanced design would be erected atop 8,000-ft Las Cam-panas Mountain in north central Chile. It would be first telescope of Carnegie Southern Observatory, which eventually would house 200-in reflector similar to that at Mt. Palomar Observatory in California. New telescope, expected to be operational in one year, would be equipped with ultrasensitive photoelectric instruments to measure light from remote sources and with digital data system. (Carnegie Institution Release)
Special six-cent postal stamp honoring Dec. 21—27, 1968, Apollo 8 mission had been approved by Post Office Dept., Postmaster General W. Marvin Watson announced. Stamp would be issued May 5, seventh anniversary of Freedom 7, first U.S. manned suborbital space flight, by Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (PO Dept Release 14)
Dr. Murray Gell-Mann of Cal Tech was named winner of 1969 Nobel Prize in physics for “fundamental work in nearly all domains of his field,” especially for “discoveries concerning the classification of elementary particles and their interactions.” Dr. Gell-Mann, who would receive $72,800 award, had introduced concept of quark—hypothetical particle from which other particles of nucleus of atom were made—and had proposed eightfold-way theory that many particles might change places and their differences from each other lay in their energy quotient. Dr. Gell-Mann was member of NASA Physics Advisory Committee from 1964 to 1969. Chemistry prize was awarded Prof. Derek H. R. Barton of Imperial College of Science and Technology in London and Prof. Odd Hassell of Univ. of Oslo for work to develop and apply concept of conformation in chemistry. (Getze, LA Times, 10/31/69; AP, W Star, 10/30/69, Al; nasa ossa)
Associated Press quoted Col. Edwin E. Aldrin (usaf, Ret.) as saying nasa had rejected his proposal to postpone Apollo 12 and run it in tandem with Apollo 13 so crews could protect or rescue each other in emergency. Aldrin was father of Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and a NASA safety consultant. NASA Manned Space Flight Safety Director Jerome F. Lederer had called proposal impractical, “tremendously expensive, and I don’t know if it could be done.” Lederer had said there was no question that astronaut rescue capability from lunar surface or orbital emergency must be provided, but it was “out of the picture for Apollo.” (Haughland, AP, W Star, 9/22/69, A4)
President Nixon and his daughter Tricia {foreground) watched preparations jor the launch of Apollo 12 from ksc, while Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA A rimin' istrator, shielded Mrs. Nixon from rain. Seconds into flight an electrical discharge shut down the spacecraft fuel cells, but the astronauts corrected the condition. 10,000	ft with tops at 21,000 ft. During ascent observers on ground saw two parallel streaks of lightning flash between clouds and launch pad. NASA reported electrical transients, later attributed to electrical potential discharges from clouds through spacecraft to ground, had suddenly shut off spacecraft’s electrical power at 00:36 get and turned on numerous alarms in cm. Spacecraft automatically switched to backup battery power while crew restored primary power system. Commander Conrad radioed, “We had everything in the world drop out.” Control Center commented, “We’ve had a couple of cardiac arrests down here, too.” “There wasn’t time up here,” Conrad answered. Power system remained normal throughout rest of mission. Spacecraft entered planned parking orbit with 118-mi (189.9-kra) apogee and 115.0-mi (185.0-km) perigee. After postlaunch checkout CSM. separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) and LM, code-named Intrepid, Onboard TV initiated after separation clearly showed csm transposing and docking with lm at 3:27 GET and ice on windows from rain frozen during liftoff. Crew ejected CSm/lm from S—IYB and conducted first SPS burn for translunar insertion. Slingshot maneuver placed S—IVB into earth orbit with 515,549.4-	to 560,429.9-mi {829,519.0- to 901,731.7-km) apogee and 93,213.2-	to 109,324.1-mi (149,980.0- to 175,902.5-km) perigee and period of 39 to 45 days, instead of heliocentric orbit planned, because of error in instrument unit. To ensure that electrical transients during launch had not affected lm systems, Conrad and Bean entered LM at 7:20 GET for housekeeping and systems checks. All checks indicated systems were satisfactory, Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse maneuver No. 1 was not necessary. Midcourse correction No. 2, at 30:53 GET, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 69.1 mi; third and fourth maneuvers were not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 47 min. Conrad and Bean began transfer to LM during translunar coast Y2 hr earlier than planned to obtain full TV coverage through Goldstone tracking station. The 56-min transmission, beginning at 62:52 get, showed excellent color pictures of GSM, intravehicular transfer, LM interior, earth, and moon. Gordon reported crew was in good condition. TV broadcast scheduled for 81:30 GET before lunar orbit insertion was canceled because of sun angle and glare on spacecraft windows. Spacecraft entered lunar orbit with 194.3-mi (312.6-km) apolune and 72.0-mi (115.9-km) perilune at 83:25 GET (10:47 pm est Nov. 17) after first sps burn. During first lunar orbit good quality TV coverage of lunar surface was transmitted for 33 min. Crew provided excellent descriptions of lunar features. Second SPS burn circularized orbit with 76.1-mi (122.5-km) apolune and 62.5-mi (100.6-km) perilune at 87:47 get. Conrad and Bean transferred to lm for l^g-hr housekeeping, voice and telemetry test, and oxygen-purge-system check and then returned to CM. CM Yankee Clipper, reported sighting Surveyor III and Intrepid on moon. Conrad opened lm hatch at 115:11 GET, descended LM ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Conrad reported seeing Surveyor HI spacecraft and said lm had landed 25 ft down-range from lip of crater. Conrad, inches shorter than Neil A. Armstrong, who had stepped onto moon July 21, had difficulty taking last step from ladder. When he touched lunar surface at 115.22 get (6:44 am est Nov. 19) Conrad said, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small step for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” He said lunar surface was soft and loosely packed, causing his boots to dig in as he walked, and sun was bright like a spotlight, lm had landed so gently its shock-absorbing legs were barely telescoped by gentle impact. Conrad recorded Bean’s descent to lunar surface at 115:52 get (7:14 am EST Nov. 19). Shortly after color TV camera was removed from mesa bracket, transmission was lost and was not regained for remainder of eva. Crew collected 40- to 50-lb contingency sample and reported mounds resembling volcanoes. Mounds were 4 ft high with flattened tops 5 ft wide and sides sloping out to 15- to 20-ft dia. Conrad said he saw neither breccia nor vesicular rocks, only basalts. Lithium hydroxide canisters and contingency sample were transferred to lm ; S-band antenna, solar wind composition experiment, and American flag were deployed as planned, alsep with SNAP—27 atomic generator was deployed 600—700 ft from lm. Shortly after deployment passive seismometer transmitted to earth signals from astronauts’ footsteps as they returned to lm. During deployment astronauts kicked up dust and some adhered to instruments. Overall effect would be determined through long-term measurements of system’s engineering parameters. Conrad and Bean dusted each other off and entered Intrepid after 3 hrs 56 min walking on lunar surface. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:33 get (10:55 pm est Nov. 19), 1 hr 40 min ahead of schedule. Astronauts stored lm TV camera in equipment transfer bag for return to earth for failure analysis. Conrad walked to alsep site to check leveling of lunar atmosphere detector. Astronaut movement on surface was recorded on passive seismometer and lunar surface magnetometer, eva traverse took crew to alsep deployment site, Head Crater, Bench Crater, Sharp Crater, Halo Crater, Surveyor III site, Block Crater, and back to lm. Astronauts walked 1,500—2,000 ft from lm, covering about 6,000-ft distance, their confidence and speed increasing with experience. After walk Conrad reported he had fallen once but Bean had picked him up without difficulty. Conrad rolled grapefruit-sized rock down wall of Head Crater about 300—400 ft from passive seismometer, but no significant response was detected. Crew obtained desired photographic panoramas, core samples, trench sample, lunar environment sample, and assorted rock, dirt, bedrock, and molten samples. They reported fine dust buildup on all sides of larger rocks and said soil color lightened as depth increased. Crew reported Surveyor footpad marks were still visible and entire spacecraft looked brown, as if something had rained on it. Glass parts were not broken. Crew retrieved parts of Surveyor III, including TV camera and soil scoop. They then retrieved solar wind composition experiment and stowed it in equipment bag, took stereo pictures near lm, and transferred all collected samples, parts, and equipment to lm. They dusted off, reentered LM, and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by 134:82,get (2:44 am EST Nov. 20), after 3 hrs 49 min walking on lunar surface in second eva period. While lm was on moon Gordon, orbiting moon in csm, completed lunar multispectral photography experiment and photographed Wall of Theophilus and future landing sites, Fra Mauro and Descartes. Film would be analyzed to aid scientists in planning for future sample collection and in extrapolating known compositions from returned samples to parts of moon that would not be visited. At 142:04 get (9:26 am est Nov. 20) lm successfully lifted off moon after 31 hrs 31 min on lunar surface, leaving lm descent stage. Astronauts brought back 95 lbs of lunar surface samples, parts of Surveyor III, films, and miniature flags of 136 nations, 50 U.S. states, and 4 U.S. possessions. A 1.2-sec overburn of lm ascent propulsion system caused by incorrect manual switching sequence prevented automatic shutdown of engine and resulted in insertion velocity 32 fps greater than planned, placing lm in orbit with 71.4-mi (114.9-km) apolune and 10.6-mi (17.1-km) perilune. Crew quickly recognized discrepancy, manually shut down engine, and used RSC trim maneuver to enter planned orbit with 53.3-mi (85.8-km) apolune and 10.1-mi (16.3-km) perilune. Rendezvous maneuvers occurred as planned and lm docked with csm at 145:36 get (12:58 pm est Nov. 20). TV was transmitted from csm for last 24 min of rendezvous sequence. Crew transferred with samples, equipment, and film to CSM; lm ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 5:17 pm est Nov. 20 about 44.9 mi (72.2 km) southeast of Surveyor III. Crash was detected by seismometer left on moon and produced reverberations lasting for more than 30 min. Crew made csm plane-change maneuver at 159:05 GET and took high-resolution and stereo-strip photos and tracked landmarks, to conclude planned photography of Fra Mauro, Descartes, and Lalande. antine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston. cm was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and cm was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Pago Pago and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 12 mission objectives—to perform selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of mare area, deploy and activate ALSEP, develop techniques for point landing capability, develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment, and obtain photos of candidate exploration sites—were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor and corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding. All three crew members remained in excellent health and good spirits. Accomplishments included first use of hybrid trajectory, largest U.S. payload placed into lunar orbit (72,335 ibs after lunar orbit insertion), first demonstration of point landing capability, first use of two EVA periods, first recharge of portable life-support system, first double-core-tube sample, first return of samples from vehicle previously landed on moon, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, first multispectral photography from lunar orbit, and longest lunar mission to date. Apollo 12 was ninth Apollo mission to date, sixth manned Apollo mission, and second manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16—24, 1969) had proved capability to perform manned landing on moon and return and to retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; Mission Commentary; NASA Release 69—148; FonF; NYT, 11/15—26/69; W Post, 11/15-26/69; W Star, 11/15-26/69; B Sun, 11/15-26/69) November 14: President Nixon became first President to witness space launch while in office when he, Mrs. Nixon, and daughter Tricia viewed Apollo 12 launch at ksc. President called liftoff “spectacular.” Later he addressed NASA personnel in Launch Control: “. . . I know there has been a lot of discussion as to what the future of the space program is. ... I do think you can be assured that in Dr. Paine and his colleagues you have men who are dedicated to this program, who are making the case for it ... as against other national priorities and making it very effectively. I leaned in the direction of the program before. After hearing what they have had to say with re'gard to our future plans, I must say that I lean even more in that direction. ... I realize that in those within the program . . . there are different attitudes as to what the emphasis should be, whether we should emphasize more exploration or more in taking the knowledge we have already acquired and making practical applications of it. . . . We want to have a balanced program, but most important, we are going forward. America ... is first in space.” (Carroll, B Sun, 11/15/69, Al; PD, 11/17/69, 1601-2)
Aerospace industry was having its greatest week in history with Apollo 11 launch, said New York Times, but aerospace stocks remained in doldrums. Wall Street was “bearish about the industry and, from an investment standpoint, unenthusiastic about space.” Security analysts interviewed agreed Apollo 11 would have little effect on long-depressed stocks, which commenced decline in 1968; many were selling near lows for year. Aerospace industry was chief beneficiary of space program funds, but largest portion of $34 billion spent since 1960 had been allocated before “really spectacular shots” occurred. While Apollo program had been “treniendous boon to the aerospace industry and to the advancement of technology,” it represented small part of total industry revenues and outlook was for further decline. (Hammer, NYT, 7/17/69, 63)
NASA announced appointment of Astronaut James A. McDivitt as Manager for Lunar Landing Operations in msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. McDivitt, who would remain in USAF, would be responsible for planning lunar landing missions subsequent to first landing and would no longer be candidate for space flight crew assignments, (nasa Release 69—96)
Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on Apollo program, space flight operations, and advanced manned missions before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. He explained importance of lunar exploration and outlined plans for new space station.	■ President’s Science Advisory Committee had said answers to questions about moon “may profoundly affect our views of the evolution of the solar system and its place, as well as man’s in the larger scheme of things.” Fact that earth’s moon was largest in relation to its planet, Dr. Mueller said, “implies that the two bodies may have been formed in the same manner at the same time. If true, the moon may be a book containing the secret of the earth’s first billion years of life. This record is lost on the earth which is subjected to . . . erosion by atmosphere and water. ... By comparing similarities and contrasting differences, man may be able to arrive at a greater understanding of the fundamental processes that affect the earth; for example, the mechanisms that cause earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, and the processes responsible for concentrating ore deposits. The orbits of Apollo 8 and the Lunar Orbiters were disturbed by mass concentrations beneath the circular lunar seas. These may be huge meteors that struck the moon with such force that they melted and sank into the interior, or they may be iron deposits. “Another objective of lunar exploration is to learn about man as a space explorer—his capabilities and limitations. Some day man will move on to other planets; the moon is a training ground. . . . We don’t have the basic information which early lunar landings will furnish and we can only speculate today about the feasibility of the moon as a base for an observatory or a permanent science station—about exploiting its environment of low gravity and high vacuum—about its potential for natural resources. ... A long-range goal like the lunar base would direct technological advances, stimulate public interest, and attain subsidiary objectives with earth application such as food synthesis, environmental control, and recovery of useful elements from rock.” Within new program category, Space Flight Operations, nasa was bypassing intermediate space station, launch vehicles, and logistic craft and proposing to move directly to new, semipermanent space station and low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system. Space station “should be in being by the mid-1970s.” With FY 1969 funds, contractor definition efforts were being initiated. FY 1970 funds would continue definition, preliminary design, and supporting work. Dr. Mueller described space complex 200 to 300 mi above earth planned for 10 yrs’ continuous operation and adaptable for crew size, additional laboratory facilities, or other special-purpose equipment through selection, design, and arrangement of component modules. Crew would rotate at three- to six-month intervals, ferried between station and earth by reusable shuttles. Station’s electric power would come from solar panels or small nuclear generator. (Testimony; NASA Release 69-49)
During day climaxed by shots from what U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry called “schizophrenic” gunman, Soyuz IV and V Cosmonauts Vladimir Shatalov, Boris Volynov, Yevgeny Khrunov, and Aleksey Yeliseyev flew from Baikonur Space Center, Kazakhstan, to Moscow for Kremlin ceremony honoring success of Soyuz missions. Attack occurred as motorcade escorting cosmonauts approached Kremlin’s Borovitsky Gate. Reports said driver of cosmonauts’ limousine and security guard had been injured by bullets and that Cosmonaut Beregovoy had been slightly injured by flying glass. Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and Soviet President Nikolai V. Podgorny, riding several cars behind cosmonauts, were not injured. Western newsmen had already been admitted to Congress Hall for ceremony at which cosmonauts received Medal of the Order of Lenin. Reports said gunman had been apprehended, (upi, W Star, 1/22/69, A13; AP, W Star, 1/23/69, Al; NYT, 1/23/69, 10; Shabad, NYT, 1/24/69, 1; Shub, W Post, 1/24/69, Al)
Thomas W. Ray, historian at Defense Communications Agency, became Assistant NASA Historian for Manned Space Flight, replacing William D. Putnam, who had resigned in August to join rand Corp. (NASA Note)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried GSFC-Univ. of Wisconsin-Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory payload to 109.8-mi (176.7-km) altitude. Objective was to provide precisely calibrated stellar observations of stars Regulus, Spica, Denebola, and Benetnasch, which had been viewed by NASA’s Oao II—using 12.9-in-dia Dall-Kirham telescope, plane-grating spectrograph, and strap in stellar pointing attitude control system. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, hut attitude control system malfunctioned. First target was acquired and data were obtained; second and third targets were not acquired; and fourth target was acquired but not identified. (NASA Rpt srl)
At annual meeting of Aerospace Medical Assn, and interview which followed in San Francisco, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, Dr. Charles A. Berry, said it was almost certain that at least one Apollo 11 astronaut would develop illness during 21-day quarantine period following return from moon. “We have to face the fact that we’ve had post-flight illness on every Apollo mission so far. Our problem will be to determine whether any illnesses that show up . . . are due to the stresses of space flight or to some micro-organism picked up on the moon.” Among difficulties noted during Apollo program were loss of exercise capacity for period after return to earth, motion sickness in flight, and damage to red blood cells from atmosphere of 100% oxygen. Blood cell damage had been alleviated by addition of nitrogen to spacecraft atmosphere. (Huntsville Times, 5/7/69)
In first large-scale attempt at radar mapping of ice-buried continent surrounding South Pole, scientists of Scott Polar Research Institute in Cambridge, England, would make at least 20 flights with airborne-radar-equipped usn C—130 Hercules aircraft from McMurdo Sound in Antarctic, New York Times said. Radar equipment already had penetrated more than 14,800 ft of ice, recording profile of mountains and valleys underneath. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/1/69, 30)
NASA’s Oao II orbiting astronomical observatory (launched Dec. 7, 1968) refused to accept commands from NASA’s Santiago, Chile, tracking station. Satellite began tumbling out of control and its solar cells were unable to receive energy from sun to charge its batteries. While project officials tried to determine exact nature of anomaly, satellite recovered, accepting command from Australian station within few hours of battery depletion. Oao II was placed in sunbathing mode while batteries recharged. (Memo, NASA Asst Director for Projects; nasa Release 69—55)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR with VAM—20 booster carried Naval Research Laboratory payload to 113.7-mi (182-km) altitude to record white-light corona of sun from three to nine solar radii with package containing two externally occulted coronagraphs and three related experiments. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA announced it had extended $69,692,000 contract with Bellcomm, Inc., to provide systems analysis, study, planning, and technical support of manned space flight. Value of one-year cost-plus-fixed-fee contract extension was $11,483,000. (nasa Release 69—25)
NASA announced appointment of l/g Frank A. Bogart (usaf, Ret.) as msc Associate Director, succeeding Wesley L. Hjornevik, who had been nominated Deputy Director of Office of Economic Opportunity. Bogart would be succeeded as Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Management) at NASA Hq. by Harry H. Gorman, msfc Deputy Director (Management). (NASA Release 69—144)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr with VAM—20 booster. Rocket carried afcrl payload to 135.5-mi (218-km) altitude to calibrate Harvard College Observatory spectrometer on board orbiting Oso VI by telemetering, grazing incidence, scanning euv monochromator to study active regions of sun simultaneously at 300 to 1,400 A. Pointing was marginal but data were 100% satisfactory. (NASA Rpt SRJL)
President Nixon announced intention to appoint Stanford Univ. physicist Hubert B. Heffner as Deputy Director of Office of Science and Technology, succeeding Ivan L. Bennett, Jr., who had resigned. Nomination was submitted to Senate June 9. (PD, 6/9/69, 806; 6/16/69, 845)
Rep. John V. Tunney (D-Calif.) introduced H.J.R. 810, “designating the day which man lands on the moon, and the anniversary of that day each year thereafter as a national holiday to be known as ‘Space Exploration Day.’ ” Resolution was referred to House Judiciary Committee. (CR, 7/8/69, H5725)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Naval Research Laboratory payload to conduct solar physics studies. Mission was unsuccessful, (nasa Proj Off)
The supersonic Soviet airliner Tu-144 following its landing at Sheremetyevo Airport, Moscow, after a public-demonstration test flight. {AP wirephoto) will be executed with the same precision that marked the early stages of this trip.” ( W Post, 5/22/69, A24) John Lannan in Washington Evening Star; “Where manned space flight once was fraught with fright and peril, it seems to have moved into an era of fun and games. . . . The astronauts have learned to fly their spacecraft, the ground crews to launch them and the Defense Department to recover them. What remains is to use this accumulated knowledge, and that’s what NASA is attempting to do.” It all pointed to fact that “space flight has come of age.” (W Star, 5/21/69, A4) Marquis Childs in Washington Post: “When the moon landing . . . is completed the cost to the government will be just under $24 billion. The achievement represents an unprecedented orchestration of the resources of science and technology. The contrast with the failures here on earth to begin to try to cure rudimentary ills could hardly at this moment of grave uncertainty be sharper.” (W Post, 5/21/69, A25) Christian Science Monitor editorial: Apollo 10 mission “has again posed the old, old question: If mankind can achieve so spectacularly in space, why cannot we improve matters faster here on earth? The answer, surely, is that it is simpler to mobilize the complex electronics and space-science gadgetry to rocket a spacecraft to the moon than it is to coordinate the manifold and conflicting human emotions, ambitions, and processes necessary for cleaning up the cities, thrusting the black revolution forward with a minimum of friction, and banishing earth’s pollutants. The earth problem is moTe complex than the moon problem. Yet success in the moon venture will offer assurance that the earth challenge can be met. “So let no one call the moon venture a waste of ambition, treasure, achievement. The whole brilliant enterprise is immensely horizon-widening, thought-expanding.” (csm, 5/21/69)
nsf released Technology in Retrospect and Critical Events in Science (traces), report by Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute which traced key scientific events leading to five major technological innovations: magnetic ferrites, video tape recorder, oral contraceptive pill, electron microscope, and matrix isolation. In all five, nonmission, or basic, research “provided the origins from which science and technology could advance toward the innovation which lay ahead.” Approximately 70% of key events documented were nonmission research, 20% mission-oriented, and 10% development and application. Ten years before innovation-—i.e., shortly before conception of that innovation—90% of nonmission research had been accomplished. (Text)
Supercritical wing would be flight-tested on usn F—8 fighter at FRC, NASA announced. Airfoil shape had been developed in four-year wind-tunnel studies at LaRC by Dr. Richafd T. Whitcomb. If wind-tunnel performance was achieved in flight, wing could improve performance and efficiency of future aircraft, particularly jet transports. It would allow efficient cruise flight near speed of sound at 45,000-ft altitude and reduce operational cost of subsonic flights by increasing operational range or permitting less fuel and more payload on faster schedules. Supercritical wing shape was developed to delay rise of drag force and onset of buffeting at high speeds. Flattened top was designed to reduce intensity of airflow disturbances; downward curve at rear of wing supplied lift lost by flattening. Flight program would evaluate behavior of wing in actual flight with both high-lift maneuvering and off-design performance, and determine sensitivity of supercritical wing to wing-contour variations associated with manufacturing processes and deformations due to flight loads, (nasa Release 69—27)
In Science article advocating large-scale mobilization of scientists to solve world’s “crisis problems,” John Platt, Associate Director of Univ. of Michigan Mental Health Research Institute, said human race was on steeply rising “S-curve” of change. “We are undergoing a great historical transition to new levels of technological power. . . . In the last century, we have increased our speeds of communication by a factor of 107; our speeds of travel by 102; our speeds of data handling by 106; our energy resources by 103; our power of weapons by 106; our ability to control diseases by something like 102; and our rate of population growth to 103 times what it was a few thousand years ago.” Within last 25 years “the Western world has moved into an age of jet planes, missiles and satellites, nuclear power and nuclear terror.” But S-curve was beginning to level off. “This means that if we could learn how to manage these new powers and problems in the next few years without killing ourselves by our obsolete structures and behavior, we might be able to create new and more effective social structures that would last for many generations.” (Science, 11/28/69, 1115-21)
In Science, Bryce Nelson reviewed Science Policy in the USSR, study sponsored by Directorate for Scientific Affairs of Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (oecd). It indicated, he said, that Soviet scientists and political leaders “need to spend considerable time thinking about how to correct imbalances in their R&D system.” U.S.S.R. had succeeded outstandingly in aviation rocketry, space exploration, atomic energy, machine tools, and iron and steel technology but its R&D system seemed sluggish. Main bottleneck was relative Unavailability of testing facilities. Central planning system in U.S.S.R. reinforced separation between R&D establishments and industry and contributed to reluctance of factories to innovate. Increasing use of contract system, with industries placing growing number of R&D contracts with institutions of higher learning, was helping bridge gap between research centers and industry. (Science, 2/28/69, 917—8) During February: In Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial written just before his appointment as Secretary of Air Force, incoming aiaa President, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said: “I believe that to understand adequately the challenges that confront those of us in aeronautical and aerospace activities, we must take as our perspective the commitments that challenge the nation as a whole. President Eisenhower, President Kennedy, and President Johnson, each in his own way, had a major impact on aeronautics and astronautics. And for each, his support of aerospace was a function of his belief that such efforts were instrumental in the accomplishment of national goals. In the future, as in the past, governmental support of aerospace will be based largely on its demonstrated relevance to the needs of the nation.” (A&A, 2/69, 26-7)
Eugene Luther Vidal, who as Director of Air Commerce of Dept, of Commerce (1933—1937) promoted growth of U.S. civil aviation, died, at age 73 in Palos Verdes, Calif. He had furthered construction of airports and beacons, encouraged private flying and manufacture of small aircraft, advanced commercial aviation, and reorganized Government control of commercial flights. After leaving Commerce Dept, he had established research laboratory near Camden, N.J., where he developed process for making airframe parts from molded plywood. (NYT, 2/21/69, 43)
Discovery of possible planet, in orbit around NPO—532 pulsar about 6,000	light years from solar system, was reported by Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold. Discovery, by astronomers at Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory in Puerto Rico, was indicated by wobble in pulsation rate from NPO—532, pulsar or neutron star in Crab Nebula. Planet was same distance from neutron star as Mercury was from sun. (W Post, 10/22/69, A9)
OV 1—17, OV I—17A, OV 1—18, and OV 1—19 research satellites, carrying 41 experiments, were successfully launched by USAF pickaback on Atlas-F booster from Vandenberg AFB. OV 1—17 weighed 312 lbs and carried experiments to measure incoming solar electromagnetic radiation and its reaction with earth’s upper atmosphere, make electricfield and vlf energy propagation studies, evaluate ionized meteor trails in calibration of ground-based radars, and make engineering tests on spacecraft materials and solar-cell power system. Orbital parameters: apogee, 287.7 mi (462.9 km); perigee, 246.7 mi (396.9 km); period, 93.1 min; and inclination, 99.1°. OV—17 reentered March 5, 1970. OV I—17A, 487-lb payload consisting of OV—17 propulsion module and Naval Research Laboratory two-beacon orbis-cal ii experiment to study unusual transmission of radio waves through ionosphere, entered orbit with 233.0-mi (347.9-km) apogee, 106.9-mi (172.0km) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 99.0° inclination and reentered March 24. OV 1—18 weighed 275 lbs and carried experiments to study ionosphere and measure radio-wave interference, electric-field intensity, and hazardous radiation. Orbital parameters: apogee, 362.3 mi (582.9 km); perigee, 288.3 mi (463.9 km); period, 95.0 min; and inclination, 98.8°. OV 1—19 weighed 273 lbs and entered orbit with 3,592.9-mi (5,780.9-km) apogee, 288.0-mi (463.4-km) perigee, 153.5-min period, and 104.7° inclination, where it would study events resulting in and sustaining trapped radiation in Van Allen belts and hazards to man. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/69; 3/31/70; oar Research Review, 6—7/69, 23—4; Pres Rpt 70 [69]; W Post, 3/19/69)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told meeting of National Security Industrial Assn, at KSC, “It is very clear that just as we have had substantial payoffs from communications, navigation, geodetic, and weather satellites in the first decade of the space age, earth resources satellites will represent extremely promising investment opportunities in the second decade.” They would require “close cooperation among many agencies in Washington, and in the long run with new commercial and international institutions that can bring the benefits of the space age to many people around the world.” (Text)
Dissatisfaction with substandard performance in other parts of society was “something worthwhile that the Space Program is contributing to the United States,” NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, said in speech before National Press Club in Washington, D.C. “I hope we have spurred our society and our people to . . . demand higher performance, to set bolder goals, and then to have the gumption to stand up before the whole world and demonstrate whether or not the goals are achieved.” Space program had also taught “need for broadly enlisting not only American capability, but the best people from around the world willing to throw their competence and a portion of their careers into challenging endeavors.” It had “unleashed in the 1960’s the talents and energies of a technological generation.” U.S. must continue “to put together bold programs that will release the creative energies of our people in productive channels.” Dr. Paine thought history would record as “the great contribution of our generation” astronauts’ blazing of “trail for all future generations of men who want to . . . conquer new worlds. . . . Through man’s brains, energy and resources life can—and life will—extend itself through the solar system. . . . The 1980’s are very clearly the decade in which both we and the Soviet Union, with reasonable-sized space programs in the 1970’s, will develop a technological capability for landing on Mars.” In response to questions, Dr. Paine said: “It seems clear to me that there are increasing opportunities for all nations to work together in space exploration and application. Certainly we and the Russians can and should cooperate more closely in space science so our two programs can produce greater results than the simple sum of their outputs.” (Transcript)
Coming age of economy space flight was discussed by J. S. Butz, Jr., in Air Force and Space Digest. Space shuttle was key to opening of space “much as the railroads opened a stream of travel into the American West.” It was “complex and expensive system that is within our grasp if the nation’s technology and management are willing to meet challenges of herculean proportions.” In prospect was day when astronauts would be as numerous as present day airline pilots, space flights would be scheduled- almost daily, and “virtually any young man who yearns to voyage into space will be able to do so at some point in his life.” (.AF/SD, 12/69, 37-44)
Creation of U.N. Space Institute was urged by Columbia Univ. law professor Richard N. Gardner in New York Times. It would be “center for the cooperative planning of space exploration in which all U.N. members would be invited to take part.” U.S. and U.S.S.R. could divide responsibilities for instrumented landings on different planets. There should be “United Nations Space Station” in outer space manned by astronauts from all U.N. nations and trained at U.N. Space Institute. It would gather information about solar system and universe and be used for practical earth applications. {NYT, 7/26/69, 24)
NASA announced the supercritical wing, a new airfoil shape developed in four years of wind-tunnel studies at Langley Research Center, would fie flight-tested on a USN F-8 fighter at the Flight Research Center. Dr. Richard T. IF hit comb, inventor of the design expected to improve performance of subsonic fet transports, stood with his model in the test section of the wind tunnel at Lane. ■	Meteorite broke into fragments in air and fell near Pueblito de Allende, Chihuahua, Mexico. Scientists at MSC Lunar Receiving Laboratory and Oak Ridge National Laboratory later reported from tests of fragments that meteorite was chondrite (C3 and C4) with opaque and microcrystalline matrices. Gamma rays from short-lived isotopes were observed in specimens brought to low-background gamma counter less than 41/2 days after fall. (Science, 2/28/69, 928-9) ■	Boeing Co. test pilot Jack Waddell flew 355-ton, $20-million prototype of 490-passenger Boeing 747 jet transport from Paine Field, near Seattle, Wash., for 1 hr 15 min of scheduled 2^-hr maiden flight. Waddell returned aircraft to field after encountering “minor malfunction” of wing surface control while lowering wing flaps to 30° angle. Later he said aircraft was “a pilot’s dream” which could be “flown with two fingers” and indicated flap misalignment would not delay further testing. The 210-ft-long 747 used only 4,500 ft of runway to become airborne at 170 mph. Spectators were impressed with quietness of its engines. (W Post, 2/10/69, 1; AP, W Star, 2/10/69, A5)
President Johnson submitted to Congress report on U.S. Aeronautics and Space Activities for 1968. In transmittal message he wrote: “Our astronauts have now flown 18 manned space missions, during which they experienced 3,215 man hours in space flight. Together with the activities of the Soviet Union, this makes a total to date of 28 manned flights and 3,846 man hours in space. Through this investment we have obtained new products, services, and knowledge; we have enhanced our national security; we have improved our international relations; and we have stimulated our educational system. Our Nation is richer and stronger because of our space effort. I recommend that America continue to pursue the challenge of space exploration.” (Pres Rpt 68; CR, 1/17/69, H405, S524)
M2—F2 lifting-body vehicle damaged in accident May 10, 1967, would be repaired, modified, and returned to service as M2—F3, NASA announced. Modifications would include center-stabilizing fin, special equipment for use as test bed for lateral control systems research, jet reaction roll control system, and improved internal components for precise maneuvering by pilot. M2—F3 would rejoin HL-10 and X—24 in NASA—usaf flight research program to evaluate wingless vehicles for manned horizontal landings at airfields after return from space. (NASA Release 69—15)
NASA noted new level of maturity in conduct of Apollo 8 mission, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. ■Homer E. Newell, told National Space Club in Washington, D.C. “We got the feeling that the people . . . handling the operations had now a new tool that fit the hand.” Maturing of total space capability was seen in use of Pioneers and earth orbiting satellites during Apollo 8 “to keep track of what the sun was doing so that the directors of the Apollo operation could know what radiation conditions in space were relative to . . . crew safety.” Mission also used weather satellites and communication satellites, “not only to transmit pictures . . . but also as an integral part of the operation, to transmit data. . . .” Asked NASA’s priority on space station versus lunar exploration in view of increase in funding request for lunar landing program, Dr. Newell said: “Now you have touched uppn what I think is going to be the most difficult question for the country to resolve in the months ahead.” There was general agreement that manned space flight should continue. Debate would be over whether it would be done by continued lunar exploration, earth orbital operations, or both. “Our own feeling is that the country ought to do both. Certainly after having put all the investment into landing a man on the moon and developing the capability to do so we must continue to explore the moou. And we cannot foresee any reasonable or rational national program in which we do not continue that exploration. At the same time ... we haven’t finished developing the manned space flight capability. We have got to . . . get that permanent foothold in space and that is where the space station comes in.” (Transcript)
Univ. of California’s Lick Observatory successfully recorded first hits on laser reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. Hits, which came after 2,000—3,000 unsuccessful attempts by Lick and Univ. of Texas’s McDonald Observatory, were made by Lick’s 120-in telescope — world’s second largest. Scientists fired 500 pulses with pure red beam of ruby laser. Each pulse lasted 15-20 billionths of a second, reached moon in 1.3 secs, and bounced back in same time. Target— 18-in-square panel of 100 three-faced prisms of fused silica—was hit about three-fourths of time, (gsfc Historian)
Once Vietnam war was over, Michael Harrington said in Washington Evening Star, there would be “money enough for both slums and space if the nation has the political will to appropriate it.” Space exploration could provide “economic alternative to war.” It was “simply not true that the United States must choose between the heavens and earth. By the mid-Seventies, this country will have achieved a $1 trillion gross national product and because of this . . . there will be almost $30 billion in ‘extra’ federal funds by 1972. That projection does not require any increase in taxes and it assumes that there will be a fairly high level of military spending.” (W Star, 1/7/69, A7)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, addressed 25th Annual General Meeting of IATA in Amsterdam, Netherlands. “Within the next ten years we can expect the full effect of the space age to be felt. New insights into our complex environment will spur the development of new industries, new products and the new jobs which we need to gainfully employ our expanding population.” Air transportation would be one of first areas “dramatically affected” by space experience. “An inertial guidance system fundamentally the same as that which carried Apollo 11 to the moon is now being installed in the Boeing 747. Data concerning the flammability of nonmetallic materials, accumulated for use in the Apollo Modules, is being utilized for interior fittings. . . .” Other space-to-aviation transfers included composite materials to withstand stresses and temperatures not previously encountered, optical tooling for large structures, welding with new materials and by new processes in new aircraft, and general-purpose onboard digital computers. “The use of solid-state large-scale integrated circuits for multiplexing and self-checking circuits will eliminate most cabling and much maintenance.” Desired characteristics of space shuttle, which could be operational by 1976, would anticipate those of next generation of air transports, possibly, global transport “so that no place on earth would be more than an hour from any other.” (Text)
Jerald R. Kubat, former Director of NASA Manned Space Flight Program Control Office, died in Seattle, Washington. He had joined Apollo Program Office in 1964. (nasa Hq WB, 5/12/69, 5)
Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Director of Science and Applications at msc, announced he would leave NASA in September to become Director of Research Laboratories for essa in Boulder, Colo. His successor had not yet been selected. Dr. Hess said he was taking new position because job was challenging one in growing organization with important mission. “We have passed a milestone in the "manned space flight program by the recent lunar landing. We have put the Lunar Receiving Laboratory into operation and it is performing its mission well. We have placed instruments on the moon successfully and have the scientific program for the next several lunar missions well organized.” Before going to MSC, Dr. Hess served as Chief of Laboratory for Theoretical Studies at gsfc, 1961—1967. (msc Release 69—54)
XB—70 supersonic research aircraft was flown from Edwards AFB, Calif., to Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, to be placed on exhibit at Air Force Museum. Flight had been delayed until turbulent air conditions prevailed so testing could continue until end of aircraft’s service. During final flight, crew collected data on aircraft handling and structural response to air turbulence at subsonic flight, nasa had announced end of XB-70 flight research program Jan. 13. (nasa Proj Off; UPl, NYT, 2/5/69, 73; AP, W Star, 2/5/69, A19)
Univ. of California astronomers Dr. E. Joseph Wampler and Dr. Joseph S. Miller reported'they had photographed winking of pulsar in Crab Nebula—first of pulsars to be unequivocally associated with observable star—by spinning disc before star’s image projected by 120-in telescope at Lick Observatory, Calif. Hole in disc, spun slower than flash rate of pulsar, permitted light from star to penetrate once each revolution. For first time star was shown photographically to be flashing on and off. Rate of light pulses was identical to that of previously observed radio pulses. {NYT, 2/1/69, 22; upi, W Post, 2/7/69, A6)
usaf dedicated 365-ft-long, $3.3-million telescope on 9,200-ft elevation in Sacramento Mountains in southeast New Mexico. Described as most important new solar observing facility constructed in U.S. in decade, telescope would expand solar research capability of USAF’s Sacramento Peak Observatory and provide unequaled image stability. Telescope would be used for research on solar centers of activity—sunspots, magnetic fields, solar flares, and plage areas. Sacramento Peak solar research was endeavoring to identify causal relationships to predict solar energy variations and environmental disturbances affecting USAF operations. Observatory would participate in Global Flare Patrol Network support of NASA’s Apollo 12 mission, scheduled for Nov. 14 launch. Operated by essa’s Space Disturbance Center in Boulder, Colo., network would give warning of any solar flares dangerous to mission, (usaf Release 10-69-42; AP, NYT, 10/19/69, 62; essa pio)
Dr. Frederick Seitz, nas President, appointed 12-member Universities Organizing Committee for Space Sciences, chaired by Frederick T. Wall, Vice Chancellor of Graduate Studies and Research at Univ. of California at San Diego. It would serve NAS as national Board of Governors of Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex., establishing policy, reviewing operations and budgets, and advising Institute’s director on program development. Committee also would draft objectives and procedures for consortium of universities operating the facilities for research, development, and education associated with space science and technology, (nas—nrc—nae News Rpt, 2/1969, 2)
jpl astronomer Dr. Ronald Schorn announced “definite and conclusive” evidence of water on Mars had been found in five-year study with Stephen Little of Univ. of Texas and jpl scientist Dr. C. B. Farmer at McDonald Observatory in Ft. Davis, Tex. Noting Mars generally should be compared with driest deserts of earth, he said: “If you took all the water we found and laid it out over the whole planet, it would be only 1,000th of an inch thick. Mars may still not be a great place to live, but there’s a chance of life there.” Photos to be taken by Mariner VI and Mariner VII spacecraft, Dr. Schorn said, would help solve question of whether enough water existed to sustain life on Mars. New spectra, superior to any previously available, were made possible by NASA-supported improvements in McDonald 82-in Struve reflecting telescope and its large spectrograph. Observations of Mars were beginning with more powerful, 107-in reflecting telescope at McDonald, constructed with funds from NASA, nsf, and Univ. of Texas, (nasa Release 69—48; AP, W Post, 3/25/69, A5)
NASA Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight, chaired by Dr. Charles H. Townes, published Proceedings of the Winter Study on Uses of Manned Space Flight, 1975—1985, Vol. I—■ Proceedings: NASA program for next two decades must project state of technology for that period. Program must be balanced in use of manned and automated operations. “The benefits to the nation, both internal and international, dictate that the United States remain in the forefront of all major categories of space activities,” space sciences, exploration of solar system, manned space flight capability, and economic applications of space flight. Study said it was reasonable to use to 1% of gnp to support civilian space flight program of which major elements were: (1) aggressive-automated planetary exploration program as recommended by nas—nrc Space Science Board, with options for manned phase to follow early automated phase; (2) economic applications program as recommended by 1968 Summer Study on Space Applications by nas; (3) continuation of lunar exploration after Apollo landing as recommended by Lunar and Planetary Missions Board of nasa; (4) vigorous program of astronomical observations in earth orbit as recommended by NASA Astronomy Missions Board; and (5) extension of manned space flight capability in earth orbit to longer duration for scientific and technological purposes. Achievement of manned low-cost transportation system deserved high priority. Study recommended use of long-duration manned space station designed to support men in weightless condition “unless unexpected biomedical problems are encountered or overwhelming engineering advantages for artificial gravity are discovered.” It agreed on advisability of placing observatories and laboratories in earth orbit but noted, “Relative emphasis among these activities and the extent of manned attendance desirable in each, must be decided by appropriate studies and experiments.” “To provide a focal point for structuring a manned planetary program a target date of 1982 and the Mars landing mode . . . are assumed here for discussion. Achievement of the operational capability in that year would require initiation of system design in about 1975.” (Text)
President Nixon arrived in Belgium at start of eight-day goodwill visit to heads of state in Brussels, London, Bonn, West Berlin, Rome, Paris, and the Vatican. In welcoming speech at Brussels National Airport, King Baudouin said: “During this year, which will perhaps be that of man’s first landing on the moon, we are more than ever conscious of the gulf between the wonderful possibilities open to us and the obligations which burden the world because of war, want, injustice, and inequality. May your journey and your interviews provide an opportunity for friendly nations better to combine their efforts to solve their problems on which the very future of mankind depends.” (PD, 3/3/69, 310) Primary mission objective was equatorial flyby mission for exploratory investigations of Mars to set basis for future experiments, particularly those relevant to search for extraterrestrial life. As secondary objective spacecraft would develop technology needed for succeeding Mars missions. The 840-lb spacecraft carried six complementary experiments to provide information about Martian surface and atmosphere. Mission offered first opportunity to make scientific measurements on night side of Mars. Two onboard TV cameras would take pictures of Mars disc during approach with 15-mi optimum resolution and of surface during flyby with 900-ft optimum resolution. Infrared spectrometer and uv spectrometer would probe Mars atmosphere, and oc-cultation experiment would obtain data on atmospheric pressures and densities. Infrared radiometer would measure surface temperatures on both light and dark sides of Mars; celestial mechanics experiment would use tracking information to refine astronomical data. Sharp increase in data returns would be achieved over 1964 Mariner missions. Mariner VI TV pictures would contain 3.9-million bits of information; Mariner IV contained 240,000 bits in 1965. Mariner VI would transmit science data at basic rate of 270 bps and high rate of 16,200 bps before flyby; Mariner IV transmitted at 8 % bps. Mariner VI was follow-on to 1964 Mariner/Mars missions and precursor to 1971 orbital and 1973 landing missions. First Mars probe, Mariner III (launched Nov. 4, 1964), had failed to achieve desired orbit when shroud remained attached to spacecraft. Mariner IV (launched Nov. 28, 1964) had transmitted first close-up photos of Mars in July 1965. Mariner VII (Mariner G) would be launched
Future space program was described by Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Reusable nuclear vehicle to serve as space shuttle between space station in earth orbit and space station in lunar orbit would be “fined link that would permit us to reduce the cost of operation to something like $200 for moving a pound of material from the earth’s surface to the lunar surface and return as compared to something like $100 thousand a pound using today’s techniques. Similar reductions in the cost of transportation to the earth orbital station will permit us for the first time to consider processing materials in space, to use space for the kind of laboratory work that ^ we now associate with ground-based laboratories.” By end of 1970s “we would find so many uses for operations in synchronous orbit both for observing the universe and for observing the earth that we would have established a space station in synchronous orbit which would be regularly supplied by a nuclear shuttle system and which would provide us with direct television broadcasting and direct radio broadcasting to the homes of all people in the world, as well as providing us with great stellar observatories and a viewing platform for air traffic control, navigation and for a permanent weather watch. “. . . this approach to using space is one that is readily extended, once the shuttle capability has been developed, to a corresponding approach for planetary exploration and . . . the same nuclear shuttle system together with the space station modules need only to be supplemented by a Mars landing module to permit us to carry out the first manned planetary expedition to Mars.” (Text)
Chances of U.S.S.R.’s Luna XV successfully returning to earth with lunar sample were small because of complexity of operations required, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, told ksc Center Directors’ Briefing. Landing, deploying equipment, collecting and storing samples, and then lifting off “are not simple tilings to do . . . and doing it remotely is more difficult than doing it with men in space. I don’t think by any means impossible, but . . . the chances of being able to carry it out on the first mission are relatively low compared to the kind of probability that we would associate with our own landings.” If Luna XV were able to successfully retrieve lunar sample, feat would be “significant technological step and one that represents a considerable degree of prestige,” he said, but “each country [U.S. and U.S.S.R.] will obtain its proper share of credit. . . . The first sample returned if it were possible to do so and the first man landing on the moon are significant events, each in their own right, and are to be treated as such.” (Transcript)
Conclusion that rings of Saturn were water ice of extraordinarily low temperature was announced by Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, Director of IJniv. of Arizona Lunar and Planetary Laboratory. Researchers had ruled out earlier theory that composition could be ammonia ice by comparing spectra of rings and ices of number of compounds. Team had studied infrared reflection of spectrum of rings with interferometer attached to 61-in NASA telescope at lpl observatory near Tucson. (Univ. of Arizona Release 6911.29 dh)
Dr. Nicholas E. Golovin, technical adviser for aviation and space science and technology in Office of Science and Technology, died of heart attack in Washington, D.C., at age 57. He had been deputy Associate Administrator of NASA in 1960. After returning to private industry for a year, he had rejoined NASA as director of Large Launch Vehicle Planning Group. Before coming to NASA he had been Chief Scientist at White Sands Missile Range for DOD and then Director of Technical Operations Div. of arpa. (W Post, 4/30/69, B14; W Star, 4/30/69, B6)
msc announced appointment of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper as Assistant for Space Shuttle Program in msc’s Flight Crew Operations Directorate. Cooper would be responsible for flight crew training program, astronaut inputs into design and engineering, and directorate’s part in hardware development and testing for Space Shuttle. He would remain on flight status and eligible for space flight, (msc Release 69/67)
At msc news conference following Apollo 11 splashdown, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said: . . we now stand at what is undoubtedly the greatest decision point in the history of this planet.” Apollo 11 had proved “that man is no longer bound to the limits of the planet on which for so long he has lived. We will return to the moon first in November and then at regular intervals in the coming year. But these trips are only the first step. . . . Will we press forward to explore other planets or will we deny the opportunity to the future? To me, the choice is clear. We must take the next step. . . . This is the time for decision. . . . The knowledge possessed by men is sufficient, the resources are adequate for the task of carrying out this next step. . . . “In this moment of man’s greatest achievement, it is timely for us to dedicate ourselves to the unfinished work so nobly begotten by three of us. To resolve that this nation, under God, will join with all men in the pursuit of the destiny of mankind will lead to the way to the planets.” In answer to questions, Dr. Mueller said next major step should be manned landing on Mars which would be possible “sometime after 1980.” l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Apollo Program Director, told press Apollo team was “strongest team that’s ever assembled in the history of man. It has the strength of technical and engineering confidence, scientific competence, and management competence that’s unexcelled. It has the dedication that’s necessary to be able to tackle an almost impossible job and bring it through” and an exciting future in lunar exploration. Second manned lunar landing mission, Apollo 12, would be launched from ksc Nov. 14 toward touchdown on Site 7 in moon’s Ocean of Storms. Primary objective would be to deploy Apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep), explore and survey mare area, and return samples to earth. Secondary objective, if lm softlanded on target, would be to examine Surveyor III spacecraft (launched April 17, 1967), which was resting on moon near planned Apollo 12 touchdown point. Astronauts would have two periods for extravehicular activities (eva), during which they would explore surface and conduct experiments for over three hours and walk farther away from spacecraft than had Apollo 11 crew. Maximum lunar stay time would be 28—32 hrs. Schedule called for planning to fly follow-on missions through Apollo 15 at four-month intervals and missions after that at five-month intervals. (Transcript)
U.S.S.R. publicly demonstrated Tu-144 supersonic airliner in 90-min test flight from Moscow’s Sheremetyevo Airport. Test pilot Eduard V. Yelyan said aircraft had not yet exceeded speed of sound although it was designed for speeds to 1,600 mph (mach 2). At airport press conference Boris Savchenko, head of U.S.S.R. aircraft export agency, said production had started on 120-seat, 130-ton airliner. In New York Times, Bernard Gwertzman said observers believed purpose of demonstration was to dispel Western reports of accident to aircraft. (NYT, 5/22/69, 94; upi, W Post, 5/21/69, Cll)
Welcome back to earth: Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (left to right inside the mobile Quarantine facility), were greeted by President Nixon aboard the V.S.S. Hornet after their splashdown. is back in orbit, having left Tranquility Base, and leaving behind a replica from our Apollo 11 patch with an olive branch.” LM docked with CSM at 128:03 get. Crew transferred with samples and film to csm, and LM ascent stage was jettisoned into lunar orbit. SM reaction-control-system separation maneuver placed CSM into orbit with 72,0 mi (115.9-km) apolune and 63.0-mi (101.4-km) perilune, where crew rested and prepared for return to earth. cm separated from SM on schedule at 194:49 GET. Because of deteriorating weather in nominal landing area, splashdown point was moved 247.4 mi downrange, where weather was excellent. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 11 splashed down in mid-Pacific at 12:51 pm edt July 24, 15 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Hornet, 195 hrs 19 min after launch. Swimmers attached flotation collar and seven-man raft to spacecraft and helicopter dropped biological isolation garments, which were donned by astronauts inside CM and by one swimmer. Two other swimmers moved upwind of CM on another large raft. Postlanding ventilation was turned off and CM powered down, and astronauts climbed out and helped swimmer close hatch. Swimmer then decontaminated all garments, hatch area, flotation collar, and area around postlanding vent valves with Betadine disinfectant. Helicopter carried astronauts to recovery ship, where they entered 32-ft-long mobile quarantine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. They were congratulated by President Nixon and Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, who were on board ship. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory (lRl) in Houston July 27. cm was retrieved, placed in dolly on board recovery ship, moved to MQF, and mated to transfer tunnel. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, mqf engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to lrl. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Johnston Island and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 11 mission objective—to perform manned landing on moon and return—and all detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor, corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits and proficiency were major factors in mission’s success. Accomplishments included first manned lunar landing and return; first lunar surface EVA; first seismometer, laser reflector, and solar wind experiment deployed on moon; first lunar soil samples returned to earth; largest U.S. payload ever placed into lunar orbit (72,037.6 lbs at lunar orbit insertion); acquisition of numerous visual observations, photos and TV transmissions of scientific and engineering significance; and first operational use of mqf and lrl. Apollo 11 was eighth Apollo mission to date, fifth manned Apollo mission, and first manned lunar landing mission. Mission acquired major quantities of data for subsequent Apollo flights. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distance and return through earth’s atmosphere. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of lm to operate in space under manned conditions. Apollo 10 (May 18—26, 1969) had successfully operated complete Apollo spacecraft on lunar orbital mission and had provided major quantities of scientific and training materials for Apollo 11. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69-83K; NYT, 7/16-25/69; W Post, 7/16-25/69; W Star, 7/16-25/69; B Sun, 7/16-25/69; PD, 7/28/69, 1016)
Oao II (launched Dec. 7, 1968) completed 30 days of flight operation and was adjudged successful by NASA. Experiments had obtained 65 hrs of scientific data over range of eight magnitudes and 4,200 A—1,100 A wavelengths. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory celescope experiment made 18 mappings and Univ. of Wisconsin experiment made detailed observations of 100 stars. Some 40,000 separate commands had been sent to Oao II and more than 4 million pieces of information had been collected, with 20 times more uv information from stars in 30 days than in 15 yrs of sounding rocket launchings. Satellite’s 11 telescopes were studying extremely young, hot stars which emitted most of their energy in uv portion of spectrum, not visible to ground observatories because of earth’s atmosphere, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69—7)
naa announced Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders would receive 1968 Robert J. Collier Trophy for significant achievement in aeronautics and astronautics, as representatives of “entire United States space flight team for the successful and flawless execution of the first manned lunar orbit mission in history.” Trophy would be presented by President Nixon at Washington, D.C., luncheon May 7. (naa Release)
NASA awarded General Electric Co.’s Aircraft Engine Group $18.7-million, fixed-price contract with performance-award provision to construct and test two experimental quiet jet aircraft engines. To cut development costs, CF—6 and TF—39 engines developed for DC—10 and C—5A aircraft would be used as core of new engine. Engines would produce 4,900-lb thrust at cruise and 22,000-lb thrust for takeoff. Work was part of oart’s Quiet Engine Research Program to develop turbofan engine with noise level 15—20 db below present engines. Contract would be managed by LeRC. (nasa Release 69—103) Crew conducted two unscheduled color TV broadcasts—for 16 min beginning at 10:32 get (taped for 11:26 get transmission) and for 50 min beginning at 30:28 get—and one scheduled 36-min transmission beginning at 33:59 get. Broadcasts were very clear and showed earth, onboard computer keyboard, and crew. At 55:08 get (4:40 pm edt July 18) crew began 96-min color TV transmission with excellent picture resolution, coverage, and general quality. Viewers in North America, South America, Japan, and Western Europe saw live pictures of csm and lm interiors, CSM exterior, and earth and watched crew removing probe and drogue, opening spacecraft tunnel hatch, preparing food, and housekeeping lm. Apollo 11 passed into moon’s sphere of influence at 61:40 get, 214,546.8 mi (345,205.8 km) from earth, traveling at 2,990 fps relative to earth. Spacecraft entered lunar orbit with 194.3-mi (312.6-km) apolune and 70.5-mi (113.4-km) perilune at 75:56 get (1:28 pm edt July 19) after first sps burn. During second lunar orbit, live color TV transmission showed spectacular views of lunar surface and approach path to Site 2. Armstrong pointed out lunar landmarks and described unexplained glow near crater Aristarchus which some scientists believed to be volcanic activity. Second SPS burn circularized orbit with 75.6-mi (121.6-km) apolune and 61.9-mi (99.6-km) perilune. Aldrin transferred to LM for two-hour housekeeping, voice and telemetry test, and oxygen-purge-system check.
NASA published A Long-Range Program in Space Astronomy: Position Paper of the Astronomy Missions Board (nasa SP—213), which Board had submitted to NASA in July. Board of 19 leading U.S. astronomers— chaired by Dr. Leo Goldberg, Harvard College Observatory Director— had been appointed by NASA in autumn 1967 to consult scientific community and propose program for 1970s. Astronomy had “far greater potential for advancement by the space program than any other branch of science.” Astronomical instruments in space could reach regions of electromagnetic spectrum unable to penetrate earth’s atmosphere; thus, “most fundamental problems of astronomy may be brought within range of solution.” Board provided guidelines for minimum balanced program costing $250 million annually in 1970s and optimum program “proceeding at fastest possible rate consistent with available scientific and technical manpower” and costing $500 million annually during same period. Proposals included “careful assignment of priorities and balanced allocation of resources in order to optimize scientific progress on such problems as the origin of the universe; the course of stellar evolution, including the ultimate destiny of the Sun and solar system; the existence of other planetary systems, some of which may support other forms of intelligent life; and other problems with deep philosophical significance which are of great interest to everyone and are therefore properly supported by public expenditure.” Board recommended increased effort in x-ray and gamma-ray astronomy using Explorer spacecraft with large payload capability; optical uv astronomy program leading to large space telescope in 1980s; r&d of detectors and small cooling systems for infrared astronomy from spacecraft to complement ground and aircraft observations; observation of astrophysical objects in longwave radio portion of spectrum; more sophisticated solar spacecraft to extend observations of solar surface and study effects of solaf activity on earth; continued observations of planets from earth orbit using OAOs and Small Astronomy Satellite; more advanced observation of interplanetary medium, cosmic rays, and magnetic fields, with astronomy instrumentation on planetary and Explorer spacecraft; and augmented experiments using aircraft, balloons, and suborbital rocket launches. (Text; nasa Release 69—149)
Roger Lewis, President of General Dynamics Corp., announced appointment of Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, as General Dynamics Vice President, effective immediately. Dr. Mueller’s resignation from NASA would be effective Dec. 10. (General Dynamics Release 1491)
NASA released transcript of Jan. 14 briefing on NASA FY 1970 budget at which Dr. Thomas O. Paine, nasa Acting Administrator, said $3,878-billion budget approved by President Johnson had been developed “to maintain an austere but balanced NASA aeronautics and space program aimed at major program goals of high national priority.” Goals were continuing advances in space applications, including initiation of experimental earth resources technology satellites and slightly decelerated research on space environment; achieving manned lunar landing and additional Apollo moon missions, with limited provision for studies—not for development—of equipment to achieve longer lunar stay-times and mobility for future exploration; proceeding with Saturn I Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount; proceeding with Viking Project to land instruments on Mars in 1973; initiating in FY 1970 Mariner flyby in 1973 of Venus and Mercury; producing family of small planetary Explorers for orbiting Mars and Venus; making preliminary observations of Jupiter with previously approved Pioneer spacecraft; continuing work on unmanned orbiting astronomical observatories; continuing advanced aerospace technology work at about current levels; emphasizing noise reduction, with construction of special noise research laboratory; developing full potential of civil and military aeronautics; and undertaking NERVA project for development of flight-weight nuclear engine. Dr. Paine noted FY 1970 budget, as approved by President Johnson, “would halt a four-year downward trend in NASA budget.” It was “austere and does not make full use of the aerospace capabilities that the nation has developed. . . .” But it permitted “a balanced program of useful work in critical areas.” Budget left “the major new program decisions, especially in the manned flight area, for the next Administration,” and was “ ‘holding budget’ that provides for progress, but defers critical program and funding decisions to the new Administration.” (Transcript)
Scientists at Lick Observatory in California unsuccessfully tried for third consecutive night to bounce ruby laser beams off reflector left on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts. They admitted difficulty in pinpointing reflector’s exact location and speculated that it might have been knocked down by lm exhaust during ascent. (AP, W Star, 7/23/69, A7)
Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of House Committee on Science and Astronautics published Science, Technology, and Public Policy During the Ninetieth Congress. Report covered 1967— 1968, giving details behind 94 public laws passed that authorized, funded, or otherwise affected R&D in U.S. and 45 additional bills on which Congress took legislative action. It included reviews of U.S. policy for science and technology by Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and by nsf for United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization. Both reviews showed pluralistic nature of U.S. public policy for science, built up by laws, executive orders, and other expressions of policy as they occurred. (Text)
Year 1969 was one of critical decision and realignment of programs for NASA as primary goal of first decade was achieved through Apollo program. Post-Apollo planning had preceded the coming of the Nixon Administration and Apollo 11. Budget retrenchment accelerated throughout Government as cost of Vietnam war continued high and White House sought to lessen inflation by fiscal economy. Nationwide reevaluation of societal; priorities emphasized problems of pollution, poverty, and crime. Successful lunar landings of Apollo 11 and 12—seen and acclaimed worldwide—mushroomed U.S. enthusiasm for manned space achievement. NASA announced development of plans for further lunar missions and post-Apollo planetary exploration. But year was turning point, with completion of a major goal and examination of possible new goals and priorities for the next decade. Phasing down of Apollo program after climax brought shifts in program emphasis and in personnel. Most of initial Saturn V launch vehicles had been completed. Hardware requirements would decrease as missions slowed. Peak costs during 1960s had built NASA base of people, technology, and facilities as national capability to conduct space missions. Future space objectives and budget options were examined, within Government and outside, for .balance between more manned missions and more unmanned scientific exploration and applications of knowledge already gained. Criticism of past emphasis on engineering rather than on science was partly answered by decision to provide more time for scientific study and planning between the next Apollo lunar missions. Program plans included Apollo Applications, missions to Mars and Jupiter, long-range studies of Venus-Mercury mission and three-planet grand tours, development of permanent space station, joint NASA—DOD studies of space transportation system with reusable shuttle, and accelerated aeronautics activities. nasa FY 1970 appropriation of $3,697 billion was $181 million below budget proposed by outgoing President Johnson and $19 million below President Nixon’s amended request for $3,716 billion. Cutbacks in Government spending forced NASA to announce 1970 closing of Electronics Research Center and DOD to cancel Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, told ERC employees in December that agency had to “effect reductions and consolidation across the board if we are to shape our programs to meet the nation’s future needs in aeronautics and space.” Reductions in work force—largely in contractor personnel—were brought by planned phasing out of Apollo program as well as by budget cuts. Year of man’s first landing on moon, despite its global impact, ended with space goals and levels of effort for the next decade an open question. (Pres Rpt 70 [69]; A&A 69)
President Nixon submitted to Congress FY 1970 budget amendments [see April 12]. White House, DOD, and NASA released details. NASA funds were reduced $45 million from $3.878-billion Johnson proposal to $3,833 billion (recommended $3,716 in new obligational authority plus $117 million carried over from prior years). Apollo Applications program would be cut by $57 million but new obligational authority of $46 million for resumption of Saturn V rocket production and $40 million for lunar exploration would be added, for net increase of $29 million in manned space flight funds. Space science and applications would be cut by $41 million, to $517.8-million new total. Advanced research and technology would be cut $13 million, to total $277.4 million; and tracking and data acquisition, $20 million, to total $278 million. University affairs funding would remain at $9 million, technology utilization at $5 million, and NERVA funding under nuclear rocket program at $36.5 million. Funds proposed for construction of facilities and for research and program management remained unchanged. At NASA budget briefing, NASA Administrator Dr. Thomas O. Paine said: “The reductions we have been required to make will make necessary difficult program adjustments and will result in reduced accomplishments in many areas. However ... in a context clearly requiring that Government spending be held to a minimum, the Administration has recognized the importance to the United States of a strong and continuing program in space and aeronautics. . . . Last January, I characterized President Johnson’s FY 1970 Budget as a ‘holding’ Budget . . . deferring to President Nixon’s Administration the decisions the nation faces on the future of manned flight programs.” President Nixon’s recommendations, “if approved by the Congress, will ensure that the nation can continue a scientifically effective program of manned lunar exploration and avoid foreclosing our ability to continue large-scale space operations in the future by allowing the capability to produce Saturn V launch vehicles ... to lapse beyond the point where it can economically be resumed.” dod spending was reduced $1.1 billion and requested new obliga-tional authority, $3.1 billion, including $51 million from MOL. Other science budget cuts: aec funding, $78.6 million; agricultural and natural resources conservation, $345 million; hew university facilities, $107 million; and nih, $47.4 million, nsf budget remained at $495 million. Nixon budget made available $92.7-million carry-over for SST r&d but no funds for prototype construction. Overall reduction in space and atomic energy funding was $140 million. (PD, 3/21/69, 561—3; nasa Budget Briefing Transcript; dod Transript; W Post, 4/15— 16/69; NYT, 4/16/69; Science, 4/25/69)
Leningrad astronomer Nikolay A. Kozyrev called for lunar laboratories over, under, and on moon’s surface^ Soviet and American space exploration had made scientists “more confident that this is not a dead accumulation of rocks but a space body with a very interesting history whose life also continues today.” Lunar research goals were establishment of astronomical instruments on stable platforms in lunar orbit, permanent scientific laboratory on moon, spacecraft launching centers on moon for planetary exploration, and laboratory stations under lunar surface or in natural caves, “to give reliable protection from dangerous radiation and meteorite hits.” (upi, NYT, 8/13/69, 11)
NASA announced establishment of task group on manned space station under Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, and of task group on space shuttle under Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Reporting to Dr. Mueller would be LeRoy E. Day, former Director of Apollo Test. His group would develop NASA material for report on space shuttles to President’s Space Task Group by June 15. Frank Borman, former Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc and Apollo 8 commander, would report to Mathews as Field Director for Space Station effort. (NASA Release 69—70)
Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development transmitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics Centralization of Federal Science Activities. Report, prepared by Library of Congress Science Policy Research Div., described centralization and potential organization of Federal science activities, summarized arguments for and against centralization, examined major functions of Federal Government in dealing with science and technology and present organization, and presented historical summary of evolution of Federal organization for science and of proposals for reorganization and consolidation. (Text)
First decade in space corresponded with early years of aviation following Wright brothers flight at Kitty Hawk, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, told Annual Kiwanis Dinner in Milledgeville, Ga. “I recently calculated the costs per seat mile of their first flight for comparison with our Apollo flight to the moon. They probably had ten thousand dollars invested in first Kitty Hawk flight that went one fifth of a mile, giving a cost per seat mile for Orville of fifty thousand dollars. We will have about twenty-four billion dollars invested in our first five-hundred-thousand-mile trip for three astronauts to the moon, giving a cost of only about sixteen thousand dollars per seat mile. We are ahead of the Wright Brothers— but we have a long way to go to catch up with the DC—8 or 707. If subsequent flights to the moon cost two hundred million dollars each, that’s less than one hundred and fifty dollars a seat mile, so we are going in the right direction.” (Text)
Rep. Louis Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), introduced H.R. 465 “providing for the establishment of the Astronauts Memorial Commission to construct and erect with funds a memorial in the John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida, or the immediate vicinity, to honor and commemorate the men who serve as astronauts in the U.S. space program.” (CR, 2/19/69, H1087)
Aerospace industry employment would continue to decline from record achieved in 1968, according to semiannual survey results released by Aerospace Industries Assn. Total employment was expected to drop from 1,388,000 to 1,305,000 (6%) between March 1969 and March 1970 because of reduced expenditures for civilian space program and declining sales of civilian transport aircraft during phase-out of current models and commencement of production on new aircraft, (aia Release 69—45)
Some NASA scientists were helping their communities and hiding their aid projects “as tho they were sinful,” Ray Cromley said in Washington Daily News. Scientists were using space-acquired skills “to help their fellow men in ways they were uniquely qualified.” Projects included applying systems analysis to air pollution problem, planning school expansion to meet population expansion, applying systems concept to town management and to city police force problems, developing new concepts for airport planning and new technique for vandalism prevention, developing improved communications systems for city emergency departments, and helping an agency develop ways of evaluating proposals for study and development contracts with private industry. (W News, 9/4/69, 23)
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission opened three-day hearings in Los Angeles on extent of racial discrimination in aerospace industry. Commission’s figures showed only 177, or 0.9%, of 20,000 officials and managers in Los Angeles aerospace industry in 1968 were black. (Pasadena Star-News, 3/13/69)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. Hans M. Mark, Chairman of Dept, of Nuclear Engineering, Univ. of California at Berkeley, as Director of Ames Research Center. He would succeed H. Julian Allen, who had announced retirement Oct. 25, 1968, but had remained as Acting Director. Dr. Mark, expert in nuclear and atomic physics, was also Reactor Administrator of Univ.’s Berkeley Research Reactor, research physicist at Univ.’s Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, and consultant to USA and NSF. Clarence A. Syvertson, Director of Astronautics at arc, was appointed to newly created position of arc Deputy Director. Both appointments were effective Feb. 28. Because of prior commitments, Dr. Mark would spend one-fifth of his time at arc until July 1969. (nasa Release 69—32; arc Astrogram, 2/24/69, 1)
Swedish aircraft constructor Has Fancher had said that in 1944 Adolf Hitler took delivery of first Junkers 390 aircraft with 14,400-hp engine constructed specially to bomb New York, Washington Daily News reported. Fancher, pilot on aircraft’s nonstop test flight between Germany and South America, said plane weighed 93 tons with bombs and had planned range for nonstop flights from Bordeaux in occupied France to New York and return. Aircraft, delivered too late for use in war, had been burned by Germans. Comparable aircraft was not built until 1956, Fancher said. (W News, 9/3/69)
Studies of shock and thermal metamorphism of olivine trachy-hasalt by nuclear explosion at Nevada Test Site for comparison studies of Apollo 11 lunar samples were described in Science. Preliminary examination of Apollo 11 lunar surface material suggested many samples would be mafic igneous rocks showing shock metamorphism produced by meteorite impact. (James, Science, 12/26/69, 1615—9) December 26—31: American Assn, for the Advancement of Science held 136th meeting in Boston, Mass. Panel discussion of future of U.S. space program was disrupted by some 50 student protesters who converged on panel chairman Dr. Charles Stark Draper, former director of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory, and participants. Protesters said they objected to space program because funds could be better spent to solve social ills on earth. They littered podium with signs and papier-mache moon rock. Dr. Draper justified continuation of space program because of its technological and prestige contributions. “Space is a bargain.” Outgoing aaas president Dr. Walter Orr Roberts met continued objections in his attempt to justify space program on basis of applications and was almost shouted down when he suggested U.S.—u.s.s.R. cooperation in internationalized space stations. In presidential address Dr. Roberts, President of University Corp. for Atmospheric Research, said space technology had “vastly enlarged the arsenals of the United States and the U.S.S.R., bringing to reality hitherto fanciful modes of military surveillance, communications, and weaponry.” Time had come “for us to take a bold new step in space. I propose that this nation call upon the Soviet Union to join hands in space, with a jointly conducted, earth-oriented space program that will put the new-found Soviet and American skills in space to work for the direct benefit of man.” Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Northwestern Univ. astronomer and consultant to usaf Project Blue Book, expressed fear that usaf would destroy classified UFO records because of Dec. 17 termination of project. “I do not believe we are being visited by little green men. ... I do believe a phenomenon exists, and that it is worthy of scientific attention.” Dr. Lewis M. Branscomb, Director of National Bureau of Standards, and Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Vice Chancellor of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, called for hard, new look at manned space flight spending and urged moratorium on pressure for early manned missions to Mars. Dr. S. Fred Singer, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Interior, said, “If we downgrade the manned space program we may find we don’t have any space program.” Panel of young scientists from Harvard Univ. and mit, invited by aaas, attacked “misuse” of science in formal papers presented before meeting. Allen S. Weinraub, graduate student at Harvard, said science was controlled by Federal Government and large corporations that held pursestrings. Panel member Larry W. Beeferman of mit called NASA “the national aerospace subsidy administration.” At press conference following meeting, Presidential adviser on hunger Dr. Jean Mayer said, “We can feed everybody—and feed them very well—and go to the moon as well.” Dr. Frank J. Low, Univ. of Arizona scientist, reported discovery of “Irtrons”—cells of creation—at centers of 12 galaxies so far, including Milky Way. He believed both matter and antimatter were created in each and then annihilated each other, continuously spraying out debris to fill universe, making stars, planets, and new worlds. Theory had originally been proposed by British astronomer Sir James Jeans early in century. (Lannan, W Star, 12/28/69, A7; W Post, 12/27/69, B6; 12/29/69, Al, A7; 12/30/69, A2; Science, 1/2/70, 11-6)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried gsfc and Dudley Observatory payload to 98.2-mi (158.0-km) altitude to provide background particle collection for comparison with data from Nike-Apache launched Aug. 13 during Perseid meteor shower. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Data were expected from all experiments, (nasa Rpt srl)
nas published Plan for U.S. Participation in the Global Atmospheric Research Program. It recommended five-year effort including Pacific test of global weather observing system and large-scale atmospheric study in 1973, series of small regional studies beginning in 1969 or 1970, and experiments to improve numerical models of atmosphere for computer forecasting, with continued development of computer 100 times faster than currently available. Total effort would require 10 yrs, with plans for second portion to be based on information gained during first 5 yrs. Report, prepared by nrc committee, said developments in computers and satellites had made it possible “to advance toward the goal of accurate two-week forecasts and, eventually, toward intelligent modification of the weather.” Use of satellites such as Nimbus III, launched April 14, and expansion of other observing systems made it technically and economically possible to provide adequate global observations for long-range forecasts. Recommended test of global observing system would require 2 satellites with advanced instrumentation, nearly 1,000 balloons, and 135 instrumented buoys. Simultaneous cloud-cluster study would require 12 additional aircraft, several ground stations, and computer facility. Participating Government agencies would be responsible for determining program costs. (Text; NRC Release)
Apollo 8 astronauts were honored in Nation’s Capital. Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, and William A. Anders received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from President Johnson at White House. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, read citation, identical for each astronaut, except for designation as commander, command module pilot, or lunar module pilot. Borman received award “for outstanding contributions to space flight, engineering, technology and exploration as Commander of Apollo 8, mankind’s first venture beyond Earth into orbit around the Moon. During this flawless mission from December 21 to December 27, 1968, he made critical decisions and carried out complex maneuvers to fly into precise translunar injection, lunar orbit, and transearth injection flight paths to a successful reentry and splashdown within 5,000 yards of the recovery vessel. His scientific observations during the journey to and from the Moon and during 10 orbits of the Moon have added significantly to man’s knowledge. He displayed outstanding leadership, courage, professional skill and devotion to duty in accomplishing all planned mission objectives, significantly advancing the nation’s capabilities in space. As one of history’s boldest explorers, he has blazed a new trail for mankind out into the vastness of extraterrestrial space.” President Johnson said: “Our space program, and this, its most spectacular achievement, have taught us some very invaluable lessons. We have learned how men and nations may make common cause in the most magnificent and hopeful enterprises of mankind. We in the United States are already engaged in cooperative space activities with more than 70 nations of the world. We have proposed a variety of adventures to expand international partnership in space exploration. This morning I renew America’s commitment to that principle and to its enormous promise. The flight of Apollo 8 gives all nations a new and a most exciting reason to join in man’s greatest adventure.” President Johnson presented retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb as “the single man most responsible for successfully administering this program and, I think, the best Administrator in the Federal Government.” Astronauts gave President Johnson miniature copies of recent international space treaties which they had carried aboard Apollo 8 spacecraft and “picture of the ranch” (photo of earth taken from space). {PD, 1/13/69, 35-6) After awards ceremony astronauts were driven in motorcade to address joint assembly of Congress attended by nine Supreme Court Justices. Borman told Congress: “The one overwhelming emotion that we carried with us is the fact that we really do all exist on the small globe. And when you get to 240,000 miles, it really isn’t a very large earth.” He said voyage was not just an American achievement; “we stood on the shoulders of giants,” from Newton and Galileo to present day scientists and space explorers. “If Apollo 8 was a triumph at all,” Borman said, “it was a triumph of all mankind.” At State Dept. Auditorium press conference, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs Julian Scheer announced Astronaut Frank Borman had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc. During conference astronauts disclosed they had not seen moon during approach to lunar orbit; presented slides indicating presence of volcanics on back of moon; and announced their conclusion that conditions on pseudolanding site, B—1, indicated “lighting conditions are . . . adequate for a lunar landing, which was one of our objectives of the flight.” Borman said, “I came away with the idea that the moon may be more homogeneous than I had realized . . . that you could get a spoon one place and find it just about the same as the samples somewhere else.” In answer to question, he said, “I don’t believe we found anything that would be of concern to future flights. We flight-tested the ground system. We flight-tested the airborne system. The command module and service module have effectively performed their designed task, their designed mission, with the exception of docking. We have got magnificent machinery. We have superb ground support.” Following press conference, astronauts and their families were guests at Smithsonian Institution dinner in Washington, D.C. (Transcript; NASA Release 69-8; Wilford, NYT, 1/10/69, 1; Maynard, W Post, 1/10/69, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 1/10/69, 1)
At dedication ceremony in Houston for Apollo 8 stamp, Postmaster General Winton M. Blount said: “The fact that this is the fifth stamp the Post Office Department has issued commemorating accomplishments of the space program signifies the extent to which space exploration has captured the imagination of the American people. . . . The nation’s concerted effort to reach the moon and outer space reflects two traditional aspects of our national character. One is scientific: the search for truth, knowledge, discovery. The other is psychological: the strong urge for adventure—an urge kindled by the unknown. We are all explorers at heart. The space program has made an entire nation explorers in fact. The flight of Apollo 8 around the moon and back was perhaps the greatest technological achievement of man to date. Certainly it was the most dramatic.” (Text)
Apollo 9 commander James A. McDivitt was appointed Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, replacing George M. Low, who was temporarily on special assignment to msc Director to plan future msc programs and work on organizational matters, (msc Release 69-66) *	East Germany’s People’s Chamber unanimously ratified nuclear nonproliferation treaty. West Germany had not yet signed. (P Inq, 9/25/69) *	House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported favorably S. 1287, which authorized appropriations for FYs 1970, 1971, and 1972 for metric system study. (CR, 9/25/69, H8488) Lee B. James, Director of Program Management at msfc, said next moon flights could suffer from lack of proper employee motivation. “We are completing [rocket] stages with welders who know they are going to be laid off.” Sheet metal workers in plants with termination papers were working on vital space hardware. Twenty defects attributed to human error had been uncovered in single rocket. Apollo Program Director Rocco Petrone said future moon landings would be even more demanding than first, with astronauts spending 54 hrs on moon during some. To make missions successful, workers must be motivated to pay greatest attention to detail. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said NASA hoped to cut payload launch costs to $200 per pound and reduce number of workers on Saturn V launches from 20,000	to about number required to get Boeing 747 off ground, (msc Release 69—65; Maloney, H Post, 9/26/69)	•	v
President Nixon signed H.R. 11271 (P.L. 91—119), $3.715-billion NASA FY 1970 Authorization Act. It provided for R&D: Apollo, $1,691 billion; space flight operations, $225.6 million; advanced missions, $2.5 million; physics and astronomy, $117.6 million; lunar and planetary exploration, $138.8 million; and bioscience, $20.4 million. Space applications R&D authorization was $128.4 million. Also authorized were $112.6 million for launch vehicle procurement, $9 million for sustaining university program, $27.5 for space vehicle systems, $33.5 for electronic systems, and $22.1 million for human factor systems. Act allocated $20.2 million for hasic research, $36.9 million for space power and electric propulsion systems, $50 million for nuclear rocket, $22.8 million for chemical propulsion systems, $278 million for tracking and data acquisition, and $5 million for technology utilization. For construction of facilities, law authorized $8 million for erc, $670,000 for gsfc, $12.5 million for KSC, $4.7 million for LaRc, $1.7 million for Msc, and $500,000 for Wallops Station. Act authorized $637.4 million for research and program management. (PD, 11/24/69, 1643; PL 91-119)
Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov said in Pravda: “The Americans have not been entirely rational in adapting aviation control panels to the needs for space flight. The control system of the Soyuz ship, for example, seems to me to be simpler, more logical and therefore more perfect.” Feoktistov, who toured U.S. Oct. 20 to Nov. 4, congratulated his new acquaintances in U.S. on Apollo 12 lunar landing and wished them “complete success.” (AP, W Star, 11/20/69, A6)
Commission on Marine Science, Engineering and Resources recommended in report Our Nation and the Sea creation of new agency, National Oceanic arid Atmospheric Agency (noaa), to coordinate and accelerate oceanology research and development. It proposed agency be composed initially of U.S. Coast Guard and Bureau of Fisheries, plus some functions of Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife, National Sea Grant Program, U.S. Lake Survey, National Oceanographic Data Center, and essa. (Pasadena Star-News, 1/12/69; Nelson, Science, 1/17/69, 263-5)
There was “growing conviction that Soviet authorities have taken administrative measures to punish the noted physicist Andrey R. Sakharov,” said Bryce Nelson in Science. Washington, D.C., sources had said Sakharov was summoned for verbal criticism after July 11, 1968, publication in New York Times of his essay “Progress, Coexistence, and Intellectual Freedom.” Discipline was thought to have been performed in early 1969. Fragmentary accounts in Western publications indicated he had been deprived of work as consultant to ministry, removed from position as chief consultant at State Committee for Atomic Energy and from work in restricted physics institute at Chernogolovka, barred from research institute at Dubna, and possibly expelled from Soviet Academy of Sciences. (Science, 5/30/69, 1043-4.)
Washington Evening Star said: “As man’s horizon of space expands, the costs of maintaining an effective program expand in direct proportion. Already, the first limited steps have resulted in an economic burden that the richest nation in the world finds almost intolerable. If the adventure is to continue much longer, it will have to be as an international effort. Nixon’s inaugural statement raises the possibility that some international body, a sort of United Nations for space exploration, could be established to pool the talents and the resources of all nations. It is an idea well worth pursuing. (W Star, 2/6/69, A10)
Man’s knowledge of Venus, Mars, and moon had been enormously enhanced by unmanned Mariner missions, New York Times editorial said. They were relatively inexpensive and did not risk human lives. “Nevertheless, American political leadership has been so obsessed with sending a man to the moon that unmanned probes of the planets became the stepchildren of the national space program. There were times when even the continued existence of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory—the center for these unmanned flights—seemed in doubt. Now, in the new phase of American space exploration begun in the wake of Apollo IPs historic achievement, the major cost-benefit advantages of Mariner type unmanned flights need to he more fully appreciated by Washington policy makers, and even more intensively exploited than in the past, even as the manned exploration of the moon continues.” (NYT, 7/31/69, 32) During July: NASA-appointed Astronomy Missions Board recommended long-range program in space astronomy to NASA. Board of 19 leading U.S. astronomers chaired by Dr. Leo Goldberg, Harvard College Observatory Director, had been appointed in 1967 to propose programs for 1970s. NASA published Board’s report in November [see Nov. 9]. (Text; NASA Release 69—149; NASA ossa)
New tempest was brewing in national scientific community over whether defense establishment absorbed exorbitant portion of U.S. scientific and technological energies, John Lannan said in Washington Evening Star. In New York, younger physicists had called for political activism at annual meeting of American Physical Society Feb. 3. mit group, Union of Concerned Scientists, had scheduled day-long “research stoppage” March 4 and initiated letter campaign to spread its views to other institutions. Union’s proposals included “a critical and continuing examination of government policy in areas where science and technology are of actual or potential significance”; redirection of research from defense-oriented to environment-oriented projects; opposition to antiballistic missile system; and organization of scientists into effective and vocal political action group. (W Star, 2/5/69, A7; Sullivan, NYT, 2/9/69, E7)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser, said at nas dinner in Washington, D.C.: “The relations between science, technology, government and the various elements of our society are enormously complex. Science and technology are no longer separable from political and social problems. . . . Whether we like it or not, science is in politics and politics is in science. . . . The fact is that today science is too important to our nation to stay out of politics. Clearly we all— politicians and scientists—must find ways of adapting ourselves to a new era—an era which began . . . really on Hiroshima day in 1945.” (Text) April 29—May 1: msfc held workshop on optical telescope technology to exchange technical information on design of future space telescopes and identify research and technology efforts needed to support future missions. (msfc Release 69—117)
usaf’s C—5A Galaxy jet became heaviest aircraft flown, in test flight from Dobbins afb, Ga., with 728,100-lb takeoff weight. Manufacturer, Lockheed-Georgia Co., said weight exceeded design gross takeoff load by 100 lbs. Its previous record was 703,826 lbs. (AP, W Star, 5/22/69, A5)
Univ. of Texas astronomers reported second unsuccessful attempt to bounce laser beam off reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. McDonald Observatory Director, Dr. Harlan Smith, said he expected eventual success. (AP, B Sun, 7/22/69, A8)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by nasa from wsmr with VAM—20 booster carried Princeton Univ. observatory payload to 112.5-mi (181-km) altitude to study uv radiation of hot stars in constellation Scorpius with 1 A and 0.3 A resolution. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, but camera and stabilization were completely demolished because of fall after parachute failed, (nasa Rpt SRL)
Astronomers at Univ. of Arizona detected for first time existence of rapidly flashing star in Crab Nebula with rhythm coinciding with that of pulsar observed by radio telescope at same position. Flashing was confirmed during week by McDonald Observatory of Univ. of Texas and by Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona. Presumably star and pulsar were identical. Discovery was first unequivocal observation of pulsar in visible light. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/21/69, 29)
In Duke Univ. lecture, Dr. Peter van de Kamp, Director of Sproul Observatory at Swarthmore College, Pa., described discovery of fourth planet-like body found outside solar system. Existence had been deduced from 30 yrs telescopic observation of irregularities in Barnard’s Star, six light years from earth. (NYT, 4/15/69, 16; AP, W Post, 4/17/69, F13)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) introduced, for himself and cosponsors, S.J.R. 285, authorizing Senate Foreign Relations Committee to undertake comprehensive study of all possibilities for international cooperation in space exploration. (CR, 11/18/69, S14593—4)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR with VAM—20 booster carried Naval Research Laboratory payload to 117.0-mi (188.3-km) altitude to record white-light corona of sun from three to nine solar radii with package containing two externally occulted coronagraphs and three related experiments. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Canadian Black Brant VB sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station carrying 450-lb Naval Research Laboratory payload containing telescope instrumented for infrared astronomy. Telescope, completely cooled with liquid helium to keep telescope radiation from interfering with measurements, contained photoelectric detectors sensitive to optical radiation in region between visible light and microwaves. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered. (WS Release 69—18)
In speech before New York Society of Security Analysts, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said: “I believe that if we wanted to we could have our space shuttle in operation by 1976. ... To achieve the desired economy, it will be necessary to operate this transportation system in the successful jet transport mode. Our space shuttle will probably take off from major airports with little or no noise. It will not create a sonic boom along the route. It will go into orbit, deposit and take on crew and cargo, and return for a horizontal airport landing.” He foresaw an international demand for reusable space vehicles. (Text)
At Smithsonian Institution ceremony, X—15 No. 566670, one of three rocket-engine aircraft built to test flight environment in upper atmosphere, took its place near Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk Flyer and Charles A. Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis. Aircraft had been officially retired with completion of joint nasa—usaf X—15 program in December and flown from Edwards afb, Calif., as cargo to be refurbished by Smithsonian. First X—15 built, it made first captive flight March 10, 1959,	and flew first glide and power flights June 8, 1959, and Jan. 23, 1960.	It completed last flight in test program Oct. 24, 1968, to total 81 free flights and 142 flights with B—52 mothership. Of three X—15s built by North American Rockwell Corp. and Thio-kol Chemical Corp., No. 3 had been destroyed in Nov. 15, 1967, crash which killed pilot, Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) ; No. 2 was being displayed at Air Force Museum, Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. X—15 program had cost $300 million and established records for 354,200-ft altitude and for 4,520 mph (mach 6.7) speed. At ceremony Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, said it was difficult to believe designer’s dream of 15 yrs ago had already found its way into museum. (Program; NASA Release 69—56; dod Release 327-69; NYT, 6/15/69, 70)
President Nixon met with National Science Board members and nas council and promised to nominate NSF director without regard to his ABM position. He asked for names for possible nominee and promised to consider only scientific qualifications. President disclosed he had asked Cornell Univ.’s Dr. Franklin A. Long to consider having his name resubmitted to Senate after original decision not to nominate Dr. Long [see April 17] but Dr. Long had declined. (Kilpatrick, W Post, 4/29/69, Al) Cal Tech scientist Kip S. Thoren suggested pulsars were subject to quakes which accelerated their pulsation. At press interview during annual meeting, he said pulsars’ insides were probably superfluids— more liquid than liquid—and were gradually cooling, with crust crystallization requiring adjustments. Adjustments, he said, would cause “pulsequakes” and could result in sudden speedups in pulsar periodicity. Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold said observations of pulsars indicated they slowed down as they aged, with oldest finally slowing billionths of seconds per year until they reached periods up to almost four seconds. He suggested pulsar radiation might account for luminosity of whole galaxies and even produce all cosmic rays detected throughout universe, including earth. Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Frank D. Drake, former director of Cornell’s Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory in Puerto Rico, said space clocks were emerging as practical scientific tools, especially in testing Einstein’s theories. Dr. F. Graham Smith of Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories, Manchester, England, said space clocks were being used to investigate interstellar medium—gas clouds between earth and other parts of solar system. (Lannan, W Star, 5/1/69, A6; O’Toole, W Post, 5/1/69, Al)
Project research method of supporting principal investigators’ research within universities accounted for about 70% of NASA funds obligated to universities and was serving NASA and schools well, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in speech at Ohio State Univ. More than 10% of project research support funds had been invested in equipment in university laboratories for continuing education and research. “More than 90% of balloon borne experiments, more than 40% of sounding rocket experiments, and more than 50% of satellite experiments flown On NASA vehicles had principal investigators or co-investigators in our universities. A large share of the significant discoveries in space science were made in university originated experiments.” NASA “supports about 13,000 project oriented research grants and contracts in universities . . . [and] 32 universities in 21 states are now working with NASA on various aspects of the earth resources satellite program.” (Text)
NASA announced decision to close Electronics Research Center at Cambridge, Mass. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, told staff: “. . . we must effect reductions and consolidations across the board if we are to reshape our programs to meet the nation’s future needs in aeronautics and space. . . . We are simply faced with the hard fact that NASA cannot afford to continue to invest broadly in electronics research as we have in the past.” Phasing down of erc work would begin immediately. Final plans were in preparation for placement of personnel and disposition of real property in Cambridge. Center, which opened Sept. 1, 1964, had 850 employees. Six buildings, representing $30-million investment, were in final phases of construction, (nasa Release 69—171)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from WSMR to conduct stellar x-ray studies. Nike-Apache carried Dudley Observatory payload and Aerobee 150 carried University of Wisconsin payload. (NASA Proj Off)
FRC announced retirement of NASA’s two X—15 rocket research aircraft, designed for manned hypersonic flight research at speeds up to 4,000 mph and altitudes of 50 mi. X—15 No. 1, which had made first flight June 8,1959, would he displayed at Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. No. 2 would he displayed at Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. No. 3 had been destroyed in accident Nov. 15, 1967. During $300-million NASA—USAF—USN program X—15 had set two unofficial world records, reaching 354,200-ft altitude and 4,520 mph (mach 6.7). Aircraft served as reusable manned platforms for wide range of experiments that helped advance development of vital spaceflight systems. Final flight, 199th, had been Oct. 24, 1968, and NASA had announced completion of program Dec. 20. (frc Release 9—69)
Christian Science Monitor reported interview with Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, President-elect Richard M. Nixon’s Science Adviser-designate: “The balance between manned and unmanned [space] exploration has to be studied. But there comes a time, place, and activity where the judgment and quick reaction of men are needed to do the job or make emergency repairs. There may even be situations in which it is cheaper to have men do this than to have automated instruments. That time has not yet arrived. Manned flight is still very expensive. But I foresee the time when you will run beyond the ability of automatic instruments to do a job either adequately or economically in space exploration.” (Cowen, csm, 1/17/69)
Author Norman Mailer’s total publishing rights on book on lunar landing would exceed $1 million when book was published by Little, Brown & Co. in January or February 1970, according to his agent, Scott Meredith. If film rights were sold, total could approach the $1.5 million paid for Lyndon B. Johnson memoirs. Mailer planned to visit KSC during Apollo 11 launch to interview astronauts and describe space center operations. He also planned chapter On philosophical and technological implications of lunar landing. Meredith said he was surprised at “phenomenal competition among foreign publishers for book and magazine rights.” (Raymont, NYT, 5/13/69, 44)
New York Times said dot had received detailed proposals for construction of 150- to 300-mph, air-cushioned vehicle guided by track or guideway. Agency hoped to design vehicle that could avoid problems of steel train , wheels and rails, which lost traction and spun at speeds of 150—200 mph. dot expected to award contract for Tracked Air Cushion Vehicle (tacv) within three months, with completion of prototype and several miles of test track by mid-1971. (NYT, 5/31/69, 46) During May: Space/Aeronautics said: “Reshaping of the budget, in combination with a flurry of new activity among NASA, the Air Force and the President’s in-house and specially commissioned science advisors, has left no doubt that the Administration favors continuation of a strong manned space flight program and a total space effort much more national in character than the current one. The latter point involves greater pressure on the Air Force and NASA to bring their future programs together, particularly in the space station and support areas. “Although manned space flight was the clear victor in the Republican amendments to the NASA budget, the surgery on the unmanned sectors was artfully performed.” Although $41 million was cut from ossa, none of it came from Earth Resources Survey satellite program. Although $14 million was cut from oart, none came at expense of nerva program. Only notable individual reductions in areas other than manned space flight came in deferral of Sunblazer program, cancellation of Biosatellite-F, and deferral for one year of new Planetary Explorer project. In net increase in omsf, NASA essentially traded off slippage in AA program for resumption of Saturn V production and insurance that lunar exploration would continue into early 1970s. (S/A, 5/69, 31-6)
Lunar Science Institute and Msc’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory were preparing for “lunar knowledge explosion” expected to follow first manned lunar landing, Washington Evening Star reported. Laboratory would quarantine astronauts and lunar samples brought back from landing, storing samples for study and distribution to scientists. Institute, funded by NASA and administered through nas by Rice Univ., would facilitate lunar research by nonspace scientific community, Administrator Robert C. Wimberley said in interview. Directed by William C. Rubey, Institute was soon to be turned over to consortium of universities. U.S. Public Health Service, nas, Dept, of Interior, Dept, of Agriculture, and NASA had planned 30-day quarantine and study of moon material and 21-day quarantine of astronauts. Samples would be sealed on lunar surface and would be flown from recovery carrier to Laboratory after spacecraft return. Astronauts were to be transferred from spacecraft into sealed van through plastic tunnel aboard carrier [see May 16]. Van would be delivered to nearest port and then flown to Houston to sealed-off laboratory. Objective was to prevent importing viruses, some of which had been known to survive thousands of years under unlikely conditions. During three-week debriefing, crew would live in glassed-in quarters including medical area. Samples would be maintained under vacuum seals until opened in high-vacuum chambers containing remotely controlled equipment. Once photographed, catalogued, and processed, content and structure would be studied to determine composition and origins. (W Star, 3/12/69, A13)
nas—nrc Space Science Board had formed 13-member standing Committee on Space Medicine to respond to requests from NASA on problems in manned aspects of national space effort, nas—nrc—nae News Report said. Chairman was Dr. Shields Warren of Cancer Research Institute of New England Deaconess Hospital, Boston, who was noted for his work on effects of radiation, (nas—nrc—nae News Rpt, 5/69, 1)
NASA announced availability of 16-in-dia globe of moon prepared by usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center from NASA photos made by Lunar Orbiter series. Lovell Observatory, Ariz., prepared art work with exaggerated color tones showing lunar landscape bathed in morning sunlight and large Ring Plains, or explosive craters, on far side. One globe had been presented to President Nixon by Apollo 10 astronauts. (NASA Release 69—83G)
nsf released Federal Support to Universities and Colleges, Fiscal Year 1967, prepared for Office of Science and Technology. Federal support to universities and colleges totaled $3.3 billion in 1967, up 9% over 1966 but below increases of 32% and 42% in previous two years. Federal support of academic science activities reached $2.3 billion, up 6%, with two-thirds for science education and institutional development and one-third for operating and plant costs for R&D projects. Nonscience activities reached $987 million, or 30% of total. While hew, Dept, of Agriculture, aec, and nsf increased aid to higher education, NASA decreased spending by $11 million (8%) and dod by $37 million (12%). (Text)	_
Dr. Harry H. Hess, Chairman of NAS—NRc Space Science Board and member of NASA’s Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight since 1963, died of heart attack suffered while attending Board meeting at Woods Hole, Mass. Dr. Hess, Blair professor of geology at Princeton Univ., was one of scientists who had analyzed Apollo 11 lunar samples. In 1960 he had advanced theory that volcanic activity on ocean floor caused continental drift. He had been past president of Mineralogical Society of America and of Geological Society of America, chairman of site-selection committee for NSF’s Project Mohole, and adviser to numerous other Federal agencies. (upi, W Post, 8/27/69, A10; Science, 8/29/69, 882)
Izvestia published article by Soviet space scientist Alexander Koval, Vice President of International Astronomical Commission. It was “high time” that space knowledge was used for advancement of communications, meteorology, geodesy, and navigation. Since space exploration was not cheap, simpler and more reliable experiments must be tried before complex and expensive ones. Three practical applications of space research were industrial use of high vacuum and absolute cold, industrial use of rocketry innovations, and putting “production-technical complexes” in space. (fV Post, 10/15/69, A21)
NAS announced formation of Universities Space Research Assn, (usra) —national consortium of 48 universities—to foster cooperation among universities, other research organizations, and Government for advancement of space research [see Jan. 10]. It would acquire, plan, construct, and operate laboratories and other facilities for R&D and education in space science and technology and had submitted proposal to NASA for management of Lunar Science Institute in Houston, Tex. Existing contract between NASA and nas would expire in autumn. (nas Release)
Aerospace industry sales of $28.3 billion in 1969 were second highest in industry’s history despite anticipated decline of 4.1% from 1968 record of $29.5 billion. All areas of aerospace endeavor leveled off except nonaerospace sales by aerospace companies, which increased. Commercial aerospace sales, principally jet transports, were $5,800 million, down from $6,429 million in 1968. Trend resulted from phasing out of current transport models while jumbo jet production was beginning. Sales by aerospace industry to dod were $16.2 million in 1969 and $16.6 billion in 1968. Military aircraft sales totaled $10 billion in 1969 and $10.7 billion in 1968. Space sales dropped to $4,499 million from $5,108 million in 1968, because of approaching completion of Apollo program hardware phase and cancellation of mol. (Aerospace, Winter, 1970)
NASA Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr with VAM—20 booster carried afcrl payload to 127-mi (204.3-km) altitude. Objective was to calibrate Harvard College Observatory spectrometer on board orbiting Oso VI by studying active regions of sun simultaneously at 300-400 A with telemetering, grazing incidence, scanning EUV monochromator. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA announced award to Bendix Field Engineering Corp. of $30 million, one-year, cost-plus-award-fee contract extension for operation and maintenance of major portion of Manned Space Flight Network. Extension was third exercised under option and brought total funding to $139,215,832. (nasa Release 69—100)
Sen. Claiborne Pell (D-R.I.) introduced on Senate floor S.R. 33 calling on U.S. representatives to U.N. to place before U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Seabed and Ocean Floor set of detailed principles to govern activities in ocean space of all nations of world. Resolution was referred to Committee on Foreign Relations. (CR, 1/21/69, S597)	> Fifth of eight spacecraft launched in NASA’s oso program to provide direct observation of sun during most of 11-yr solar cycle, Oso V weighed 636 lbs, carried eight experiments, was designed with six-month lifetime, and had two main sections—wheel (lower) section, which provided stability by gyroscope spinning and housed telemetry-command equipment, batteries, gas-spin control arms, and five experiment packages; and sail (upper) Section, which contained solar cells and solar pointing experiments and was oriented toward sun. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of preceding OSO spacecraft, were provided by University College (London) and Univ. of Leicester, Univ. of Paris, Univ. of Colorado, Univ. of Minnesota, Naval Research Laboratory, and gsfc. Both tape recorders were turned on and were operating satisfactorily and all spacecraft subsystems were operating nominally, nrl wheel x-ray experiment was turned on during 11th orbit and was obtaining good data. By Jan. 29 Oso V had received 707 commands and had completed 102 orbits. All eight experiments had been turned on and obtained good scientific data. All spacecraft systems—including raster scan and both tape recorders—had operated satisfactorily. Data from gsfc x-ray experiment were being used to plot spectrum of sun. Data from NRL uv pointed experiment had been used to obtain Oso P’s first Lyman-alpha spectroheliograph. Oso I (launched March 7, 1962) and Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965) had surpassed their six-month design lifetimes and, together, provided 6,000 hrs of scientific information. Oso III (launched March 8, 1967) and Oso IV (launched Oct. 18, 1967) continued operating satisfactorily, each providing 7% hrs of real-time data daily, oso program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction. (NASA Proj Off; nasa Release 69—13)
Bill added $258 million to R&D funds for new total of $3,264 billion, including increase of $75.7 million for Apollo program, to total $1,767 billion. Of this increase, $32.1 million was for Saturn V improvements and $4.6 million for lunar exploration. Within new total of $354.8-million noa for manned space flight operations, bill restored $57 million cut from Apollo Applications by budget amendment and added $66 million for space station and shuttle and $6.2 million for Saturn V production. In space science and applications, bill reduced funds for supporting research and technology by $12 million and deferred funding for four proposed Explorer satellites and for Mariner-Mercury 1973 mission, but restored biosatellite program to originally requested $18 million plus $1.6 million restored for Delta launch vehicle for Biosatellite-F. Earth Resources Technology Satellite funds were increased by $10 million, with transfer of funds to other projects prohibited. Advanced research and technology funds were increased by $31.5 million, including $13.5-million increase for nuclear rocket program, $5.25 million for chemical propulsion, and restoration of $1.20 million for aeronautics. Research and program management total was cut by $7.15 million, to $643.75 million. Construction of facilities total remained unchanged. (Text; CR, 5/15/69; House Rpt 91—255)
At state dinner in New Delhi, India, Acting President Mohammed Hidayatullah exchanged toasts with President Nixon and congratulated him: “The epic flight to the moon and back by three of your countrymen has amazed the world and marks a new stage in science and technology. On behalf of the Government and people of India, and myself, I congratulate you, and through you, the people of your country on this historic occasion. . . . We are glad to know that you are sharing the knowledge you have gained with the rest of the world.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1056-9)	.
French scientists, using “world’s most powerful laser” at Limeill Weapons Research Center of French Atomic Energy Commission near Paris, had generated succession of tiny thermonuclear explosions, Walter Sullivan said in New York Times. It was important step toward taming hydrogen bomb energy. It also underlined concern of some scientists that lasers might simplify design of devastating nuclear weapons. (NYT, 9/19/69, 1)
World Data Center A for Rockets and Satellites, established at National Academy of Sciences in June 1958, moved to location adjacent to National Space Science Data Center at gsfc. ( nas—nrc—nae News Rpt, 2/69, 11)
End of era in satellite watching would come with discontinuation in June 1970 of Smithsonian Institution’s optical tracking program, John Lannan said in Washington Evening Star. NASA already was terminating 10-yr support of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s efforts at Cambridge, Mass. Optical tracking had cost $4 million annually since 1958, first through nsf, then NASA. Program had led to nationwide “Dial-A-Satellite” telephone net by which tape-recorded messages told callers where satellites could be seen in sky. Service had become “Dial-A-Phenomenon” to note ecological, geophysical, and astronomical events, since decay of only visible satellites, Echo 1 and Echo II. Smithsonian Observatory had watched satellites with worldwide battery of Baker-Nunn cameras, which had been phased out except for observing maneuvers in major space flights. Observatory’s geodetic program was being expanded, with two lasers operational, one on Mount -Hopkins, Ariz., the other in Athens, Greece, but financial support had been halved for current fiscal year and would be cut to $1.3 million in 1971. (W Star, 12/10/69, A26; Smithsonian pao)
Tass announced that Luna XV was still functioning normally in lunar orbit with 109.4-km (68-mi) apolune, 16.1-km (10-mi) perilune, 1-hr 54-min period, and 127° inclination. Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said Luna XV had conducted two midcourse corrections and speculated that spacecraft was preparing either to land or to observe Apollo 11 landing. (AP, B Sun, 7/21/69, Al) Harlem, many of 50,000 attending soul music festival booed lunar landing announcement. At massive “Moon In” at Central Park, enthusiastic crowd of young people watched landing on huge outdoor TV screen in steady downpour and bought “lunar dogs,” “Apollo rock candy,” and “moon picnic” boxes. Composer and band leader Duke Ellington made singing debut with “Moon Maiden,” song he wrote to celebrate Apollo 11 success, taped for ABC. New York Times sold out 950,000 copies of July 21 issue announcing lunar landing and announced it would reprint entire edition July 24 as souvenir. Special Florida Times-Union edition datelined “Moonday, July 21” sold out in Jacksonville within two hours. Estimated 8,000 Western Electric Co. employees left work or failed to show up in protest against being denied access to TV or radios on job during lunar landing. Des Moines, Iowa, TV stations received some complaints from viewers over absence of regular programs.	, Crime rate fell in Los Angeles, while in Savannah, Ga., 17 prisoners sawed their way out of Chatham County prison branch while guards watched Apollo 11 on TV. At msc, Houston Welfare Rights Organization members demonstrated around display of lm, calling on U.S. to set new goal—elimination of poverty. (AP, B Sun, 7/22/69; W Post, 7/21/69; 7/22/69; Apollo 11 Mission Commentary, 7/21/69; NYT, 7/17/69, 7/27/69) • Millions around world hailed Apollo 11 landing: Soviet Premier Alexsey Kosygin complimented U.S. on lunar landing and expressed interest in widening U.S.—U.S.S.R. space cooperation during July 21 Moscow discussion with former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, who was ending Soviet visit. Soviet TV did not carry live coverage of Apollo 11 lunar landing July 20; Tass announcement was read by newscaster and carried in two-paragraph item on Pravdals front page. Evening paper, Izvestia, accorded story more space and featured photo of astronauts on moon. On TV, Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov described landing as “major landmark” and said crew had coped “brilliantly” with mission. Georgy Petrov, Director of Soviet Institute for Cosmic Research, called Apollo 11 “outstanding achievement” but said more data per ruble could have been gathered by unmanned probes. Statue dedicated to Apollo 11 astronauts was unveiled July 21 in sports stadium at Cracow, Poland. In U.K., Queen Elizabeth watched lunar landing on TV, then cabled President Nixon “warmest congratulations.” Prime Minister Harold Wilson expressed “heartfelt relief.” At Jodrell Bank Experimental Station astronomers applauded and director, Sir Bernard Lovell, said that “the future has been revolutionized.” David Threlfall collected $24,000 on five-year-old bet that man would land on celestial body before 1971. Betting shop had given him thousand-to-one odds [see May 29]. In Wollongong, Australia, local judge heard cases while watching Apollo 11 lunar landing on portable TV set. Czechoslovakia issued two postage stamps July 21 commemorating lunar landing, while record crowds at U.S. Embassy exhibition tapered off after exhausting supply of Apollo giveaway materials. Five thousand Hungarians walked through American Embassy in Budapest July 21, picking up USIA pamphlet Man on the Moon. In Romania, bouquets were tossed through U.S. Embassy fence to foot of flagpole and several Romanians reported large numbers of Bulgarians were crossing border to watch live TV coverage of Apollo 11. Cuban government decided not to jam Voice of America broadcast of Apollo 11 lunar landing. In Algiers news was ignored except for announcement in government-controlled newspaper that “the man is on the moon.” In Ghana, village chief listening to voa broadcast feared astronauts might fall off moon if not careful. In Bangkok, freedom for 622 pardoned prisoners was delayed because guards refused to leave TV sets showing Apollo 11. Lunar landing stole top play in Israel and Egypt, from accounts of their fierce fighting at Suez Canal. In Singapore, girl born half hour after lunar landing was named Luna. In Pakistan, boy baby was named Apollo. Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, and Indian Parliament gave standing ovation to Apollo 11 astronauts at opening of day’s business in New Delhi July 21. In Japan, Emperor Hirohito called off customary daily stroll and interrupted lunch to watch Apollo 11 on TV. Iroquois Indians in Brantford, Ontario, Canada, feared lunar landing might plunge earth into darkness and release monsters from earth’s core. Their medicine man and chief, Joseph Logan, Jr., had said moon was sacred to his people and “we are not supposed to disturb her.” In Taipei, Formosa, Nationalist China Parliament member Hsieh Jen-chao invited Apollo 11 astronauts to attend Moon Festival honoring rabbit which Chinese legend said lived on moon and could provide eternal life. Some devout Moslems in Somalia refused to believe Apollo 11 lunar landing was reality. Following radio, press, and word-of-mouth announcement, fist fights broke out July 21 in Mogadiscio streets between believers and disbelievers. Parents of baby boy born on lunar landing day broke with Muslim tradition and named child Armstrong Abdurahman Osman. In Brussels workers in radio and TV studios suspended strike during transmission of Apollo 11 mission film. In Brazil several thousand persons cheered as they witnessed televised lunar landing at Museum of Modern Art in Rio de Janeiro while church bells rang outside. In Santiago de Chile people rushed out of restaurants to look at moon, forgetting it was midafternoon when they learned of lunar landing. While rest of world focused on lunar landing, one quarter of world’s population labored through sixth moon of Chinese lunar year unaware of event. Approximately 800 million people in Communist China had heard no news of lunar landing. Only deviation from “total blackout on space exploration” was July 17 story of Astronaut Frank Borman’s visit to Moscow, reported by New China News Agency. (C Trib, 7/22/69; W Post, 7/21-22/69; W Star, 7/22/69; NYT, 7/22/69; B Sun, 7/21—22/69; Am Embassy, Prague, Bucharest, Brussels, Budapest, Mogadiscio)
AIA released results of survey which showed expected decline of 4.5% in aerospace industry employment between September 1968 and September 1969, from 1,416,000 to 1,353,000, because of continuing decline in civilian space program and decreasing sales of civilian aircraft. Employment in aircraft production and R&D plants was expected to decline 4.6%, transport aircraft employment, 7%; general-aviation aircraft employment, 0.3%; and missile and space employment, 5.7%. Helicopter and nonaerospace employment, including oceanographic research, was expected to increase slightly. Scientists and engineers would continue to account for 16% of total aerospace employment. (Text)
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge, Mass., said comet Tago-Sato-Kosaka, discovered Oct. 10 by Japanese astronomers, was being observed by astronomers in Southern Hemisphere and should be visible to naked eye throughout U.S. in mid-January 1970. It was first comet visible without telescope in more than two years, (upi, W Star, 12/14/69, A33)
Dr. Persa R. Bell, Chief of msc Lunar and Earth Sciences Div. and Manager of Lunar Receiving Laboratory, announced his resignation, effective in January 1970. He said he would return to scientific research at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Until his departure Dr. Bell would act as special assistant to Anthony J. Calio, msc Director of Science and Applications, evaluating and making recommendations on LRL operations and performing scientific research within LRL. Bryan R. Erb, Deputy Chief of Lunar and Earth Sciences Div., would be acting lrl manager for Apollo 12 mission, (msc Release 69—74)
Richard W. Cook, Deputy Director for Operations in Science and Engineering Directorate, MSFC, would become Deputy Director, Management, to msfc Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc announced. He would succeed Harry H. Gorman, new nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Management), for one or two years, or until permanent replacement became available. (MSFC Release 69-232)
Basic research program conducted by Dr. Wilhelm Rindner had led to development of cardiovascular pressure transducer, erc reported. Tiny device had been placed in arteries and hearts of laboratory animals to measure blood pressure while using 100 times less power than conventional devices. Medical team headed by Harvard Univ. cardiologist Dr. Bernard Lown, in collaboration with NASA, said device was significant advance in monitoring important blood flow changes. Eventually it should be possible to implant device in human beings to observe blood flow and pressure in persons suffering from hypertension and other blood pressure disorders, including heart attacks. Discovery of properties of device was made during erc study of effects of pressure on semiconductors. Properties would also be important in space applications; sensing of acceleration already had been demonstrated, (erc Release 69—9)
NAS—NRC Space Science Board released Physiology in the Space Environment, Vol. 1, Circulation, prepared at NASA request. Report found systematic program of ground-based and inflight biomedical experimentation was essential for planning of long-duration manned space missions, such as to Mars. Knowledge of circulatory system and effects of space flight must be greatly expanded. It recommended experimentation with animals, man, simulations, laboratory investigations, comprehensive literature studies, and physiological measurement before, after, and during flight to obtain all possible data from ground-based work. Flight experiments should be limited to those requiring weightlessness and other conditions not reproducible on ground. (Text; nas Release)
In American Scholar architect R. Buckminster Fuller said: “It seems eminently clear that we not only must put our space programs on highest priority of attention and resource investment but that all humanity must be accredited and financed to enter into a new re-educational system that is geared to develop our most prominent awareness, that we indeed are in space and that all of our concern is with the fact that our space-vehicle Earth and its life-energy-giving Sun, and the tide-pumping Moon can provide ample sustenance and power for all humanity’s needs to be derived from our direct energy income without further robbing our fossil fuels energy savings account. In reality, the Sun, the Earth and the Moon are nothing else than a most fantastically well-designed and space-programmed team of vehicles. All of us are, always have been, and so long as we exist, always will be—nothing else but—astronauts. Let’s pull our heads out of the brain benumbing, mind frustrating, misinformedly conditioned reflexes. If it is going to be ‘All ashore who’s going ashore,’ once more intent to return to nonspace down here ON earth, humanity is doomed.” (American Scholar, Winter 1969-70, 27-47) During 1969: In 1969—the year man first set foot on another celestial body —U.S. orbited 54 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 70. U.S. total included 31 orbited by DOD. NASA’s 23 included 2 satellites orbited for dod as secondary payloads. Highlight of 1969 was achievement of major goal in NASA’s Apollo program—to land man on the moon and return him safely to earth. Lunar landing system completed final phases of test and demonstration when Apollo 9 demonstrated operation of LM in earth orbit and Apollo 10 demonstrated operation of complete Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit, with LM making two passes within 47,000 ft of lunar surface. Apollo program climaxed with Apollo 11, July 16—24, when LM Eagle landed on moon and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. —first men on the moon—performed tasks on lunar surface, redocked with csm in lunar orbit, and returned safely to earth with lunar samples. Apollo 12 successfully accomplished second manned lunar landing with pinpoint accuracy, touching down close to Surveyor 111, which had landed on moon April 19, 1967. Crew set up first alsep on lunar surface and returned safely to earth with lunar samples and parts of Surveyor III. Unmanned Mariner VI and Mariner VII passed within 2,000 mi of Mars, transmitting more than 200 times more data about Mars than were obtained by Mariner IV in 1964. Spacecraft measured chemical composition and temperature of atmosphere and surface and took 198 high-quality pictures, providing new insight into Mars surface characteristics. Other scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso V, Oso VI, Ogo VI, and Explorer XL1. Applications satellites included Intelsat-Ill F—3, Intelsat-III F—4, and Intelsat-III F—5 for ComSat-Corp; Essa IX meteorological satellite for essa; Nimbus III; and Ats V. Biosatellite 111 provided significant biological data on instrumented monkey on board, but mission was terminated early after monkey’s physiological condition deteriorated, and monkey died shortly after recovery. Pioneer E, scheduled to enter solar orbit, and its secondary payload tetr—c were destroyed shortly after launch when Delta booster malfunctioned. Some 189 meteorological sounding rockets, 85 scientific sounding rockets, and 60 high-altitude balloons were launched. NASA—usaf XB—70 and X—15 programs were concluded and new joint program was initiated to continue aeronautical R&d, using YF—12 supersonic aircraft. First operational C—5A, military cargo transport and world’s largest aircraft, was delivered to usaf and by November seven C—5As had accumulated 1,320 hrs flying time. Aeronautical R&d continued to improve quality and quantity of options available in aircraft technology, and aircraft industry made first flights of several wide-bodied jumbo jet transports for civil use, including Boeing 747. New SST design with delta wing was approved by faa and prototype construction was recommended by President Nixon. NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 3 successful glide flights and 15 powered flights included first supersonic flight at mach 1.1 and 54,000-ft altitude, usaf’s X—24A lifting-body vehicle completed 7 flights. dod space program included orbiting of 2 Vela nuclear-detection satellites, 7 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, Tacsat I tactical comsat, Egrs XIII (Secor XIII) geodetic satellite (launched by NASA), and U.K.’s Skynet A comsat (launched by NASA). Titan HIM development was terminated and usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program was canceled because of budget cutbacks. NASA and aec completed ground tests of xe experimental rocket engine with 28 successful startups and 2.8 hrs of operation, including 3.5	min at full thrust, and validated test stand No. 1 in Jackass Flats, Nev. SNAP—27 generator was used as electrical power source for Apollo 12 experiments left on moon and SNAP—19 was auxiliary power system for Nimbus III. SNAP—29 program was terminated. New liquid-propellant rocket engine was developed and new triprapellant system produced record performance for chemically powered engines. U.S.S.R.’s 70 payloads included 55 Cosmos satellites and 2 Intercosmos, 2 Meteor, 1 Luna, 1 Zond, 5 Soyuz, and 2 Venus spacecraft, and 2 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz IV docked with manned Soyuz V and two cosmonauts transferred from Soyuz V to Soyuz IV before returning to earth. Manned Soyuz VI, VII, and VIII, launched on three successive days, rendezvoused in orbit and performed experiments including photography, communications, and welding. Luna XV, apparent unmanned challenger to NASA’s Apollo 11 for first lunar landing and return, crashed onto lunar surface in July. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully reached speeds up to 900 mph and was demonstrated publicly in 90-min test flight. (Pres Rpt 70 [69]; nasa Release 69—161; gsfc SSR, 12/31/69)
Apollo 12 Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., orbiting moon in csm, set new world record for solo space flight. Gordon piloted csm alone for 37 hrs 41 min, breaking 30-hr 20-min record set by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., in Faith 7 May 15—16, 1963. (upi, W Star, 11/21/69, A7)
In Science, Walter Orr Roberts, President of University Corp. for Atmospheric Research, wrote: “Manned exploration of the moon will provide answers to age-long speculation about its nature. Perhaps even more important than what we find will be the fact that we have done it. The event will mark the successful attainment of a goal that demanded technological attainments of unprecedented complexity and difficulty. Our sights were set upon this goal nearly a decade ago by President Kennedy. I was, I confess, one who feared he had asked the impossible.” Weather forecasting—one example of earth-oriented use of space science—would require space satellites of new and sophisticated character. “We will not solve this problem unless we can somehow inspire atmospheric scientists of all the world to commit themselves to the goal. . . . Space technology is perhaps the most important single component of the technology development needed for success. What better use could be found for our incredible talents in space? After the moon, the earth!” (Science, 2/7/69)
Federal Council for Science and Technology transmitted to nasa “Policy on Expanded Use of Federal Research Facilities by University Investigators” approved by President Nixon Feb. 21. (nasa Off of Policy Memo, 3/14/69) Vice President Spiro T. Agnew told American Management Assn, briefing on oceanography in Washington, D.C., that Nixon Administration was not yet ready to endorse concept of “a wet nasa”—marine-oriented Government agency. As Chairman of National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development he was studying opinions of advocates of such an agency, as well as [Jan. 11] report by Commission on Marine Science, Engineering and Resources. (Smith, NYT, 2/25/69, 53) February 24—March 3: First documented pulsar acceleration was discovered in Pulsar PSR 0833—45 in Vela constellation in southern sky by JPL radio-astronomers Paul Reichley and Dr. George S. Downs, using 85-foot dish antenna at Goldstone, Calif. While pulsars normally showed moderate but steady slowing in pulse rate, Vela’s rate accelerated, then slowed at slightly faster rate than before, during week’s observation. Findings in NASA-sponsored research were confirmed by Parkes Observatory astronomers in Australia, (jpl Release BB—513, 4/16/69)
Press conference on results of NASA’s Oao II orbiting astronomical observatory (launched Dec. 7, 1968) was held at NASA Hq. OAO Project Manager Joseph Purcell of GSFC said spacecraft’s five months of orbital operations had been “a fabulous success” and all spacecraft systems were operating normally. As of last week, he said, “we had 137 mission days. [Univ. of] Wisconsin [experiment] has been pointed to 846 different locations in the sky [and] 344 of those were unique objects that they were studying. SAO, the Smithsonian package, has been pointed at 483 separate locations and taken some 1,172 pictures.” (Transcript)
Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post observed similarities among astronauts. Of 23 who already had flown in space, 21 were either only sons or eldest sons. Pattern tied in, he said, with psychologists’ beliefs that only and eldest children tended to achieve more in life because they were disciplined more and trained and treated better by parents. Astronauts also were athletic, showed academic excellence, and had intense love of flying, O’Toole said. (W Post, 3/2/69) Primary objectives were to demonstrate crew, space vehicle, and mission support facilities performance during manned Saturn V mission with CSM and LM; demonstrate LM and crew performance, demonstrate performance of nominal and selected backup lunar orbit rendezvous (lor) mission activities; and assess CSm/lm consumables. Multispectral photography experiment was carried for first time to provide photos of earth resources using several different film-filter combinations. Launch events occurred as planned and spacecraft, carrying Astronauts James A. McDivitt (commander), David R. Scott (cm pilot), and Russell L. Schweickart (lm pilot), entered initial orbit with 119.5-mi (192.3-km) apogee and 117.6-rai (189,3-km) perigee. After post-insertion checkout csm, code-named “Gumdrop,” separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) and lm, code-named “Spider.” Crew successfully transposed csm and docked with lm, and docked spacecraft was separated from 3rd stage with rcs burn. Two S—IVB burns placed stage on earth-escape trajectory. Crew conducted first docked SPS burn. On second day crew tracked landmarks, conducted pitch and yaw roll maneuvers, and increased apogee by firing sps engine three times. On third day, McDivitt and Schweickart entered lm through docking tunnel, evaluated lm systems, transmitted first telecast, and conducted first manned firing of lm descent propulsion system (dps). They then returned to csm and conducted fifth sps burn to circularize orbit. McDivitt and Schweickart reentered lm on fourth day and transmitted second telecast. Schweickart, recovered from earlier nausea, spent 37 min outside spacecraft, walking between lm and csm hatches, maneuvering on handrails, and standing in “golden slipper” foot restraints. He commented on sun’s brightness, photographed spacecraft and earth, and described rain squalls over ksc before he and McDivitt returned to csm. Scott opened cm hatch and retrieved thermal samples from csm exterior. McDivitt and Schweickart reentered lm on fifth day to perform csm—lm rendezvous. Scott separated csm from lm and fired csm reaction control system thrusters to place spacecraft about 3.4 mi (5.5 km) apart, lm dps was ignited twice to set up rendezvous, lm descent stage was jettisoned and LM ascent propulsion system (aps) was fired to set up conditions for circularization. Although problems were encountered with crewman optical alignment sight (coas) because of extremely bright reflections, radar and optical sightings backed up by earth tracking enabled spacecraft to dock successfully after being up to 114 mi (183.5 km) apart during 6%-hr separation. After McDivitt and Schweickart returned to csm, crew jettisoned lm ascent stage and maneuvered to safe distance while stage burned to propellant depletion and entered orbit with 4,309-mi (6,934.5-km) apogee and 142.2-mi (228.8-km) perigee. By end of fifth day 97% of Apollo 9 objectives had been successfully accomplished. On sixth through ninth days crew conducted sixth and seventh SPS burns to alter apogee, tracked NASA’s Pegasus III meteoroid detection satellite (launched July 30, 1965), took multispectral photos of earth, tracked landmarks, exercised spacecraft systems, and prepared for reentry. Final sps burn for deorbit on 10th day was delayed one revolution because of unfavorable weather in planned landing area, cm—sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal; spacecraft reentered during 152nd revolution and splashed down in Atlantic 180 mi east of Bahamas at 12:53 pm est March 13, 241 hrs 53 secs after launch, within sight of recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. Astronauts were welcomed by Guadalcanal crew and received congratulatory telegram message from President Nixon which said: “The epic flight of Apollo Nine will be recorded in history as ten days that thrilled the world. You have by your courage and your skill helped to shape the future of man in space. The three of you and the great team which enabled you to complete your successful mission have shown the world that the spirit of man and his technological genius are eager to begin an age of adventure, an age which will benefit all the people on this good earth.” All primary Apollo 9 objectives were achieved and anomalies were not serious enough to alter mission operations or flight plan significantly. First manned flight of lm qualified last major component for lunar landing mission. Apollo 9 was sixth Apollo mission to date and third manned Apollo mission. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4, 1968), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had achieved all primary objectives and verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Second manned mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), proved capability of Apollo hardware and systems to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Releases 69-29, 69-33; PD, 3/17/69, 400)
nsf published Research and Development in Industry, 1967: Funds, 1967; Scientists and Engineers, January 1968 (nsf 69—28) : Historically, about 70% of U.S. R&D had been performed by industrial sector. In 1967, industry spent $16.4 billion for R&D, four and half times 1953 level of $3.6 billion. Federal agencies financed 51% of 1967 total, or $8.4 billion. Ratio was down from 1959 high of 59%. NASA and dod furnished 89% of Federal funds to industry in 1967 and supported 89% of 158,000 R&D scientists and engineers working on Federal programs in January 1968. NASA’s R&D cost was $55,400 per scientist or engineer, while DOD spent $51,600. Industry spent $8 billion of its own funds for R&D in 1967, 11% more than in 1966 and 265% more than in 1953. In January 1968, 387,900 full-time-equivalent R&D scientists and engineers were in industry sector, of which 59% worked on company-financed R&D projects. Industrial spending for basic research reached $655 million in 1967, 5% higher than previous year and more than four times 1953 level. (Text)
NASA announced decision to install color TV camera on Apollo 12 lm for operation on lunar surface. Decision had been made after three-hour test using unified S-band transmitter. Engineers had simulated varying return signal strengths to Manned Space Flight Network tracking antennas. Camera had been refurbished after flying in Apollo 10 cm. (msc Release 69—75)
