U.S. and France had agreed on program to launch series of 18 NikeCajun sounding rockets from France’s space center in French Guiana, French National Space Study Center announced. Launches would begin in February or March 1971. (upi, WPost, 10/5/70)
NASA announced appointment of Dale D. Myers, Vice President and General Manager of North American Rockwell Corp.’sJSpace Shuttle Program, as NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, effective Jan. 12. Myers would succeed Dr. George E. Mueller, who left NASA Dec. 10, 1969. (NASA Release 70-4)
NASA announced tracking station at Antigua, no longer required for manned space flight support, would be closed by June 30. Station, which included unified S-band radar complex and 9-m (30-ft) dish antenna, had been established in 1967 and had played major role in tracking Apollo flights through Apollo 11. (nasa Release 70-58)
U.S.S.R. celebrated National Cosmonauts Day—ninth anniversary of Vostok I, first manned orbital space flight by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin April 12, 1961. Soviet press reviewed U.S.S.R. space triumphs and praised 18 cosmonauts. Except for brief announcement in Pravda that Apollo 13 had “departed for the moon,” press ignored third U.S. manned lunar landing attempt. AP reported mood of Soviet people was not festive and quoted one Muscovite as saying, “It seems a bit silly celebrating Gagarin’s first space flight while the Americans are paying their third visit to the moon.” (B Sun, 4/13/70, A5)
Failure of Government to define priorities in science and technology and stay with them was one cause of unemployment among scientists and engineers in U.S., Richard S. Lewis said in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Cutback in civilian space program was prime example: “The consequences of this retrenchment in the dissipation of human resources could hardly be more pronounced than if the Nixon Administration was phasing out space exploration—which it is not.” (Bull of Atomic Scientists, 4/70, 28-9)
Discovery of 2500-yr-old solar observatory at ancient ceremonial center of Monte Alto near Escuintla, Guatemala, was reported in London Times dispatch printed in New York Times. Harvard Univ. anthropologist Edward M. Shook had dated observatory provisionally to 500 B.C. (NYT, 9/21/70) During seminar on threat to U.S. security, Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., DOD Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said U-S.S.R. had “more than 300 large SS-9 icbms operational or under construction.” . Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, said in speech that usaf must modernize its strategic offensive and defensive forces to remain creditable deterrent to aggression. He was concerned over increased numbers and total payload of Soviet ICBMs and Soviet deployment of initial ABM systems and extensive abm research. Apollo 11 Astronauts Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins received H. H. Arnold Trophy, Air Force Assn.’s highest award, on behalf of Apollo team “responsible for achieving man’s first landing on the moon—the flight crew, industry and government.” L/G Samuel C. Phillips, SAMSO Commander and former Apollo Program Director, accepted award on behalf of Federal Government and J. L. Atwood, former NR president and chief executive officer, accepted on behalf of industry. (SBD, 9/11/70, 52;W Star, 9/9/70, A2; Getler, W Post, 9/24/70, A27; PInq, 9/24/70,2) September 22:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLXIV from Plesetsk into orbit with 294-km (182.7-mi) apogee, 201-km (124.9-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 2. (GSFC SSR, 9/30/70; SBD, 9/28/70,118)
Teknika i Vooruzheiniye (Moscow) quoted Soviet Cosmonaut Georgy T. Beregovoy on future U.S.S.R. space program: “The Soviet Union is successfully carrying out a space research program designed for many years in the future. Its aims are determined by the needs of science and the national economy and the requirements of scientific and technical progress.” Prospects for development were “unfolding with the establishing of orbiting stations. ... Cosmodrome stations, extra atmospheric bases for geophysicists and astronomical observatories, and space laboratories for chemists will appear.” (jprs 50505,5/13/70)
Apollo 12 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., accepted Silver Quill Award of American Business Press on NASA’s behalf at dinner in Wahington, D.C. Award was given for “greatest exploration expedition in the history of mankind,” abp Board Chairman Donald V. Buttenheim said. It also recognized “tremendous feat of organization of human and material resources” and translation of discoveries and development of manned space flight into “down to earth benefits of the new technology for the good of industry, America, and all mankind.” (abp Release, 1/1/70; abp Off)
NASA’s oao-b Orbiting Astronomical Observatory failed to reach orbit after launch from etr by Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle at 5:40 pm est, apparently because nose-fairing failed to separate from vehicle. Additional weight of nose fairing prevented Centaur from reaching necessary orbital velocity and satellite impacted shortly after completion of Centaur burn. Failure investigation board would be established by LaRC. Primary objective of OAO-B was to obtain moderate resolution spectrophotometric data in uv bands between 1100 and 4000 A to investigate photometry of peculiar stars, law of interstellar reddening, magnitude and intensity of Lyman-alpha red shift for nearby galaxies, spectra of emission and reflection nebulas, and spectral energy distribution of normal stars, galaxies, and intergalactic media. OAO-B at 2123 kg (4680 lbs) was largest U.S. satellite to date and carried world’s largest telescope—914-mm (36-in) Goddard experiment package—which could make detailed measurements and observations previously unobtainable in space astronomy, oao-b was third in series of four observatories planned by NASA. Oao II, launched Dec. 7,1968, was still operating satisfactorily, (nasa Release 70-174; nasa Proj Off)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center was study mg subsfjfuf/on of a thermal reactor for the standard manifold on an automobile engine, to reduce pollution from exhaust. In the photo technician Warren A. Moore connected a temperature sensor to an experimental reactor during testing on a VS engine at LeRC. The reactor burned up the carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons formed during combustion. funds for firm orders. British and French governments had put $1.5 billion into project in seven years and were ‘‘increasingly reluctant" to see Concorde spending spiral. Result might be “that everybody concerned (except the French and British manufacturers) will be contenttosee the program slow down." British prototype 002 had been fitted with more powerful Olympus 593 engines and was undergoing runway testing. French prototype 001 was undergoing engine refitting and was scheduled to fiy again in September. Together, two prototypes had logged 225 hrs in 120 test flights. French model had logged 170 hrs in air, 30 at supersonic speeds. Neither had flown at mach 2 but this would become possible with engines now being fitted. Testing would be over 1290km (800-mi) “boom corridor” from Northwest Scotland to tip of Cornwall over Irish Sea. Flight plan called for 25 runs at mach 2 within 50 days. Measurements would be taken of sonic boom, noise level at takeoff, and smoke emission. (WPost, 8/9/70, El)
Portuguese Government announced plans to establish permanent study committee on space exploration. Committee would collect, collate, and study information on space travel, promote training of scientists and technicians, and maintain contact with world organizations on space exploration. (Reuters, WPost, 1/22/70, A7)
NASA announced selection of Bendix Field Engineering Corp. to receive $85-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for operation of 10 stations of NASA’s Manned Space Flight Network. Contract covered three years with two one-year options, (nasa Release 70-161)
dot takeover of nasa’s Electronics Research Center was discussed in Science: Since inception in September 1965, erc had built up to about 825-member staff including 420 professionals. “If the NASA and dot proponents are right it may not require so wild a transition to bring space electronics research down to earth and deploy it against problems of air traffic control. There seems to be a fair amount of optimism that the technical problems of developing effective control systems will yield to electronics research, but dot, which plans a budget of about $20 million next year for the center, is likely to encounter the practical problems of getting research funds equal to the task.” (Science, 4/3/70, 100)
Discovery of hydrogen cyanide in radio emissions from space was described by Dr. David Buhl of National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Kitt Peak, Ariz., during interview with New York Times. Dr. Buhl, with Dr. Lewis E. Snyder of Univ. of Virginia, had used 11-m-dia (36-ft-dia) dish antenna at Kitt Peak to locate second or
At annual meeting of American Chemical Society in Houston, Tex., Univ. of Chicago lunar chemist Dr. Anthony Turkevich described lunar highlands as “comparable to the continents of earth, floating like icebergs on a more dense medium of deeper rocks.” Only chemical basis of comparison between lunar plains and highlands had been provided by Turkevich-designed experiment flown on Surveyor mission to highland region near crater Tycho. Compared with Apollo II lunar sample data, experiment data proved plains were darker and denser than highlands because they contained twice the abundance of elements heavier than calcium. Moon’s chemical content also showed “evidence for a crust on the moon.” Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astophysical Observatory presented corroborating evidence based on traces of highland material in Apollo ll samples. He explained meteoroid impact at nearby highland area might have showered lighter-colored material—anorthosite—on plain where Apollo II landed. Anorthositic crust, formed by melting, probably covered moon at one time. Then giant craters, which became plains, were blasted into crust by early impacts and lavas from beneath surface welled into holes and solidified. Dr. Wood estimated depth of crust at 24 km (15 mi), but other scientists were skeptical. In interview following meeting, Cal Tech chemist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg said crust was thin “like the skin of an onion.” (Wil-ford, NYT, 2/24/70, 25)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, spoke at dedication ceremony for $2.8-million Life Support Technology Laboratory at LaRC. He said decade of space exploration had been characterized by progress in scientific knowledge and practical benefits to man. New laboratory would contribute to future U.S. efforts to learn more about universe. Laboratory was dedicated “to the welfare of man in space and to the solution of the problems that must be overcome before he can stay there.” (Langley Researcher, 6/12/70,1)
America’s “sanguine attitude about manned space flight” had been shattered by Apollo IJ’s technical problems, Howard Simons said in Washington Post. “As the first words came that the three astronauts were in peril, earthbound fears began to race along with the moonbound craft. The astronauts seemed remarkably calm, most other persons desperate.” As tension heightened, “inevitable questions began to intrude on one’s innate fears. Would they get back? Could they get back?” It seemed certain situation would revive debate over rescue capability. “Mysterious ‘bang’ in space is bound to further slow an already slowed effort to stretch man’s reach beyond his immediate horizon.” (WPost, 4/14/70, Al)
Stages in development of Soviet space stations were described by Boris Petrov in Soviet Academy of Sciences journal Vestnik Akade-mii Nauk SSSR: “First.. .small stations. . .with three to twelve men, with a period of existence of from one month to a year or slightly longer, will be put into circumterrestrial orbit. ... Well elaborated and tested compartments of space vehicles and individual stages of carrier rockets will be used as the main units of those stations.” Orbital stations could be orbited in assembled state by carrier rockets or in parts, with one or two dockings. Station crew could be delivered by transport space vehicle and crews exchanged. One of main tasks of stations would be medical and biological experiments. Orbital stations would be created “of block design, assembled in circumterrestrial orbit in parts,” with maximum 10-yr life and 12- to 20-member crew. Petrov saw advisability “of very large multipurpose orbital base stations” for crews of 50 to 70 and, ultimately 100 to 120. U.S.S.R. had in view not simply space station but system of space stations. (AF Mag, 6/71,54-9) November I: Nixon Administration was “moving to make the hydraheaded Federal science and technology apparatus more responsive to the nation’s needs,” New York Times reported. New effort, to be tested in early 1971, would identify priorities in science and technology and weigh them to determine “where they will rank in the struggle for Federal dollars.” oSTand nsf officials had said in interviews that they were determined to bring better order into system of Federal research agencies. Reorganization efforts would focus on $14-billion-a-year r&d programs to translate scientific knowledge into better housing, mass transportation, cleaner air, and “healthier people.” Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, had emphasized that pure and basic research, currently allotted $2 billion per year, would be specifically exempted from reorganization. Current r&d budget was lowest in five fiscal years and smallest in decade in terms of constant dollars. (Lyons, NYT, 11/1/70, 1)
Challenge and objectives of space science and applications program for next decade were outlined by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during NASA FY 1971 authorization hearings: “In the allocation of its scarce resources NASA is emphasizing those projects which help solve immediate problems and deferring to a later year those major new starts whose objectives are primarily to gain the new knowledge. Obviously, we cannot continue to defer such promising scientific projects indefinitely without mortgaging the economic health, the technical progress, and the security of this Nation. “In the immediate future these postponements are tolerable because of our active ongoing program. Future Aeronomy and Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (imp) Explorer missions will be directed at the earth’s environment: improved oso’s will study the sun and provide data for correlation with ecology studies; the Small Astronomy Satellites (sas) will start giving us continued data on galactic x-rays and gamma-rays; and future missions of the OAO will continue the successful observation program begun with oao-2. Before the middle of the decade, we will visit two additional planets, Jupiter and Mercury. We will orbit Mars in 1971 and land in 1976. Under our supporting programs, we are analyzing space data, developing theories to explain the findings; we are conducting relatively less expensive but very productive investigations with sounding rockets and airplanes; and are developing concepts and investigations for future missions.” Establishing scientific priorities, allocating proper resources to research, and deciding between various expensive scientific projects would continue to be “a most difficult problem.” NASA would work with in-house scientists, advisory groups, and nas and nae “to be sure that the scientific projects we are undertaking are sound and worthy of support.” (Testimony) Donald P. Hearth, Director of Planetary Programs, ossa, testified on continuation of Mars program before Committee: “The results of the Mariner 6 and 7 missions have affected very little the probability that life, in some form, may exist and they have not dampened the enthusiasm of the biologist to search for life on Mars. The apparent low nitrogen content in the atmosphere can be tolerated by many organisms. In fact, biota can be readily conceived which do not directly utilize gaseous nitrogen at all. The results have increased the geological interest in Mars primarily due to the discovery of the chaotic and featureless terrains. An understanding of these geological differences could shed new light on the origin and evolution of Mars and, thereby, on the origin and evolution of the solar system as a whole. We are, therefore, continuing the Mars program. . . . However because of the need to minimize expenditures. . .it has been necessary to delay the Viking missions from 1973 to 1975.” (Testimony) R. B. Marsten, Director of Communications Programs, OSSA, testified on broadcast service of NASA advanced flight experimentation in satellite communications: “Broadcast services come in three classes—the distribution class, which, through a relatively small satellite, would broadcast program material to large receivers, perhaps co-located with local broadcast transmitters for rebroadcast in the conventional mode; a somewhat larger satellite in the community mode, which would broadcast to moderate size receivers located in village squares, or in remote areas and connected to a cable distribution system for redistribution of the program material to viewing sets; and. . .direct broadcast mode, in which multi-kilowatt power level satellites broadcast directly to the user, who may have a conventional TV receiver. This application has the potential of providing instant national service where there is no ground infrastructure, and is much talked about now for educational purposes.” (Testimony) Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs, OSSA, said in submitted statement that research with instrumented aircraft was integral part of NASA program. “This research helps to bridge the gap between groundbased experiments and those that require the more expensive rockets and space vehicles. We have conducted auroral and airglow research observations of the solar corona during total eclipses and infrared observations. The ability to investigate interstellar dust and other celestial objects by observing their infrared emissions is opening up a promising line of research. A small jet aircraft has been used to take a 12-inch [305-mm] infrared telescope to 50 000 feet [15 200 m] above the earth. At this altitude, much of the infrared radiation from the universe is observable; in contrast, at the surface of the earth it is obscured by water vapor. Investigators from the University of Arizona have used a Lear jet from ARC for observations of planets, stars, and galaxies at wavelengths from 30 to 300 microns.” They had discovered centers of galaxies were bright in infrared. Because of importance of this area of astronomy, “36-inch [914-mm] telescope is presently being constructed to be placed in a C-141 jet airplane. This plane and the larger telescope will constitute a unique and effective airborne astronomical observatory.” (Testimony) Joseph B. Mahon, Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, OSSA, submitted statement on NASA plans for use of Titan IIIC and Titan-Centaur booster configuration. Titan IIIC would be used to launch ATS-Fand ATS-G into synchronous orbit. Introduction of Titan-Centaur configuration in time scale to support Viking mission would represent "vital portion of the effort associated with the Centaur Program in Calendar Years 1971,1972, and 1973.” NASA and USAF had concluded basic management agreements for operation of Titan IIIC and Titan-Centaur systems, usaf would act as Titan IIIC launch vehicle systems manager, responsible to NASA mission direction. NASA would be Titan-Centaur launch vehicle systems manager but would use selected elements of existing usaf contractor organizations. Titan III complex at etr would be modified to provide single launch pad capability for supporting planetary opportunities with two launches from the same pad. Plans for Titan Ill-Centaur included engineering proof flight of all-up Viking configuration late in 1973. First operational use was planned for 1974 to support He-lios-A solar probe, subject to discussions with West Germany. During FY 1970, preliminary design and program definition effort for Titan Ill-Centaur would be completed and final design and qualification effort initiated, as well as action for procurement of proof-flight vehicle and supporting hardware. (Testimony)
Apollo 13 editorials: Baltimore Sun: “The simple, grateful ‘welcome home’ spoken throughout the world yesterday not only lifted a burden of dread; it celebrated a new and unforgettable triumph in man’s exploration of space and his own resources of courage and ability at their highest.” (B Sun, 4/18/70) New York Times: “Only in a formal sense, Apollo 13 will go into history as a failure . . . Apollo 13’s booster rocket was sent crashing into the moon on schedule, and that did produce some useful and important scientific data. But in a larger sense, Apollo 13’s flight was enormously productive. The emergency which so gravely endangered its crew turned this flight into a crucial—though unintended— experiment in space rescue .... The lessons learned from this near-disaster will help save spacefarers who are still unborn. And Apollo 13’s ordeal must raise more insistently than ever the question of creating an international space rescue organization with the rockets, crews, and other necessities required to give aid to distressed travelers in space.” (NYT, 4/18/70) Cleveland Plain Dealer: “The very real triumph of Apollo 13, the successful return of a crippled craft, could help the United States space program. What NASA can learn from its inquiry into the cause of the accident could further advance space science and technology —and safety. Certainly further evaluation of the space program’s timetable is in order. But man learns from his failures as well as from his spectacular achievements.” (C Plain Dealer, 4/18/70) New York News: “President Nixon has very fittingly proclaimed tomorrow a day of national thanksgiving. And with that attended to, the U.S. space research and exploration program should proceed full-speed ahead, with special reference to more manned moon shots, and the sooner the better. To falter or fail now would be. . .unworthy of Americans or America.” (NY News, 4/18/70) Nature: “One of the striking features of the past days has been the sheer competence of the people who have been concerned on the ground as well as in the sky. As always, NASA has put on a good show, and there is more to this than the mere capacity to keep a stiff upper lip or even to diminish real dangers.” NASA had functioned “superbly” during daring exploits. “A part of the secret has been that there have been enough men on hand to think of everything, or nearly everything. Another has been the logic of the planning.” Conduct of Apollo would be “monument to the way in which pure reason can accelerate complicated technical developments. Nothing decided in the next few months should diminish the importance of this brilliant demonstration. Those who are inclined to complain that there had been an accident should, rather, wonder why it has not happened before.” (Nature, 4/18/70* 197)
At NASA Hq. briefing, NASA and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory officials displayed and described 10-kg (22-lb) meteorite found by Prairie Network [see Jan. 9], Observatory’s Dr. Richard Mc-Crosky said meteorite was “not sucked into earth by gravity.” It had flamed through atmosphere on direct collision course and was “almost a direct hit. Earth’s gravity had a very little role.” Eight billion meteors struck earth’s atmosphere daily, but most burned out and only few remaining ones were discovered. NASA official said Lost City, Okla., meteorite was “freshest” ever examined. (NASA pao; WPost, 1/14/70, A7)
Bronzite chondrite meteorite weighing 10 kg (22 lbs) was found by Gunther Schwartz, field manager of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Prairie Network, near Lost City, Okla., 73 km (45 mi) east of Tulsa, six days after it had been photographed by network’s automatic cameras [see Jan. 3]. Schwartz found meteorite less than three fourths kilometer (half mile) from impact point predicted by Smithsonian Observatory scientist Dr. Richard E. Mc-Crosky. (sao Release 70-01)
Photos of falling meteorite were taken by automatic cameras at Hominy, Okla., and Pleasanton, Kans., field stations of Prairie Network operated for NASA by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Sao). Fireball was observed over large area of midwestern U.S. Observatory scientist Dr. Richard E. McCrosky later predicted from film records probable impact point near Lost City, Okla. Meteorite entered earth’s atmosphere at 56 300 km per hr (35 000 mph), creating trail that was visible for nine seconds. (SAO Release 70-01; McElheny, Boston Globe, 1/20/70)
Former Presidential science advisers testified on NAS funding before Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare’s NSF Subcommittee. Dr. James R. Killian, Jr., mit Board Chairman, said he could recall “no time when financial outlook was so bleak” in 30 yrs of college administration work. Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, mit Provost, said cutbacks in scientific research might cost U.S. world leadership in science and technology and economic well-being in future. Dr. George B. Kistiakowsky, Harvard Univ. chemist, said budget stringency and “selective and uncoordinated pruning” by Government agencies had damaged U.S. scientific effort. Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President-elect of Brown Univ., concurred with colleagues. (Schmeck, NYT, 4/24/70, 9)
vtol aircraft linking new Tokyo International Airport at Narita, Japan, with downtown Tokyo were scheduled for 1975 service and would make 59.6 km (37-mi) flight in 20 min, Air Force and Space Digest said. Aircraft, seating 150 passengers, would also link Tokyo’s old and new airports. Aeronautical and Space Technological Research Institute of Japanese Science and Technology Agency was testing to develop domestic vtol. Experimental aircraft was powered by two JR 100F lift-jet engines with 1243-kg (1.4-ton) thrust each. (Golden, AF/SD, 9/70, 31)
Uhuru (Explorer XL]I) Small Astronomy Satellite was (aimdied into an equatorial orbit by Italy Iron the San Marco launch platform off the coast of Kenya, East Africa, on Kenya’s Independence Day. “Lfhuru" was the Swahili word for “freedom." Boosted by a four-stage Scout vehicle to map x-ray sources both within and beyond the Milky Way Galaxy, the satellite was the first launched for the United States by another country. At left Mrs. Marjorie Townsend, project manager, discussed satellite performance with a colleague during p re flight tests at Goddard Space Flight Center. During first day of operation Uhuru was expected to collect more data than had been obtained with sounding rockets in past eight years. Satellite’s Jong observing time, rather than the few minutes for sounding rockets, would permit observation of x-ray sources from 30 to 50 times fainter than those observed thus far, probably increasing number of observed x-ray sources from 540 to several hundred. Uhuru was first in series of three explorers in Small Astronomy Satellite program to survey sky above earth’s atmosphere and identify x-ray, gamma-ray, UV, and infrared sources. It was first U.S. satellite launched by another country. Under NASA and Univ. of Rome agreement NASA provided booster and satellite; Italian team, trained at Wallops Station, conducted assembly, checkout, and launch services on cost-reimbursable basis, sasb would be launched in October 1971 and SAS-C in December 1972. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 70-203)
Formation of Convair Aerospace Div. and Electro Dynamic Div. was announced by Roger Lewis, General Dynamics Corp. President. Both new divisions would report to Dr. George E. Mueller, former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight who had joined General Dynamics as Senior Vice President in December 1969. (General Dynamics Release 1537)
Approximately 155 representatives from industry, universities, and government attended pre-proposal briefing on proposed High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) at MSFC. (msfc Release 70-58)
Apollo 12 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., received award of excellence from Governor’s Committee of 100 000 Pennsylvanians at ceremonies in Pittsburgh. Conrad, cited for excellence in science and technology, was born in Philadelphia. Ceremony climaxed day during which Conrad and Apollo 12 Astronauts Alan L. Bean ana Richard F. Gordon, Jr., toured Pennsylvania. (P Bull, 1/19/70, 1/20/ 70)
USNS Vanguard, seagoing tracking station of NASA Manned Space Flight Network, joined OSSA-GSFC-Wallops Station mapping expedition to measure cavity in ocean surface over deepest spot in Atlantic —five-mile-deep Puerto Rico Trench. Vanguard would sail across cavity making precise navigation and gravity measurements while its radar tracked NASA’s Geos II satellite orbiting overhead. Underwater transponders would provide local geodetic control point for referencing ship’s position in support of onboard navigation system. Purpose of mission was to provide calibration standard for altimeter planned for use aboard geos satellite scheduled for 1972 launch. (NASA Release 70-108)
Point-to-point second-generation space shuttle was possibility and could be “transportation system of the future as opposed to the hypersonic aircraft,” Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in speech before Aero Club in Washington, D.C. (Text)
Lidar, new light detection and ranging device to detect air pollutants, was described in New York Times interview of meteorologist Ronald Collins of Stanford Research Institute. Device sent energy signal outward to bounce off air particle and return to receiver on ground. Returned signal was then translated from energy pulse into visual pattern seen on picture tube. Unlike radar, which used longer microwave, lidar used wavelengths measuring 0.6943#*, which picked up extremely small particles in concentration too thin to be seen with naked eye. It was even possible to track some gases in atmosphere with lidar. (Blakeslee, NYT, 12/14/70, 53)
DOT’S SST development environmental impact statements and comments received by DOT on draft statement from other agencies were transmitted to Council on Environmental Quality by James M. Beggs, DOT Under Secretary of Transportation. Statement, required by National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, said development of two prototype SSTs “will not give rise to any long-range environmental problems.” Possible adverse environmental consequences arising from fleet operation of SSTS represented “only possible effects on long-term productivity of environment.” Such effects “remain in the realm of speculation at this time.” Prototype development “would not involve an irreversible commitment of any environmental resources.” Prototype would demonstrate performance, economics, safety, and environmental qualities of sst design before large-scale production of ssts. Government research application to sst environmental factors included; LaRC r&d program to determine feasibility of tubular noise-suppression technique for sst engines, noise reduction and control at source program, system analysis of aircraft noise abatement, university research program to develop and expand noise research interest within educational institutions, theoretical and experimental studies of structure and turbulence levels of ssts to reduce sideline noise and turbomachinery noise, LeRC, studies of noise reduction potential of suppressors and engine cycles, and work on control and evaluation of noise on receiving end, including human factors. Other sst environmental programs were: dot-nasa-usaf high-altitude-radiation research program and noaa air-transportation atmospheric weather-modification research program. NASA and dod gave unqualified support to draft impact statement. hud said it would support prototype development on assurance that new airports would not be needed tor ssts. State Dept, felt “insufficient information exists now to negate all possible significant adverse environmental effects.” Dept, of Commerce said there were still significant questions about sst effects on climate and atmosphere. Dept, of Interior endorsed impact statement after dot had met its previous objections. (Text; dot Release)
Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, msfc Director, welcomed 59 science and engineering professors from universities and colleges in 26 states who would participate in Summer Faculty Fellowship programs sponsored by NASA and American Society for Engineering Education. Research program from June 15 to Aug. 21 would be followed by 11-wk design program, both conducted by Auburn Univ. and Univ. of Alabama. Participants would perform individual research in msc laboratories. Work would be documented for NASA use. (msfc Release 70-115)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published The National Space Program—Present and Future, compilation of papers prepared for Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. Papers represented attitudes of Government, aerospace industry, and academic community on objectives of national space program during next decade and funding level needed to support program. Statements had been prepared for hearings, originally scheduled for September and October 1970, that had been canceled because of press of legislative business and ‘‘uncertain status of the NASA appropriation measure” for FY 1971 because of Presidential veto. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, had urged that “new initiatives proposed for the 1970s represent not only a space program that will maintain our Nation’s leadership, but also an opportunity to utilize resources which will otherwise remain idle or grossly underemployed. In this sense the ‘real cost’ to the society of NASA’s programs for the 1970s is very low and the cost-benefit of these programs correspondingly high.” Dr. Thomas O. Paine, Vice president and Group Executive of General Electric Co. and former NASA Administrator, said in statement that U.S.-U.S.S.R. discussion on common spacecraft docking had been “excellent step forward” in space programming. “The United States, Western Europe, Australia, Canada, and Japan should also work more closely together in the forefront of space science and technology, eliminating duplicative projects and obsolescent developments for purely nationalistic purposes. Space activities are inherently global; they challenge us to develop new international institutions as advanced as our technologies. Attractive new international arrangements should also be established for the developing nations to help them take full advantage for new application opportunities.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, urged vigorous space program with space shuttle as “cornerstone.” Answers to question “Why go to the moon?” would not be found in budget books and cost-benefit analyses but “in the hearts and minds of men, who, responding to a mystical, metaphysical imperative, join hands and reach out to the stars.” Committee found “clear consensus. . .that a vigorous aeronautics and space effort is in the National interest, since it sets the pace for the country’s technological advancement. There is also general agreement that a revitalized space program, given strong direction and adequate funding, is needed for the United States to retain its technological preeminence in the decades ahead.” (Text)
usn F-14 Tomcat fighter aircraft crashed and burned after developing hydraulic problem during second flight from Grumman Corp. test flight facility at Calverton, N.Y. Aircraft had made maiden flight Dec. 21. Grumman Corp. officials and engineers said aircraft was not dawned by major design errors. Both pilots ejected at 90 m (300 ft) and parachuted to safety. (Hoffman, W Post, 12/31/ 70, Al)	_
Termination of manned space flight within three years was urged at Washington, D.C., press conference by four Senators and space scientists Dr. James A. Van Allen of Umv. of Iowa and Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ. Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) said, “I want to shift spending from space extravaganzas to needy programs.” Sen. Clifford P. Case (R-N.J.) said, “The space shuttle. , .should not be allowed to go forward until the proper role of manned versus, unmanned exploration has received a fuller examination than it has to date.” Both Senators, with Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R-N.Y.) and Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), favored continuation of four remaining Apollo flights and three-mission Skylab program but called for ending manned flight on their completion. Dr. Van Allen advocated unmanned space program after Skylab that would devote two thirds of its funds to direct applications of space with remainder devoted to “scientific experiments to examine the solar system.” Dr. Gold said, “If we fritter away our limited resources on unwanted further demonstrations of manned flights [U.S.S.R.] may, with much smaller means, get way ahead in all the areas that really count.” He predicted that, if space station was built, it would be “focal point of anti-science and anti-intellectual-ism which is very much in predominance today.” (Lyons, NYT, 10/7/70,21)
NASA Hq. briefing explained to university administrators effects of NASA budget cuts on funds for educating space scientists. Termination tof sustaining university program in FY 1971 would eliminate more than 200 predoctoral training grants which had been funded at $4.18 million. Funding for multidisciplinary research grants also would end. Students would not be cut off immediately, since grants had been step-funded and would be reduced over three years. NASA Assistant Administrator for University Affairs F. B. Smith said other agencies might assume funding of some grants, since university r&d funding in total Federal budget would increase by $114 million during FY 1971. Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. Du-Bridge, said increase would not compensate for leveling off of r&d budgets in past few years nor for effects of inflation. He noted Government support for graduate students was declining generally and said Government did not need as many scientists as previously. Total $21 million would be cut by NASA in contracts and grants to universities. In ossa, university R&D grants in bioscience would be cut by 30%. Cuts would eliminate a high-energy astronomical observatory. oart would experience 30% cut in university r&d, chiefly affecting electronics and space vehicles research, omsf contracts with mit for Apollo program would be reduced by $2 million. University grants and contracts which survived would be reoriented in FY 1971, with emphasis on what universities could do for NASA. (nasa Off of Univ Aff.; Gruchow, Science, 2/20/70, 1107)
Atlanta Constitution editorial commented on resignation of Dr. Thomas O. Paine as NASA Administrator: “Dr. Thomas O. Paine didn’t ride the Apollo spaceships. But he will be remembered in the history of space exploration as the man who guided America’s space agency through its great adventure that ended in a moon landing.” Dr. Paine had “served his country well and deserves its thanks.” (Atlanta Constitution, 7/31/70)
At NASA Hq. industry briefing on space program for 1970s and beyond, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “I think that when we talk about reducing the overall aerospace program by 12 percent, we have to look at the other side of the point too.. .we will still be spending $3.3 billion in the 71 budget, and I think by any possible measure that puts the space program very, very high in the nation’s priorities.” Major reduction would be in manned spaceflight “from a little over $2 billion in FY 70 to $1,474,000,000 in 71.” With “the manned lunar landing behind us, with almost all the initial buy of 15 vehicles now completed, we are able to take a major reduction in the Apollo account as that program reaches a logical termination. We had hoped to continue the Saturn V at limited production of several a year. The decision was made under these austere conditions that we would terminate that production and take the savings.” Peak NASA expenditure of $6 billion in 1965 included outlay for buildup of total NASA base. Fact “that we are now down between the three and four billion mark by no means means that we will be operating at a substantially lower space activity than we had at the peak. It reflects more the fact that the base is now completed; we can put a much higher percentage of our expenditures into program.” However, FY 1971 budget would delay Apollo Applications flight until end of 1972; stretch Apollo lunar flights to two a year, with Apollo 16 occurring before aa program launch in 1972-1973 and Apollo 17 and 18 after aa program missions; delay ATS-F and ats-G by one year, and Viking-Mars lander from 1973 to 1975; and reduce NASA operational base by shutting down erc and possibly mothballing Mississippi Test Facility. Dr. Paine said NASA aeronautics effort would increase. “We feel that much of the work that will be going forward in the shuttle program will probably have some spin-off into the aeronautics area.” Emphasis would be placed on v/STOL and quiet engines. Orbiting Solar Observatory launch recommended by Space Task Group for 1975 would be delayed to 1976. Interplanetary Monitoring Probes originally scheduled for 1971 and 1972 would be launched in 1972 and 1973 and ISIS would be moved from 1970 and 1972 to 1971 and 1973. Synchronous Meteorological Satellites each would slip one year, to 1972 and 1973, and Applications Technology Satellites, one year, to 1973 and 1975. lunar roving vehicle would be carried on Apollo 16,17, 18, and 19. Decision on whether to fund two or three space shuttle definition studies would be made after proposals were received. In space station area experimental requirements would be emphasized. Two Phase-B definition studies were under way. Summer study of utilization of space stations would be international conference “with, we hope, strong participation from the European space research organization.” nerva studies would continue. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told conference that “with the technology we already have in hand” antipollution program could be initiated “to produce a space reflector—maybe it will have to be a mile [1.6 km] in diameter—that can direct the sun’s energy to create holes over our cities which would act as chimneys to evacuate smog.” (Transcript)
President Nixon transmitted to Congress Aeronautics and Space Report of the President for 1969 (dated January 1970). He said: “The year 1969 was truly a turning point in the story of space exploration —the most significant of any year in that still brief history.” U.S. had achieved “most prominent of our goals in space—one which had long been a focus for our energies. As we enter a new decade, we must now set new goals which make sense for the Seventies. The space budget that I am submitting to Congress reflects my view of a balanced space program, one which will build on the progress we have already made. Our space and aeronautics program has benefited this Nation in many ways. It has contributed to our national security, to our educational, transportation, and commercial strength, to our scientific and medical knowledge, to our international position and to our sense of the dignity and the capacity of man. And the story is only beginning. We have made long strides into the future during the past year; now we must build on those accomplishments in the coming years and decades.” (Pres Rpt 70[69]; PD,2/9/70; 146)
nsf issued Research and Development in State Government Agencies, Fiscal Years 1967 & 1968 (nsf 70-22). State government agencies spent $131 million in FY 1967 and $155 million in FY 1968 for r&d and additional $5.1 million in 1967 and $4.5 million in 1968 for supporting r&d plant. Expenditures had grown at 20% annual rate since 1964, when expenditures were $77 million. Federal agencies provided funds for nearly one half of state agency r&d expenditures in both years. Applied research activity represented 50% of state agency r&d expenditures; development accounted for 20% of total in 1968 and basic research 23%. (Text)
Management of U.S. and Soviet space programs were compared in Science by Dr. Foy D. Kohler, former U.S. Ambassador to U.S.S.R., and Dr. Dodd L. Harvey, both of Univ. of Miami: Programs had been roughly equal in complexity and in input of resources. “If, as has been asserted, the U.S. moon undertaking represented a task equal in technological complexity to the total of all the great tasks performed by man from the building of the pyramids through explosion of the atom bomb, hardly less can be said of Soviet space enterprise.” Soviet investment in space program had been comparable to that of U.S., “if not substantially greater.” Both programs had depended for success on effective organization and use of existing organizations and expertise and both had required extensive organizational and administrative innovations and new management techniques.In both programs most of basic scientific knowledge and technology already existed. Organization and management had been complicated by necessity of serving both military and nonmilitary objectives and by pressures of diverging national interests. Both programs represented “organizational triumphs of a high order.” Aspect of U.S. moon landing now generally forgotten was “that a number of knowledgeable people were convinced it could not be done.” Programs differed in that “to the Soviet regime.. .the name of the game in space has been ‘the system,’ not scientific and technological excellence as such.” In U.S., National Aeronautics and Space Act “reflected the operation of the representative process at what could be called its best.” Its provisions “subjected space activities to continuing congressional control in accord with long-established processes.” U.S. space effort represented “new sort of partnership between government, industry, and universities. . . a partnership that has benefited and strengthened each of the participants without impinging on their interests and integrity.” Soviet space effort had had less impact on national economy than had U.S. effort. Soviet sources had revealed continuing shortcomings in computer technology and hardware upon which space program was dependent. Soviet scientists and technologists not directly engaged in space program did not receive direct knowledge of space program’s technical discoveries and innovations and were denied use of research tools and techniques employed. “The Soviets themselves are evidencing increasing agitation over their inability to match the United States in transferring ‘great prestige’ and ‘great accomplishments’ in science and technology to meet the general needs of society.” Authoritative statement indicated U.S.S.R. intended to triple space expenditures in next few years, while in U.S. “prevailing national mood seems to be moving strongly against investments for the future in favor of maximum utilization of resources for the immediate betterment of conditions of life.” This raised question, “Has the whole operation represented but another highly successful one-shot exercise in crisis management, or has it represented incorporation into American society of a new way to organize, systematically and purposefully, the development and use of scientific and technological resources to the furtherance of national goals?” (Science, 9/11/70,1049-56) On Sept. j7 LunaXVIentered near-circular lunar orbit with 110.1km (68.4-mi) altitude. Tass said ground controllers put spacecraft into elliptical orbit with 104.6-km (65-mi) apolune and 14.5-km (9mi) perilune. Rocket firing thrust spacecraft toward moon and braking rockets were fired 295 m (968 ft) from lunar surface. Main braking rockets were shut down 19.8 m (65 ft) above surface and Luna XVI softlanded on moon’s Sea of Fertility at 10:18 am Baykonur time (1:18 am edt ) Sept. 20. Scientists at Bochum Observatory in West Germany monitored spacecraft’s signals and reported TV pictures transmitted during and after landing were of excellent quality. After collecting lunar samples and performing other undisclosed experiments, Luna XVI lifted off from moon. It had spent 26 hrs 25 min on lunar surface. Tass announced that spacecraft’s mission was the “solution of a radically new task—automatic unmanned delivery of lunar ground to earth.” Samples, Tass said, were obtained with earth-operated electric drill that penetrated to 350 mm (13.7 in) and were placed in container by a “manipulator” and hermetically sealed in. Spacecraft’s landing stage was used as launch pad for liftoff from moon on command from earth. After liftoff spacecraft entered “ballistic trajectory of flight to the earth close to the predetermined one.” Luna XVI entered earth atmosphere at 10:00 am Baykonur time (1:00 am edt) Sept. 24 and parachuted onto steppes of Kazakhstan 26 min later, after 11-day 16-hr mission. Capsule containing lunar samples was recovered by helicopter for delivery to Soviet Academy of Sciences. Luna XVI was first unmanned spacecraft to land on moon and return to earth with lunar samples. In last mission in series Luna XV had landed on moon July 21, 1969, but had not returned to earth. (.NYT, 9/13-25/70; B Sun, 9/22/70, Al; SBD, 9/18/70, 78; 9/25/70, 102)
At Washington Heart Assn, meeting in Washington, D.C., Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, received Spacemedic Award “for outstanding contributions to the study of hearts in space.” He also reported evidence from Apollo 12 mission that prolonged space flight might intensify action of some bacteria normally found on human skin. Astronauts Alan L. Bean and Charles Conrad, Jr., had sustained temporary post-flight infections from staphylococcus bacteria carried from earth, which had increased in virulence during flight. (AP, HPost, 2/3/70; W Post, 2/3/70)
Semiannual aia employment analysis said aerospace industry payrolls would drop by 374 000 persons to 1 044 000 by March 1971. Industry would remain largest manufacturing employer in U.S. despite drop from 1968 peak of 1 418 000 employees. (Corddry, B Sun, 11/12/70, A7)
MiT-sponsored group of U.S. and European scientists concluded month-long environmental study at Williams College to advise 1972 U.N. Conference on Human Environment and other national and international conferences. In preliminary report, Study of Critical Environmental Problems, group recommended that large-scale operation of supersonic transport aircraft be delayed until serious questions about potential for environmental contamination could be ' answered. Study had indicated increase of water vapor induced into stratosphere by supersonic aircraft favored formation of clouds and that fine particles from jet engine exhaust would double global averages of particles, with unknown effects. Particles reflected sunlight back into stratosphere and tended to warm it. Report recommended program to measure lower stratosphere for water vapor quantities and sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide, and hydrocarbons—fine particle matter. Study also found increasing carbon dioxide in atmosphere had caused little climate change. Earth’s oxygen supply remained fairly constant. (Webster, NYT, 8/2/70,1)	_
First published eyewitness account of lunar samples brought from Sea of Fertility by Soviet Luna XVI was given in Izvestia by B. Konovalov: Lunar dust turned greenish and sometimes reddish under direct light but in general looked like “dry mud.” Later New York Times said Izvestia correspondent Konovalov had been permitted to observe lunar material at special Soviet Academy of Sciences laboratory in Moscow, where initial examination was taking place. Exact location of laboratory and names of top officals in Luna XVIprogram were being kept secret. Konovalov had reported container of samples had been placed in cylindrical stainless steel chamber with portholes. Pumps had sucked oxygen from chamber and sterilizing gas had been injected. Chamber had been filled with helium gas to prevent reaction with moon samples. Then container, which included moon rock and its electrical drill, had been opened for observation. Rock had been placed on steel trough containing scale divisions. Some material would be taken in special bags to other laboratories for examination. Konovalov’s reference to lunar “dust” had been first use of term by Soviet journalist, New York Times said. Previous references had been to “lunar surface,” “lunar ground,” or “lunar rock.” Soviet scientist Aleksey Turgarinov said on Moscow TV that lunar samples were blue and had been removed from hermetically sealed container in low vacuum and sterile conditions. Tass said rocks would be kept in quarantine and would be given to Soviet Academy of Sciences for special research program. Research results would be published. (WPost, 9/26/70, A7; Gwertzman, NYT, 9/27/70, 12)
Initial plans for international docking system that would eliminate current “key-in-lock” approach of U.S. and Soviet space programs had been presented by NASA representatives at Oct. 26-27 U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation meetings in Moscow, Walter Sullivan said in New York Times. U.S.S.R. had reciprocated with detailed plans of docking system similar to Apollo’s. “While the proposed American scheme is a long-term project,” NASA engineers believed “the Apollo system and the new Soviet one are enough alike to be modified for compatibility.” (NYT, 11/21/70)
House passed by 229 votes to 105 H.R. 16516, FY 1971 NASA authorization, after agreeing to recommit bill to House Committee on Science and Astronautics with instructions to reduce Apollo program funding by $14.5 million and space flight operations funding by $15.5 million. Action brought authorization total to $3,601 billion, $30 million below $3,631 billion reported by House Committee on Science and Astronautics on March 12, but $268 million more than $3,333 billion requested by Administration. (CR, 4/23/70, H3377-23)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., received gold medal from Federation Aeronautique Internationale in New Delhi for promoting peaceful space exploration. (AP, HPost, 11/22/70)
Significance of Soviet flights to moon was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Luna XVI and XVII, launched Sept. 12 and Nov. 10, had been “technically impressive; but as isolated events, their importance to science and technology is relatively minor.” U.S. still held technological leadership with Apollo 11. U.S. had had four men on moon and U.S.S.R. none. U.S. had returned 56 kg (123 lb) of lunar material and U.S.S.R. had returned 85-113 g (3-4 oz). U.S. had placed automated station on moon that had functioned for more than year. U.S. had gained “enormous amount” of lunar information; U.S.S.R. had added very little. In overall trends, however, U.S. launch rate was decreasing while Soviet rate was increasing. In 1970 to date, U.S.S.R. had placed 74 payloads in space, to 31 by U.S. “They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus and Mars; our planetary program has many gaps.” U.S.S.R. had continuing manned space program and capability, with Zond spacecraft, for manned circum-iunar flight. Soviets had stated intention to orbit space station before U.S. and reportedly were developing booster of Saturn V class while U.S. had suspended Saturn V production. U.S.S.R. was spending more money on space annually than U.S. “.. .when we view Luna 16 and 17 in the context of trends in our program and theirs, then we must be concerned about our future in aeronautics and space—about our position of leadership that we have worked so hard to achieve.” (CR, 11/30/70, S19002)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics submitted to Congress Issues and Directions for Aeronautical Research and Development, report of Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. Report recommended that U.S. establish national aeronautics and aviation policy emphasizing aeronautical r&d, Government-industry roles be clarified, and dot be statutory member of nasc. Report found reason for concern over maintenance of long-term U.S. leadership in aeronautics and aviation. Technological r&d base needed to be rebuilt and existing technology should be used more fruitfully. (Text)
Aug. 15 closing of Antigua Tracking Station in Caribbean would reduce Manned Space Flight Network to 13 stations, 4 aircraft, and 1 ship, NASA announced. At peak complement—during July 17-24, 1969, Apollo 11 mission—network had had 15 stations, 8 instrumented aircraft, and 4 tracking ships. (NASA Release 70-101)
Discovery among Apollo 12 lunar samples of 4.6-billion-yr-old radioactive rock from moon’s Ocean of Storms was announced simultaneously by Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Lunar and Earth Sciences Div., at MSC press conference and by Cal Tech scientist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg at cospar meeting in Leningrad. Rock— oldest lunar material discovered to date—was first solid evidence that solar system was 4.6 billion yrs old. Rock was chemically unique and had highest concentration of radioactive elements yet observed in lunar samples, msc analysts said 85-g (3-oz) rdck, size of lemon, had 20 times as much uranium, thorium, and potassium as any other Apollo It or Apollo 12 rock, (nasa Release 70-80; Wil-ford, NYT, 5/27/70,1)
Christian Science Monitor editorial on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space discussions: “While not wishing to minimize the long road which still lies ahead before America and Russia have peacefully resolved all their major disagreements, we see the new space pact as an extraordinarily heartening development. It has created a new bond, a new mutual interest, a new feeling of joint participation. It is from the multiplication of such ties that international peace and friendship grow. And from such a vision of space togetherness there can come a stronger desire for greater brotherliness on earth.’’ (CSM, 10/31/ 70) During October: Scientists at Boeing Space Center in Kent, Wash., were studying piece of Surveyor III, 5 cm (2 in) long, returned from moon by Apollo 12 astronauts, to determine why original white paint had discolored, Boeing Co. said. White paint reflected intense solar rays in space and helped prevent heat buildup inside spacecraft. Boeing researchers thought paint degraded in space because of contaminating film from rocket exhaust, constant proton bombardment, or other radiation from sun. If discoloring came from contamination, paint could be restored to whiteness through oxygen plasma process. If paint had changed through radiation damage, Boeing could replenish depleted atoms. Results of study would enable Boeing to renew reflective paint of future spacecraft which might need to function for 10 to 20 yrs. (Boeing Release S-0788)
Dr. Rafael Caldera, President of Venezuela, addressed joint session of U.S. Congress: “I am convinced that the future of the hemisphere depends on the extent to which this great nation reaches a decision to become a pioneer in social international justice. The measure to which your people. . .become conscious of the fact that with the cost of one of its Apollo moon shots it could contribute to the prosperity and happiness of nations like ours on whose security its own security depends,” Venezuelans hoped Apollos would continue exploring space, “but the result of these explorations make the need for a better life for men on earth more urgent," (CR, 6/3/ 70, H5025-7)	. * Baltimore Sun editorial on Soviet space platform program: “How far along towards realization it is and what Soyuz 9 will contribute to it can only be matters of conjecture. What is impressive is the methodical way the Russian space directors are concentrating their efforts and resources. While there has been nothing eyecatchingly novel or adventurous about the progress so far, the program seems concerned not with the public response, either in Russia or the rest of the world, but with a gradual, systematic achievement of a single, selected goal." (B Sun, 6/3/70) June 3-5; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, headed group of NASA and industry officials who met in Paris at request of European Space Research Organization (esro) to brief ESRO representatives and European scientific, industrial, and government representatives on space station and related systems. Dr. Paine told meeting U.S. wished to expand cooperation with European nations. He said space station should grow over next decade into very important international research facility. (NASA Release 70-83; Av Wk, 6/8/70,16) Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said: “Where men are concerned in utilizing the space facilities of the future. . .we are prepared to accommodate astronauts of other countries in these programs.” NASA assumed there would be “an interest in training pilot-astronauts in conjunction with some expectation to use them for your own experimental or applications objectives. We would be very happy to cooperate in that kind of training, and we would be prepared to see pilot astronauts fly the space shuttle after a test period establishes the operational status of the vehicle.” (Transcript)
NAS released Venus: Strategy for Exploration, report of NASAsupported study by scientific panel chaired by Harvard Univ. astronomer Dr. Richard M. Goody and Kitt Peak National Observatory astronomer Dr. Donald M. Hunten. Report urged unmanned scientific study of Venus with Planetary Explorer spacecraft, 385-kg (850-lb) “universal bus’’ capable of carrying entry probes, orbiters, balloons, and landers. Estimated cost of unmanned Venus probe program was $ 100-million total for first three missions and up to $25 million for each succeeding mission. Program would be undertaken in addition to planned NASA program of planetary exploration. Panel urged Venus exploration because information on cloud cover blanketing planet and planet’s carbon dioxide atmosphere could contribute to understanding of general atmospheric systems, including earth’s, and conflicting theories could be tested with relatively simple measurements. Determination of concentration of hydrogen atoms and compounds could reveal whether oceans once covered Venus and, if so, what happened to them. Panel urged that higher failure risks be accepted for Venus missions to lower equipment costs, that experimental operations be simplified, that landers be permitted to impact on Venus, and that NASA cooperate with space organizations of other nations in planning and carrying out investigations. (Text)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Nov. 12 confirmation by jpl radioastronomers of Einstein theory of relativity: “nasa scientists who have confirmed the general relativity theory as well as the critical scientists who have thought it to be in error, have alike based their calculations on the most sophisticated and expensive
NASA's thick supercritical test wmg was flight-tested on a USN T2-C aircraft for the first time, in flight from the North American plant in Columbus. Ohio. Joint NASA. USN program was testing the new airfoil that might save structural weight on moderate-speed aircraft. Thin version of the airfoil for maximum-speed performance, fitted to a modified F-S jet fighter (below), was delivered to the Flight Research Center Nov. _1 for test flights beginning in the spring of 1971. pieces of modern equipment, from computers to the Mariner vehicles themselves. And they were operating in the light of the theory itself. Einstein, drastically revising received thought, created the theory with a blackboard and a piece of chalk and a mind able to talk to Isaac Newton and correct him.” (W Star, 11/24/70)
Thermal properties of lunar magnetic rocks at high temperatures were evaluated m Science by Univ. of Oregon volcanologists Tsutomu Murase and Alexander R. McBirney: “Thermal conductivity of a synthetic lunar rock in its melting range is about half that of a terrestrial basalt. The low conductivity and increased efficiency of insulating crusts on lunar lavas will enable flows to cover great distances without being quenched by high radiant heat losses from the surface. For a given rate of heat production, the thermal gradient of the moon would be significantly, steeper than that of earth.” (Science, 10/9/70,165-7)
Transition of World War II aircraft industry into 1970 aerospace industry was traced in Air Force magazine by Karl G. Harr, Jr., aia President. Increased performance had increased complexity. Average 1944 combat aircraft had carried 454 kg (Vi ton) of avionic gear; 1948-1950 counterpart needed three to five times as much. Weapon revolution did not signify end of manned aircraft era; it brought forth “new family of aircraft of substantially improved capability.” First operational “barely supersonic” 1954 fighter had been followed by succession of more advanced fighters. “The complexity curve took a sharp upward turn, taking the cost curve with it,” with corollary decline in numbers of aircraft produced. Fewer aircraft were needed because of individual aircraft’s superior performance. With advent of supersonic aircraft production, guided missile output became significant portion of industry workload. Big push had come in 1954 when missile procurement topped billion-dollar level for first time. “Undoubtedly, the space program was the dominant influence in history’s most explosive decade of technological advance. There were two primary contributing factors: breadth and acceleration.” Breadth of program required continual probing of new research frontiers across spectrum of almost every scientific and technological discipline. “The acceleration of effort imposed by the lunar-landing timetable necessitated a forcing of technology, compressing into one decade the normal advance of several.” (AF, 9/70, 84-8)
Harry H. Gorman had accepted, in permanent capacity, position of NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Management) to which he acceded in October 1969, MSFC announced. Richard W. Cook had been named to fill Gorman’s former post as MSFC Deputy Director, Management, pending Hq. approval. (MSFC Release 70-129)
ESSA announced it had assumed control of Solar Particle Alert Network (span) from NASA. Network, which originated in 1966 in support of NASA space flight programs, included observatories in Canary Islands and Carnarvon, Australia, and at essa’s Space Disturbance Laboratory in Boulder, Colo. Under ESSA management, principal observatories would have identical optical and radio solar telescopes to provide continuous coverage of sun. Three stations were connected by voice-quality communications links to allow real-time transmission of data and observations, and all stations were equipped to photograph sun in hydrogen (H-alpha) light. Stations could be supplemented by standby observatory at msc. essa also had accepted responsibility for processing, storing, and distributing photographic data and radio data from span observations, (essa Release 70-74-238)
NASA's HL-JO lifting body ('above right.) reached a lifting-body speed record of tnach 1.S6 and an altitude of 1980(1 meters (65 000 feet) during powered night after air launch from a B-52 aircraft. Experimental vehicles in the joint nasa-usaf Lifting Body Flight Research Program to develop the design of future space shuttle craft also included the X-24A (above left), which made its first supersonic flight Oct. 14, and the M2-F3 (center), which made its first glide flight June 2. research was still too flimsy to risk two-year manned Mars flight. (Krimsky, Long Beach [Calif] Independent, 2/19/70)
U.S. laser reflector placed in moon’s Sea of Tranquility by Apollo II crew was measuring variations in distance between site and McDonald Observatory in Texas with accuracy within less than 0.3 m (1 ft), New York Times quoted Univ. of Maryland scientist Dr. Carroll 0. Alley as reporting. Accuracy was determined by shortness of pulses and accuracy with which travel time of pulses to moon and back could be measured. New lasers being developed might cut accuracy margin to less than 25 mm (1 in) and could produce reflections bright enough to be observed in telescopes of small observatories. Dr. Alley was chairman of committee of international specialists seeking to encourage widespread ranging of lunar reflectors such as French laser reflector landed on moon by Soviet Luna XVII. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/70)
President Nixon had asked Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Science Adviser, to explore future use of erc, Office of Science and Technology announced. (ostpio)
In speech before Young Communist League in Moscow, Cosmonaut Aleksey Yeliseyev said: “Every country follows its own path in space exploration. The main trend in Soviet space research is the construction of orbital stations that can make long flights. The United States in recent years concentrated its efforts on putting a man on the moon. In the future these paths will merge into a wide road of mankind far into space.” (upi, NY News, 5/27/70, 34; upi NYT, 5/31/70) t _
Establishment of Charles S. Draper Research Center and appointment of mit scientist Dr. C. S. Draper as its President were announced by Dr. Jerome P. Keuper, President of Florida Institute of Technology, site of new center. Dr. Draper would continue as Vice Director of MIT Instrumentation Laboratory, which had been renamed Charles S. Draper Laboratory, with cognizance of dod projects and responsibility for advanced technology in control navigation guidance, (fit Release)
U.S.S.R. and West Germany signed agreement in Moscow calling for exchange of scientists and direct contacts between institutes and laboratories. At news conference after signing, Chairman Vladimir A. Kirillin of Soviet State Committee for Science and Technology said countries planned to cooperate in physics, physical chemistry, astronomy, biology, medicine, oceanography, computing techniques, problems of information, and education. (NYT, 9/29/70, 3)
nsf Released Research and Development in Industry, 1968: Funds, 1968; Scientists & Engineers, January 1969 (nsf 70-29). of 36% of industrial scientists and engineers in r&d activities in January 1969, about two fifths worked on Federally financed r&d projects. For first time since 1956, companies financed over half of tneir r&d work with their own funds, spending $8.9 billion in 1968. Company funds increased 23% between 1966 and 1968, while Federal spending remained nearly level. Pattern was expected to continue from 1968 to 1970, with company r&d financing expected to rise about 20% and Federal support possibly declining slightly. In 1968, 90% of $8.6 billion in r&d funds furnished to industries by Federal agencies came from dod and NASA, dod funded 104 600 r&d scientists and engineers in 1968, at an average cost of $51 800 per r&d professional. NASA projects averaged $66 000 per r&d professional and included 35 000 persons. Industrial firms spent $3.7 billion on research, both basic and applied. Federal Government furnished 32% of these funds. In 1968, 72% of applied R&D funds was devoted to five product fields—guided missiles and spacecraft, electrical equipment and communication, aircraft and parts, machinery, and chemicals (not including drugs and medicine). (Text)
Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of House Committee on Science and Astronautics transmitted to parent committee The National Institutes of Research and Advanced Studies: A Recommendation for Centralization of Federal Science Responsibilities. Report, result of 10-mo study by subcommittee, recommended immediate establishment of National Institutes of Research and Advanced Studies (niras) to consolidate Federal responsibilities for basic research and graduate education, niras would be independent agency below cabinet level with administrator appointed by President subject to Senate confirmation, nsf, whose charter was basis for niras, would be distributed in new centralized agency, with education programs at undergraduate level or below transferred to hew Office of Education. Basic research programs determined to be no longer relevant to individual agency missions would be considered for transfer to niras. Committee also recommended increase of OST staff with director given Cabinet status and responsibilities extended. (Text)
Ninth anniversary of first U.S. manned space flight, by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in Freedom 7Mercury spacecraft. Apollo 13 astronauts visited Grumman Aerospace Corp. plant at Bethpage, N.Y., where lm Aquarius was built. Astronauts received rousing cheer from 15 000 workers. Aquarius received rousing cheer from astronauts. (UPI, W Star, 5/6/70, A2; MSC Hist Off)
Technical progress made through space program was described by Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in commencement address at Whitworth College in Spokane, Washington: Chrysler Corp. was using computer-controlled equipment derived from Apollo checkout equipment to test distributors in its automobile ignition systems. U.S. Bureau of Public Roads had found automotive safety device that originated in Apollo spacecraft couches was trimming 97-km-per-hr (60-mph) impact to equivalent of 8 km per hr (5 mph) when used in conjunction with special highway guardrails. Nationwide insurance company had announced collision premium reductions of 20% for cars equipped with device. (Text) May 25:	Dedication ceremonies were held at Goddard Park in Auburn, Mass., memorial built by Auburn Rotary Club to honor late rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard. Park contained replica of first liquid-fuel rocket invented by Dr. Goddard and Polaris rocket donated by USN. (CR, 6/3/70, E5170)
Lunar Science Institute near MSC in Houston, Tex., was dedicated at ceremonies attended by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, other nasa officials, and some 70 space scientists who had gathered early for Jan. 5 opening of Apollo 11 Lunar Science Conference at MSC. Dr. Paine said, “This is the institution to help us bring all the expertise we need together to solve the riddles of the moon.” LSI, created by 49-university Universities Space Research Assn., had one-year contract with NASA, renewable annually. Facilities would be open to all scientists, including those from Iron Curtain countries. Dr. William W. Rubey, Univ. of California and Rice Univ. geologist, would be Director. (HPost, 1/5/70)
Rep. Charles H. Wilson (D-Calif.) introduced in House H.C.R. 710, “to utilize more effectively the expertise and abilities” of NASA scientists and engineers in “fight against environmental pollution.” (CR, 8/12/70, H8191)
In profile of Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., new OST Director and Science Adviser to President, New York Times said Dr. David’s goal was “to combine science and technology with the human factor in society.” Associate had said Dr. David was skeptical of value of manned space program and felt space program should be pushed in “very studied fashion.” (NYT, 9/15/70,26)
NASA was “bracing itself for the inevitable backlash of opinion,” now that “public jubilation” over Apollo 13's safe return had subsided, Economist said. “But so far the reaction has been surprisingly mild. The newspapers have generally argued that people had become too over-confident about the dangers of space travel and that the exploration of the moon must continue. President Nixon has made it clear where he stands; he announced to Dr. Thomas Paine. . .that he had ‘a great organization’ and that he himself was a firm believer in manned space flight.” (Economist, 4/25/70,43-4)
NASA said it had confirmed Aug. 12 observation by astronomer V. E. Bell at Lodi (Calif.) Observatory of bright blue-white flare on lunar surface near Fra Mauro highland area, when moon was closest to earth. International astronomical group Astronet had reported similar sighting in crater Lassell K Sept. 1. Observation reports were in response to Aug. 10 alert by Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program’s principal seismic investigator, made through Smithsonian Astro-physical Observatory. (W Star, 9/2/70, A6)
Japan’s attempt to launch second satellite, 61.8-kg (136.4-lb) MS-F1 solar monitor, failed when Mu 4S1 4th stage malfunctioned after launch from Uchinora Space Center. Instrument package went dead 16 min 10 secs after launch. Mission had been postponed seven times since original Aug. 19 launch date because of inclement weather and technical problems. First satellite, Ohsumi, had been launched Feb. 11. (SBD, 9/28/70, 119; AP,W Star, 9/25/70)
NASA and Univ. of Rome’s Aerospace Research Center dedicated Explorer XLII satellite, scheduled for launch Dec. 12, to Kenya. Dedication was in honor of Kenya’s independence day Dec. 12 and in recognition of Kenya’s cooperation with Italy in establishing San Marco launch platform off coast of Kenya. If successfully orbited, satellite would be named “Uhuru,” Swahili word for freedom. (NASA Release 70-212)
French Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes) successfully launched French Diamant-B rocket carrying Franco-German scientific satellite Dial (Diamant pour 1’Allemagne) from Guiana Space Center (gsc), Kourou, French Guiana. Mission, under joint agreement with West Germany, was France’s fifth successful launch. The 115-kg (253-lb) payload included German scientific “WI Kapsule” wika and French technological “Mini Kapsule” mika which was damaged by vibration between 2nd and 3rd stages. French capsule was to have checked Diamant-B stages during flight. Satellite entered orbit with 1613-km (1002.3-mi) apogee, 308-km (191.4-mi) perigee, 104.3-min period, and 5.4° inclination, (gsfc ssr. 3/31/70; C Trib,3/11/70; Av Wk, 4/6/70; NASA Int Aff; SBD, 3/12/70, 57; SF, 51 70,189)
Apollo 13 editorials: Washington Post: “The footprints are still imperishably graven on the lunar dust and the flag still flies on the surface of the moon, but it all seems more distant, unreal and unattainable now. The loud bang that rocked Apollo 13 and echoed back to us from outer space last week did more than challenge our comfortable assumptions about manned space flight. It reminded us how much we have taken for granted, how much has been achieved and how far man has yet to go.” (WPost, 4/19/70, Bl) Washington Sunday Star: “. . .men, the world over, instinctively recognize the metaphysical importance of the reach into space. Lovell, Haise, and Swigert were not just three Americans on a dangerous mission. They, and those who will follow, are ambassadors of life to new, unknown regions. The success of these first halting steps into space has brought a new vision to a slightly weary world and given mankind a new pride in its humanity. It is a gift without price. It is an offering that must not be withdrawn because of a momentary setback and a dramatic demonstration of the dangers that have always been present.” (W Star, 4/19/70) Philadelphia Sunday Bulletin: “Of all the machines man has made to plumb the depths of space, surely none has served him better or more faithfully in desperate circumstances [than the LM]. So Aquarius and the men who designed and manufactured her earned the plaque in Smithsonian, just as the astronauts and the Apollo 13 ground crew earned the Freedom Medals President Nixon has awarded them.” (P Bull, 4/19/70)
Harold G. Miller, Chief of Mission Simulation Branch in MSC’s Flight Control Div., received AlAA’s DeFlorez Training Award in Cape Kennedy for “contributing significantly to the United States space flight programs through development of flight controller training techniques and capabilities.” (aiaa Release, 3/11/70)
Robert J. Perchard of Bourne, Mass., had obtained exclusive royaltyfree patent license from NASA to manufacture and sell inflatable life raft developed for manned space flight program, NASA announced. Patent had been issued to NASA Nov. 11, 1964. Nontippable raft with radar-reflective surface had been part of survival equipment aboard all Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft. Under NASA patent policy exclusive royalty-free license could be granted if commercial use of invention had not occurred within two years after patent’s issuance. Perchard had become interested in developing new life raft after death of his son at sea during Coast Guard air rescue mission. (NASA Release 70-3)
House leaders of both parties urged that U.S. push ahead with space exploration despite Apollo 13 abort. Speaker John W. McCormack (D-Mass.) said in floor speech, “There may be a small minority who will urge that we pull back our space efforts. This is not my position. Neither am I convinced it will be the view of the Congress or the overwhelming majority of American people.” House Minority Leader Gerald R. Ford (R-Mich.) said he concurred. Chairman George P. Miller (D-Calif.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics said committee would not conduct investigation of Apollo 13 accident but would review findings of NASA inquiry board. (CR, 4/20/70, H3247,3276; upi, WPost, 4/2/70)
Dr. W. D. McElroy, NSF Director, called for reevaluation of U.S. science and technology policies in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development. He proposed smooth transition between science and its applications by ensuring continued support of basic science by mission-oriented agencies; raising level of support for academic science from 18% to 35% or 40% of total Federal expenditure; elimination of conflict between “big science” (high-energy physics, etc.) and “little science” (projects of equal importance but smaller scale); long-term, level funding for science to avoid periodic ups and downs; Government sponsoring and funding of research on national problems to avoid competition with “normal” flow of research; and system of priorities with built-in “safeguards to hedge against imprudent judgments.” (Testimony)
Apollo 13 editorials: National Observer: “At a time when Americans were becoming bored with successful flights to the moon, the ordeal of Apollo 13 reminded the nation of the dangers and difficulties of space. But because of courage, care, and uncommon resourcefulness—because, in fact, of history’s most dramatic field expedient—the astronauts made their way safely back to earth. The first walk on the moon was a wonder of wonders, but the return of Apollo 13 was the gladdest moment of them all.” (National Observer, 4/20/70) Wall Street Journal: “Assuming all feasible precautions are taken, then, the issue of death potential should not really be a major factor in assessing the space program, and particularly the very costly moon program. That program should be judged on whether any gains from it are proportionate to the totality of its costs. Some scientists and laymen believe the costs are disproportionate. At any rate, that is the proper criterion for weighing the future of space exploration, not the admitted and awesome danger of death in eternal orbit.” (WSJ, 4/20/70)
Scientists at Royal Observatory in Edinburgh unveiled Galaxy, machine conceived by Dr. P. N. Fellgett of Reading Univ., Scotland, to measure star images at rate of 10 000 per hr. Machine had found 1103 stars less than 28 million yrs old in constellation Perseus, where only 15 had been found previously. Galaxy contained Elliot 4130 computer linked to 406-mm (16-in) Schmidt telescope and could measure accuracy of star’s position to one micron. British scientists said they believed machine established world lead in astronomy for U.K. (WPost, 1/21/70, A3)
Oral history of space flight on 647 reels of tape assembled over six years had been presented to Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum, Washington Daily News reported. Assembled by Michael Kapp, Vice President of Capitol Records Co., tapes began with reminiscences of Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard, and went through Apollo 11 mission. Six-record LP album had been excerpted from tapes. (W News, 10/27/ 70)
Second fragment of Lost City, Okla., meteorite weighing 277.8 g (9.8 oz) had been found by farmer Philip Halpain in Lost City pasture, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory announced. It had been flown to Richland, Wash., for analysis of short-lived radioactive byproducts of radiation in outer space. (McElheny, Boston Globe, 1/20/70)
Sud-Aviation test pilot Andre' Turcat flew Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport to mach 2 (2125 km per hr; 1320 mph) for first time during 90-min, 102nd test flight from Toulouse-BIagnac Aerodrome. Soviet supersonic transport Tu-144 had flown at 2150 km per hr (1336 mph) May 26. (Farnsworth, NYT, 11/5/70, 94)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) introduced S. 4241 to authorize NSF “to conduct research and educational programs to prepare the country for conversion from defense to civilian, socially-oriented research and development activities.” NASA was named, with aec and dod, to participate in conversion efforts. (CR, 8/14/70, SI3457-66)
National Air and Space Museum was victim of “shocking lack of attention” by Smithsonian Institution management, Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said on Senate floor. He said that museum received “extremely meager share,” about 1.7% of $40-million-plus annual Smithsonian appropriation, and was undermanned, with “only 31 people on board.” Museum attracted at least one third of visitors to Smithsonian Park. It had no director “even though it has been 24 months since the last Director gave notice of his planned retirement”; museum had been put into arts and humanities wing of Smithsonian for years rather than being considered science and technology component; in 1969, Smithsonian management had threatened to expel museum from Mall. Most museum exhibitions were badly housed and deteriorating rapidly, and program for construction of permanent Air and Space building was ‘‘at dead center.” In words of ‘‘Paul Johnston, the last Director of the museum, the project ‘may never get off the ground.’ ” (CR, 7/22/70, SI 19116) .
During April: Science and Technology: Tools for Progress, report to President Nixon by President’s Task Force on Science Policy, was released. Report, submitted Dec. 10, 1969, recommended that President enunciate as national policy, need for vigorous, high-quality science and technology and continuing leadership in science and technology “relevant to our other national goals and purposes”; that President direct Federal departments and agencies to strengthen capability to use science and technology in attack on social, urban, and environmental problems; and that U.S. achieve effective and consistent commitment to long-range research, uninterrupted support of graduate education, improved use of Federal laboratories, and improved process for establishing priorities in Federal support of science. Report further recommended President enunicate policy of increasing long-term participation by private institutions—particularly business—in social, urban, and environmental programs and direct appropriate departments and agencies to identify deterrents to private investment of capital and technology in these programs; suggest incentives for action and remedies for each deterrent; enunciate policy of increased emphasis on r&d for national security, if necessary; and continue encouragement of new science-based foreign policy initiatives and opportunities for international cooperation. Administration should make clear policy of technical assistance to underdeveloped nations to help them establish their own scientific research, education, and technical training institutions. Task Force recommended President direct his Science Adviser to develop, for his approval, broadly-based program for continuing development of national science policy. (Text)
Flight model of Skylab multiple docking adapter was flown from msfc to Martin Marietta Corp. Space Center in Denver, Colo., aboard Super Guppy aircraft. It would be outfitted with controls and display panels for solar astronomy and earth resource experiments, storage vaults for experiment film, and thrust-attitude control system. When completely equipped, adapter would be mated with Sky-lab airlock flight version at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. in St. Louis, Mo., and unit would perform simulated mission in altitude chamber, (msfc Release 70-237; msfc pio )
Concorde 002, British prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport aircraft, reached its fastest speed—1600 km per hr (1000 mph) during test flight. French Concorde 001 had already reached 1600 km per hr. (Reuters, NYT, 8/24/70,6)
Progress of Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) was described in Astronautics & Aeronautics by essa scientist David S. Johnson. NASA’s Itos I, launched Jan. 23, was in sun-synchronous orbit. Operational sounding capability would be added to system in 1972.	Third-generation operational satellite was planned for 1975 launch. Synchronous Meteorological Satellite scheduled for 1972 launch would be operational prototype of Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite that would complement Itos I. Initially, U.S. would keep one geostationary spacecraft operating continuously. It was hoped second would be launched before first garp global experiment scheduled for one-year period about 1976. France and Japan were considering synchronous satellites for first garp global experiment, esro and U.K. might build polar-orbit meteorological satellites for experiment. U.S.S.R. was operating meteorological satellites in quasi-polar orbit and was developing sounding instruments. Space-based observing system apparently would furnish major portion of data for garp global experiment, by which time “U.S. operational meteorological satellite system will approach the coverage needed, except for the four synchronous satellites. Promising signs of significant contributions towards these have come from other countries.” (A&A, 10/70, 28-32)
Lowell Observatory astronomer Dr. Peter Boyce had reported “blue smog” of Mars was caused by physical changes on planet’s surface rather than by looking at Mars through earth’s atmosphere, Philadelphia Inquirer said. Dr. Boyce had used special area-scanning photometer attached to Lowell Observatory’s 610-mm (24-in) reflector at Cerro Tololo in Chilean Andes to obtain accurate photometric measurements of Mars. (P Inq, 3/25/70)
The U.S. Navy's F-14 Tomcat fighter made a successful /0-minute maiden flight from the Grumman test flight facih'ty in Ca/verfon, N.Y. Capable of mach 2 speeds, the F-14 would be successor to the F-4 Phantom and the F-l I IB. composed of quadrants separated by explosives lining seams. Each panel had to be ejected without touching Skylab vehicle in flight. Plum Brook vacuum chamber had been selected for shroud test because tank, 36.6 m (120 ft) tall and 30.5 m (100 ft) wide, could produce hard vacuum equivalent to 483-km (300-mi) altitude and easily house shroud 17 m (56 ft) high and 6.7 m (22 ft) wide, (nasa RgIc&sc 70-214)	■
VictorC. Clarke, Jr., jplengineer, received 1970 award from Gravity Research Foundation of New Boston, N.H., for essay “The Application and Principle of Gravity-Assist Trajectories for Space Flight.” Clarke, mission analysis and engineering manager for 1973 Mariner Venus-Mercury project, had first demonstrated possibility of bouncing spacecraft from planet to planet in 1961. He had received 1969 NASA Exceptional Service Medal for contribution to Mariner Mars 1969 mission design. (NASA Release 70-112; jplpio) June 2-19: U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz IX, carrying Cosmonauts Andrian G. Ni-kolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, was launched from Baykonurat 12:09 am Baykonur time into orbit with 249-km (154.7-mi) apogee, 236-km (146.6-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass said cosmonauts would conduct extensive program of scientific and technical research in “solitary orbital flight,” including medical and biological research on effects of space flight on man, studies of earth’s geography and atmosphere, research into “physical processes in near-earth space,” and checkout of spacecraft systems. Launch and pictures of crew in spacecraft were televised in Moscow about one hour after liftoff. Five hours after liftoff Tass reported cosmonauts were “coping well with conditions of weightlessness and carrying out the flight program.” Only anomaly had been dirtying of windows from engine fired for midcourse maneuver after fifth orbit, Tass said. Systems were functioning normally and Nikolayev had begun “experiments linked with the investigation of human peculiarities as an element of the control system in different dynamic operations.” Tass issued daily bulletins that described routine of space flight chores and experiments: “While one cosmonaut runs a vacuum cleaner, the other brews coffee or shaves.” Cosmonauts performed strenuous physical exercises each day in special “load suits,” practiced manual maneuvers of spacecraft, and photographed earth and sun. By June 8 Soyuz IX had completed 100 orbits and 147 hrs of flight—record for man-hours in space in Soviet space program— with all systems functioning satisfactorily and with crew demonstrating it could “withstand well the complex impact of the factors of space flight and retain high efficiency.” Insomnia, only problem reported by crew, had been overcome. On June 19 Tass announced Soyuz IX had softlanded 76 km (47 mi) west of Karaganda, Kazakhstan, after orbiting in space for 17 days 16 hrs 59 min and setting new world record for manned space flight endurance. Tass said that crew had “fully fulfilled its programs of research” and that preliminary medical examination showed cosmonauts “had withstood the prolonged space flight well.” Most important part of program, Tass said, was medical-biological experiments on effects of prolonged flight on man. (GSFC SSR, 6/30/70; SBD, 6/2/70, 152; Mills, B Sun, 6/2/70, Al; 6/20/70, A1;AP, NYT, 6/3/70, 18; UPI.W Star, 6/7-8/70; 6/12/70)
NASA announced selection of Computer Sciences Corp. for $5 million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to provide programming and computer support services for Manned Space Flight Network (msfn) Central Computing System at gsfc. Contract covered two-year period, preceded by six-month phase-in, with option for one-year extension. (NASA Release 70-187)
In Science editorial, Brown Univ. scientist Dr. A. Hunter Dupree outlined changes that would shape new U.S. science policy: dod had lost ability to justify support for basic research and to attract many scientists. “If the scientists knowledgeable in military research, who provide one of the groups with the best chance to change the course of events with competent criticism, lose touch with the Department of Defense completely, an unparalleled disaster could ensue. Yet, a reordering of the relation of the scientific community to the Department of Defense cannot be postponed.” Scientific community needed to pay more attention to environmental problems. Space program “must find a role for itself with predominantly scientific objectives and a steady state of funding.” Social sciences must receive greater emphasis. Justification of Federal support for research in universities must emphasize goal of building healthy institutions in national interest. And support for education “must contemplate a national research program with a radically different mix of disciplines from that recently prevailing.” (Science, 7/10/70,131)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Toward a Science Policy for the United States. Report summarized hearings held during July, August, and September and recommended that Federal Government establish national policy for support and furtherance of science and technology. Report further recommended that ost be separated from direct administrative connections with President’s Science Adviser or President’s Science Advisory Committee; OST submit annual report to President and Congress reviewing status of r&d in U.S. and recommending r&d program for following year; National Institutes of Research and Advanced Studies (niras) be inaugurated; and Congress seek centralized Senate jurisdiction over science and technology and establish Office of Technology Assessment. Report also recommended, pending establishment of niras, responsibility for basic research be centered in NSF, which should provide one third of all Federal support; ost develop criteria for support of basic research by mission-oriented agencies; Office of Management and Budget develop “stable funding” procedure for basic research; and niras, when established, emphasize science education. Smithsonian Institution should have responsibility for science-information system, with backup from ost’s Committee on Scientific and Technical Information. NAS and nae should assist in explaining to public science and technology’s role in solving major problems (Text)
nsf released Federal Support for Research and Development at Universities and Colleges and Selected Nonprofit Institutions, FY 1968: A Report to the President and Congress (nsf 69-33). Federal Government had obligated $1.4 billion for r&d in FY 1968—5% increase over FY 1967. Average annual increase of Federal obligations to universities and colleges for r&d 1955-1967 had been over 21%. Dept, of Agriculture and dod reported cutbacks in academic R&D funding in FY 1968, including $21 million in defense R&D. Number of academic institutions receiving Federal support rose 8%, from 573 in FY 1967 to 620 in FY 1968. One hundred top-ranking institutions received 93% of R&D totals obligated by NASA and aec and 88% of dod r&d total in 1968. mit was largest recipient again, with $80 million, “three-fourths of which was obligated by dod and NASA.” (Text)
ata President Stuart G. Tipton testified on attitude of U.S. airlines toward SST development before Senate Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on Transportation: “Airline support of the SST research program is bottomed on the belief that in the course of the prototype program, solutions to [SST’s] problems will be found. The airlines have supported this belief in American ingenuity with over $50 million in risk capital. . . .” Airlines “will insist that these problems be solved before they will be ready to operate sst’s.” (Testimony)
U.S. observed national day of prayer in gratitude for safe return of Apollo 13 astronauts. In New York 150 persons attended sunset service at Temple Emanuel. Invocation of gratitude was added to Sunday mass at St. Patrick’s Cathedral, expressing hope that space exploration would contribute to peace and welfare of mankind. Greek Orthodox Primate of North and South America, Archbishop Iakovos, delivered special message for faith’s Palm Sunday observances. He said he believed “God permitted the agony of these last four days” to aid men in “overcoming the temporal with the spiritual, the temporary with the eternal.” Church and interfaith councils in St. Petersburg, Fla., made combined appeal for prayer in area churches and kept chapels open during day. In Marietta, Ohio, Jaycees completed petition containing 50 000 signatures, opposing efforts to ban prayers in broadcasts from space. Petition was later presented to space officials in Washington, D.C. Gov. Nelson D. Rockefeller proclaimed “day of prayer and thanksgiving” in New York State. Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.) said crisis refuted claims that space exploration dealt fatal blow to religion. “The manner in which great numbers of Americans attended special prayer services. . . has been inspirational.” J. F. Meredith, treasurer of Central State Conference of the Seventh Day Adventists, said in Kansas City, “We feel that this points up the fact that despite all of man’s knowledge and ingenuity there is still a supreme being in control of things, and that we have to trust him.” (NYT, 4/20/70,28; 4/19/70, 54)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics ordered favorably reported H.R. 15695, FY 1971 NASA authorization with amendments that added $297.8 million to President Nixon’s budget request of $3,333 billion. New authorization total of $3,631 billion included addition of $144.9 million to Apollo budget request, for total Apollo allocation of $1.1 billion, and $155 million for space flight operations, making total of $670.2 million in that category. (H Rpt 91-929; CR, 3/12/70, D225; W Post, 3/13/70, A10)
Aircraft hijacking was discussed by David Hoffman in Washington Post: “That hijacking entails much more today than the Havana detour, a sidetrip costing passengers frayed nerves and the airline $3000, has begun to sink home in official Washington. It has now become an instrument of international policy, a play within a play about the cold war. Quite apart from whether a treaty might help, there exists no treaty. That testifies to the concern of governments, this one included.” {W Post, 9/9/70, A15) At meeting on future of Apollo, scientists proposed crater Tycho near moon’s south pole and Descartes, hilly region near Ocean of Storms, as sites for two of remaining four Apollo program lunar landings. Cal Tech geologist Dr. Leon T. Silver said, “If you had only two missions left to make, you’d send one of them to Tycho.” Tycho offered samples from area of one of last collisions of large meteor with lunar surface, samples from moon’s original southern hills, and samples from deep within moon that had come to surface after impact that had created Tycho. Flight path to and from Tycho would enable astronauts to photograph and examine almost half visible face of moon from lunar orbit. Astronauts could leave scientific instruments less than 1609 km (1000 mi) from moon’s south pole, to give earth-bound scientists listening post on lunar region that would otherwise go unexplored. Surveyor VII photos had shown Tycho landing to be strewn with many varieties of rocks. Difficulty with Tycho landing was that Apollo crew might have to use so much fuel getting to it that they would not have enough to return if they encountered difficulty on approach, Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., said. Donald K. Slayton, msc Chief of Flight Crew Operations, said NASA was studying possibility of Tycho landing: “Our position so far is that Tycho is a bad place. ... But, if we can figure the reasonable way to do it.. .and decide it’s a reasonable place to go, then Tycho becomes a candidate for landing.” Descartes, second site favored by scientists, contained relatively young volcanic material and also crust on surface away from volcanic highlands that might be as old as moon itself. It was thought to be one of two Apollo sites where tnoonquakes might be occurring; other was hills of Fra Mauro, Apollo 14 landing site. Dr. Alfred E. Ringwood of Australian National Univ. told seminar he had concluded from study of Apollo 11 and 12 lunar samples that moon once had heat source 160-480 km (100-300 mi) beneath surface that was emitting 1500 K (2200°F) temperatures. Heat had emanated from abundance of radioactive minerals in moon’s depths, he proposed, and partially melted moon’s inner rock, which then flowed to lunar surface through pores or forced its way upward as it expanded where pores did not exist. Upswelling rock, Dr. Ringwood said, caused lunar features visible on moon’s face. He speculated that moon had lost most of its radioactivity and heat 2 billion yrs earlier. Dr. Charles P. Sonnett, ARC scientist, said he had found “little bumps” of magnetism along lunar surface when studying signals from instruments left on moon. Bumps suggested that radioactive heat was coming to surface and causing parts of moon to behave as if they had magnetic field. Moon was “strong and rigid to depth of 200 mi [322 km],” Dr. Sonnett said, “but I believe that all you need is a porosity of about 10 per cent in that crust to have a warmer and more plastic material leak to the top.” Dr. Rolf Meisner of Univ. of Hawaii said analysis of data from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer led him to believe that moonquakes could not be caused by breaks in moon’s crust but were caused by warm gases escaping from beneath lunar surface in response to earth’s increased gravitational pull. He had recorded 14 moon-quakes, all of which seemed to come from about 240 km (150 mi) east-southeast of seismometer in Fra Mauro hills, where Apollo 14 was to land in February 1971. Dr. Thomas Gold, Cornell Univ. astronomer, argued that lunar maria contained dust and not lava. Lack of electrical activity of surface material and the way Apollo moonquake detectors had reacted to tremors and impacts could mean there was deep deposit of powder. Acoustical signal from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer was “compatible with a deep layer of a very homogenous nature in which the speed of sound is uniform.” (O’Toole, WPost, 9/12/70, A3; 9/13/70, A27; Hill, H Chron, 9/13/70)
Oran W. Nicks, NASA Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics on oart’s FY 1971 program. Primary objective of v/STOL program was “research needed for the development of advanced rotorcraft which will offer hovering capability and low-noise operations for inner-city operations plus the cruise flight efficiency necessary for inner-city to outlying airport service. Experience with conventional helicopters shows that this service is desired but that it falls short of economic success. If the gap can be closed by improved technology, then the way will be clear for rapid development of this type of travel service. To this end, we are working on several advanced rotor concepts.” LaRC v/stol Transition Research Wind Tunnel would be operational in late 1970. Facility would study effect of down flow from rotors on fuselage and tail, high-lift flaps for stol air transport applications, and effect of jet-lift engine exhaust on aerodynamic and propulsion characteristics of vtol fighter configurations. (Testimony) Dr. Walton L. Jones, Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Div., oart, testifying on human factors program, told Committee: “No seriously limiting effects have been noted in cardiovascular function during the relatively brief manned space flight to date. However, longer duration exposure to weightlessness and the absence of hydrostatic stresses of earth gravity may cause deterioration in cardiovascular reactivity.” (Testimony) Charles W. Harper, Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, oart, testified before House Committee on NASA’s v/stol technology: “In the past few years NASA has focused its research increasingly toward the objective of enabling development of several types of v/stol aircraft, each directed at a single important mission. These include an advanced rotor type with airplane-like cruise capability for those missions where vertical takeoff and landing is mandatory, a small and agile stol aircraft with modest cruise performance and capable of operating easily out of 1500' [460-m] runways having minimum site preparation and a large stol aircraft having jet transport type cruise performance while also operating easily out of well prepared 1500' [460-m] stol ports. In addition to this more focused activity, the v/stol program contains broader research objectives leading eventually to multimission v/stol aircraft satisfying this growing transportation mode most effectively.” (Testimony) Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg, Director of Research, oart, testified on NASA basic research programs: NASA-supported research had developed new approach permitting for first time step-by-step numerical calculation of growth of disturbances in atmospheric shear flows, which should contribute to detection and avoidance of clear-air turbulence by jet aircraft. First steps had been taken to apply fluid physics knowledge to atmospheric pollution from airborne and ground sources, testing pollutant action in models of city streets. New research programs would apply knowledge of fluid dynamics to noise abatement studies. Establishment of direct relationship between surface structure and electrical characteristics of germanium surface during oxidation had increased knowledge of oxygen’s role in device performance and should increase efficiency in electronic devices. Special attention was being given to evaluation of alloys at the high temperatures of supersonic speeds and to evaluation of rigid polymeric foams as lightweight structural materials for aircraft. (Testimony)
Explorer I. first U.S. satellite (launched Jan. 31. 1958), reentered the atmosphere over the South Pacific after completing 58 408 revolutions and traveling 2.67 billion kilometers (1.66 billion miles) during its 13-year lifetime. To celebrate the launch. Vice President Richard M. Nixon visited Jet Propulsion Laboratory Feb. 17. 1958. Examining the spacecraft model with him (left to right above) were Dr. Clark B. Millikan. Director of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory at Cal Tech: Dr. Lee A. Du Bridge, President of CalTech: Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of JPl; Dr. Jack E. Froehlich. Explorer Project Director at JPL; V, C. Larsen, Jr., Laboratory Administrator at ipl: and Robert J. Parks, Chief of JPl. Guidance Control Division. ty Associate Administrator for Planning, Dr, Wernher von Braun held press conference on NASA planning procedures: Skylab program would consist of four flights. First would be an unmanned flight boosted by two-stage Saturn V—only first and second stage, with third stage replaced by orbital workshop, now called Skylab. “It will be this country’s first orbital space station. Attached to this Skylab is an airlock module, and a multiple docking adapter, to which arriving command and service modules can dock for crew exchange. And ajso attached to it is the ATM.. .a manned solar observatory that will be serviced by the people living in the Skylab. One day after this Skylab has been launched into orbit and has deployed its solar panels, both on the ATM and the Skylab itself, it will be visited by a Saturn IB-launched command and service module, bringing the first crew complement of three. The command module will dock to the multiple docking adapter, the crew will slip through the docking adapter and the airlock, into the workshop. . . . And the men will stay up there for 28 days.” Crew would then “crawl back into their command module, detach.. .use the service module to deboost themselves, and the command module will reenter the ocean and make a normal Apollo landing. “About three months after the first flight, another flight will go up, and this time the crew stay.. .will be extended to 56 days. ... And finally, there will be a third revisit, again of 56 days, after which the third crew will descend. The Skylab will then go into storage and can potentially be reactivated any time thereafter if more revisits are planned.” Even without budget restraints, it would be “something like 1977 before we could have a [space] shuttle flying.” NASA was “in continuous touch with the Air Force” in space shuttle and space station field. “The armed forces. . .have the duty to look into everything that may have a defense aspect; and so it is entirely proper that they want to understand the ramifications of space.” (Transcript)
In 1970 NASAreviewed!priorities and redirected activities to conform to new national goals and budgetary restraints under Nixon Administration, which directed increased funding toward solution of nation’s inflationary and environmental problems. Year was transition from dramatic successes of 1960s to new plans for 1970s and beyond, with balanced aeronautical and space program. Major administrative event affecting NASA was resignation of Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, effective Sept. 15. Dr. Paine, who had been nominated NASA Administrator by President Nixon March 5, 1969, returned to General Electric Co. as a Vice President. Dr. George M. Low became Acting NASA Administrator. In March Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, and in May NASA Planning Board was established under his direction for coordination of NASA planning. NASA adjusted time-phasing of future programs to avoid commitments to excessive funding, but progress was made toward new goals and objectives announced in March. Design, development, and testing for Skylab program went forward and fabrication of flight hardware was begun. System characteristics for space shuttle, key element in program for late 1970s, were established and study contracts were let for vehicle and engine. Program definition studies for space station neared completion, erts spacecraft design was completed and aircraft flights tested remote-sensing devices for gathering earth resources data from space. Two flight spacecraft for Mariner Mars ’71 missions were progressing toward final testing. Mission design for Grand Tour of outer planets later in decade was completed and conceptual design of key elements of spacecraft established. NASA continued aeronautical and space studies in conjunction with dod, dot, noaa, and other agencies—including nasa-faa v/stol avionics program. Scientific analysis of 56 kg (123 lbs) of lunar material from Apollo 11 and /2and data from Apollo experiments contributed significant knowledge on moon and possibly universe, including finding that moon was formed 4.5 billion yrs ago. gsfc research in optical methods for data processing experimented in applying lasers and coherent optics to analysis of large volumes of data from spacecraft. During year NASA’s research centers expanded work on applications of space technology to fields of medicine, engineering, agriculture, manufacturing, safety, and environmental sciences. NASA FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion was $64 million below $3,333 billion requested and $428 million below FY 1970 appropriation. Lowest budget since 1962 necessitated cutbacks and deferrals which NASA Administrator termed “austere.” Cost of NASA space program in 1970 was $3.4 billion—1.7% of total Federal funding, or $17 for each person in U.S., against $400 per person for domestic program funding. Despite its challenging goals for the decade, nasa officials warned of increasing U.S.S.R. competition for space superiority. Observers expressed fears that cutbacks in aerospace industry jeopardized U.S. ability to sustain and capitalize on previous space successes and to maintain technological superiority. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71; House Com on Sci and Astronautics, The National Space Program—Present and Future, 12/10/70)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Director of OST and Presidential Science Adviser, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development on need for adequate Federal science policy: “Science and technology policy.. .must be formulated on an evolutionary basis, continuously under review and subject to change with changing conditions. It must be a policy that can be implemented both by the Aministration and by Congress and one which will be supported by the public.” Policy should provide “strong base of science” and “mechanisms for using science and technology to meet changing problems of national concern.” It should “recognize that policies and events wholly outside the field of science and technology may strongly influence our r&d expenditure level.” Dr. DuBridge told Subcommittee some of nation’s “most valuable and productive research projects” had been lost because of FY 1970 amendment to dod appropriation bill which banned defense-financed studies unless they had direct relation to military missions. (Testimony; Cohn, WPost, 7/9/70, A7)	_
House Committee on Science and Astronautics had tentatively approved funding of $6.5-million project to convert antenna 300-m (1000-ft) wide at Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico to radar 2000 times more sensitive than any in existence, New York Times reported. Modification of world’s largest radiotelescope would enable telescope to map features on Venus down to mile in width. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/17/70)
Testimony on Apollo 13 mission was given before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator; Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director; and Apollo Flight Director Glynn S. Lunney. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., was unable to attend. Dr. Paine said: “The Apollo 13 mission was a failure. We did not succeed in America’s third lunar landing attempt and we were therefore unable to explore the moon’s Fra Mauro formation. This hilly region remains a high priority objective in our lunar program. . .. We cannot yet say which of the remaining Apollo missions will be sent there. Although the Apollo 13 mission failed, we regard the recovery actions that followed.. .as a gratifying success which will contribute greatly to the nation’s space flight competence.” There was no reason “why this setback should be—or should be made to be—the occasion for a major change in the course of the nation’s space program. We have clearly demonstrated the basic soundness of the Apollo system and of our operational procedures. ... From a technical standpoint, there is no question but that we are prepared to move forward in the 1970’s with the space program we have outlined to you....” Dr. Paine said President Nixon “fully shares this view.” (Testimony) Dr. Petrone testified: “This long arduous voyage continuously presented the challenge to balance the spacecraft systems required to perform necessary functions against the availability of consumables, of water, electrical power, oxygen, and the lithium hydroxide to remove the carbon dioxide. The options available to flight and ground crews in every case permitted acceptable courses of action to be selected. During this emergency situation, the remaining systems performed in an outstanding manner meeting the unusual demands placed upon them. At the same time, the flight and ground crews demonstrated exceptional confidence in meeting these sets of unusual circumstances.” Mission ended with “set of consumables which were within about two percent of what we had predicted back at 63 hours or about seven hours after the problem occurred,” Lunney told Committee. “If the consumable posture. . .had worsened or if we had absorbed another failure. . .we would have had to resort to scheduling communication times with the crew.” Although probably within 12 hours to 24 of running out of most critical consumable, water, “had we proceeded into.. .duty cycling the communications gear onboard, we probably could have stretched that period.” Astronaut Lovell described crew’s feelings during crisis: “We soon realized that our only hope of survival was to go into Aquarius, power up its systems and use the systems and the consumables on board. . .for a return home. And it was here that we realized that it was now a case of survival.” Spacecraft was on trajectory that “would have entered us in a sort of permanent orbit, some . 230. . .thousand miles [370 000 km] in apogee, and maybe a thousand [1600 km] or so in perigee. ... Again, the ground came through, and gave us. . .the free trajectory burn, which was required to get us back to earth. My main concern at this point was to get this spacecraft back within the earth’s atmosphere.” (Transcript)
Chairman Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., was named Chief Executive Officer and Robert Anderson was elected President and Chief Operating Officer of North American Rockwell Corp. by board of directors at annual meeting. (NAR News, 2/20/70,1) Two neurophysiological experiments would evaluate central nervous system responses. First, human vestibular experiment would extend studies initiated during Gemini program to investigate effects of weightlessness and subgravity states on perception and organization of personal and extrapersonal space and establish integrity of vestibular apparatus during prolonged weightlessness. In second, electroencephalogram (eeg) would determine efFects of prolonged space flight on patterns of sleep and wakefulness and assess attention levels in task performance and work-rest cycles. Energy expenditure in space would be measured for first time by comparison of metabolic rate during rest, during calibrated exercise, and while performing operational tasks. (Testimony)
Full-scale hypersonic research engine (hre) under development by NASA was tested for first time in 8-Foot High-Temperature Structures Tunnel at LaRC. Mach-7.4 speed was reached at temperature of 1800 K (2000°F) and pressure of 6.2 meganewtons per sq m (900 psi). NASA project would demonstrate technology needed for engines to propel future aircraft at hypersonic speeds—more than five times speed of sound. (Pres Rpt 71; NASA Photo Release 70-H-1362)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, NASA Director of Aeronautical Research, described Soviet Tu-144 as “striking” supersonic aircraft “every bit as attractive” as Anglo-French Concorde, during luncheon meeting of Aero Club of Washington and Aviation-Space Writers Assn, in Washington, D.C. Armstrong said visit to Tu-144 hangar had been highlight of Moscow visit. He said Tu-144’s four engines were similar to those on U.S. B-70 bomber and interior resembled McDonnell Douglas DC-9. Tu-144 pilots had told him aircraft had flown at twice speed of sound and handled well at all speeds. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/11/70, A3)
New York Times editorial appeared before Apollo 13 splashdown: “Here on earth the drama in space has done more than shatter any complacency that may have begun to surround lunar flight. It has drawn men and nations together in common concern over astronauts who are envoys of mankind even before they are nationals of a particular state .... Lovell, Swigert and Haise have already written an epic of heroism and skill that assures them immortality in the annals of space exploration.” (NYT, 4/17/70)
J. W. Chamberlain, Associate Director for Planetary Sciences at Kitt Peak National Observatory, Ariz., reviewed cosmological theory for systematical exploration of outer planets in Astronautics & Aeronautics. Jovian planets—Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune— had high intrinsic interest because their characteristics were similar to one another’s but “vastly different” from those of terrestrial planets. Atmospheric distinctions which did exist among Jovian planets had probably “arisen from relatively minor differences in the prevailing conditions at the times of their birth.” Major planets constituted “completely different kind of object.” Nearest and biggest—Jupiter—had over 1000 times earth’s volume and 300 times earth’s mass for mean density of only 1.3 times that of water. It was “guardian (if not the parent) of a large family of at least 12 satellites, two of which are as large as a small planet. It has a daily rotation period of only 10 hr; and its atmosphere is composed primarily of hydrogen and helium, the most abundant elements in the Sun (and the universe itself. ..).” Neptune was “most distant of the giants” and Pluto was “nonconformist of the solar system” whose orbit “is far from circular, the solar distance ranging between about 30 and 50 A.U. [30 and 50 times distance from earth to sun] during its 248-year revolution, at a 17-deg inclination to the ecliptic.” Many astronomers suspected larger differences between terrestrial and major planets held clues to formation of solar system. (A&A, 1/70, 20-2)
U.S.S.R. was constructing astrophysical observatory atop 5633-m (18 481 -ft) Mt. Elbrus in Caucasus mountains to house 599-cm (236in) altazimuthal telescope, Los Angeles Times said. Instrument would be largest optical telescope in the world. Its mirror would be tested in autumn 1971, with observations to begin in autumn 1972. Telescope would be used for extragalactic exploration; study of nebulae and stars, particularly faint stars; and planetary research. (Bengelsdorf, LA Times, 2/17/70)
usaf X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 19th flight in joint nasa-usaf research program from frc. Purposes of flight were to expand flight envelope to mach 1.25, obtain lateral directional derivatives at mach numbers greater than 1.15, obtain longitudinal trim and lift-to-drag ratio data with 30° upper flap, and determine effect of upper flap on approach and landing. (NASA Proj Off)
Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as CM pilot on Apollo 13 mission April 11, Dr, Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced. Mattingly, exposed to German measles, had not developed immunity and was expected to show symptoms of disease next week. “The recommendation of ApriMO: nasa announced that Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as cm pilot on Apollo 13 mission. Cancellation of the mission had been considered following Mattingly's exposure to German measles. Below, Dr. George M, Low (left). Deputy Administrator, conferred with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers at April 10 launch status meeting at Kennedy Space Center. everyone. . .was unanimous that Apollo 13 be launched tomorrow,” Dr. Paine told press at ksc. Decision was made after Swigert demonstrated in intensive training that he could replace Mattingly on short notice. “When it comes to the problems you can get into in the command module. . Jack [Swigert] literally wrote the book on the malfunctions and how to overcome them,” Dr. Paine said. Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton said Swigert had performed critical maneuvers flawlessly in training. “Our simulator people said it couldn’t be done. . .but we anticipated more problems than we had. We were all surprised. It went very smoothly.” (Wilford, NYT, 4/11/70, 1; O’Toole, WPost, 4/11/70, Al)
Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), for himself, Sen. Clifford P. Case (R-N.J.), Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), and Sen. Jacob K.	Javits (R-N.Y.), submitted amendment to H.R. 17548, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill which would reduce NASA R&D appropriation by $110 million—amount requested by NASA for design and definition of space shuttle and station. Sen. Mondale said: “This project represents NASA’s next major effort in manned space flight. The $110 million.. .is only the beginning of the story. NASA’s preliminary cost estimates for development of the space shuttle/station total almost $14 billion, and the ultimate cost may run much higher. Furthermore, the shuttle and station are the first essential steps toward a manned Mars landing.. .which could cost anywhere between $50 to $100 billion. I have seen no persuasive justification for embarking upon a project of such staggering costs at a time when many of our citizens are malnourished, when our rivers and lakes are polluted, and when our cities and rural areas are decaying.” (CR, 6/29/70, S10057-8)
House Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development submitted to Committee on Science and Astronautics Technology Assessment: Annotated Bibliography and Inventory of Congressional Organization for Science and Technology. Bibliography was designed to identify selected items on technology assessment as part of public policy. Citations dealt with concept of technology assessment, proposals made for organization of technology assessment mechanisms in Government, and examples of technology assessments completed or in progress. (Text)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Nixon Administration’s cut in space funding: “The lowering of the sights in space is regrettable. It is unfortunate that, with the new frontier now open to us, we cannot move out to the full extent of our technical ability. But the decision to cut down on expenditures and to spread out the enormous cost of space exploration was no mistake. ... The planets and the ocean of space beyond have endured for quite some time. They will wait undisturbed for man’s intrusions. The economy is not so accommodating.” (W Star, 1/17/70, A4)
aiaa announced reelection of Dr. Ronald Smelt as aiaa President and of Dr. John C. Houbolt as Vice President-Technical and election of eight new Directors: Dr. Mac C. Adams, Vice President and Deputy Group Executive of Avco Government Products Group and former NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology; A. Scott Crossfield, Division Vice President for Flight Research and Development for Eastern Air Lines; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Deputy Director; Carlos C. Wood, Division Vice President of United Aircraft Corp.’s Sikorsky Aircraft Div.; Edward N. Hall, Assistant Chief Scientist for United Aircraft Corp.’s Corporate Technical Staff; Dr. Walter T. Olsen, LeRC Assistant Director; Alan Y. Pope, Director of Aerothermodynamics for San-dia Corp.; and Charles W. Duffy, Jr., Director of Personnel for Boeing Co.’s Commercial Airplane Div., sst Branch, (aiaa Release)
NASA held series of three Apollo 13 post-recovery press conferences at msc hosted by NASA Administrator, manned space flight officials,' and technical specialists. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said although mission “must be recorded as a failure, there’s never been a more prideful moment in the space program.” Most impressive aspect of mission was “tremendous effectiveness in team work of our ground support operation .... From every state . . . we’ve had people. . . working to backstop the many different system decisions that had to be systematically and methodically faced up to and made. . . . The Flight Operations Directors . . . certainly demonstrated that flight controllers can operate under these very adverse conditions. They’ve been able to do things in a far shorter period of time than we’d ever thought possible be-1 fore.”	’ Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said basic procedures used for every phase of mission were predetermined. “For example, the burn made behind the moon . . . was a standard emergency burn that would be used in case the service propulsion system would not work on a normal lunar mission going into lunar orbit. Each one of these steps had been predetermined and also simulated. But putting them all together into a sequence of steps . . . and working out some of the detailed procedures on how to save power and how to save batteries; how to save water; those things were determined during the course of the flight, both by the men ... on the ground and by the astronauts.” (Transcript)
President Nixon announced transfer of Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, Mass., from NASA to DOT, effective July 1. James C. Elms would continue as Director and Center would be renamed Transportation Development Center. Later, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced dot would use center for r&d efforts on systems and equipment to automate air traffic control system more highly, economically feasible collision avoidance system for commercial and private aircraft, sensors to measure and monitor air pollution caused by transportation elements, automatic landing systems for aircraft, system analysis on urban transit systems and highway traffic control, ocean-data buoy systems to transmit weather and oceanographic data, and auto-driver simulation systems to study accident causes and prevention. (PD, 3/30/70,446; dot Release 6870)
Sen. Joseph M. Montoya (D-N. Mex.) introduced S. 4453, “to establish a Department of Science and Technology, and to transfer certain agencies and functions to such Department.” Bill provided that NASA, NSF, and AEC be transferred to new department. (CR, 10/12/ 70, SI7689-95)
Concorde 002, British prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport, reached mach 1.54 speed in test flight over North Sea. Concorde 002 flew for two hours at 12 500-m (41 000-ft) altitude in seventh flight of series to prove aircraft could fly at up to 2250 km per hr (1400 mph). (AP, B Sun, 8/30/70)
AIAA Board of Directors meeting in Denver Colo., created two new committees: Technical Committee on Application of Aerospace Technology to Society would report through Technical Activities Committee (tac); Committee on International Cooperation in Space Flight would “foster international cooperation in space activities among the engineers and scientists of the world.” (A&A, 6/70,76)
Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) certified establishment of two space flight records by U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz VI, VII, and VIIImission (Oct. 11-18, 1969). One was for group flight of two spacecraft, with five men logging 35 hrs 19 min 33 secs over 989 242-km (614 685.3-mi) distance. Second was for group flight of three spacecraft, with seven men for 4 hrs 24 min 29 secs over 123 425 km (76 692.6 mi). (SBD, 4/27/70,268; fai)
Pravda said new 3-m (10-ft) wide telescopic mirror being installed at Zelenchuk Observatory in northern Caucasus could pick up glimmer of candle 24 900 km (15 500 mi) from earth and enable astronomers to see parts of universe never before viewed by man. Largest of its kind, mirror was cut from 64-metric-ton (70-short-ton) mass of glass and was cooled in furnace from 518 K (472°F) to room temperature during 18-mo casting period. (Reuters, B Sun, 6/27/70)
Four major research directorates were established at LaRC: Aeronautics, directed by Laurence K. Loftin, Jr.; Space, directed by Clifford H. Nelson; Electronics, directed by George B. Groves, Jr.; and Structures, directed by Dr. George W. Brooks. Supporting Centerwide directorates were established in Systems Engineering and Operation, directed by Percy J. Crain; Administration, directed by T. Melvin Butler; and Center Development, directed by Eugene C. Draley. Reorganization was to implement goals outlined in staff meeting by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright: expanded aeronautics program with increased emphasis on civil aircraft, new era of manned space flight with permanent space stations supplied by reusable space shuttles, planetary exploration, and maintenance of NASA’s basic research skills. (Langley Researcher, 10/2/70,1)
Christian Science Monitorsditorial said nasa had postponed manned Mars mission because of budget cutback but “it is keeping its space shuttle program pretty much on schedule.” Reusable space vehicle was “guarantee that space progress won’t be wholly shunted aside by budget stringencies.” It would “help to keep alive the interest of the big rocket and airframe contractors, and the enthusiasm of the thousands of researchers and scientists who have hoped to make space exploration their life work.” (CSM, 2/12/70)
President Nixon, in White House ceremony, presented Atomic Pioneers Award to Dr. Vannevar Bush for his ‘‘exceptional contributions to the national security as Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development in marshalling the resources of American science for national defense during World War II and for his pioneering leadership as a Presidential advisor in fostering the establishment of new Federal agencies, including the National Science Foundation, and the Atomic Energy Commission, which have made possible the unprecedented growth of scientific research and development in the last two decades.” President also presented Award to Dr. James B. Conant for his “exceptional contributions to the national security as Chairman of the National Defense Research Committee in overseeing the successful development of weapons systems, including the atomic bomb, during World War II and for his pioneering leadership in the nation’s atomic energy program after the war as Chairman of the Committee on Atomic Energy of the Joint Research and Development Board and as a member of General Advisory Committee to the Atomic Energy Commission.” President presented third Atomic Pioneers Award to l/g Leslie R. Groves (USA-Ret) for his “exceptional contributions to the national security as Commanding General of the Manhattan Engineer District, United States Army, in developing the world’s first nuclear weapons during World War II, and for his pioneering efforts in establishing administrative patterns adopted by the Atomic Energy Commission in effecting the use of atomic energy for military and peaceful purposes.” (PD, 3/2/70, 279-80)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCCLXXV, launched from Baykonur, entered orbit with 2098-km (1303.6-mi) apogee, 525-km (326.2-mi) perigee, 111.8-min period, and 62.8° inclination. It made close approach same day to Cosmos CCCLXXIII( launched Oct. 20), Space flight magazine reported, and 25 fragments were cataloged to Dec .11. Cosmos CCCLXXVI, launched from Plesetsk, entered orbit with 286-km (177.7-mi) appgee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.3° inclination. It reentered Nov. 12. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/70; 11/30/70; 12/31/70; SF, 4/71, 138-9)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., told press at ksc that Apollo 13 mission would be his last space flight. “There are a lot of people standing in line for flights. I’ve had more than my share. So I’ll step aside after this one.” Apollo 13 would be Lovell’s fourth space flight. (AP, W Star, 2/5/70, A2)	.
Dr. W. Ross Adey, head of ucla Brain Research Laboratory and principal investigator for NASA Biosatellite III primate experiment launched June 28, 1969, had filed $2-million defamation of character suit against United Action for Animals, Inc. (antivivisectionist group), Washington Post reported. Group had accused Dr. Adey of “savagery” in death of Bonny, pigtailed monkey used in experiment. Suit had been prompted by feeling among researchers that attacks on scientists by antivivisection movement should be discouraged. (Auerbach, WPost, 9/19/70)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1971 NASA authorization hearings: “One of the immediate challenges to NASA, and particularly to the Office of Space Science and Applications, for this decade will be to understand the problems of the ecology of the earth, to determine and develop the space systems which will be required to solve these problems, and to understand the long-range implications of their use so that we do not, by their use, create new problems for mankind.” In FY 1971 NASA budget had almost doubled resources allocated to applications in FY 1969. Agency was proceeding with erts, cooperating with essa in Global Atmospheric Research Program, and studying with faa and ESRO “feasibility of establishing a joint navigation and traffic control satellite system over the North Atlantic within the next decade.” (Testimony)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial commented on Apollo 13 crew’s exposure to German measles: “It is an untimely reminder of how much America spends to send men to the moon and how little to combat disease on earth.. .. We are in favor of continued space exploration, to a point, but we cannot help thinking what the money spent on just one shot to the moon could do if devoted instead to the prevention and cure of diseases that afflict millions of earthlings.” (P Inq, 4/8/70)
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, addressed International Joint Conference of American Geographical Society and American Div. of World Academy of Art and Science in New York: “It is obvious that for some people science and technology are among the best scapegoats of the time. They are said to be the cause of most of our ills today. By conquering disease and extending life they have been responsible for an explosion of population. By increasing productivity and raising living standards they have been responsible for depleting resources and polluting nature. By expanding knowledge and emphasizing efficiency, they have been responsible for deflating myths and diminishing man. And by placing enormous power in the hands of man they have brought him to the brink of his own destruction.” Science had been “victim of its own single-minded success” in going “from the broad and general philosophy from which it origi
President Nixon sent to Congress annual report on marine resources and engineering development. Budget request for FY 1971 would provide $533.1 million for marine science and technology activities to improve management of coastal zone, expand Arctic research, develop program for restoring damaged lakes, expand collection of data on ocean and weather conditions, and undertake other projects. Funds also would support U.S. participation in International Decade of Ocean Exploration. (PD, 4/13/70, 518)
NASA Hq. briefing on FY 1971 budget, held Jan. 31, was released. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, had said: “We are putting into motion with this budget a program which does not advance toward a single climactic event. It follows the recommendations of the Space Task Group Report’s Option II, although at a reduced pace. The budget to implement the recommendations, however, is austere and, as a result, does not take full advantage of our total capability. But the new program has the flexibility to accommodate this reduced budget in FY 1971.” Lowest NASA budget since FY 1962 “means substantial cutbacks and deferrals in a number of programs. Our best current estimate is that the total nationwide employment on NASA work—which was once 420,000 people—will decline from current level by another 45,000, to about 144,000 people by the end of fiscal year 1971. The impact will be felt in many sections of the country. This is regrettable, but the Administration has faced the hard fact that these steps must be taken to achieve a fiscally responsible balanced budget in this time of inflation. .. .this budget level, which we hope will be NASA’s lowest level, is strongly oriented to the future. The necessary reductions.. .have not been made ‘across the board.’ We have made careful selections and decisions.” NASA would preserve strong future capability centered on development of economical, reusable space transportation system including shuttle, space station, and reusable nuclear rocket; continue efforts on practical applications of space technology for early practical benefits on earth; continue lunar exploration with Apollo vehicles and Apollo Applications earth orbital workshop flights with hardware previously under procurement; continue, “but with stretchouts and deferrals,” balanced program of planetary exploration and scientific investigations in space focused on potentially exciting discoveries; continue increasing emphasis on aeronautics; and maintain “essential cadre of NASA’s technical, operational, and management capabilities on which the continuing and future position of the United States in space depends.” [See Jan. 13.] Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly during briefing had replied to question that planned fund request for space station and shuttle had been for $250 million to $260 million— supporting Task Group’s Option II, to provide operational systems in 1977—but request had been cut to final $110 million. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had said program should give CY 1978 operational date. Dates for Mars mission were not yet planned. Michoud Assembly Facility and Mississippi Test Facility were among NASA installations to be affected by budgetary action, Lilly had said. Plans on Michoud would be to “complete the last of 15 Saturn 5’s in 1970; then we will be carrying on activities for the storage, repairing and refurbishing of the 1-B and the Saturn 5 stages, providing the engineering and support necessary for the flights through 1974, and maintaining the capability to restart or reinitiate the production of Saturn 5’s; maintaining the capability to accept new work.. .and. . .attempting to find other, users of that facility in New Orleans.” At mtf, Saturn V static test firings would be completed. “Then, the plans in our budget are to mothball the facilities. Personnel will be phased down.. .to essentially a mothball or caretaker mode.” NASA was working with other agencies to seek other uses for that location. (Transcript)
USAF contract awards: Aerojet-General Corp. was being issued $12 100 000 initial increment to $33 409 607 fixed-price-incentive contract for procurement of Titan IIIB, C, and D stage 1 and 2 liquid-rocket engine systems. TRW Inc. was being issued $351 000 initial increment to $4 669 800 contract for advanced development of electronic propulsion system for space satellites. General Dynamics Corp. was receiving $250 000 initial increment to $2 585 000 contract for development, assembly, test, and launch support of integrated unmanned spacecraft for space flight-testing of dod experiments. (dod Release 544-70) During June: Hypersonic aircraft technology and applications were discussed in Astronautics & Aeronautics by Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy; Richard H. Petersen, Senior Research Scientist in arc Mission Analysis Div.; and Nathaniel B. Cohen, special assistant in NASA policy research program. Because of long-life requirements of its structure, it was unlikely that hypersonic transport would be developed until operational experience was available on some other hypersonic aircraft. Therefore, hypersonic transport would benefit not only from technology developed for space-shuttle vehicle, but very probably from experience gained during shuttle operation. Operating experience with high-temperature structures would help immensely in developing longer life structures for hypersonic transport and gain considerable new knowledge of hypersonic aerodynamics. In contrast to situation in aerodynamics and structures, technology program being planned by NASA to support development of rocket propulsion for shuttle would not contribute significantly to hypersonic airbreathing-propulsion-system technology. Current generalized scramjet research program had amply demonstrated feasibility of such engines. Developing airbreathing propulsion for either hypersonic transport or secondgeneration airbreathing 1st stage for space shuttle would require applied program focused specifically on scramjet. (A&A, 6/70, 30-41)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, spoke on future of national space program before aiaa in Washington, D.C. He said he thought if U.S. “can still afford foreign travel, still afford Scotch whiskey, can still afford to buy our wives Italian shoes, it is mainly due to the space program.” Unprecedented growth in U.S. economy during first decade of space could have been accomplished only “by such programs as demanding as the landing of men on the Moon.” Endeavor focused science and technology “into a direction that raises the entire plateau of knowledge and the plateau of engineering to enable you to do better things.” (Program; SBD, 12/4/70,133)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, began NASA testimony on FY 1971 authorization before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences [See Feb. 17]. Among FY 1969 aerospace accomplishments he noted that “the promising nAsa supercritical wing development moved from conceptual and wind tunnel work into preparations for full-scale tests at our Flight Research Center on a modified jet aircraft acquired from the Navy. These flight tests will begin in November 1970. Because of its potential for enhancing both the cruise performance and the operations economics of subsonic jet aircraft, this new NASA concept has generated widespread interest within the aircraft industry.” (Testimony)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean were presented Distinguished Service Medals by Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, Chief of Naval Operations, in Pentagon ceremony. Conrad also received Navy Command Insignia for his role as Apollo 12 commander. Bean, for whom Apollo 12 was first space flight, received usn astronaut wings, (dod Release 97-70)
Implications of failure of Mariner VI and VII uv experiments to detect emissions associated with nitrogen in Martian atmosphere were discussed in Science by Harvard College Observatory and SAO astronomer A. Dalgarno and M. B. McEIroy of Kitt Peak National Observatory. Examination of physical and chemical processes causing nitrogen emission in Martian airglow had shown that if atmosphere was uniformly mixed, mixing ratio of nitrogen to carbon dioxide of 5% was consistent with observational data on uv dayglow of Mars. If magnitude of the eddy coefficient in atmosphere was similar to that for earth, this limit was reduced to less than 0.5%. (Science, 10/9/70,167-8)
Mt. Palomar Observatory and Mt. Wilson Observatory were collectively renamed Hale Observatories, in honor of founder George E. Hale. As California facilities operated jointly by Cal Tech and Carnegie Institution of Washington, Mt. Palomar housed 5080-mm (200in) Hale telescope, world’s largest optical telescope, and Mt. Wilson, 1524-mm (60-in) reflection telescope, (upi, W News, 1/19/70, M) .
NASA announced that Charles J. Donlan, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Technical), would also become Acting Director of Space Shuttle Task Force, replacing Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Appointment was effective immediately. (NASA Ann, 11/18/70)
At NASA Hq. press briefing, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers and program officers gave status of programs, plans for 1970s, and studies leading into 1980s. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, announced selection of Hadley-Apennine site for lunar landing of Apollo 15, scheduled for launch July 25, 1971. Site, cut by large gorge along base of mountains, was 3° east of moon’s center and 25° north of lunar equator on edge of Sea of Rains. Apollo 15 crew would collect material from base of Apennine Mountains, examine Hadley Rille area, sample fresh-looking mare and volcanic-like features, and deploy ALSEP. Apollo 16 would be launched in January 1972 and Apollo 17, in June 1972. High-priority landing sites were Copernicus, Davy, Descartes, and Marius Hills. To improve CSM return capability in emergencies after landing on moon, an LM descent battery and third tank would be added to Apollo 14 SM. Additional potable water would be generated and stored on way.tomoon. Douglas R. Lord, Deputy Director of Space Station Task Force, described plans for 12-man space station weighing 49 985-54 400 kg (110 000-120 000 lbs) that could remain in earth orbit for up to 10 yrs. Richard J. Allen of Space Shuttle Task Force said NASA was developing plans for shuttle with 100-mission reusable capability. Myers said dod was “very much involved” with shuttle activities. “We have a joint committee operating with the Air Force. . .for continuous communication and review of requirements.” He saw “possibility of international cooperation on certain flights and [U.S.] military use of the vehicle on others.” Myers said he had discussed with European officials possibility of participation in space shuttle program on three levels: orbit-to-orbit space tug, “cleanly separable and easily interfaced piece of equipment” that would probably be managed by European consortium and financed with European dollars; subcontracts from American companies to European contractors without transfer of American money ; and use of technological contributions from European national space activities and national aircraft establishments. (Transcript; NASA Release 70162)
NASA FY 1971 interim operating plan news conference was held in Washington, D.C. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said principal decision was “how best to carry out the Apollo and other existing programs to realize maximum benefits from them while preserving adequate resources for the future. ... In our discussions, it became clear that the vitality of our national space program depends on a determined and vigorous continuation of plans for a reusable space shuttle followed by a space station in the manned flight program”; early development of erts, ATS, and HE AO; Grand Tour unmanned flights to distant planets; unmanned Viking Mars landers; Pioneer flights to Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter; and ‘a healthy aeronautical research program.” “With all of these considerations in mind. . .actions have been taken that will effectively reduce NASA’s FY 1971 budget request of $3,333 billion to an interim operating plan of $3.2687 billion.. .and to minimize NASA’s budgetary requirements for future years.” Budget request for Apollo was being reduced by $42.1 million to $914.4 million by canceling Apollo 15 and 19 lunar missions and by phasing down manpower levels at major Apollo facilities more rapidly. Although Lunar and Planetary Missions Board and nas-nrc Space Science Board had strongly recommended, after special review, that NASA carry out all six remaining lunar landing missions, NASA had “most reluctantly concluded that a reduction. . .should be made.” Remaining Apollo missions would be redesignated 14 through 17 and would be flown before start of Skylab operations in November 1972. Schedule would allow additional flexibility by providing Apollo hardware for possible use in Skylab, space station, or other programs where manned operations or heavy boost capability would be required. Advanced mission studies would be reduced by $1 million. Tracking and data acquisition network operations would be reduced $8 million by reducing number of manned flights and by more rapid phasedown in operating levels. Construction of facilities would be reduced to $25 million by deferring Polymer Research Laboratory at arc, Calibration Laboratory at MSC, and Multispectral Photo Laboratory at msfc and by rehabilitation and modification effort and facility planning and design. Research and program management minimum operating budget would be established at $678.7 million, amount included in previous appropriations bill and $13.6 million below NASA’s FY 1971 request. Dr. Paine said NASA had concluded “that it is prudent and realistic. . .to make these decisions now.. .to avoid more drastic and disruptive actions which would result if the decisions were postponed until later in the fiscal year. We also no longer have the capability to prepare in parallel two Apollo spacecraft, as would be required to maintain an option to reach a later decision on the number of Apollo missions.” Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers explained Apollo schedule changes: Apollo 14 would be launched as planned Jan. 31, 1971, followed at six-month intervals by Apollo 16 (renamed Apollo 15) with advanced capability for greater exploitation of lunar exploration, Apollo 17 (renamed Apollo 16), and Apollo 18 (renamed 17), last launch in series. Beginning with Apollo 15 launch in July, eva would be increased from two periods to three and man-hours per mission, from 18 hrs to 40 hrs. Weight of landed scientific payload would be doubled, from 227 kg to 454 kg (500 lbs to 1000 lbs); SM experiment package would be added; and range and efficiency of surface operations would be increased by improved suit mobility, improved life support system, and addition of lunar roving vehicle. Crew for new Apollo 15 would be same as previously planned—Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin. Skylab core module would be launched by Saturn V in November 1972, as scheduled, and would be revisited by Saturn IBs and csms up through June 1973. Beyond that, activities would be “at a standstill as far as orbital operations are concerned until the shuttle comes on line, hopefully in the 1976-77 time period.” (Text; Transcript)
Work of scientists using NASA’s Oao II (launched Dec. 7, 1968) and GSFC team to investigate uv radiation from stars was described in Science. They had mapped large areas of sky in uv, discovered larger amounts of uv radiation than previously expected, and derived detailed information that would lead to “better understanding of stellar genesis, evolution, and decay.” (Hammond, Science, 11/27/ 70, 960-1) November 28:	Vertikal I high-altitude geophysical probe launched by U.S.S.R. carried recoverable payload containing experiments from six Communist countries to 487.6-km (303-mi) altitude. Equipment included x-ray cameras and x-ray spectrogeography experiment designed and built in Poland; x-ray spectrometers designed and made in U.S.S.R.; meteor particle experiment designed and fabricated by Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and U.S.S.R.; altophotometer and radiofrequency pulse probe designed and fabricated in East Germany; and solar radiation instruments provided by Bulgaria, East Germany, U.S.S.R., and Czechoslovakia. (SBD, 12/3/70/, 131; Sov Rpt, 12/4/70,5) November 29:	Observations of more than 100000 photos of 21 satellites made from 19 cameras and tracking stations of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had shown that satellites bobbed and dipped slightly in earth orbit, New York Times reported. Erratic motions were caused by variations in earth’s gravitational field. Satellites were attracted and pulled downward more as they passed over high areas and attracted less over low areas. Scientists had concluded that if earth were round orbits would be perfectly elliptical. Instead, bulges and depressions covered earth in two bands— high band with neck across North Pole and ends stretching over Europe and West Africa on one side and Pacific Ocean on other; low band over South Pole with ends over North America and Asia. (NYT, 11/29/70,24)
President Nixon sent $200.8-billion FY 1971 budget request to Congress, including total space budget of $4,954 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $3,148 billion (plus $185.5 million for aircraft technology); dod would receive $1,674 billion; aec, $99 million; essa, $26 million; Dept, of Interior, $4 million; nsf, $2 million; and Dept, of Agriculture, $1 million. Total NASA new obligational authority (noa) requested, $3,333 billion, was $404.9 million less than FY 1970 noa of $3,737 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to decline $486.4 million, from FY 1970 level of $3,889 billion to $3,403 billion. Reductions placed proposed NASA FY 1971 funding at lowest level since 1962. Of budget request, $2,606 billion would go for r&d, $34.6 million for construction of facilities, and $692.3 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $729.6 million, to $956.50 million in FY 1971, reflecting successful completion of manned lunar landing goal, would be partially offset by increase to $515.2 million for manned space flight operations. The $515.2 million would include $364.3 million for Apollo Applications, $110 million for space shuttie and station, and $40.9 million for operations. Advanced missions would receive $2.5 million, same as in FY 1970, to bring total for manned space flight to $1,474 billion, down $557.5 million from FY Funding for space science and applications programs would increase $45.9 million, from $519.7 million in FY 1970 to $565.7 million. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program, for airborne research ($3 million), s<Jlar observatories ($16.1 million), and Explorer satellites ($25.6 million). Funding for Pioneer program of planetary exploration would increase from $20 million in FY 1970 to $32.9 million. Funding for biosatellites would decrease from $6 million in FY 1970 to $1.5 million. Earth resources survey would receive more than 50% increase in funding, from $26 million to $52.5 million, with $41.5 million allocated for Earth Resources Technology Satellite. New projects funded were navigation and traffic control studies (with dot), $3 million, and Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) study, $1 million. Total for advanced research and technology programs would be reduced from $272 million in FY 1970 to $264 million, nerva rocket funding would increase from $27 million to $32 million. Increases also were proposed for v/stol aircraft technology ($15 million in FY 1971, from $9.5 million in FY 1970), subsonic aircraft technology ($11.9 million, from $9.4 million in FY 1970), and supersonic aircraft technology ($21.9 million, from $18.9 million in FY 1970), within total $185.5 million requested for aeronautics. Sustaining university program was being phased out, with no funds requested for FY 1971. dod space funding, down $82 million, reflected cancellation of mol program. FY 1971 funding would support satellite development, portions of missile development, and range operations. AEC’s requested $99 million reflected slight decreases for development of nerva rocket and space nuclear electric power sources for space applications. Funds for Depts. of Interior and Agriculture would support participation in erts project. NSF’s $2-million space funding was for research rockets and satellite and observation instruments. faa 1971 budget reflected restoration of $275 million in Federal funds for development of two prototype ssts. (NASA Release, 2/2/ 70; US Budget for FY 1971; bob Special Analysis)
Ten msc employees had applied for joint patent on device and process for recovering water and its constitutent elements from lunar soil, NASA announced. Chemical process used hydrogen and solar energy to reduce iron oxides and produce water vapor, which could be electrolyzed to yield oxygen and hydrogen. Calculations showed process could produce 0.5 kg (1 lb) of water from 45.4 kg (100 lbs) of lunar soil; if iron oxides were first concentrated magnetically, yield increased to nearly 6.4 kg (14 lbs) of water from 45.4 kg (100 lbs) of lunar material. (NASA Release 70-202) Washington Post editorial commented on Soviet Lunokhod I: “The appearance of this vehicle, as well as the landing on the moon and return to earth of Luna 16, makes it clear that the Russians hope to regain some of the prestige they lost in the race to land men on the moon.... In terms of the American space program, this new success of the Russians should have little impact other than to persuade the administration and Congress not to cut back its funds any further. There is no logical reason for NASA to go like gang-busters in an effort to match the Russians in unmanned space exploration since the decision has already been made to proceed with a scaled down and more rational space program. The first big trophy in space activities went to the Russians, the most recent big one to the Americans, and it is reasonable to suspect that future ones will be divided between the two nations.” (WPost, 11/20/70, A26)
NASA budget cutbacks would not substantially affect jpl, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, told press following conference with jpl leadership teams in Pasadena, Calif. “Our cutbacks will fall most heavily upon the manned space flight program.” Some 16 000 aerospace employees would be cut from Governmental payroll throughout California, Dr. Paine said. (Pottage, Glendale Ledger, 2/5/70)
Fvii-scate hypersonic research engine (Hre) was tested for the first rime in Langley Research Center’s 8-Foot High-Temperature Structures Tunnel, which produced a stream of hot gases moving faster than seven times the speed of sound, nasa project would demonstrate technology needed for future hypersonic aircraft. The test engine incorporated advanced technology in structure and materials and a cooling system that circulated liquid hydrogen through engine parts to protect them from the intense heat of hypersonic Sight. Coolant was then burned as fuel. tacular areas. And while politicians may glare at each other, the technologists are finding common interests.” (NHav Reg, 10/20/70) October 21: Two solid fuel rockets, carrying cloud-measuring payload triggering device, were launched from ksc in lightning study, but electrical field was too low for triggering payload to ignite lightning discharge. Launches were first in NASA Mighty Mouse program being conducted by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency to study feasibility of discharging lightning potential from clouds before lightning could damage vulnerable areas, such as launch pads. (KSC Releases 354-70,337-70)
Imaging photopolarimeter for Jupiter probe was being developed by Santa Barbara Research Center for ARC, Armed Forces Journal reported. Instrument for Pioneer F and G spacecraft to be launched in 1972 and 1973 would map density and distribution of “asteroidal debris,” measure gas above Jupiter’s cloud layers, and transmit two-color spin-scan images of planet. (AFJ, 2/7/70, 2)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, reported on international cooperation in NASA programs before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: NASA had established “sound base of extensive and successful cooperation” with over 70 countries in 1960s, entered into almost 250 agreements for international space projects, orbited foreign satellites and flown foreign experiments on U.S. spacecraft, participated in more than 500 cooperative scientific rocket soundings from sites throughout world, involved more than 50 foreign scientists in analysis of lunar samples, and provided for direct daily reception by some 50 countries of data from weather satellites. “Third” countries together spent “roughly $300 million a year on space.” “On the aeronautics side of NASA’s responsibilities, cooperative projects with Canadian, French, German, and British agencies are contributing importantly to the development and testing of a variety of v/stol aircraft configurations.” In experimental meteorological satellite and balloon program, Project Eole, NASA would launch French satellite to track several hundred balloons to derive global circulation of winds. Cooperative earth resources survey projects had been undertaken with Brazil and Mexico to acquaint foreign scientists and policy makers with potential of remote sensing. NASA had added earth resources disciplines to international graduate fellowship program and planned international workshop in 1971. NASA was providing technical assistance to India in aircraft survey of coconut palm blight in Kerala State so that its spread could be controlled. Agency was considering proposal to launch French synchronous meteorological satellite as joint contribution to Global Atmospheric Research Program and had met informally with ESRO and European aviation officials to consider mission requirements for possible preoperational air-traffic-control satellite system for North Atlantic. Dr. Paine had written new letters to Soviet Academy of Sciences President Mstislav V. Keldysh and to Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov “inviting new initiatives in space cooperation.” Keldysh had accepted suggestion for meeting, but had deferred further discussion for “three or four months” from Dec. 12, 1969. Keldysh had declined invitation of Soviet proposals for experiments on NASA planetary probes, “advocating instead a relationship in which NASA and the Soviet Academy would coordinate ‘planetary goals’ and ‘exchange results’ of unmanned planetary investigations.” (Testimony)
International cooperation in space was described in Science by Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs: NASA had developed extensive program which “opens the entire range of its space activities to foreign participation and benefit.” Limitations in program lay in areas of manned space flight, large-booster development, and cooperation with U.S.S.R. Low level of European space budgeting accounted for gaps in manned space flight and booster development. Lack of Soviet cooperation “seems to rest with Soviet political views rather than with technical problems or any lack of interest by the United States.” Despite restricting factors abroad, there was “every reason to persevere with existing and improved programs for international cooperation.” (Science, 7/24/70, 333-8)
Results of acquisition measurements of round-trip travel time of light from McDonald Observatory, Tex., to laser ranging retroreflector deployed on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts—made Aug. 20 and Sept. 3, 4, and 22, 1969—were reported in Science by astronomers from Univ. of Maryland, GSFC, and Univ. of Texas. Uncertainty in round-trip travel time was ± 15 nanoseconds, with pulsed ruby laser and timing system used for acquisition. Uncertainty in later measurements of planned long-term sequence from McDonald Observatory was expected to be order of magnitude smaller. Succes-ful performance of retroreflector at several angles of solar illumination, as well as during and after a lunar night, confirmed prediction of thermal design analyses. (Science, 1/23/70, 368-70)
Japan successfully launched 38-kg (84-lb) Ohsumi (Lambda 4S-5) satellite carrying 10.9-kg (24-lb) instrumented payload from Kagoshima Space Center at Uchinora at 1:25 pm local time, becoming fourth nation to orbit earth satellite on own launch vehicle. Orbital parameters: apogee, 5136 km (3191.4 mi); perigee, 525 km (326.2 mi); period, 116.1 min; and inclination, 31.4°. Total cost of satellite and 16.5-m (54-ft) four-stage Lambda 4S booster was 118 million yen. Onboard equipment included 4th-stage spherical motor 48 cm (18.9 in) in diameter with small radio transmitter, battery, thermometer, and accelerometer in nosecone and four antenna spikes projecting from cone. Launch was fifth attempt by Japanese Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science to orbit satellite. Spacecraft was named for district from which it was launched. (GSFC SSR, 2/15/70; SF, 5/70,189; NASA Int Aff)
Discovery that velocity of sound waves through Apollo 11 and 12 moon rocks was roughly one third that through earth’s rocks was reported in Science by Edward Schreiber of Queens College, City Univ. of New York, and Orson L. Anderson of Lamont-Doherty Observatory. Scientists compared sound velocity in various earth materials with that of lunar samples. Materials which exhibited “compressional velocities that are in consonance with those measured for lunar rocks” included provolone, emmenthal, muenster, and cheddar cheese—“which leads us to suspect that perhaps old hypotheses are best, after all, and should not be lightly discarded.” (Science, 6/26/70,1579-80)
NASA manned earth-orbital experiment program for next decade was discussed during meeting of more than 150 Government and industry scientists and engineers at msfc. Purpose of conference was to discuss changes to planning document Reference Earth Orbital Research and Applications Investigations. NASA used book as primary source of experiment program data for continuing space station studies, research and applications module studies, and other manned space flight planning activities. General Dynamics Corp. had NASA contract to update book. (MSFC Release 70-252)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial commented on President’s space goal message: “President Nixon’s ‘low profile’ space program represents a realistic appraisal of the American temper at this time. Without the Russians nipping at our heels, apparently, there is little public pressure to keep space exploration and development going at better than a jog. It’s worth noting, however, that although Mr. Nixon has accepted implicit funding limitations reflecting both his own anti-inflation drive and public opinion, he hasn’t really slammed any doors.” (P Bull, 3/14/70) The Economist commented: “Nasa’s future plans may not brighten the back of cereal boxes but they are solid, varied and balanced. The dangers from now-on are not likely to be financial but technical: the space shuttle will be hard to make.” (Economist. 3/14/70,53)
Aerospace industry sales continued anticipated decline in 1969, to $24.9 billion from $26.1 billion—decrease of 4.6%. Commercial aerospace sales, primarily jet transports, increased 13.7% in 1970 from $4,342 million in 1969, to $4,910 million. Increase reflected delivery of wide-bodied jet transports. Space sales continued decline, to $3,606 million from $4,272 million in 1969, beciause of completion of Apollo program hardware phase and decline in military space expenditures. Aerospace industry remained Nation’s largest manufacturing employer during 1970, with more than 1 million workers. Employment in aerospace industry declined from average of 1 347 000 workers in December 1969 to 1 067 000 in December 1970. Production workers dropped from 696 000 in December 1969 to 515 000 in December 1970, a 26% decrease. (Aerospace, 12/70, 3)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, released statement: “Red China has apparently become the fifth nation to launch an Earth satellite with its own booster following the Soviet Union, the United States, France and Japan. Working in close cooperation with the U'S., Canada, Britain, France, Italy, Australia, and the European Space Research Organization (esro) have flown Earth satellites. This new development has been anticipated for some time. ... It is a dramatic demonstration of the determination of the Chinese leaders, despite many problems, to put science and technology very high on their list of national priorities.” (Text)
Electronics Research Center, Cambridge, Mass., was officially closed as NASA installation. Transfer to dot as Transportation Systems Center, announced by President Nixon March 25, would be completed July 1. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, had announced decision Dec. 29, 1969, to close erc because “NASA could not afford to continue to invest broadly in electronics research” in face of budget reductions. Center had opened Sept. 1, 1964. In December 1969 it had 850 employees engaged in advanced research in electronics for aeronautics and space, under Director James C. Elms. Six buildings were in final phases of construction. (NASA Steering Group, Rpt on Closing of NASA ERC, 10/1/70; PD, 3/30/70,446; NASA Release 69-171)
Models of Viking Mars lander had been tested at speeds from mach 0.6 to mach 0.3 in Propulsion Wind Tunnel at AFSC’s Arnold Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn., AFSC announced. Atmosphere on Mars had been simulated in tunnels for tests conducted for nasa and Martin Marietta Corp. on aeroshetl and base cover that would protect lander during entry through Martian atmosphere. (AFSC Release 67.70)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight released Manned Space Flight: Present and Future. Staff study concluded that growth of national space program in decade had “provided major national technological and scientific resource of personnel and facilities.” Decline in resource could increase risk in accomplishing current programs and was causing “dislocations in affected communities throughout the United States.” With termination of Apollo fabrication, 8 Saturn Vs and 6 Saturn IBs, 12 cms and sms, and 1 or 2 lms would be available for manned flight. After 1974, U.S. would have no capability for lifting manned payloads over 27 200 kg (60 000 lbs) into space and would have only three vehicles that could lift 27 200-kg payloads unless Saturn V production was resumed or substitute was developed. Launch rate of less than two manned vehicles per year could materially increase risk of manned launch and spaceflight operations; production rate of two or more Apollo spacecraft and launch vehicles per year would minimize annual cost without inordinate increases in total vehicle cost over current costs, while maintaining critical skills of major subcontractors. U.S. would have no long-duration manned earth-orbital capability after 1973 without extension of orbital workshop program or initiation of development of space station. Early development of low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system appeared to offer greatest opportunity for reducing space flight costs while increasing flexibility and variety of missions in near-earth orbit. For increased flexibility in low-cost earth-to-orbit recoverable transportation system, development of chemical space tug was advised. Report noted that nasa maintained the only U.S. manned space flight capability and advised major decisions on manned space flight program to prolong capability beyond 1974. (Text)
Observation of nighttime lightning activity from Oso II orbiting solar observatory (launched Feb. 3, 1965) by monitoring light in 10° field of view of four telescopes was described in Science by Univ. of California at Berkeley physicists. Positions of nighttime thunderstorms determined from detection of optical radiations by Oso II had revealed that 10 times as many lightning storms occurred over land areas as over sea. (Vorpahl, Sparrow, Ney, Science, 8/28/70,860-2)
Edgar M. Cortnght, LaRC Director and Chairman of Apollo 13 Review Board, summarized report of Review Board before House Committee on Science and Astronautics and commented: “Total Apollo system of ground complexes, launch vehicle, and spacecraft constitutes the most ambitious and demanding engineering development ever undertaken by man. For these missions to succeed, both men and equipment must perform to near perfection. That this system has already resulted in two successful lunar surface explorations is a tribute to those men and women who conceived, designed, built, and flew it. Perfection is not only difficult to achieve, but difficult to maintain. The imperfections in Apollo 13 constituted a near disaster, averted only by outstanding performance on the part of the crew and the ground control team which supported them. The Board feels that the Apollo accident holds important lessons which, when applied to future missions, will contribute to the safety and effectiveness of manned space flight.” (Testimony)
Science editorial noted that President’s Council of Economic Advisers had projected increase in Federal expenditures from $189 billion in 1970 to $206 billion in 1975. It was “within this budgetary situation—one so cramped as to allow little room for maneuvering—that future research funds must be considered. The President’s budget for 1971 calls for $15.8 billion of R&D funds, an amount which constitutes a smaller percentage of the total federal budget than in any year since 1959. Research and development funds hit a high of 12.6 percent of the federal budget in 1965 and have been decreasing by an average rate of 0.8 percentage point a year, to 8.7 percent in 1970 and a requested 7.8 percent in 1971. Any statistical projection of r&d funds for the next several years looks bleak, and there is little that can be done to improve matters for the coming year.” (Wolfle, Science, 4/3/70, 69)
Discovery of cyano-acetylene molecules in gas cloud Sagittarius B2 near center of Milky Way was announced by Dr. Barry E. Turner of National Radioastronomy Observatory in Green Bank, W. Va. Discovery, made through radiotelescopes on earth, suggested that planets and life were being created in Milky Way galaxy and brought to seven the number of chemical radicals (incomplete molecules) and chemical molecules found in deep space. Dr. Turner said radio emissions from cyanoacetylenes, most complex chemicals yet found in space, were stronger than background radiation filling all of space. He thought they were remnants of radiation from fireball that created the universe billions of years ago. (O’Toole, W Post, 10/4/ 70, A5)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences conducted hearing on S.R. 49, providing for Congressional recognition of Goddard Rocket and Space Museum at Roswell, N. Mex., as fitting memorial to Dr. Robert H. Goddard, U.S. rocket pioneer. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, testified: “Americans can ill afford to ignore the contributions of Robert H. Goddard in the history of the coming of the space age. Young Americans need to appreciate that what appear as unsoluble problems today are not new to man’s experience. Dr. Robert H. Goddard’s rocket artifacts and his lifelong labors should be an inspiration to each generation of youth as they grapple with their concerns of their day and their dreams of a better world of their tomorrows in a dynamic universe. This nation cannot afford not to have Robert H. Goddards in the future.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, testified: “It seems very important that we and our children after us never lose awareness of what key individuals such as Robert Goddard provided to a fuller understanding of the progress of mankind. He, like Konstantine Tsiolkovsky of Russia and Hermann Oberth of Germany, correctly theorized on the use of liquid hydrogen as a fuel with liquid oxygen for high-energy thrust. Based upon the liquid-hydrogen work at the Lewis Research Center, NASA developed the upper stages for the Saturn V which enabled us to achieve the Apollo missions to the moon.” Hearing took place on 44th anniversary of first successful launching of liquid-fuel rocket by Dr. Goddard. (Testimony; CR, 3/17/70, S3828-30; Huntsville News, 3/17/70)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, addressed Inland Daily Press Assn, in Chicago on U.S. achievement and leadership in science and technology and “danger that exists today that we will soon lose the capability that gave us this achievement and leadership.” Capability built by NASA in 1960s was rapidly diminishing. Recent study had shown 35 000 aerospace scientists and en
At White House press conference former astronauts Michael Collins, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, and William A. Anders, NASC Executive Secretary, described arrangements that had kept President Nixon informed on Apollo 13 crisis. President had had access to direct TV, radio, and telephone contact with MSC Mission Control. He had talked with NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O.	Paine, and Astronaut Frank Borman there. Collins and Anders had set up “squawk box” into Mission Control outside President’s office and briefed President and his staff on developments. President’s chief concerns had been CM-SM separation, and crew’s safety and physical condition. Collins said, “The fact that we had this incident really changes very little. We have always known that such a situation could develop and he [President] does not feel that it should unduly cloud the future when it comes to space exploration.” (Transcript)
James H. Wyld Propulsion Award was presented to Hans G. Paul, Chief of MSFC Propulsion Div. and Joseph G. Thibodaux, Jr., Chief of MSC Power and Propulsion Div. during aiaa 6th Propulsion Specialist Conference in San Diego, Calif. Paul was cited for “outstanding leadership in research and development of Saturn launch vehicle propulsion”; Thibodaux, for “outstanding leadership in research and development of Apollo spacecraft propulsion.” (MSFC Release 70-114)
Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on NASA FY 1971 authorization before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Manned space expenditures for FY 1971 would be about 25% less than in FY 1970 and about half FY 1966 peak. “We are able to make these rapid changes . . . as the result of two fundamental policies .... One of these policies is that the great bulk of the NASA program is carried out under contracts with industry, university laboratories and other institutions in the private sector of our economy. The other ... is that NASA must maintain a civil service staff sufficient in quality and numbers to properly supervise the work performed under contract .... Essentially all the reductions being implemented in the manned space flight programs in Fiscal Year 1971 are in those efforts carried out urtder contract.” In FY 1971 NASA proposed to complete definition of space shuttle and space station and continue studies of systems, missions, and payloads for further economies in future years. In Apollo program, Myers pointed out, scheduled stretchout of manned lunar landings would “add to operational costs of the lunar exploration program, although not to our costs this year.” In Skylab program, design, development, and ground testing of subsystems and assemblies of Saturn Workshop, airlock module, multiple docking adapter, and atm were well advanced. Fabrication had begun on first flight articles, with delivery scheduled for late 1971. In space shuttle program, shuttle would be “designed so that it can be maintained in a state of launch readiness for lengthy periods and yet be launched within two hours notice into an orbit of any inclination. In the event of an emergency in space, it would be able to carry engineering or repair specialists to overcome the problem or rescue an endangered crew.” (Testimony)
Gen. James Ferguson, AFSC Commander, discussed role of military in current controversies over cost and efficiency of F-lll and C-5A aircraft during Seventh Space Congress at Cocoa Beach, Fla.: “If we in military development have been remiss, I would say it is because we not only failed to fully communicate the difficulties involved in pushing the state of the art, but we also neglected to stress the uncertainties between known design parameters on paper and the hardware that ultimately results. To the intense competition for finite resources, and to a flood of paper studies, we reacted with overoptimism and neglected to properly qualify the normal uncertainties of development or the technical risks involved.” Advancing state of the art was “synonymous with working beyond the boundaries of the certain and the known. As long as we operate at these outer limits of science and technology, performance, schedule and cost are inevitably going to be, at best, elastic parameters. The alternative is to stand pat with the F-4, the B-52, and the C-141. Such an alternative would be hardly supportable in even a static world.” (Text)
Discovery of carbon monoxide in five regions of Milky Way was made by scientists of Bell Telephone Laboratories using National Radio Astronomy Observatory telescope at Kitt Peak, Ariz. Carbon monoxide was sixth molecular substance identified in outer space. nsf later said discoveries would “stimulate further work by chemists as well as astrophysicists, looking toward better understanding of the chemical processes taking place in space, and eventually more knowledge of the possibilities of life elsewhere in the universe.” (upi,W Star, 4/11/70, A14)
Dr. Cyril A. Ponnamperuma, heading a team of Ames Research Center Scientists, reported the first positive identification of amino acids formed outside the earth's environment. A meteorite that fell near Murchison, Australia, Sept. 28, 1969, was found to contain these constituents of living cells and was probable proof of extraterrestrial chemical evolution—chemical processes preceding the origin of life. research project under way to insure against damage. Further progress on tne part of the United States in the sst field will give this country a much stronger voice with regard to any iong range effects on the environment than if we permit other nations to take over the entire field. . . .The sst is an airplane that will bp built and flown. The issue is simply which nation will build them." (PD, 12/7/70, 1630)
Soviet and West German talks on future cooperation in science and technology would begin in Moscow in November, Hans Leussink, Minister of Science and Education in Bonn, West Germany, said at news conference. (NYT, 10/1/70,6) During September:	Scientists at frc, LaRC, arc, and msfc were conducting flight-test programs and studies into ways to alleviate trailing vortex hazards from large transport aircraft, NASA reported. Research was concentrating on understanding trailing-vortex-sys-tem movement and attenuation for different aircraft, operation modes, and meteorological conditions; developing remote monitoring technique for trailing-vortex position and wind intensity; and discouraging formation of high-density vortices by aircraft design or artificially induced impedances. Theoretical descriptions of trailing-vortex-system behavior would be developed from flight-test programs at frc and LaRC. arc was experimenting with wing design to reduce trailing-vortex intensity and with effects of induced impedances near aircraft path. MSFC was attempting to adapt laser Doppler technology to flight research programs and to development of remote monitor for trailing vortices in airport areas. (NASA Aviation Fact Sheet, 9/70)
Space/Aeronautics editorial commented on Apollo 13 accident: “It has shown us how vulnerable are the men who go into space in their tiny, fragile capsules. It has stunned us into the realization that accidents can and will happen in space, that not every mission will run off like clockwork, that manned space flight is, and will always be, dangerous. Public awareness, finally, that this is so could immeasurably strengthen the space program. If so, Apollo 13 may prove to be one of the most important missions we have flown to date.” (S/A, 5/70,21)
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, addressed Fourteenth General IAEA Conference in Vienna: “The industrial and technological advances being made in the world are creating increasing demands for electric power that is cheap, abundant, safe, reliable and clean. In my country, the estimated total electrical generating capacity for 1970 is about 300 000 megawatts. I believe that a realistic estimate of the projected growth of our electrical generating capacity by the year 2000 is about 2 100 000 megawatts, which will require adding the equivalent of a total of 1 800 power plants of 1000 megawatts capacity each.” On global scale, “some 5000 new electric generating plants of 1000 megawatts capacity each would be needed over the next 30 years.” (Text) Predominant theme of conference, was that reusable shuttles would substantially lessen cost of practical uses of space. There was little talk of manned space stations or exploration of other planets. Discussions centered on use of satellites for communications, air traffic control, and weather forecasting. European public had become “cool to manned space flight,” New York Times said. ESRO head, Dr. Herman Bondi, said at conference, “We have grown up with the impression that everything in space is devilishly expensive.” Belgian aerospace executive Maurice Desirant said European efforts at joint space programs had been handicapped by pressures to perform national feats. Now, however, European countries had become “more and more aware of the dangers.” They had seen money wasted on duplicated efforts which had achieved limited results. Lefevre said that, to be effective, European contribution to major space effort must be under leadership strong enough to override any differences arising from “divergent technical points of view, reasons of industrial competition, economic whims for national politics or finances.” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers outlined shuttle plans. Payload of 22 680 kg (50 0OO lb) had been halved. (Sullivan, NYT, 9/23-24/70; NYT, 9/26/70, 11) September 23: Roy P. Jackson, Vice President and Assistant General Manager of Northrop Corp. Aircraft Div., was named NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, effective Nov. 2. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, also announced appointment of Oran W. Nicks, who had been Acting Associate Administrator of OART, as Deputy Director of Langley Research Center, effective Nov. 2. Vincent L. Johnson was named Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, effective immediately. (NASA Release 70-155)
nsf problems in stabilizingiU.S. basic science research during FY 1971 “with budgetary squeezes on mission-oriented agencies such as NASA, and aec, and Mansfield-amendment effects rippling through dod,” were described by nsf Director William D. McElroy in interview published by Astronautics & Aeronautics magazine: “We can identify positively right now the order of $70 million [in basic science research] that has been previously supported by other agencies. .. .we don’t have $70 million additional money to pick that up, so there is going to be a squeeze here.” Though nsf FY 1971 budget would show $73-million increase over FY 1970 amount of $438 million, only $10 million could be earmarked for picking up programs cut by other Government agencies, (A&A, 12/70, 12-14) During 1970: U.S. orbited 38 spacecraft in 28 launches—including Apollo 13's CSM Odyssey, lm Aquarius, and S-IVB stage intentionally crashed onto moon. U.S.S.R. orbited 88 payloads in 81 launches; France, 2; Italy, 1 (for NASA on NASA launch vehicle); Japan, 1; and Communist China, 1. U.S. total included 21 orbited by dod in 17 launches and 17 by NASA in 13 launches. NASA’s total included 1 launched for NATO and 1 for dod. NASA’s manned space flight program continued with launch of Apollo 13, but mission was cut short by an oxygen tank rupture. Three-man crew, taking emergency measures and using lm as “lifeboat,” returned safely to earth after looping around moon. Analysis of Apollo system and modifications necessary to prevent or meet future emergencies and reevaluation of Apollo program caused rescheduling of Apollo 14 from 1970 to early 1971 and reduction in number of remaining Apollo missions from six to four. Unmanned program included orbiting of Intelsat-III F-6, Intelsat-Ill F-7, and Intelsat-III F-8 comsats for ComSatCorp; Noaa I meteorological satellite for noaa and prototype meteorological satellite Itos I; NASA’s Nimbus IV in support of world weather program; Uhuru (Explorer XLII) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched for NASA by Italy); Serf II Space Electric Rocket Test; and Ofo Orbiting Frog Otolith, carrying two bullfrogs. Launched as secondary payloads were Oscar V(U.S.-Australia) amateur radio-propagation satellite carried on Itos I; DOD’s Topo 7 geodetic satellite, on Nimbus IV\ RM Radiation/Meteoroid Satellite, on Ofo; and Cepe Cylindrical Electrostatic Probe Experiment, on Noaa I. Almost 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched to altitudes between 160 and 1600 km (100 and 1000 mi) to study space physics and astronomy, including 19 during solar eclipse. One of the 19 detected unexpectedly high amount of neutral hydrogen streaming into earth’s atmosphere. Meteorological sounding rockets included 46 Nike-Cajuns and more than 200 boosted Dart and Areas rockets. About 60 high-altitude balloons—including one carrying Strato-scope II optical telescope—were launched to altitudes as high as 45 700 m (150 000 ft). In joint NASA-USAF lifting-body program M2-F3, HL-10, and X-24A lifting-body vehicles made 22 flights. HL-10 reached mach 1.86 (1970 km per hr; 1224 mph), setting new lifting-body speed record. M2-F3 made its first glide flight and X-24A made its first supersonic flight, reaching 1223 km per hr (760 mph). In aeronautics, YF-12A aircraft made 60 flights in joint nasa-usaf research program. Boeing 747 jumbo jet began commercial operations, and maiden flights were made by usn F-14A Tomcat air superiority fighter, Lockheed L-1011 airbus, and Douglas DC-10 airbus. C-5A cargo transport was delivered to Charleston afb for operational use. SST development continued—amid much debate over costs, sonic boom, and environmental pollution—with Congress approving funding through March 1971. Full-scale hypersonic research engine was tested for first time in LaRC’s 8-Foot High-Temperature Structures Tunnel at mach 7.4, and thick supercritical wing was flown on modified usn T-2-C aircraft. Other aeronautical research included studies on runway slipperiness, v/stol avionics, aircraft noise, landing radar, and pilot warning indicators. dod space program included orbiting of last two Vela nuclear detection satellites, Topo I geodetic satellite (launched by nasa), and U.K.’s Skynet B military comsat (launched by nasa). In joint NASA-AEC effort, SNAP-19 and SNAP-27 radioisotope generators completed one year of continuous operation on lunar surface, candidate fuel element for nerva completed 10 hrs of electrical corrosion testing, and Peewee-2 experimental reactor was fabricated and delivered for testing in early 1971. U.S.S.R.’s 88 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 2 Lunas, 1 Zond, 1 Soyuz, 1 Venus, 2 Intercosmos, 4 Meteors, and 5 Molniya Is. Unmanned Luna XVI landed on moon and returned to earth with lunar samples. Luna XV/flanded on moon and released Lunokhod I unmanned explorer that traveled across lunar surface and conducted experiments by ground command. Venus VII landed on planet Venus and transmitted data on Venusian surface and atmosphere. Only manned mission was Soyuz IX, which carried two cosmonauts on 18-day earth-orbital mission, a new space endurance record. Two countries orbited their first satellites: Japan launched Ohsu-mi and Communist China launched Chicom I. France launched two satellites—Dial, carrying West German wika minicapsule, and Peole applications satellite. (Pres Rpt 71)
In Astronautics and Aeronautics, Herbert Friedman discussed pulsars and their implications in new astronomy. “Even with the modest payloads of small rockets it is possible to instrument for pulsar detection at periods as short as 1 millisecond.” X-ray astronomers had been eager to have NASA provide program of high-energy astronomy payloads in 4500- to 9000-kg (10 000- to 20 000-lb) class that would be launched by vehicles of Titan-Centaur capability. Large x-ray detector could “very likely detect thousands of weak sources and discover high-frequency pulsar characteristics, if present. Such a program,” heao (High Energy Astronomy Observatory), “was to have begun in 1970 but has been a casualty of the present budgetary squeeze.” (A&A, 4/70, 22-5)
Four Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched by NASA from Kiruna, Sweden, carrying AFCRL and Dudley Observatory payloads to study noctilucent clouds. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Article by woman cosmonaut Valentina V. Tereshkova-Nikolayava published in January UNESCO magazine Impact asserted equality of sexes in space, New York Times reported. Cosmonaut—who had orbited earth 48 times in June 16-19, 1963, mission—said that “a woman can stand all the conditions of space flight as well as a man.” Women had endured silence and isolation as well as men and had adapted to weightlessness more quickly, although takeoff and landing of spacecraft should be timed to consider menstrual cycle. (NYT, 4/4/70,20)
Japan launched its first satellite. Ohsumi, becoming the fourth nation to orbit a spacecraft on its own booster. The satellite was photographed during preparation for launch from Kagoshima Space Center, Uchinora, in the Ohsumi district. provision for joint research, (nas-nrc-Nae News Rpt, 3/70, 1: nas pio)
Soyuz IX Cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Vitaly Sevas-tyanov returned to Moscow and complained of having “heavy bodies” in adjusting to earth gravity after 17-day space flight and 1 day on ground. Doctors escorted cosmonauts to hotel for extensive physical examinations and start of 10-day debriefing. Later Tass said cosmonauts were “quickly adapting. What was heavy an hour ago is becoming light.” Initial results of debriefing under precautionary quarantine indicated “condition of health, working efficiency and the general tone of the cosmonauts are much higher than medical men expected.” (upi, C Trib, 6/21/70; W Post, 6/21/70, A22)
Reorganization of faa engineering and development activities was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Move would place functions of faa Aircraft Development Service in Systerns Research and Development Service. National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center at Atlantic City, N.J., and National Airspace Systems Program Office would come under direction of Associate Administrator for Engineering and Development, (faa Release T70-17) April3: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXXIX from Plesetsk into orbit with 241-km (149.8-mi) apogee, 210-km (130.5-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and 81.4° inclination. Satellite reentered April 15. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/70; SBD, 4/6/70, 168)
Report on the Closing of the NASA Electronics Research Center was released by Planning Steering Group for erc closing. Report was prepared by Deputy Administrator for Administration Boyd C. Myers II, Steering Group Chairman, and members of group; ERC Task force; and DOT. Following ERC closing on June 30, 1970, new DOT center functioned “reasonably well.” All but 85 former ERC employees had jobs; NASA had programs and equipment it needed. DOT had ample equipment for new center and 27 universities were pursuing new work relevant to NASA interest. “Most important, the government and the nation were in a position to fully utilize a national capability of nearly $60 million in facilities and equipment and over 740 highly capable people on new programs. NASA had retained the highest priority work and related equipment.” Move was almost completed in six months but personal equipment packing and shipping and disposition of leased space would take about 60 days. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator at time of ERC closing, had directed disposition priorities: people first, program second, and physical facilities third, with every employee placed in appropriate job at higher salary. “While these objectives could not be entirely achieved sequentially, there was no question about the prime importance Dr. Paine placed on the actions affecting each individual employee.” (Text)
Office of Science and Technology sent to Congress The Next Decade in Space, report of Space Science and Technology Panel of President’s Science Advisory Committee: National program for next decade in space should focus on using “space capabilities for the welfare, security, and enlightenment of all people.” Recommended goals were to contribute to Nation’s economic strength and security and expand earth-oriented research and applications of space science and technology; explore solar system with phased program of lunar exploration, search for extraterrestrial life, and diversified planetary exploration; and use space platforms to expand knowledge of universe and basic physical laws. Panel urged that U.S. develop technology to expand capability for automated equipment controlled by man in remote location for space exploration and civil applications, reduce cost of space operations by cost reduction for expendable vehicles and payload development, strengthen biomedical basis for possible long-duration manned space flights, and encourage international cooperative programs. Panel recommended NASA and dod continue joint study of reusable space transportation system “in the expectation that a decision can be made for a FY 1972 budget decision on an STS development program.” Design target should be replacement “of the largest possible part of the national launch vehicle stable,” including Saturn V. “We urge the deferral of a development decision on space stations more elaborate than the aap space station.. .concept until the prior availability of the STS can be'confidently anticipated.” It was “likely that some form of multiply reusable space transportation system will indeed become the most attractive major new technology development for the decade.” Other recommendations were basic biomedical research program supplemented by 12- to 18-mo Apollo Applications flight program, to provide human factors information for more ambitious space station; possible second-generation space station to utilize sts; and earth-orbital manned space flight activity with systems using sts. (Text)
By vote of 180 to 37, House passed H.J.R. 1421 making further continuing appropriations for FY 1971. Resolution would provide additional $51.7 million to DOT for SST development funding through March 30,1971. (CR, 12/31/70, H12603-6; NYT, 1/1/71,1) During December: Discovery of two galaxies possibly only 10 million yrs old—one thousandth the age determined for galaxies under “big bang” theory that all material in universe had exploded in one place 10 billion yrs ago—was reported in Astrophysical Journal by Hale Observatory astronomers Dr. Wallace L. W. Sargent and Dr. Leonard Searle. Galaxies, about 100 light years in diameter against 100000 for larger galaxies, contained only 1000 to 100 000 stars of short-lived blue type. Milky Way galaxy contained 10 billion stars, including those capable of living billions of years. If newly discovered galaxies were young, they would provide first evidence that galaxies evolved from infancy to old age and that galaxies could be created after “big bang.” Dr. Sargent and Dr. Searle tentatively concluded that galaxies were “dense intergalactic clouds of neutral hydrogen in which the formation of massive stars is proceeding vigorously while the formation of low-mass stars is suppressed.” (As-trophysical Journal, 12/70, LI 55-9)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced appointment of William M. Huey, special consultant to faa Administrator and Deputy Administrator, to fill new position of faa Deputy Assistant Administrator for General Aviation Affairs, (faa Release 70-89) Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, said in speech at meeting: “nasa and the aerospace industry are not uniquely qualified to solve our domestic problems. The domestic problems, including those of the physical environment, are largely social, economical, and political. The need for new technology, for research and development, does exist in some areas, but certainly is not the driving force in obtaining solutions.” Solutions “must come from sociologists, economists, and politicians—not engineers and scientists. We in aerospace should. . .assist wherever and whenever we can: We have developed techniques of management that may apply; there are technological problems that we are qualified to tackle; and there are areas where space technology, and the applications of space technology, apply directly. We should assist, but we should not think or encourage others to believe that we can solve all of our domestic problems.” Space program had “one major deficiency—a gap in manned space flight after Skylab, a hiatus of four years or more when no American will be in earth orbit, or anywhere in space.” Gap had to be accepted because of lack of funding. Decision to cancel Viking or delay space shuttle would be wrong. “Viking is the major scientific experiment of the decade, and a delay in starting the shuttle would only delay the hiatus, not eliminate it.” If shuttle development was advancing when gap occurred, Dr. Low believed gap would not be “unacceptable.” NASA was building “the next generation of space vehicles, a generation that will far surpass existing capabilities to explore space, to use space, to live and work in space.” (Text) Sen. Mike Gravel (D-Alaska) told meeting: “Our space program is being viewed with increasing skepticism. Future historians will smile at the irony of our situation. Immediately following the fantastic feat of sending men to the surface of the Moon and back in safety, our national resolve in expanding this effort faced a mounting wave of domestic criticism. The irony of homo sapiens for the first time standing upright on his planet and not availing himself of his full ability to explore and experiment in the universe. The irony of not moving forward as aggressively as possible from a new beginning almost as fundamental as the beginning of life itself.” (SBD, 10/23/70, 23) Work of dot Transportation Systems Center, formerly NASA erc, was described by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe: Center was “already working on harbor advisory radars for the Coast Guard, phased array radars for the faa, crash sensors for the Federal Highway Administration, and alcohol detectors for the National Highway Safety Bureau. In communications we are studying wayside systems for tracked air-cushion vehicles and data links from ground controllers to cockpit displays. Computer systems are being adapted to automated scanning of highway traffic films and simulation of ground and air traffic patterns controllers must learn. The architecture of large, real-time computers for air traffic control systems is also under study.” (Text) JPL engineers Ronald F. Draper and Thomas R. Gavin* said technology for long-lived, unmanned spacecraft for Grand Tour flybys and separate orbiting missions to Jupiter and outer planets was well advanced for 1977 and 1979 missions. Thermoelectric outer planet spacecraft (tops) under development at jpl would use radioisotope thermoelectric generators, with nuclear energy supplying power beyond range where solar panels and batteries were effective. Scientific experiments and spacecraft control problems would be handled by self-test and repair (star) computer with sufficient backup units for 10 to 15 yrs operation, (jpl Release 564) Richard S. Johnston, MSC Deputy Director for Biomedical Engineering, announced that final two Apollo missions would land at Descartes, upland valley surrounded by craters, and Marius Hills, near Imbrium Basin. Sites had been selected because material there would furnish new data on age and origin of moon. (AP, W Star, 10/ 20/70, A4) Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Deputy Director, received $5000 aiaa Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award for “outstanding management and leadership in directing the planning and operational control of all United States manned space flight missions from the first Mercury suborbital mission through the first Apollo lunar landing.” Dr. Maxime A. Faget, MSC Director of Engineering and Development, received $500 Spacecraft Design award for ‘‘outstanding leadership and technical ability which resulted in the conception and design of this nation’s first manned spacecraft, the Mercury capsule system.” Glynn S. Lunney, Chief of msc Flight Director’s Office, received $500 Lawrence Sperry Award for “outstanding performance as a flight director during the Gemini and Apollo manned space flight missions; for exceptional leadership, professional skill and personal dedication which contributed to the success of this Nation’s first manned lunar mission, and particularly during the flight of Apollo 13.” Dr. Walton L. Jones, Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Div. of NASA oart, received John Jefferies Award of $500 and certificate for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of aerospace medical research.” Von Karman Lecture award of $1000 and travel allowance of $1500 was awarded to Dr. Erik L. Mollo-Christensen, mit meteorologist, (aiaa Release; msc Roundup, 9/25/70, 1) NASA and dot sponsored session on national aeronautical programs, with Charles J. Donlan of NASA omsf as theme chairman. Exhibit was prepared by LaRC, LeRC, and arc. Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy, chaired panel discussion on problems facing aeronautics in U.S., including vehicles, airport systems, and airway systems. Historical session, “American Advancement into Space,” was chaired by Royal D. Frey of usaf Museum at Wright-Patterson afb and Dr. Loyd Swenson of Univ. of Houston. Organized by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, session heard description by Col. John A. MacReady (usaf. Ret.) and Sally MacReady Liston of early experiments to combat known and unknown hazards of first attempts to climb into space, narrative by l/g William E. Kempner (usaf, Ret.) of flight of Explorer I into stratosphere, description by Cdr. George W. Hoover (usn, Ret.) of usn developments leading to space, and story by Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf, Ret.) of XB-70. (Program; NASA Hist Off) On Oct. 24 Tass announced that Zond VIII had circled within 1120 km (696 mi) of moon, studied space, photographed moon, and was returning to earth. Spacecraft splashed down in Indian Ocean Oct. 27 and was recovered by Soviet vessel Tama. Tass said spacecraft brought back “extremely important photographs needed for studies of the geological and morphological qualities of the moon.” Zond VIIIwas eighth spacecraft in Zond series and second spacecraft to land in water; first had been Zond V (Sept. 15-22, 1968). Zond VI(Nov. 10-17, 1968) and Zond VII(Aug. 8-14, 1969) had circled moon and returned to earth with data and photos, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/70; Gwertzman, NYT, 10/22/70, 1; SBD, 10/28/70, 249; 10/29/ 70, 256; B Sun, 10/28/70, A5; SF, 4/71, 138-9)
NASA announced selection of Hughes Aircraft Co. for $22-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for new, more advanced series of Orbiting Solar Observatory (OSO) spacecraft, Hughes would deliver three flight spacecraft, oso I, J, and k, for missions in 1973, 1974 and 1975; provide ground support equipment; and perform launch services. (NASA Release 70-218)
First radar receiver developed by Naval Research Laboratory scientists was presented to Smithsonian Institution’s Hall of Electricity by Capt. James C. Matheson, Director of nrl. Device had been successfully tested first on April 28, 1936, when it detected and ranged aircraft in flight at 40-km (25-mi) distance. (Naval Research Reviews, 7/70, 31)
msfc announced appointment of Robert E. Lindstrom as Deputy Director of Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory, Science and Engineering Directorate. Lindstrom had worked in aerospace industry since his resignation from NASA in 1963. (msfc Release 70-10)
In international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched U.K.’s Skynet B military comsat for dod, Nato I military comsat for NATO, and Oscar V radio propagation satellite for U.S. and Australian amateur radio operators. Italian crew, trained by NASA, launched NASA’s Uhuru on NASA launch vehicle. U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement was reached on procedure for joint efforts to design compatible rendezvous and docking systems for manned spacecraft. Since European Space Conference had indicated that major participation in U.S. space transportation program would probably mean end to Europa III launcher program funding, esc was assured U.S. would continue to make reimbursable launch services available for European payloads for peaceful purposes. Such participation was understood to mean at least 10% of developmental costs of space transportation system, or about $1 billion. During year NASA held briefings for U.N. Outer Space Committee and invited u.n. and specialized agencies to participate in International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey System in 1971. Discussions were held with Brazil, Canada, and Mexico on agreements to extend cooperation in earth resources area; experimenters from 28 countries signified intention to submit proposals to analyze data acquired by erts. Joint working group meetings were held in India and U.S. on satellite instructional TV experiment for ats-f. nasa and aid began 18-mo experimental project with Korea in application of aerospace technology to Korean economic problems. NASA and Canadian government signed agreement to study application of augmentor-wing concept to v/stol aircraft. Agreement was concluded with U.K. to test-fly NASA’s XH-51 rigid-rotor helicopter in U.K. and to share data. Agreements for new projects were reached with Netherlands, U.K., and Italy. Netherlands agreement called for cooperative development ana launch in 1974 of small astronomical satellite (ans) with one U.S. and two Dutch experiments to investigate stellar uv and x-ray radiation. U.K. agreement was for 1973 launch of uk-R x-ray satellite, fifth in Ariel series. Italian agreement established principles for nasa launch on reimbursable basis of Italian Sirio satellite to study wave propagation and electron flows in magnetosphere. nasa accented experiment from French National Laboratory for Space Astronomy to study stellar uv emissions from Skylab and accepted instrument developed by French National Laboratory for Stellar and Planetary Physics for investigating solar chromosphere structure from osO-i, scheduled for 1973 launch. Assistance was accepted from U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Observatory in planning activities of radio science team for 1975 Project Viking Mars probe. New sounding rocket agreements were signed with Australia, India, Spain, and Sweden, and negotiations were held with France for cooperative upper-atmosphere sounding rocket launchings at Kour-ou in French Guiana. Lunar material returned by Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 was studied by 54 foreign principal investigators in 16 countries in addition to U.S. scientists. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71)
Feasibility of high-speed, efficient, digital message transmission through troposphere had been confirmed by afsc scientists, afsc announced. Findings were result of research program conducted at AFSC Rome Air Development Center near Niagara Falls, N.Y. (AFSC Release 151.70)
Four ground test models of Apollo Telescope Mount manned solar observatory were under construction at msfc Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory, msfc announced. Flight versions—prime spacecraft and backup—would follow, msfc engineers were modifying laboratory, previously used for Saturn V assembly and early Skylab mockup work, for atm fabrication role. Changes included installation of clean room where air would wash downward over unit under construction, installation of airlock 14 m (45 ft) high for moving hardware to and from building without contaminating air, and installation of second clean room and automatic checkout equipment in Quality and Reliability Assurance Laboratory area. (msfc Release 70-87)
New York City Mayor John V. Lindsay addressed more than 300 mayors at National League of Cities Conference in Atlanta, Ga.: “The human potential of technology is boundless. We have only scratched the surface. For the sake of our cities and for the sake of the men and women in out aerospace, industry, we must learn more.” Mayor Lindsay said aiaa and city of New York would sponsor first annual Urban Technology Conference in May 1971. Conference would focus on application of space techniques and talent to urban crisis. “From it we hope to learn how to convert the creativity that put a man on the Moon into an ally in the struggle to help men live in our cities.” (A&A, 1/71,9)
Financial plight of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. was “symptomatic of a far more pervasive malaise spreading in the aerospace industry,” Robert A. Wright said in New York Times. Because of “intricate interwoven pattern” of subcontracting common to large defense programs, Lockheed’s problems would affect other companies including 2000 that supplied or made parts for C-5A cargo aircraft. “In the current atmosphere of defense spending cuts and political criticism of the so-called military-industrial complex, the attention generated by Lockheed’s problem is unlikely to enhance the poor prospects of the depressed aero-space industry.” (NYT, 4/12/70, FI)	.
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified in NASA FY 1971 authorization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Our most serious problem in recent years has been our inability to hire newly graduated scientists, engineers and administrative professionals in sufficient numbers. The average age of NASA employees is now increasing 8/10 of a year each year. While we were able to hire 965 graduating college students in 1966, the number dropped to 738 in 1967, 567 in 1968, 253 in 1969, and an estimated 180 in 1970.” NASA Civil Service staffing would decline from 31 350 at end of FY 1970 to 30550 at end of FY 1971. Of this reduction, 600 would result from phasing out of erc employees. Total of 200 would be reduced at manned space flight centers and NASA Hq. (Testimony)
NASA held 12th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington, D.C., with Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, as keynote speaker. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, former NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, and Alan L. Bean; and Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. Vice President said award ceremony was “perhaps the most significant since NASA was founded. Those individuals we honor have accomplished goals that required over a decade of vision, hard work, determination and courage by thousands in the NASA, industry, and university research and development team. ... NASA has had an outstanding beginning, successfully meeting its challenging mission and goals.... Though some reordering of national priorities and some fiscal constraints will not permit us to do all the things we would like to do in the immediate future, the future still holds many challenges and wonderful opportunities.... I am proud of you, the President is proud of you. We salute you.” Dr. Low said NASA could look forward to new achievements in program designed “to maintain that hard-earned lead, but one that also recognizes the many other problems that we as a nation must face. Today,we are moving forward on all...fronts—we have accepted the challenge of the future—a challenge in aeronautics, a challenge in science, a challenge in applications, and above all, a challenge in the exploration of the unknown.” Presidential Medal of Freedom was presented to Apollo 11 and Apollo 13 astronauts and to Apollo 13 Mission Operations Team. Herbert W. Grandy, Stationary Engineer at GSFC, received Exceptional Bravery Medal for responding quickly and “without regard for personal safety” to smoke alarm in gsfc building housing satellites, computers, and clean rooms—preventing loss of thousands of dollars and sustaining serious injuries. Group Achievement Award was presented to LeRC Dynamic Power Systems Group; FRC, ARC, and LaRC Lifting-Body Team; Wallops Station Solar Eclipse Sounding Rocket Project; and USN Solar Eclipse Underwater Salvage Team Associated with Recovery of Payload. Outstanding Leadership Medal was presented to Robert L. Krie-ger of Wallops Station and to former ERC Director James C. Elms. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 18 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 17. (Program; NASA Release 70-196; NASA Activities, 12/15/70)
In NASA-sponsored solar eclipse project scientists used spacecraft in deep space, earth-orbiting satellites, instruments on ground, and sounding rockets to make intense study, concentrating on eclipse’s effect on earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere. In-space observations were conducted with four NASA spacecraft and three U.S.-Canada satellites. Radio signals from Mariner VI on far side of sun were measured to determine how eclipse affected signals and to study changes in charged particles in earth’s atmosphere. Oso V and Oso VI, in earth orbit, pointed instruments at sun to gather data on sun and solar atmosphere, and Ats III photographed earth and its cloud-cover to show path of eclipse across northern hemisphere. American-Canadian satellites Alouette I, Alouette II, and Isis I investigated eclipse-caused changes in ionosphere. Ground observations were conducted by observers from three universities and four NASA centers at sites in Virginia and Mexico. At site near Sandbridge, Va., Univ. of Michigan team photographed solar corona and LaRC experimenter photographed solar flash spectrum that was too weak to be seen when sun was not obscured. LaRC, GSFC, and sao scientists used four Super Schmidt Meteor Cameras at Wallops Island, Eastville, and Sandbridge, Va., to photograph faint comets believed to be near sun. At LaRC, Univ. of Colorado scientists used optical assembly for two Wallaston prisms on LaRC’s 241-mm (9.5-in) Cassegrain telescope to investigate difference between color of tangentially and radially polarized radiation from solar K-corona. arc scientists photographed full intermediate-scale coronal structure, using special radial transmission filter in front of LaRC telescope’s prime focus. In Mexico LaRC scientists used NASA’s mobile Satellite Photometric Observatory in path of totality at Miahuatlan to determine intensity of coronal radiation to 1% accuracy. Simultaneous wideband monitor measurements of intensity and polarization of coronal radiation were made out to 3.2 million km (2 million mi) from sun to determine for first time fine structure of coronal electron density and temperature. Team of MSC and Univ. of Houston scientists made variety of observations near Miahuatlan in attempt to separate F- and K-coronas, determine structure of coronas, and study interplanetary dust and particles by measuring coronal intensity and radiation, recording flash chromosphere spectrum, and using photographic and photoelectric techniques to study shadow bands. Data from satellite and ground observations would be compared
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, opened testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics on NASA FY 1971 authorization: “Apollo 11 and 12 demonstrated that we can fly across a quarter of a million miles [400 000 km] of space, land with precision, carry out research and exploration, and return safely to earth. We met our commitments for the decade of the sixties. Now we must chart a new course for the next decade in space. The Congress again shares with the Administration the responsibility for continuing progress and leadership in space and aeronautics. At the same time, NASA is going through a difficult period of redirection, and austere budget goals must be met. This is therefore a time of great challenge. But I firmly believe that with your support we can continue to forge ahead in space exploration, in science, in applications, and in aerospace technology. The program which we will lay before you, although austere, provides for balanced progress toward the challenging goals for the 1970’s and the decades to follow.” NASA budget as it came from President included “major reduction in space program,” to achieve balanced U.S. budget in “time of inflation.” By reducing operating base, making selective cut-backs, and deferring new starts NASA had developed program permitting progress toward SpaceTask Group’s Option II goals, but at reduced pace, [see Jan. 13 and Feb. 2], Dr. Paine noted it was significant that, “in a sharply reduced total budget, we have been able to increase our space applications efforts. Our aeronautics effort will also continue to be strengthened.” He urged Committee to keep in mind that proposed program “could not be conducted in the face of further cuts.” NASA had no plans to fly astronauts in space between last Apollo flight in 1974 and the time space shuttle would be operative in late 1970s. “Any significant reduction in our FY 1971 request will further extend this gap in American manned space flight, and reduce other important programs.” (Testimony)
Concorde 002, British prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport, reached mach 1.68 (1770 km per hr; 1100 mph) and created double sonic boom in test flight over Oban, Scotland. It was first time British Concorde had broken sound barrier in current test series. No sonic boom damage was reported. (AP, W Post, 9/2/70, A19)
Decline to 2.3%—lowest point in several years—of U.S. aerospace industry profits in first quarter of 1970 was reported by Space Business Daily. Net income of entire manufacturing industry had declined, but profits remained at 4.0%. Aerospace backlog at first quarter’s end was $27.1 billion, off $1.2 billion from end of preceding quarter, and down $4.3 billion from end of first quarter of 1969. (SBD, 10/16/70,199)
Use of radiotelescopes to identify pollutants in atmosphere had been advocated by astronomers Dr. David Buhl of National Radio Astronomy Observatory and Dr. Lewis E. Snyder of Univ. of Virginia, Washington Evening Star reported. Astronomers believed pollutants from oxides of nitrogen to sulfur dioxide and small particles could be measured day and night in all weather at low cost, but radioastronomers did not have background “to do the chemistry.” They recommended modification of equipment to survey regional atmosphere or known polluting sources unattended, by use of receivers feeding into computerized data banks via microwave links. Identification and quantification of pollutants could be instantaneous and single-dish antenna could be electronically controlled to “sweep” wide range of pollutants at regular intervals. (Lannan, W Star, 8/10/70, A4)
MSFC announced selection of Grumman Aerospace Corp. and TRW Systems Group for negotiation of $250 000 fixed-price contracts for one-month definition and preliminary design studies of 10 000-kg (22 000-lb) High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao), scheduled for launch in 1972. MSFC also announced award of three contracts for continuation of nuclear shuttle definition studies: $343 000 to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for completely modular concept with earth-to-or-bit shuttle to transport modules for in-space assembly; $245 000 to NR Space Div. for nuclear stage with 10-m (33-ft) diameter to be orbited by Saturn V and refueled by earth-to-orbit shuttle; and $282 000 to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. for both types, (msfc Releases 70-97, 70-98)
Comment of Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Lunar and Earth Sciences Div., on learning of chemical composition of lunar samples brought from Sea of Fertility by Soviet Luna XVI spacecraft was quoted by New York Times. Dr. Gast had said Soviet analysis of material, reported at Oct. 28 Moscow news conference, indicated same relative abundances of some 11 major elements as found by U.S. scientists in Apollo 12 lunar samples from Ocean of Storms. Both differed significantly from relative abundances found in Sea of Tranquility rocks and soil returned by Apollo 11. Most striking difference in Sea of Fertility and Ocean of Storms material was titanium content. Sea of Tranquility material contained. 10% titanium dioxide; all soil and rocks from Ocean of Storms and Sea of Fertility contained under 5%. Dr. Gast said Sea of Fertility sample provided 50% additional data to that known previously on chemical composition of lunar surface. It was important and remarkable that analyses of Ocean of Storms and Sea of Tranquility data were so similar though sites were more than 1600 km (1000 mi) apart. (Schwartz, NYT, 11/15/70)
NASA was placing new emphasis on development of profitable manufacturing facilities orbiting in space and operated by private industry, because of budget cuts, New York Times article said. Industry participation could lead to operation and ownership of facilities by organizations like ComSatCorp—“prototype of such a joint undertaking.” NASA would make available facilities like space shuttle transportation system, space workshops, and station at mutually agreeable price. Some manufacturing might be more economical in space because of high vacuum and zero g, but before program could become practical NASA would have to move into “more highly developed operational stage. . .more applicable to research and development and to manufacturing.” (Tomaszewski, NYT, 2/15/70, Cl)
