Identification of molecule magnesium tetrabenzporphine in outer space as forerunner of chlorophyll by Dr. Fred M. Johnson, California State College spectroscopist, was reported in Washington Post. Dr. Johnson had analyzed spectral lines taken of Milky Way from Lick Observatory optical telescope during 18-yr effort to identify nitrogen-bearing hydrocarbons among hydrogen clouds in interstellar space. He had succeeded after analyzing spectral line surrounding hot, young star in Orion constellation. Finding, Dr. Johnson believed, might provide clue to building blocks of life in universe. “Whatever mechanism occurs here occurs throughout the universe and you can be sure it occurs in the solar system.” (O’Toole, W Post, 10/26/71, A3)
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory astronomers said in Cambridge that radio signals from Apollo 15 cm Endeavor had passed into radio “dead spot” behind moon on Aug. 3, faded away, and reappeared on receivers of observatory’s 46-m (150-ft) radio antenna two minutes later. Subsequent analyses had confirmed that signals had been transmitted through moon’s body. (AP, NYT, 11/13/71)
Chinese-built version of Soviet Mic-19 fighter produced at Mukden, Manchuria, at rate of 200 per year had been “backbone” of Communist Chinese Air Force for number of years, New York Times said. So many had been produced from blueprints supplied by U.S.S.R. before Sino-Soviet split in early 1960s that Communist China had sold some to neighboring Pakistan. Western sources quoted by Times had recently reported that 2800 combat aircraft of Communist Chinese Air Force were being supplemented by new jet fighter of Chinese design being produced in China at rate of 10 per month. Aircraft, called F—9 in West, flew at twice speed of sound, had combat range of 480 to 800 km (300 to 500 mi) and could operate above 15 000 m (50 000 ft). (.NYT, 5/23/71)
NASA announced it had issued RFPs for automated HEAO to study high-energy radiation from space. Proposals were due Aug. 27 at msfc and contract would be awarded early in 1972 if heao became approved project in FY 1972. Single contract for two spacecraft would continue through launch and mission operations support for seven years. Contract called for system engineering of heao payload; design and development of spacecraft; procurement and integration of orbit adjust stage and shroud; integration of experiments; design, development, and delivery of one set of heao ground support equipment; and launch operations support. Winning contractor also would provide mission operations support for observatory for up to two years for each mission, (nasa Release 71-127)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations, announced at msc that Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had become first man to gain weight while in space. Other two crew members had lost weight: Edgar D. Mitchell had lost 0.5 kg (1 lb) and Stuart A. Roosa had lost 4.5 kg (10 lbs). Shepard had gained 0.5 kg (1 lb). NASA physicians were making fluid tests on astronauts to determine reason for weight loss during space flight. (Altman, NYT, 2/11/71, 40)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Dr. H. Guyford Stever as nsf Director. Dr. Stever would succeed Dr. William D. McElroy, whose resignation would be effective Feb. 1. Dr. Stever was member of National Science Board and of Advisory Panel to House of Representatives on Science and Astronautics. He had served as usaf Chief Scientist and as Chairman of President Nixon’s PreInauguration Task Force on Science and Technology. {PD, 11/22/71, 1528, 1542)
CBS commentator Walter Cronkite received Bradford Washington Award of Boston Museum of Science for “outstanding contribution toward public understanding of science.” Award, which included $5000 and gold medal, was presented by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., at dinner commemorating museum’s 35th anniversary. Cronkite was cbs anchorman for coverage of most NASA manned space flight missions. (AP, Denver Post, 11/22/71; Lovell Off)
Dish-shaped 305-m (1000-ft) radiotelescope at Cornell Univ.’s Arecibo Observatory near San Juan, Puerto Rico, was undergoing $7-million modification program that would increase telescope’s sensitivity 2000 times, Dr. Frank D. Drake, Cornell Univ. astronomer and former Arecibo Observatory Director, told San Juan meeting of American Astronomical Society. Modified telescope would search skies for unusual features and objects “we cannot even begin to predict” and organic molecules in intergalactic space that were clues to evolution of life and evidence of possible distant civilizations. “We expect to devote about 1 per cent of our time to just listening. If any civilization is advanced enough to communicate with other civilizations in the universe, we might get the message.” (Goodwin, W Post, 12/16/71, E9)
Immediate report from nasa on role of Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in award of $500-million space shuttle engine contract to NR Rocketdyne Div. was requested by Rep. William R. Cotter (D-Conn.). In statement to press, Rep. Cotter said Myers “as co-chairman of the joint NASA-Pentagon space transportation system committee, may have been instrumental in cutting off Air Force funding of Pratt & Whitney’s space shuttle research under the XLR—129 program.” Cotter said Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. had based its contention of superior “technical knowhow” on shuttle engine development [see Aug. 3] on its 10-yr XLR-129 research. Myers had been a Rocketdyne Vice President before coming to nasa in 1970. (Text; Warden, C Trib, 8/27/71,22)
aaas held symposium in Boston on use of long-baseline interferometry— antennas thousands of miles apart, working together, to determine angular width and precise direction of distant radio sources. Three teams of astronomers who had worked independently reported observation in distant space of what appeared to be two objects flying apart at 10 times speed of light, but were unable to agree on plausible explanation for phenomenon that defied laws of physics that said such velocity was impossible. Discovery had been made originally by nine-man team of scientists from mit, gsfc, jpl, and Univ. of Maryland. Team, under direction of Dr. Irwin I. Shapiro of MIT, using MIT Haystack antenna and JPl’s Goldstone antenna, had observed two components of quasar 3C-279 accidentally during experiments conducted in October 1970 to observe passage of 3C—279 around sun. Discovery also was described by Dr. David L. Chauncey of Cornell Univ. and team from Cal Tech and National Radio Astronomy Observatory. Dr. Alan T. Moffet of Cal Tech reported on joint observations of phenomenon with Australian astronomers. • Following symposium, Rumford Premium, oldest scientific prize given in U.S., was presented to 21 scientists from U.S. and Canadian observatories who had pioneered in development of baseline interferometry. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/15/71, 33)
Calibration had been completed at msfc on new tube wind tunnel capable of test speeds up to twice speed of sound, Marshall Star reported. Tube was 130 cm (52 in) in diameter and was 119 m (390 ft) long. It would be used in wind-tunnel test program for space shuttle. (Marshall Star, 1/13/71,1)
NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from esrange, Kiruna, Sweden, to sample noctilucent clouds and particulate matter in upper atmosphere. First payload was launched to altitude of 114 km (70.8 mi) and recovered within 2 hrs 15 min after launch in good condition. Mission was considered 100% successful. Second payload attained 106 km (65.9 mi) and was recovered within 2 hrs of launch. Two of eight collector doors opened prematurely and caused slightly reduced apogee, but experiment results were not affected and mission was judged 100% successful. (NASA Rpts srl) During July: Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.) praised U.S. space shuttle program in Aerospace article: “Logic dictates that we should move ahead with the shuttle program. Experience tells us that the aerospace industry can respond to even seemingly impossible challenges— and that nations that reject the major challenges of their times do not remain major powers. And a hard fact of international economics is that the United States can remain prosperous in this world only by maintaining and utilizing its advanced technology.” (Aerospace, 7/71, 3-7)
nasa published Mariner-Venus 1967, Final Project Report (nasa SP—190). In foreword, Project Manager Glenn A. Reiff said Mariner 5 (launched June 14, 1967, toward Oct. 19, 1967, flyby of planet Venus), apart from significant contributions to knowledge of deep space, had achieved secondary objective, “to gain engineering experience by converting a spare Mariner-Mars 1964 spacecraft into one that could be flown to Venus,” with substantial savings. Cost of mission had been 10% less than anticipated. (Text) During 1971: U.S. orbited 51 spacecraft in 29 launches—including Apollo 14 and 15 csms Kitty Hawk and Endeavor with lms Antares and Falcon and their S—IVB stages intentionally crashed onto moon. U.S.S.R. orbited 97 payloads in 83 launches; Japan, 2; U.K., 1; France, 1; Italy, 2 (1 for U.S. on U.S. booster); and Communist China, 1. U.S. total included 33 orbited by DOD in 17 launches and 19 by NASA in 13 launches. NASA’s total included 1 launched for USAF on behalf of NATO, 1 for France, and 1 for U.K. NASA’s manned space flight program continued with launches of Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 manned lunar landing missions. Mobile equipment transporter, used for first time on Apollo 14 to carry equipment and samples, allowed astronauts to explore 3.5 km (2.2 mi) of lunar surface and collect 43 kg (94.8 lbs) of samples. On Apollo 15, astronauts traveled 28 km (17.4 mi) over lunar surface on four-wheeled, battery-powered lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover and collected 77 kg (170 lbs) of lunar samples, including one white anorthosite rock about 4 billion yrs old. Unmanned program was highlighted by Mariner 9 Mars probe, which traveled 400 million km (248 million mi) to Mars and began transmitting photos of major Mars dust storm and, later, of details of Martian surface and moons Deimos and Phobos. Mariner 8 launch vehicle malfunctioned at launch. Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory—rescued from initially incorrect orbit by ground command—made first x-ray observations of beginning solar flare and revealed that sun had “polar caps.” Other unmanned missions included lntelsat-IV F-2 and Intelsat-IV F—3 for ComSatCorp and Explorer 43, Explorer 44, and Explorer 45 (the last launched for NASA by Italy). Launched as secondary payloads were Subsatellite on Apollo 15 and Tetr 3 on Oso 7. All elements of Skylab flight system reached final manufacturing and checkout in preparation for 1973 launch and intensive engineering studies on Space Shuttle were conducted throughout year. In joint NASA—usaf lifting-body program, M2—F3 and X—24A lifting bodies made 17 flights, including first supersonic flight by M2-F3. X-24A reached 1687 km per hr (1048 mph) before completing program and beginning modification for new flight program as X—24B. In aeronautics NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing - made 27 successful flights. USN F-14 fighter aircraft successfully demonstrated first automatically programmable variable sweep wing. USA CH—54B helicopter set new world altitude record of 5120 m (16 798 ft) while carrying 10 000-kg (22 000-lb) payload. New v/stol Wind Tunnel at LaRC became operational, providing greatly improved testing capability for scaled models. GE quiet experimental engine successfully completed initial tests in NASA program to reduce jet engine noise, and NASA let competitive design contracts for development of quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) transport U.S.-U.S.S.R. Space Activity, 1957-1971 Successful Launches to Earth Orbit or Beyond aircraft, sst program ended, with Congress voting to terminate program. In sounding rocket program, 126 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations and to make astronomical observations in x-ray, uv, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum. DOD’s 33 payloads included orbiting of 2 Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs-2) military comsats, 2 ov—i scientific satellites, and Cannonball 2 and Mmketball. U.S.S.R.’s 83 launches set an all-time record in number of flights. The 97 payloads included 81 Cosmos satellites, 2 Luna, 2 Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 2 Mars, 1 Intercosmos, 4 Meteor, 2 Molniya I, 1 Molniya II, and Oreol (launched for France). Soyuz 11, carrying three-man crew, Summary of Soviet and United States Space Payloads by Mission Category Soviet Union						United States 1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total		1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total Earth orbital science			 5	10	3	9	7	59	12	16	14	4	11	137 Earth orbital engineering								6	1	5	1	10	50 Communications				...... 4	4	2	5	3	23	19	11	6	6	6	83 Navigation/ferret			6	6	16	27	84	3	1		1 .		25 1	1	1	1 .		17 Military observation: Low orbit recoverable			 22	29	32	29	28	202	19	16	12	9	7	198 Low orbit nonrecover 		..... 8	10	12	12	12	67	7	7	11	4	6	77 4 .						10 Synchronous or higher 								2	1	3	5	1	18 Q	2	1	2	1	17 . 9	5	2	4	8	25 . Earth orbit man-related 			 3	4		i	2	20	1 .		1 .			11 Earth orbit manned			1	5	i	3	19 .						14 Lunar man-related			3	1	2 .		8	1	2 ,		1	3	13 Moon-unmanned programs			1	3	3	2	25	8	1 ,				21 Venus 		...... 2 .		2	2 .		17	1 .					2 5	10 .			2 .		1	5 Subtotal 				77	71	91	102	602	87	64	66	39	53	764 Orbital launch platforms			 6	8	6	10	7	59 . From Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Staff Report, Soviet Space Programs, 1971, 92d Cong., 2d Sess., April 1972, p. 5. ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971	During 1971 successfully rendezvoused and docked with unmanned Salyut 1 to form first orbital scientific station, but cosmonauts died during earth reentry because of improperly sealed hatch. Mars 2 and Mars 3 dropped instrumented capsules on Mars surface. Mars 2 capsule crashlanded and Mars 3 capsule transmitted 20 sec. Lunokhod 1 lunar rover carried to moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, continued to explore lunar surface until October 1971, when isotope heat reserves were exhausted during its 11th lunar night. Japan launched two satellites—Tansei and Shinsei. China launched Chicom 2, France launched Tournesol, U.K. launched Prospero, and Italy launched San Marco 3. (nasa Release 71—245; NASA Lifting Body Off; GSFC Sounding Rocket Br; NASA Exec Secretariat; Sheldon, United States and Soviet Progress in Space, Library of Cong, 1/22/72) • NASA’s scientific and societal achievements advanced national goal of alleviating environmental problems and expanding basic research on behalf of humanity, as public pressed for immediate, usable returns from research in all fields. Apollo manned missions swelled storehouse of lunar information. Unmanned astronomical missions gathered unique data, including new clues to Martian atmosphere. NASA-developed inventions saw increased use beyond space exploration—in environmental sciences, communications, medicine, industry, and agriculture. U.S.—U.S.S.R. space meetings set stage for future joint space missions. And balanced program of space and ^aeronautics, despite low funding level, continued to raise U.S. prestige as aerospace pioneer while it worked to improve man’s future. Some observers, however, warned of higher rate of technological advances abroad than in U.S. and of ever-growing U.S.S.R. space program and technological capability. Soviet expenditures on space were estimated at level about double U.S. peak expenditure of l°/o of GNP when combined nasa-dod space program was at highest level and four times present level. Dr. James C. Fletcher was nominated new nasa Administrator by President Nixon. President of Univ. of Utah and former aerospace executive, Dr. Fletcher took office April 27. He succeeded NASA’s third Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, who had resigned Sept. 15, 1970, to return to industry. Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, had served as Acting NASA Administrator in the interim. Operating at lowest budget level since 1962, nasa in 1971 continued phase-out of Apollo program with successful completion of Apollo 14 and 15. Man’s fourth landing on moon, in Apollo 15 mission, proved to many that man had an effective scientific role in space. At year’s end, Apollo 16 had been scheduled for March 1972, with Apollo 17 to complete program later in year. Reduced funding forced additional reduction of personnel as well as program cutbacks, stretching out remaining Apollo missions, delaying first Skylab flight, and slowing studies of space shuttle, nerva nuclear rocket engine program was reduced to holding action. Bioscience funding was eliminated. Aerospace employment in industry throughout nation also fell, reflecting cuts in DOD spending as well as in NASA’s. During year, however, Skylab hardware manufacture neared completion and space shuttle work continued. Shuttle preliminary design contracts were extended so that nasa could examine alternative configurations, contingent on Administration approval of shuttle development. In erts program, aircraft tested remote sensing devices for gathering earth resources data and first satellite for global monitoring of resources was scheduled for 1972. During 1971, instrumented aircraft measured air pollution, investigated corn blight infestation, and sought hidden natural resources. Pioneer-F spacecraft for planned 1972 launch and December 1973 Jupiter flyby went into final manufacturer’s tests. Increased emphasis on aeronautics included research into aircraft noise reduction, increased air transport efficiency with use of supercritical wing, and STOL aircraft for transportation. To emphasize practical goals of space science, NASA established new Office of Applications, increased technology utilization budget from $1 million to $5 million, and issued request for proposals for additional uses of space-developed technology to solve problems of society. Among NASA projects were nsf contract to investigate use of solar cells to electrify homes and buildings and hud contract to study application of space technology to sewage recycling. Joint nasa-dot study resulted in recommendations for civil aviation R&d policy (card). Research achievements at NASA centers included ARC discovery of amino acids—building blocks of life—in second meteorite. Discovery strengthened case for chemical evolution of life elsewhere in universe. NASA FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion was $27 million more than requested $3,271 billion and $29 million above FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion—halting downward trend but far below 1965 peak of $5,250 billion. (A&A 1971; O’Toole, W Post, 1/2/72, Al; Sheldon, Soviet Space Programs, 1966—70, Senate Doc 92-51)
First complete details on Mars 2 and 3 instruments were telexed by Soviet scientists to NASA scientists at JPL over direct line installed for exchange of Mariner 9 and Mars 2 and 3 data. Message said Soviet Mars spacecraft each had two radiometers, four photometers, one magnetometer, one ion trap, one spectrometer, and device to measure cosmic radiation. Analysis of data from Mars probes had been delayed while Soviet scientists investigated interruption of TV transmission from capsule dropped on Mars by Mars 3 Dec. 2. Message did not state cause of interruption or whether transmission had resumed. JPL officials later said Soviet message had given location of Mars 2 spacecraft but Soviet scientists had asked that information not be publicized. (AP, Long Beach, Calif, Independent-Press Telegram, 12/22/71) *	Flight version of multiple docking adapter (mda) for Skylab was transported from Denver to St. Louis, Mo., aboard Super Guppy aircraft for mating with airlock module (am) being manufactured by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. After mating, all systems would be tested and mated modules would be placed in large altitude chamber where manned and unmanned simulated missions would be conducted, (msfc Release 71—241)
Special medallion to commemorate 1971 quadricentennial of Johannes Kepler was issued by American Museum-Hayden Planetarium. Kepler —born Dec. 16, 1571—had founded science of optics, was first to ascribe tides to moon, shaped much of comet theory, and came close to theory of gravity. His Somnium, highly technical “dream” of voyage to moon, had been first work of modern science fiction. (American Museum-Hayden Planetarium Release, 8/13/71) Section on History of Aircraft, Rocket, and Space Science and Technology was held Aug. 19. Paper “The Historiography of Rocket Technology and Space Exploration” submitted by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, was summarized at meeting by Dr. Lloyd S. Swensen, Jr., of Univ. of Houston. Paper covered features of evolution of rocket technology pertaining to beginning of space exploration and exploitation and discussed work of international pioneers like Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, Robert H. Goddard, and Hermann Oberth, who became interested in space exploration before deducing that liquid-propellant reactive thrust was the best technology. Dr. Swenson, coauthor of book This New Ocean: A History of Project Mercury, presented his own paper “On the Mixture of Science and Technology in the Apollo 8 Circumlunar and the Apollo 11 Lunar Landing Missions.” Paper examined effect of internal pressures on overall posture and achievements of Apollo project as illustrated by Apollo 10 and 11. Anatoly A. Blagonravov and V. N. Sokolsky of Soviet Academy of Sciences submitted paper on “Main Lines of Research in the Field of the History of Aeronautics and Astronautics.” (Program; NASA Hist Off)
MSFC announced selection of Itek Corp. to perform large space telescope definition study under $400 000, 12-mo contract. High-resolution optical telescope 3 m (120 in) in diameter would be placed in 630- to 810-km (391- to 503-mi) orbit aboard research and applications module (ram) by reusable shuttle vehicle or Titan III launch vehicle in late 1970s as national facility for operation by many astronomers. (msfc Release 71-219)
U.N. General Assembly adopted resolutions directing Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to formulate treaty by 1972 charting international course for space exploration, commending proposed liabilities convention for outer space travel [see Nov. 11], and recommending convention of working group on remote sensing of earth by satellites. (Fulton, C Trib, 11/30/71)
Leaders of aerospace industry, professional societies, and academic community met with President Nixon; Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Science Adviser to President; and James D. Hodgson, Secretary of Labor. Meeting discussed Technology Mobilization and Reemployment Program to alleviate unemployment in aerospace industry. {PD, 4/5/71, 592)
First combination of modern radar data from observations of inner planets with existing optical observations of sun and planets made between 1750 and 1970 had shown that Pluto’s mass could not be determined reliably from existing data, MIT scientists M. E. Ash, Irwin I. Shapiro, and W. B. Smith reported in Science. Total 300 000 measurements had been made during experiment which also included available observations of asteroids Eros and Icarus. Radar data were from MIT’s Millstone Hill and Haystack facilities; optical data were from original observatory reports transformed over six years into machine-readable form. Results had shown “insufficient basis for the widespread conclusion that Pluto’s average density is greater than, or even comparable to, the earth’s.” (Science, 11/5/71, 551-6)
Tenth anniversary of first U.S. manned space flight. Freedom 7—Mercury spacecraft launched May 5, 1961—had achieved objective of putting man into suborbital flight when Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., went to 185-km (115-mi) altitude during 15-min flight. Anniversary was observed at KSC with exhibition of Mercury spacecraft and Redstone launch vehicle in main auditorium, motion pictures on Freedom 7 and Apollo 14, and guided tours. Following commemorative ceremony, Shepard visited Freedom 7 Elementary School in Cocoa Beach, Fla., where he told students he had made his last venture into space and would step aside to give younger astronauts a chance, (msc Release 71-28; msc pao; W Star, 5/6/71)
NASA manned space flight officials proposed four-launch program to place astronauts in earth orbit to map U.S., study earth resources, and study pollution, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D.	Myers said in AP-reported interview that program was in preliminary stages and would require additional funding from Congress. MSC Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said project would keep U.S. in maimed space flight business during period when U.S.S.R. would probably be very active in the field. Project would fill four-year gap between Skylab and manned space shuttle tests. It would also directly benefit mankind, Kraft explained: “The two-man crews will fly at a higher inclination than we’ve ever flown before in earth orbit. Using photographic and other sensing equipment developed in the space program, they could accurately map the entire United States, including Alaska. The astronauts also could make earth resources and environmental measurements.” (AP, W Star,	A16)
arc would join California Statewide Air Pollution Research Center in smog research program to start in late June, NASA announced. Program would include 12 Cessna 401 aircraft flights over San Francisco Bay area yearly for three years, to trace photochemical production of pollutants and their dispersion in atmosphere. Aircraft would carry some 230 kg (500 lbs) of research equipment for tests at altitudes to 5200 m (17 000 ft). Data collected would be available to research collaborators and data users in Air Pollution Control Office of U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, California State Air Resources Board, Los Angeles Air Pollution Control District, Assn, of Bay Area Governments, and other NASA centers. (NASA Release 71—108)
President Nixon in message transmitting FY 1972 budget to Congress said: “Science and technology can make major contributions to the public by developing creative solutions to a wide range of national problems.... I am proposing in this budget a substantial expansion in outlays for federally supported research and development.” President recommended increased funding to “make greater use of our scientific and engineering capabilities and resources to cope with.. . pollution, crime, health, transportation, and other environmental and social problems; strengthen research essential to the advancement of our technology and economic productivity; and increase our investment in fundamental science which leads to the long-term progress of our society.” President recommended increase in nsf budget from $506 million in 1971 to $622 million in 1972. In 1972, defense spending would increase but, even with increase, would “drop from 36% of total spending in 1971 to 34% in 1972.” Human resources programs’ share would be 42% of total. Budget proposed “sharing Federal revenues with States and communities,” “national strategies to improve health care” and to ensure “an income floor for every family,” and efforts toward “full-employment in peacetime with relative price stability.” (PD, 2/1/71, 130-9)
Discovery of hydroxyl molecule in interstellar dust between stars of M—82 and NGG—253 galaxies 97 billion km (60 billion mi) from earth by use of big dish radio telescopes, was reported by Dr. Leonid N. Weliachew, visiting fellow at Cal Tech from Meudon Observatory in France. Discovery implied that chemical evolution was proceeding throughout universe. Hydroxyl was considered a chemical essential to evolution of life, (latns, W Post, 7/15/71, A3; B Sun, 7/19/71)
Newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 14 difficulties in docking CSM with LM [see Jan. 31-Feb. 9]. New York Times said that “as the world waited tensely for the outcome of the struggle to solve the problem, there was a deep sense of disappointment at the possibility that all the effort, training and planning that went into this mission have been imperiled.” (NYT, 2/1/71, 30) Washington Evening Star editorial called Apollo 14 “pressure mission.” It had “already qualified for several entries in the record book. It is the first Apollo mission to be crewed entirely by men who have never before flown in earth orbit and commanded by a veteran whose total previous time in space was 15 minutes. The mission is led by the oldest man to go into space, the first American to ride a rocket, the only astronaut to return to active duty after a medically enforced period of idleness. It is the first Apollo shot to be delayed because of weather. It is the first to run into a major problem on its first day out. It is a mission that, in the opinion of many in the top ranks of the space agency, will decide the future of manned space flight.” (W Star, 2/1/71) _	_
Moscow Trud published account of test flight by Soviet pilot Oleg Gudkov of new supersonic fighter aircraft to ascertain whether aircraft could be brought out of spin. Test had been successful. (fbis-Sov—71-149, 8/3/71, Ml)
Aerospace industry sales continued anticipated decline in 1971, to $23.3 billion from $24.9 billion—decrease of 6.3%. Commercial aerospace sales, primarily jet transports, increased 7.1% in 1971, from $4,578 in 1970 to $4,903 billion. Increase reflected increased deliveries of wide-bodied jet transports. Space sales continued decline, to $3,220 billion from $3,580 billion in 1970. Aerospace industry remained nation’s largest manufacturing employer during 1971, despite continuing drop in employment from 1 069 000 workers in December 1970 to estimated 931 000 in December 1971. (Aerospace, 12/72, 3-5)
NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from wsmr. One carried Univ. of Colorado and gsfc experiment to study airglow, and one carried Dudley Observatory and gsfc experiment to collect micrometeoroids. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
usaf X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Cecil A. Powell (usaf) in joint nasa-usaf research program, reached 21000-m (70 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.35 during 26th flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft from frc. Objectives were to determine lateral-directional derivative with rudder bias at 2° toe out, check out lateral acceleration feedback to control system, and check out automatic mach schedule for upper flaps, (nasa Proj Off)
Washington Post editorial commented on plans for new Air and Space Museum: “We are glad that skyrocketing costs have brought the proposed National Air and Space Museum down to earth. The trouble with the design architect Gyo Obata prepared several years ago was not only that it would now cost $70 million to build. It was also far too grandiose, bold and ambitious.” U.S. air and space accomplishments “have a very prominent place in the hearts of the American people . . . they should also have a prominent place in the nation’s capital. But that is not to say that we need or want a monumental aircraft hangar.” Museum Director, Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins, had described new museum as “national center for education about the science and technology of flight and its economic, social, cultural and political meaning.” New model, Post said, “shows a pleasing and interesting structure that is well behaved. ... If it lacks architectural excitement, that is not what we want on the Mall.” Post also published letter from Gilmore D. Clarke, former Chairman of Commission of Fine Arts, protesting construction of Air and Space Museum on Mall, “on a site of restricted size whereon the structure cannot be enlarged in the course of years as the science of aviation and outer space technology advances. Whatever is built will, within a decade or two, prove to be too small,” (W Post, 11/23/71, A18, A19)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by nasa from WSMR carried Dudley Observatory payload to 123.5-km (76.7-mi) altitude to measure particulate matter in upper atmosphere by photometer, microphones, plasma detector, and particle collection. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered as planned, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa announced it had begun joint program with USA Air Mobility Research and Development Laboratory to develop flight research vehicle to test various rotors in actual flight under controlled conditions with provision for extensive engineering measurements during maneuvers. LaRC had issued rfps for two parallel design studies requiring 10 mos to determine feasibility of attaining Government’s research goals and provide development plan for further phases of program. Joint NASA-Army team would base detailed specifications for vehicle preliminary-design competition on results of predesign studies. (NASA Release 71—152)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, testified on aerospace unemployment before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1972 authorization hearings: From number of studies of unemployment of scientists and engineers, estimated 30 000 to 40 000 were out of work at end of 1970. “The majority of these came from aerospace-related industries. Projections indicate that this number could more than double by June 1972, which means that as many as 30 percent of the Nation’s aerospace scientists and engineers will be unemployed. The effect of this national trend—in terms of an individual scientist or engineer being reemployed—is magnified by the concentration of this unemployment, geographically and by training and experience. . . . This not only causes great personal hardship but . . . represents the loss of a tremendous national resource.” NASA-sponsored survey by Battelle Memorial Institute of persons laid off by group of nasa contractors from June 1968 to September 1970 had made preliminary findings: only 31% had found permanent jobs, 32% had found temporary jobs, 32% were still unemployed, and 5% had left work-force. Average person was unemployed 31 weeks. Of those who had found permanent jobs, only 18% returned to aerospace. Of those permanently employed outside of aerospace, only 12% reported having positions highly related to aerospace skills and 50% reported new positions unrelated to aerospace. Unemployment rate of those over 50 was 48%. Of those who had found permanent work outside, 31% said they would not return to aerospace if given opportunity; 16% said they would. Preliminary results of survey indicated “we are losing much of the aerospace capability that is an indispensable ingredient of our long term economic strength and national security.” In closing, Dr. Low made point that there was “no either/or choice between technological advances and social advances. Without technology, we cannot maintain the capability to deal effectively with any national problem.” Dr. Low was questioned on his testimony that U.S.S.R. was spending more on R&D than U.S. was spending in total science and technology area. He answered that Soviet space program, with apparent Soviet policy of steadily increasing r&d investment, would soon match and then surpass U.S. program in size and accomplishment. “For this comparison, I am dealing with the combined civil and military space programs of both nations; to try to differentiate between civil and military activities of the U.S.S.R. would be speculative at best. The most difficult comparison to try to make between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. economies or programs is in terms of absolute costs: each national economy is geared and motivated to produce a different, nonparallel mix of goods and services.” (CR, 7/31/71, E8611—2) Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed future of Apollo program: “We can now move with confidence to the final phase. ... In these last missions, we will expand the capability of the system very dramatically. Design changes in the spacecraft and supporting equipment will allow the two astronauts in the lunar module to remain on the moon up to 67 hours, as compared with 34 hours on Apollo 14. The scientific payload landed on the moon will be doubled to above 1200 lbs [544 kg]. Changes in the command and service modules will permit up to 10 days total flight time and major increases in orbital scientific activities. During the Apollo 15 and 16 missions small subsatellites will be placed in lunar orbit and will continue to make scientific measurements long after the astronauts return to earth.” In Skylab program, “three separate three-man Skylab flight crews will be selected during the coming year. Scientist astronauts will be included. . . . They plan to perform about 50 experiments in various disciplines. Twenty of these are in the life sciences, to determine how human beings adjust and perform under the conditions of prolonged space flight, up to 2 months’ duration. “They will also operate the Skylab Earth Resources Experiment Package in the second space flight phase of NASA’s earth resources program. These observations will be in conjunction with [and] complementary to those [of] the automated earth resources test technology erts, to be launched in 1972.” FY 1972 request for space shuttle of $100 million would provide for broad spectrum of studies, including analysis of new alloys and promising external materials for thermal protection; test demonstrations of design concepts for structures; wind-tunnel tests to define aerodynamic heating, launch aerodynamics, etc.; design of long-leadtime hardware, subsystems, and test devices; initiation of scaled model for flight tests; dynamics testing; electronic-data-bus-system demonstration testing; and integration of upgraded fuel-cell electrical power subsystem with other components for proof-of-concept testing. (Transcript) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, testified on dod applications of space transportation system and dod-nasa teamwork on space shuttle: “Present dod satellite communications program consists of two major systems: The long distance point to point or strategic system and the local-area multiple-user or tactical system. . . . We are pursuing a new system called Defense Satellite Communications System, Phase II, which can provide many voice channels to selected limited areas of the earth. These present and proposed systems give us the flexibility for voice and teletype communications from our forces overseas and allow rapid transmission of photographic images from operational theaters to the United States.” In conjunction with NASA studies, usaf was analyzing defense applications of space shuttle to provide better insight into utility of concept for dod. usaf was providing NASA with data to help ensure that configuration was of maximum utility to dod. nasa and usaf had worked jointly on engine development. Air Force “has supported advanced development efforts on liquid rocket engines in the past, and more recently concluded a hydrogen/oxygen high performance engine demonstration program.” Engine, XLR-129, had “provided the basis for selection of the reusable high pressure rocket engine concept for the shuttle. It also provided design data for a 250 000-pound [1100-kilonewton] thrust engine which supports the current shuttle engine design concepts.” In operational testing area, “usaf and NASA recently conducted unpowered approach and landing demonstrations with F—Ills and B-52s. . . . These demonstrations investigated terminal area energy management for maneuvering reentry vehicles and have a relationship to the Space Shuttle operational concepts.” (Transcript)
Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb (left), developer of nasa’j supercritical wing, congratulated test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry after the successful first flight of the wtng on the TFSA jet aircraft. Program Manager John G. McTigue looked on. The new airfoil shape, undergoing tests at the Flight Research Center, was designed to reduce buffeting at high subsonic speeds and permit increased aircraft performance. dling qualities. Aircraft reached 3000-m (10 000-ft) altitude at 220 and 300 knots, (nasa Proj Off)
Louis H. Brennwald, former Vice President of Northrop Aircraft Corp. in charge of Puerto Rico operations, became Director of Administration for Ames Research Center, (arc Astrogram, 9/2/l\, 1; ARC pro)
Preliminary results of experiment in which two clocks were flown around the world to test Einstein theory of relativity had indicated “clock paradox” of theory was correct, Dr. J. C. Hafele, Washington Univ. in St. Louis scientist, told meeting of American Assn, of Physics Teachers in Rolla, Mo. Clocks, carried in two separate aircraft, had not kept same time as master clock at Naval Observatory in Washington, D.C. Einstein theory said that as body approached speed of light, variables in time, size, and weight changed. (W Star, 10/24/71, A3)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.)—who had been Vice President under President Johnson-—addressed Space Seminar of Hugh O’Brian Youth Foundation at KSC: “One of the reasons that I have been active in the Space Program is because I believe that this program did something for all of the things I thought were important in life.” Space program was “pioneer in beginning to make the discovery in environmental control.” It had proved men could live in pure environment and “that there’s a relationship between the living space that we have and the number of people that can be there . . . [and] that you can have clean water and clean air. And it’s proven to us that you can work together.” Space program had helped produce computer and had developed satellite monitoring system. Possibly “one of the greatest efforts for world peace has come right out of the science and technology of space research.” Sen. Humphrey recalled his role as negotiator of Nuclear Test Ban Treaty: “I went to Moscow when it was signed. I have the pen that President Kennedy used to sign the treaty ... he said, ‘I give you this pen, Hubert, because it’s your treaty.’ ” He had been in Moscow when Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong made first moon walk. “I was in the offices of Pravda and Izvestia . . . and a dispatch came through from Reuters . . . noting that the launch had been successful, and I had said to the editors of Pravda, ‘Why don’t you run this as a headline?’ There was nothing in their paper that indicated that our launch had taken place. And when I went to Izvestia the same afternoon I said ‘Look, the launch has taken place and I see nothing in your headlines in your papers.’ I am happy to tell you that they were somewhat embarrassed and the next morning, at the National Hotel, under my door was a copy of Pravda and Izvestia with front page stories saying that there had been a successful launch.” When Neil Armstrong “touched down that Sunday night . . . the only information that I was able to get was out of the Voice of America through the United States Embassy because the Russians had blacked out.” (CR, 6/18/71, H5484-7)
Tenth anniversary of the first manned space flight, made by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin in the Vostok 1. In the April 14, 1961, photo Gagarin and US.SJl. Premier Nikita Khrushchev, standing atop the Lenin-SlaUn Mausoleum, responded to a welcome by crowds during a ceremony in Moscotc’s Red Square, (Photo by courtesy of the National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution.) In letter to Pravda, group of Soviet cosmonauts said “it is our opinion that businesslike cooperation of space researchers of different countries, including the U.S.S.R. and the United States, should develop and grow stronger in the interests of peace and friendship among the peoples of our planet.” Soviet Academician Boris N. Petrov said in article reprinted in a number of Soviet journals that “main trend of the next development of cosmonautics and space exploration . . . will probably be as follows: Further investigation of near-Earth space, studying the Earth from space for purposes of space meteorology, geology, agriculture, oceanology, and marine and air navigation. The task of constructing space exploration facilities and the usage of outer space for peaceful purposes is the favorable basis for fruitful international cooperation wherein both big and small countries can effectively participate.” U.S.S.R. had “always directed its efforts into an arena of peace and international cooperation. . . . The time is not behind the mountains when the remarkable idea about construction of long-duration, piloted orbital stations will be implemented.” Soviet Military Review editorial said Soviet space program had demonstrated “the benefiting the whole of mankind and the contribution to worldwide progress. The Gagarin flight, as all subsequent achievements of Soviet space exploration, demonstrated the organizing and guiding role of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and the inexhaustible potentialities of the socialist social system and of the Soviet economy, science, and technology. Consistency and purposefulness are a feature of the Soviet program of exploration in outer space, on the Moon and on the planets of the solar system.” (Yuenger, C Trib, 4/13/71; Shabad, NYT, 4/13/71; upi, W News, 4/12/71; upi, LA Her-Exam, 4/12/71; SBD, 4/12/71, 263)
DOD signed $25-million contract with Lockheed Space & Missiles Corp. for definition and development phase of new-generation submarine-launched ULMS (underwater long-range missile system) with maximum 10 000-km (6200-mi) range. (Reuters, B Sun, 12/1/71, A12; W Post, 12/1/71, A14)	,	-.. November 30—December 2: Apollo 15 investigator’s symposium was conducted at Lunar Science Institute in Houston, Tex. Apollo Photo Science Team members Robert D. Mercer of Dudley Observatory and Lawrence Dunkelman of GSFC described photos of sun and interplanetary dust taken by Apollo 15 cm pilot Astronaut Alfred M. Worden. Photos showed features of solar corona and zodiacal light never before observed. Preliminary examination of photos showed “light levels less than can be seen by the best telescopes on earth.” Analysis of photos would permit direct, comparative measurements of solar phenomena’s relative brightness to obtain information on mechanisms by which energy left sun and on distribution of particles outward from sun. (msc Release 71—97) November 30-December 3: Joint meeting of nasa and European Space Conference (esc) was held in Washington, D.C., to identify candidate areas for possible European participation in post-Apollo space programs. Meeting had been proposed in Sept. 1 letter from Under Secretary of State U. Alexis Johnson to Belgian Science Minister Theo Lefevre, esc Chairman, (nasa Release 71—235, 71—241; nasa pao) During November: arc research into heat shields to protect aircraft passengers in crash fires was described in Astronautics & Aeronautics by ARC and Avco Corp. scientists. Concept of surrounding passenger compartment by fire-retardant shell to protect occupants long enough for fire to burn out or be extinguished had been made possible by Apollo program research into fire-retardant materials polyisocyanurate foam and intumescent paint. “Exposed to heat . . . paint expands to many times its original thickness and insulates the surface underneath it. The thermal-protection mechanisms of these materials operate on the same ablative principles . . . that protect our astronauts during re-entry of the Apollo spacecraft.” (Neel, Parker, et al., A&A, 11/71, 18-26)
NASA released Goals and Means in the Conquest of Space by R. G. Perel’man (nasa Technical Translation F-595 dated May 1970). Translation of Tseli i Puti Pokoreniva Kosmosa, “Nauka” Press, Moscow, 1967, concluded: “The time will come when space liners will be sent across interstellar routes, but the achievements of Soviet science and technology will never be forgotten, since they first made it possible for man to set foot in the universe, and since the labor of every Soviet citizen is involved.” (Text)
Newspapers commented on Apollo 15 mission, while astronauts were exploring lunar surface. Christian Science Monitor editorial praised Apollo 15: “Once again, a superbly synchronized lunar mission has proven man’s capacity to focus the knowledge of hundreds of specialists to achieve a singular goal. Apollo 15 is one more grand historic achievement. It testifies to the benefit that science and technology, properly harnessed, can reap for mankind.” (CSM, 8/2/71) French novelist and TV critic Jean Dutourd commented on Apollo 15 TV coverage in France Soir. It had made him walk away from TV set. “It must be confessed,” he wrote, “that these experiments are an unspeakable bore.” (Reuters, W Post, 8/3/71, All) New York Times editorial defended manned space flight: “After Apollos 16 and 17 next year, there are no known plans of any nation to send any more men to the moon. A vast and complex technology developed at the cost of many billions of dollars over the last decade is being abandoned even as its vast potentialities are being demonstrated. If American resources do not permit manned lunar exploration beyond the end of next year, the United Nations should take over the task, appealing to all governments for funds and soliciting contributions as well from private individuals and private business enterprises. The dusty planet that is the moon could become the planet of human cooperation, a new frontier of hope for all mankind.” {NYT, 8/2/71, 22)
Soviet progress in science and technology was discussed in Sovetskaya Rossiya article by M. D. Millionschikov, Vice President of Soviet Academy of Sciences: “In recent years there has been an immense improvement in the development of astronomy and astrophysics. Our science has made discoveries of fundamental significance and has shifted considerably the limits of phenomena in the universe known to man. Research into the nature of powerful sources of radiowaves discovered some years ago has led to the conclusion that the objects noted are located almost on the edge of the observable area of the universe at a distance of 5 billion light years. The power of radiation exceeds all currently known scales. In order to explain the colossal energy they radiate from the standpoint of the most powerful known mechanism for emitting energy—thermonuclear synthesis—it is necessary to suppose that its source must be simultaneous thermonuclear explosion of a mass equivalent to a hundred million stars the size of the sun.” (fbis-Sov-71-134, 6/30/71, LI)
Perspective in science funding was drawn by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator, in Science editorial: “The funding proposed for 1972 for basic science ($2.4 billion), or even that for the entire space exploration program ($3 billion), is a very small fraction of the funding that is proposed for efforts to ameliorate societal problems today ($90 billion). The real need is not so much for additional dollar attention as it is for attention of a different kind. Ideas, new approaches, and new insights into the wise management and utilization of our human and natural resources are what is required. Many experimentally before application to human patients recovering from open heart surgery, (nasa Release 71-69)
Spencer M. Beresford, NASA General Counsel, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during hearing on H.R. 4545, Chapel of the Astronauts bill. NASA had agreed to consider request by Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc., to purchase up to seven acres (three hectares) of land adjacent to ICSC Visitor Information Center for construction of “nondenominational, nonsectarian, nonprofit public facility for worship or meditation and a memorial to the astronauts.” NASA was then “actively engaged in the defense of a law suit arising from the reading of portions of the Bible by the crew of Apollo 8 while in space.” Wishing to avoid a further suit, NASA had sought assurance that Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc., purpose was “truly nondenominational.” Corporation had complied with NASA’s request for assurance. “It is my professional opinion that ... if present plans for the Chapel are followed and it is operated with sound discretion, the Chapel Corporation, NASA and the United States Government are as secure from successful legal attack as is possible.” (Proceedings)
NASA, faa, and usaf began joint runway research program at Wallops Station to evaluate methods for measuring runway slipperiness at military and civil airports and improve techniques for estimating aircraft performance on runways that become slippery when wet. Tests would be followed by similar measurements at Houston Intercontinental Airport, Lubbock (Tex.) Regional Airport, Edwards afb (Calif.), Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, and John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York, faa Boeing 727 aircraft instrumented by LaRC would be used for flight portions of program, usaf C-141 aircraft would carry personnel and equipment. Runway surface measurements would be made by mu-meter—friction measuring device provided by usaf—and diagonally braked automobile developed by NASA at LaRC. (nasa Release 71—190)
New York State Court of Appeals approved sale of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory to edp Technology, Inc., affirming lower court ruling that sale of research facility to private firm was legal. (W Post, 5/13/71, Kll)
William M. Allen, Boeing Co. Chairman, received 1970 Robert J. Collier Trophy during Washington, D.C., ceremonies. Citation was to “the Boeing Company as leader of the Industry-Airline-Government team which successfully introduced the 747 into commercial service with particular recognition to Pratt & Whitney division of the United Aircraft Corporation and to Pan American World Airways.” (naa Release)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate James H. Wakelin, Jr., as Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology succeeding Myron Tribus, who had resigned in November. Nomination was submitted to Senate Jan. 25. (PD, 1/25/71, 84; 2/1/71, 141)
French Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes) announced U.S.S.R. would cooperate in launching two space probes from France’s Kourou Space Center. French Veronique rocket would launch Soviet radiofrequency spectrometer in mid-December in first use of Kourou facilities by U.S.S.R. France would also track Soviet MR—12 rocket carrying French mass spectrometer after launch in December from Soviet ship near Kourou. CNES also announced French Centaure rocket would launch Indian equipment Oct. 8 to test recovery system for space probe instruments. (Reuters, NYT, 8/22/71, 35)
Delegation of congressmen watched Apollo splashdown from onboard recovery ship for first time. Congressmen—prevented from attending previous manned space splashdowns by limited space on ships and expense of flying them from Washington, D.C., to mid-Pacific—were flown to U.S.S. Okinawa from Hawaii by helicopter. Congress was not in session. Watching Apollo 15 splashdown were Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight; Rep. Edward P. Bolane (D-Mass.); Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.); Rep. Richard T. Hanna (D-Calif.); Rep. Joseph M. McDade (R-Pa.); and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio). (W Post, 8/8/71, A10)
European interest in U.S. space program had “with notable exceptions” dwindled since Apollo IPs first lunar landing and “trouble-fraught” Apollo 13, New York Times said. Despite extensive press and TV coverage, Europeans had taken Apollo 14 for granted. “In some countries local events overshadowed man’s third visit to the moon,” but in West Germany opinion poll had shown that 64% favored continuation of manned space flights. Frankfurter Rundschau editorial had said, “What Shepard and Mitchell carried off couldn’t have been done by a Lunokhod.” Polish newspapers had given equal prominence to Lunokhod 1 and Apollo 14, but stressed technological feat of unmanned vehicle. Soviet press had highlighted Apollo 14 difficulties to suggest superiority of unmanned vehicles. Soviet man in street “seemed bored with space exploration, although some Russians went out of their way to ask Westerners about the United States moonshot.” Komsomolskaya Pravda, Soviet youth daily, had praised astronauts’ “indisputable bravery.” In U.K. Apollo 14 had been overshadowed by unrest in Northern Ireland and collapse of Rolls-Royce Ltd. Live TV coverage of Apollo 14 had been less than of previous Apollo missions. Earthquake and civil disorders had crowded Apollo 14 from front page of Italian newspapers, and Feb. 7 power blackout in New York had received as much space as launch. Italian radio and TV coverage had been thorough but audiences seemed smaller than for previous Apollos. Pope Paul VI had praised Apollo 14 as advance for all mankind. In France interest had waned as mission progressed. Newspapers and TV offered comprehensive coverage but “excitement of two years ago” had vanished. Spaniards, too, were losing interest in space exploration and public interest had declined in Hungary and Yugoslavia. Communist student, leader in Zagreb had said, “If the Americans and Russians would cooperate in space instead of carrying their rivalries to the moon, maybe there could be some scientific progress on earth and maybe the smaller nations could be helped to contribute their knowledge instead of being shut out of science by the expense.” (NYT, 2/10/71, 24)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, described planned Skylab mission medical research in address before Utah State Medical Assn.: . . we will be looking far beyond the requirements of the immediate mission; we will be seeking answers to questions with a strong impact on the future of manned space flight during the remainder of this century.” Major questions as yet unanswered after Gemini and Apollo flights were the causes of moderate loss of weight by astronauts early in flight, moderate cardiovascular deconditioning, moderate loss of exercise capacity, and minimal loss of bone density. Medical results from Gemini and Apollo missions had shown that “1. There were no major surprises. 2. As of now, we see no reason why man cannot live and work effectively in space for a long period of time. 3. Man seems to adapt to space flight more easily than he does to Earth’s environment after returning from space.” (Text)
London Sunday Express reported U.S.S.R. was building launching sites for intercontinental hydrogen bomb missiles at unprecedented speed in rocky areas. Paper said more them 60 silos had been photographed by spy satellites in recent months. U.K. Defence Ministry had said article was speculative, Reuters reported. (NYT, 1/11/71, 48) During October: nas published Plans for U.S. Participation in the GARP Atlantic Tropical Experiment and Plan for U.S. Data Management in the Global Atmospheric Research Program. Reports of panels of ncr’s U.S. Committee for the Global Atmospheric Research Program called for increased preparation for major tropical observation experiment in Atlantic in summer 1974. Ad Hoc Tropical Task Group said experiment would require geostationary satellite “having both day and night imaging capability,” closely spaced array of ships with calibrated radar, upper-air wind-measuring systems, and from 10 to 12 aircraft. Garp Data Management Panel recommended international data management for project, with fulltime professionals appointed by U.S. and foreign atmospheric agencies. (Texts)
Retirement of Jerome F. Lederer as NASA Director of Safety Jan. 14, 1972,	was announced by NASA. Internationally recognized authority on air and space flight safety had joined NASA as Director of Flight Safety for omsf June 1, 1967, after having been Director of Flight Safety Foundation since 1947. Lederer, who had received NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1969, would return to Flight Safety Foundation as part time consultant, (nasa Release 71—224)
Office of Management and Budget had released $98.1 million in FY 1972 funds voted for science education and institutional support, while impounding $30 million, Aviation Week & Space Technology noted. “The 25% holdback of funding at the basic science level is considered by some in Congress as highly destructive because it will tend to reduce the number of future scientists.” It was viewed as “direct contradiction of the pro-science policy they have been led to anticipate.” (Av Wk, 9/20/71, 15) Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott told opening session that analysis of 2.7-m (9-ft) Apollo 15 lunar core sample had disclosed 58 distinct layers that represented 58 “chapters in the history of the sun.” Number of “pages in each chapter” awaited further analysis. Later Scott said in interview that Dr. Liaquat Husain, State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook scientist who had analyzed Apollo 15 “Genesis” rock, was concerned that alteration of rock by shock when it impacted with site at which it was found might have partly invalidated determination of rock’s age at 4.15 billion yrs. arc engineer John C. Arvesen described development of method for monitoring biological productivity from air by detecting signs of chlorophyll. Monitoring device, when tested over California lakes and offshore areas, had produced results that conformed closely to readings obtained by arduous direct sampling of waters. Ultimate goal was to develop satellite-borne system that could monitor global productivity of oceans. Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director of Life Sciences, said newly completed studies of medical data from Apollo 14 had shown radiation exposure to crew that was more than twice that of previous Apollo missions. Primary reason for higher exposure was passage of Apollo 14 spacecraft close to Van Allen radiation belts. Dr. Berry said radiation dose was “of no hazard or biological significance.” Soviet scientists said later that cosmonauts carried special antiradiation drug on all space flights but had never used it. Dr. Berry said Apollo 14 Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa had lost 27% of fluid within his body cells during mission. His total body water had dropped 18% and red cells in his bloodstream had decreased 9%. Losses had been far less for other Apollo 14 astronauts and no such dramatic losses had been recorded for Apollo 15 astronauts, indicating that individual responses to space varied widely. Heavy loss of “exchangeable” potassium had been noted in astronauts during extended missions. On Apollo 15, loss had been as great as 15%. Potassium was deemed exchangeable because it could move readily in and out of tissues and thus could be purged from body. E. G. Johnson, Equipment and Facilities Branch Chief in NASA Space Nuclear Systems Office, described program for development of teleoperator systems in which remote-controlled devices could perform tasks in situations dangerous to health or safety of humans. In space, teleoperator could enter high radiation environment of space station’s nuclear power plant to change fuel elements or make repairs. Johnson said optical or radioastronomy observatory on moon’s far side could be run for 40 to 50 yrs using computer-controlled teleoperators whose control could be assumed from earth when necessary. Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium was held during iaf congress. Sessions discussed earth resources technology and scientific research objectives and needs of developing countries in regard to earth resources research. iaa Fifth History of Astronautics Symposium on Sept. 23 was chaired by JPL Historian R. Cargill Hall. Soviet Cochairman V. N. Sokolsky did not attend for unexplained reason. Papers read included “From the History of the Development of Powder Rockets in the U.S.S.R.,” by Soviet Academician Yu A. Pobedonostsev, which traced work on Soviet solid propellants leading to Katyusha rocket in current use; “Comparative Analysis of Projects for Jet Planes Constructed up to the 1940’s,” by V. N, Sokolsky; “Evolution of Spacecraft Attitude Control Concepts before 1951,” by R. E. Robertson of Univ. of California at San Diego; and “Memoir: The Evolution of Aerospace Guidance Technology at M.I.T., 1935-1951,” by Dr. C. Stark Draper. Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium, held during Congress, discussed earth resources technology and scientific research objectives and needs of developing countries. Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award was presented to Professor Luigi Broglio of Univ. of Rome for achievements in experiments with floating platforms to launch satellites into equatorial orbits. Only cosmonaut attending IAF Congress was Boris B. Yegorov, only physician to travel in space (launched in Voskhod 1 Oct. 12, 1964). (iaa Annual Rpt 1971; Sullivan, NYT, 9/21/71, 9/23/71, 9/27/71; Proceedings)
Dept, of Labor released results to date of Technology Mobilization and Reemployment Program to relocate unemployed aerospace and defense industry personnel. While 10 284 professionals had registered with state unemployment agencies since program’s May 3 inception, about 300 jobs had come into registry. These did not include aerospace and defense jobs already listed but not yet tallied. Labor Dept, spokesman said program hoped to provide jobs for about 30 000 out of about 100 000 scientists, engineers, and technicians it would serve over next two years. (Shabecoff, NYT, 5/25/71) May 24r-26: Eleventh European Space Symposium was held in West Berlin, Germany, to discuss applications satellites. In welcoming address Dr. Manfred Bodenschatz of German Society for Aviation and Astronautics (dglr) said: “We have passed through the infancy period of space flight and realized the untold possibilities of utilization. . . . It is only to be regretted that the general public has not apparently fully realized this and one does . . . begin to note a certain indifference to space flight accompanied by the feeling that the major space powers will be doing it for us anyway.” Purpose of symposium was “to demonstrate clearly that a whole range of . . . fields of application already exists and must be enlarged upon, and that European space technology, science, and industry can and must render its own important contribution here if it does not want to be left hopelessly behind.” (SF, 10/71, 393-4)
Apollo 15 Awards Ceremony was held at msc. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal for “accomplishments in the Apollo 15 mission” to Dr. Larry A. Haskin, Univ. of Wisconsin; Dr. Robert 0. Pepin, Univ. of Minnesota; Dr. Leon T. Silver, Cal Tech; Dr. M. Gene Simmons, mit; and Dr. Gordon A. Swann, U.S. Geological Survey. NASA Exceptional Service Medal was presented to 22 msc employees and NASA Public Service Award to representatives of contractors Boeing Co., Grumman Aerospace Corp., Delco Electronic Div. of General Motors Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp. NASA Group Achievement Award was presented to msc Extravehicular Mobility Unit Team, msc Lunar Orbit Experiments Team, msfc and msc Lunar Roving Vehicle Team, msc Lunar Traverse Planning Team, noaa Space Flight Meteorology Group at ksc, and msc Television and Lunar Communications Relay Unit Team. Dr. Fletcher read telegram from President Nixon congratulating Apollo 15 Team which, President said, deserved “highest praise for their vital contributions to man’s scientific knowledge and our nation’s prominence in space.” (nasa Ann, 10/1/71; msc Roundup, 10/8/71, 1)
nas released Priorities for Space Research, 1971—1980. Report of study group of nas-nrc Space Science Board recommended priorities for nasa ossa programs at three funding levels for space missions in 1970s. Study was made at NASA’s request. Highest priorities were recommended for probes of Venus and Jupiter beginning in 1975; completion of three remaining Apollo manned lunar missions and unmanned landers and rovers for lunar and planetary studies; series of heao satellites for x-ray, gamma-ray, and cosmic-ray exploration; Small Astronomy Satellites (sas) ; increased astronomy rockets, balloons, and aircraft; development of mirror for Large Space Telescope (lst) ; continued study of earth-orbiting gyroscope and esro sunorbiting satellite for studies of gravitational physics in mid-1970’s; pair of satellites to study interaction between earth’s magnetosphere and solar wind and doubling of funds for solar-terrestrial physics; three satellite programs and increased data analysis for meteorology and earth resources surveys; and ground-based research to support Viking softlander and future exobiology missions. Report recommended next larger level of NASA funding provide for 1.5-m (60-in) space telescope, oso, and additional Atmospheric Explorers and Earth Resources Satellites. Grand Tour of planets between 1975 and 1980 was recommended only if nasa’s budget was increased still further. (nashvrc-nae News, 3/9/71)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of gsfc Institute for Space Studies, was quoted as saying in London that people often forgot intelligence factor in debate over manned versus unmanned space missions. Dr. Jastrow had pointed out that by time unmanned space exploration technology reached level of achievement already exhibited in manned exploration, lunar exploration—or even Martian exploration—might have advanced to stage of extended expeditions or space station. Then human performance would again have jumped ahead of machines. (Cowen, CSM, 2/11/71)
Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory, launched by NASA Sept. 29, had completed more than 850 orbits of the earth and was officially adjudged a success. Primary objective, to obtain high-resolution data from solar corona in particular spectral bands in EUV and in visible regions during one solar rotation, had been achieved. Fulfillment of secondary objective, of investigating intensity and spectrum of solar and cosmic x-rays from nonpointed instruments beyond one solar rotation, continued. All spacecraft systems, including star-tracker— gyro night-pointing feature new to OSO—had operated satisfactorily. Tape recorder No. 1, inoperative when first interrogated on seventh orbit, had not recovered despite several attempts to operate unit. Tape recorder No. 2 had performed required data storage and readout functions satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Interpretation of Gum Nebula as fossil of super nova, or exploded star, was reported in Astrophysical Journal by gsfc astronomers Dr. John C. Brandt, Theodore P. Stecher, and Dr. Stephen P. Maran and Kitt Peak National Observatory astronomer David L. Crawford. Gum Nebula, largest known object within Milky Way Galaxy, extended 60° across southern sky. Light took some 3000 yrs to cross it at speed of 299 000 km (186 000 mi) per sec. Previous theory had been that nebula glowed visibly because it contained “hot” stars that ionized surrounding hydrogen gas cloud. New interpretation, based on more accurate information on nebula’s distance from earth, indicated Gum Nebula was produced with pulsar during supernova explosion some 11 000 yrs ago when burst of radiation ionized surrounding hydrogen. (Astro-physical Journal, 2/1/71, L99-104)
usaf YF-12 aircraft, one of two in joint nasa-usaf aeronautical research program to advance technology of supersonic military and civil aircraft, crashed on routine flight from Edwards AFB, Calif. Both pilots parachuted to safety. Coincidentally, nasa announced addition of another usaf YF—12 to program. New aircraft was specially instrumented for inflight propulsion studies of engine internal flow dynamics, propulsion and airframe interreactions, air inlet dynamics, atmospheric turbulence and temperature variations, rapid airflow changes, and factors affecting inflight stopping and restarting of engines, (afsc pio; frc Release 16-71; Aero Daily, 6/28/71, 316)
Clare F. Farley, Executive Officer in Office of NASA Administrator since 1968, became Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization. Farley was succeeded as Executive Officer by Henry E. Clements, formerly of usaf Hq. Directorate of Space Research and Development. (nasa Ann, 7/12/71)
Three men would spend up to 56 days in MSC altitude chamber in early 1972 to obtain medical data and evaluate medical experiment equipment for Skylab program, NASA announced. Test would closely simulate Skylab conditions so that differences observed during actual flight might be attributed to causes such as weightlessness which could not be simulated in chamber tests. Test would evaluate 16 medical experiments and selected items of experiment equipment and aid in training ground-based medical operations team for their participation during actual space flight. Chamber was 6 m (20 ft) in diameter and was being modified to resemble Skylab Workshop crew quarters. Atmosphere would be 70% oxygen and 30% nitrogen at 34.5 kilonew-tons per sq m (5 psi) pressure with 45% to 60% humidity, (nasa Release 71-86)
AP quoted NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly as saying NASA was not releasing some information on Soviet space program received through official channels. Clampdown was being made at U.S.S.R’s request and through “bilateral agreement.” AP said Donnelly had forbidden NASA engineers who had returned from NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meeting on compatible docking system Nov. 29—Dec. 7 in Moscow to talk to press. Text of message telexed by Soviet scientists to nasa at JPL during exchange of Mars 2 and 3 and Mariner 9 information would be withheld at Soviet request. Soviet scientists had sent three such messages. (NYT, 12/16/71, 27)
Preliminary results of Apollo 15 scientific experiments were reported by principal experimenters at MSC press briefing. Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Gary V. Latham reported that three-station seismometer network completed on moon by Apollo 15 had detected 39 events, including “most significant event we’ve recorded on the moon.” Event was moonquake 800 km (500 mi) beneath surface—greater depth than for any quake recorded on earth—about 644 km (400 mi) west of crater Tycho. Apollo 15 seismic data also had revealed that swarms of quakes occurred on moon as they did on earth. Most intense swarm recorded “contained 30 events over a period of just 2 and a half days ... at very regular intervals, at about 2 hour spacing, and culminated in the largest moonquake yet recorded.” Dr. Latham, Apollo program’s chief seismic investigator, said data from missions to date had proved “that we can place long life geophysical observatories on the moon and they can exist years, which means that we can expect to maintain a network of stations with larger spacing between missions.” Two heat probes drilled almost two meters (almost six feet) into surface had shown that moon was hot, with heat concentrated deep in interior or in pockets of radioactive mineral 160 km (100 mi) below surface. Temperature of moon increased 0.56 K (1°F) each foot deeper into moon, indicating heat flow from interior was one fifth earth’s heat flow. Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Marcus E. Langseth said this evidence showed that abundance of radioactive minerals inside moon was at least comparable to abundance inside earth. It also suggested moon and earth were formed at same time from same elements. Cal Tech scientist Dr. Leon T. Silver and U.S. Geological Survey scientist Dr. Gordon A. Swann said Apollo 15 had discovered green rocks on moon composed of magnificently colored spheres of green glass. Dr. Paul W. Cast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said 75 kg (165 lbs) of Apollo 15 lunar rocks had been logged to date and would be distributed to investigators. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 9/2/71, Al)
Japan would launch scientific observation satellite from Uchinoura Space Center Sept. 20, Space Business Daily reported. Satellite design and planned orbit would be similar to that of Japan’s Tansei, launched Feb. 16. (SBD, 7/22/71, 96)
usn P—3C Orion turboprop antisubmarine aircraft, piloted by Cdr. Donald H. Lilienthal (usn), broke four “time-to-climb” records by climbing from brake release to 3000 m (9843 ft) in 2 min 59 sec, to 6000 m (19 685 ft) in 5 min 48 sec; to 9000 m (29 528 ft) in 10 min 31 sec, and to 12 000 m (39 370 ft) in 19 min 53 sec. Aircraft also posted new maximum altitude record for its class of 14 050 m (46100 ft). (AF Mag, 7/71, 15)
msfc announced it was checking out extreme uv coronal spectroheliograph, first flight instrument to be delivered for atm solar observatory. Instrument was one of two designed by Ball Brothers Research Corp. from nrl concepts. Second nrl flight instrument—extreme uv spectrograph—would be shipped to msfc in March 1971. (msfc Release 71-7)
Biostack, West German experiment to study biological effects of cosmic radiation during space flight, would be carried in Apollo 16 CM, NASA announced. Experiment, by Univ. of Frankfurt, would stack four layers of biological systems—spores, seeds of European watercress, bean embryos, and encysted eggs of brine shrimp—between different physical detectors of heavy particle tracks (nuclear emulsions and plastics). Measurements of effect of particles on biologic material could be compared with effect of same particles on detecting layers to provide data on strength and other characteristics of particles. Combined action of heavy cosmic ions and space environment would he evaluated by comparing results with those from balloon-borne Biostacks and with ground-based irradiation experiments. Research on biological effects of heavy nuclei was significant because of possible relationship to biological effects of space flight on man. Experiment was sponsored by German Ministry for Education and Science, (nasa Release 71-230)
U.S. manned space flight program would continue on schedule despite Soyuz 11 tragedy, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, told press in Houston. Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, said cosmonauts could have been killed by a toxic gas that accidently escaped, either by a chemical reaction or by a substance being heated inadvertently. He said odds were 1000 to 1 against one cosmonaut dying from effects of 24 days of weightlessness and it was almost impossible for all three to die simultaneously from weightlessness. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told press cosmonauts’ deaths might have been caused by failure of spacecraft’s oxygen-supply system or by physical rupture of spacecraft. Deaths, he said, were “a terrible tragedy. They were pioneers in their achievements in space—in establishing the first manned space station. Our hearts go out to their families and to their colleagues. The cause of their death is not yet known to us. But I would speculate that the fault was with the spacecraft and not with the men. In all of our experience man has readily adapted to new conditions, while machines have sometimes failed.” Dr. Low said he did not expect changes in nasa’s Skylab program because of cosmonauts’ deaths: “All of our experience in 24 manned flights suggests we can and should move ahead.” (upx, W Star, 7/1/71, A3; NASA Activities, 7/15/71, 107)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried gsfc payload to 115.9-km (72-mi) altitude to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, with all 19 grenades exploded and recorded as planned. Launch was part of series of similar experiments at three sites [see Jan. 7]. (nasa Rpt SRl) arc team of scientists headed by Dr. Charles P. Sonett announced that first measurements of moon’s interior indicated moon had basaltlike mantle 338 km (210 mi) deep surrounding “cool core of primordial olivine-like rock.” Measurements suggested moon’s outer layer was melted during first billion years of its 4.5-billion-yr history. Measurements had been made with arc magnetometer placed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts and also made by Explorer 35 moon-orbiting satellite launched July 19, 1967. (arc Release 71—2) Cornell Univ. astrophysicist Dr. Thomas Gold said stratifications found in Apollo 12 lunar surface samples were caused by earth in same process that made near side of moon different from far side. Moon passed behind earth with face turned earthward for four days during regular monthly cycle and was bombarded by high-energy electrons in earth’s magnetic field. Dr. Gold said he and coworkers had reproduced lunar surface markings inside vacuum chamber by bombarding finely ground earth material and small amounts of lunar soil with high-energy electrons up to 800 ev. Dr. Gold’s theory of “electrostatic motion” was disputed at meeting by Univ. of California physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey. (Lannan, W Star, 1/12/71, Al) NASA announced plan to continue lunar exploration with unmanned robots after last Apollo manned lunar landing in 1972. Plan would cost minimum $1 billion. Robot vehicles would travel 965 km (600 mi) across lunar surface and return to earth with samples or would rendezvous with other robot spacecraft that could return samples to earth. NASA spokesman said, “We sincerely hope that collaboration with the Russians takes place in space. A common program to explore the moon with instrumented spacecraft remotely controlled from earth might be the best way to help that collaboration take place.” (O’Toole, W Post, 1/14/71, Al)	_	_ Dr. Gerald R. Taylor, msc scientist, described laboratory experiment in which three highly resistant strains of bacteria were killed within 10 hrs of contact with one core sample from a number of centimeters below surface of moon’s Sea of Tranquility. Micro-organisms in protein soup had been exposed to lunar soil. Dr. Narenda Bhandari of Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in Bombay, India, reported that analysis of cosmic ray tracks on moon had provided “conclusive proof” of existence in lunar soil of fossils from chemical elements far heavier than any previously discovered in nature or in laboratory. If verified, discovery would greatly extend periodic table of elements. (Wilford, NYT, 1/14/71, 9) Dr. P. Buford Price of Univ. of California at Berkeley, said during interview that Apollo 12 lunar samples might contain first real evidence of “magnetic monopoles,” basic force units that were to magnetism what electrons were to electricity. If their existence could be confirmed, it would mean rewriting books on magnetism and electrodynamics. Dr. Price’s group of scientists appeared to have found two fossil tracks of nuclear type of particles which, theoretically, could have been made by monopoles in two lunar cysts. (Lannan, W Star, 1/14/71, A3) Dr. Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Soviet academician and Director of Vernadsky Institute for Analytical Chemistry in Moscow, told conference U.S.S.R. would continue to explore moon with unmanned spacecraft and would attempt bolder missions in future. He believed U.S.S.R. would exchange lunar samples with U.S. beginning with samples of Sea of Fertility returned by Soviet Luna 16. He said main task for Lunokhod 1, Soviet moonwalker still on moon, was to determine how eight-wheeled vehicle could best move about moon and how it could best be used in future. “We discovered that the moonwalker can move in very large angles and can go down into craters at angles of 20 degrees. The mechanical qualities of this car are very good.” Dr. Vinogradov said Lunokhod 1 carried instrument to analyze soil, but device had not done so thus far. He described Luna l6 samples as bearing no evidence of water or life on moon. Drill used to dig samples had been stopped at 330 mm (13 in) below lunar surface because it hit rock. “We were afraid to send it any deeper.” Dr. Vinogradov described Sea of Fertility as “blackish powder” sprinkled with “cosmic beads.” Luna 16 sample was similar to soil brought back by Apollo 12 from Ocean of Storms and not very different from samples returned by Apollo 11 from Sea of Tranquility. Age of Sea of Fertility had been calculated at 4.6 billion yrs, older than some rocks returned by Apollo missions. (O’Toole, W Post, 1/15/71, Al) Dr. Paul W. Gast, chief of msc Earth and Lunar Sciences Div., reported discovery by msc scientists of “exotic components” in lunar soil believed to be fragments from primitive crust that covered moon 4.5	billion yrs ago. Fragments differed from other Apollo lunar samples and were thought to be pieces of crustal bedrock scattered by impact of meteorites pounding more ancient lunar highlands. Discovery, through chemical analysis, supported theory that moon once had hot, molten surface and that crust had hardened as it began cooling off. Discovery also helped explain why lunar soil was mostly one billion years older than lunar rocks. Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory described norite found in chemical analysis of five soil samples. Norite was lighter in color than most Apollo samples and did not appear to be chemically native to landing sites. Most norite represented “nearsurface material in an ancient lunar crust.” Coarser grained relative of norite might have come from “somewhat deeper in the moon— perhaps several miles.” If discovery proved true, samples would go back in age to beginnings of solar system. Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg—Cal Tech physicist who had dated Apollo 12 Sample 13, oldest rock yet found, at 4.5 billion yrs (other Apollo 12 rocks were about 3.4 billion yrs old)—said Sample 13’s oldest parts were granite that crystallized early in lunar history and could fie some of original crustal material and some of “magic component” that accounted for difference in ages of lunar rocks and soil. Dr. Wasserburg believed that fact there was always some missing ingredients in lunar soil meant soil contained debris from granites and other materials originating elsewhere on moon. Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, reported Apollo 12 seismometer was recording weak but frequent moon-quakes along rilles near landing site. He suggested rilles might be “fault zones,” where slight movements in lunar surface were occurring. (Wilford, NYT, 1/17/71, 4:7; Gast, msc)
Dr. Vasily V. Parin—Soviet physiologist, former President of Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences, and member of Soviet Academy of Sciences—died at age 68 of liver ailment. Dr. Parin had been known primarily for his work during 1960s on human physiological problems during space flight and had authored studies on effect of weightlessness on functioning of heart and circulatory system. He had received Order of Lenin, U.S.S.R’s highest award, in 1963 for his work in developing Soviet medical science. (AP, NYT, 5/Yl/ll, 42) Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified June 15 on nasa policy on backup spacecraft and Centaur reliability: “In the manned program, all possible steps are taken to assure the safety of the astronauts. Single point failures are reduced to an absolute minimum. Missions are planned to build upon the previous missions so as to reduce the number of unknowns.” Within missions, “plateaus are established so that all systems can be checked out in real time prior to committing to the next plateau. Vigorous testing procedures coupled with redundancy and in many cases dual redundancy are adopted before a system is ‘man-rated.’ ” In Skylab “we are building a back-up workshop which will be brought right up to the point of actual checkout. This will permit us to proceed with the program even in the event that the first workshop would not be successfully launched. Similarly, we will have a single back-up Command and Service Module-Saturn IB capability for the three manned visits to the workshop.” Capability was built into program and was “key to the plan for a rescue capability in Skylab which we recently adopted.” In earth-orbital automated programs “we generally plan a series of related missions, using identical or similar hardware. If we have a mission failure, decisions will then be made, based on all available factors, whether we will (1) prepare and fly a specific back-up to the mission which failed, (2) modify succeeding flights ... to achieve the objectives, or (3) defer achieving the mission objectives to future years.” In planetary programs, with launch opportunities at only discrete intervals, NASA usually had provided for two identical launches. Each launch in dual mission was planned to complement its twin, while at same time serving as backup if twin were lost. This year Manner 9 was backup, flying hybrid mission. Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle had history of 3 failures out of 16 operational vehicles, without apparent relationship between failures, giving probability of success of 80% if based solely on past experience. Launch vehicles for automated missions—such as Scout, Delta, and Atlas-Centaur—were “complex systems without much redundancy, and cannot be expected to achieve reliabilities much greater than about 90% without very major and costly changes. They certainly cannot be considered ‘man-rated’ vehicles.” Addition of redundant systems would be investigated again but was not complete solution. Redundancy added weight, reduced payload capability, and was expensive. For launch vehicles of size of Titan-Centaur, which would carry Viking and Grand Tour payloads, additional redundancy might be practicable and desirable and would be actively studied. Major increase in reliability of achieving orbit would be one of important attributes of space shuttle. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, on June 16 continued testimony on backup philosophy, expanding on application in ossa: “We do not schedule backup missions for observatory spacecraft. We always buy, and intend to fly, at least two flight units of a new series of observatory-class spacecraft. When we have a failure or a malfunction in a spacecraft or a launch vehicle we will always do everything possible to thoroughly understand and correct all other future missions which could conceivably be subject to a similar malfunction. When we have a failure we will always review the effect of the loss on the program, determine the alternative recovery plans by which we can attain the objectives of the lost mission, assess the cost and any other impact of those alternatives on the program and then decide which alternative to choose.” Vincent L. Johnson, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, testified June 17: “In the basic considerations which establish the philosophical approach to reliability of unmanned space vehicles, the over-riding necessity for protection of the lives of human passengers is absent. The result is an approach to reliability in which cost and simplicity play a much larger part. We have not imposed a requirement for total elimination of single point failure modes, but have concentrated upon reducing the probability of failure by careful design, parts application, major quality and reliability efforts, and, most importantly, tender loving care. Our launch vehicles . . . are characterized as simplex systems, implying lack of the complexity characteristic of redundancy.” (Testimony; Subcom Rpt, 10/71)
Japan successfully launched its third satellite, Shinsei (“New Star”), from Uchinoura Space Center at 1:00 pm Tokyo time (4:00 am edt Sept. 27). The 65.8-kg (145-lb) spacecraft was Japan’s first scientific satellite and was launched by 22.9-m (75-ft) Mu rocket into orbit with 3892-km (2418.4-mi) apogee, 619-km (384.6-mi) perigee, 133-min period, and 31.2° inclination. Purpose of mission was to study cosmic rays and solar electric waves for one year. Shinsei was 26-sided body, 75 cm (30 in) in diameter, equipped with 5184 silicone solar batteries and used “gravity-turn” device in lieu of conventional guidance and control techniques. Payload included solar radio receivers, cosmic-ray detectors, and ionospheric probes. Satellite functioned perfectly and relayed scientific information. Japan had become fourth country to orbit satellite with successful launch of Ohsumi Feb. 11, 1970. (Spacewarn, 10/5/71, 2; W Post, 9/29/71, A14; W Post, 9/30/71, A6; gsfc SSR, 9/30/71)
President Nixon issued Proclamation 4060 Commemorating World Law Day. He said: “We can see many heartening evidences that law is becoming stronger and more just around the world under the pressures which reason and necessity exert. Within the nations, human rights and ecological wisdom continue to gain stature in the law. Among the nations, security and cooperation—on every front from space to the seabeds—are being enhanced through negotiations, treaties, and conventions. The United Nations is entering its second quarter of a century, and many other international organizations are working effectively through and for world law.” {PD, 6/21/71, 942) June 17—July 2: Fourteenth Plenary Meeting of Committee on Space Research (cospar) was held in Seattle, Wash. International meeting of scientists hosted by NAS included symposia and working groups on 1970 total solar eclipse, astronomical observations from space, use of stratospheric balloons in space research, and lunar lasers. Grumman Aerospace Corp. scientist Dr. Henry C. Courten, professor of astronomy at Dowling College, said mysterious tracks on photographic plates he made during 1966 and 1970 solar eclipses appeared to be of small planet or asteroid belt inside Mercury’s orbit. Cal Tech scientist and lunar expert Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg told cospar meeting four rocks gathered by Apollo 14 astronauts had ages ranging from 3.85 billion to 3.95 billion yrs. Ages were surprising “since it was anticipated that Fra Mauro would yield rocks of greater antiquity.” Discovery suggested that volcanism was active on moon far longer than had been thought and was still forming lunar crust more than 600 million yrs after moon came into being. It also suggested that Sea of Rains had been carved by collision 600 million yrs after moon’s formation, or 100 million to 150 million yrs later than lunar experts had originally believed. Soviet scientists Yuri G. Nefyuduv, L. I. Kakurin, and A. D. Yegorov said Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov “found it difficult to keep the upright posture and had to be assisted while walking” during first three hours after return from June 2-19, 1970, mission. “Next day . . . their walk was still inadequate and erect positions were maintained with great efforts.” When cosmonauts returned to physical activity, few days after flight, effects of prolonged weightlessness had proved temporary. Astronaut John W. Young represented U.S. astronaut corps at ceremony to honor 10th anniversary of first space flight by Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. He asked, “What better tribute to the memory of Yuri Gagarin can we offer than the hope that the growing unity of efforts in space—which this cospar meeting so well exemplifies— may one day extend to all the Earth? (nas Release, 4/21/71; AP, W Post, 6/13/71, A7; O’Toole, W Post, 6/21/71, Al; upi, W Post, 6/28/71, A7; NASA Activities, 7/15/71,107) nas and nrc submitted to cospar United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1970. Report included summaries of observations from spacecraft, sounding rockets, high-altitude balloons, and aircraft made or reported during 1970 and discussed flights planned for 1971. (Text)
British Aircraft Corp. said in London that Concorde test flights had “met with success unique in the annals of commercial aircraft flight development.” bac chief test pilot Brian Truhshaw told press conference he was optimistic since British and French prototypes had flown total 393 hrs 56 min, including 92 hrs 35 min at supersonic speeds. Aircraft had maintained directional stability at twice speed of sound and on stalling two of its four engines at same speed. Modifications would he made on nacelles before next phase of test flights because of Jan. 22 incident to French prototype 001 at mach 2 over Atlantic. Air pressure had broken off forward intake ramp of No. 4 engine and engine had fallen off into sea. (Berger, B Sun, 2/16/71, C6)
President Nixon sent $229.2-billion FY 1972 budget request to Congress, including total science r&d budget of $16.7 billion. Total request for NASA new obligation^ authority (noa) of $3,271 billion (1.4% of total U.S. budget) was $27 million less than FY 1971 noa of $3,298 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to decline $216.5 million against decline of $486.4 million in FY 1971. Reduction to $3,152 billion placed proposed NASA FY 1972 funding at lowest level since 1962. Of budget request, $2,518 billion would go for r&d, $56.3 million for construction, of facilities, and $697.4 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $302.2 million, to $612.2 million— reflecting cancellation of Apollo 18 and 19—would be partially offset by increase from $515.2 million in FY 1971 to $672.8 million in FY 1972 for manned space flight operations. Manned space flight operations would include $535.4 million for Skylab, $100.0 million for space shuttle, and $37.4 million for orbited systems and experiments. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring total for manned space flight (including Apollo) to $1,286 billion, down $144.6 million from FY 1971. Funding for space science and applications programs would increase $184.7 million, from $565.7 million in FY 1971 to $740.4 million in FY 1972. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program for solar observatory ($19 million in FY 1972), High Energy Astronomical Observatory ($13.4 million), and space telescope study ($500 000). Funding for lunar and planetary exploration would increase $166.6 million, to $311.5 million, with $38.3 million going toward Mariner-Venus/Mercury 1973, $180.4 million toward Viking project, and $18.8 million toward supporting research and technology advanced studies. Funding for Pioneer program of planetary exploration would decrease from $35.5 million in FY 1971 to $17.6 million. Funding for bioscience program, including Biosatellites, was eliminated from NASA budget for FY 1972. Increase of $15.5 million in space applications programs, to $182.5 million in FY 1972, included $48.5 million for Earth Resources Survey, $13 million for Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, and $60.3 million for ATS. Total for advanced research and technology programs decreased from $264.2 million in FY 1971 to $212.8 million, stol technology program would receive $15 million, against $1.9 million in FY 1971. nerva rocket funding would decrease from $32 million in FY 1971 to $9.9 million. Tracking and data acquisition funding would fall $26 million, to $264 million. dod’s FY 1972 budget of $76 billion for outlays included $1.55-billion space funding, $500 000 less than previous year [see April 2]. Budget also included $370 million for B-l intercontinental bomber, up from $75 million in FY 1971; $39 million for lamps antisubmarine-warfare helicopter, up from $4 million, $145 million for air defense aircraft system (awacs), up from $87 million, $47 million for usaf AX close-support aircraft, up from $28 million, $409 million for Poseidon missile system, and $926 million for Minuteman III program, up from $720 million in FY 1971. aec funding for nerva and space electric power would decrease from $84 million in FY 1971 to $39.7 million. Increase of $437 million in total dot FY 1972 budget of $7.8 billion would go mostly to expanded aviation and urban mass transit spending, dot funding for reduction of aircraft noise and study of environmental effects of SST would increase from $27 million in FY 1971 to $54 million. These funds also would he used for pollution reduction from Coast Guard installations, noa of $235 million was requested for sst prototype program, up from $210 million in FY 1971. (US Budget for FY 1972; bob Special Analysis; NASA budget briefing transcript; dod budget briefing transcript; aiaa release 71—2; CR, 1/29/71, H265; ddr&e Dir Foster Testimony, 4/2/71)
U.S. scientists conceded that U.S.S.R. led U.S. in many areas of basic research and space medicine largely because U.S. had “opted for an engineering approach to manned space flight and deliberately ignored some areas of theoretical research as irrelevant to the moon landing mission,” Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Scientists were worried that political developments in U.S.S.R. could harm free flow of this data. (Av Wk, 10/11/71, 14-5)
NASA announced establishment of new Office of Applications (oa). Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight since 1968, was named Associate Administrator for Applications. Leonard Jaffe, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Applications) since 1966, was named Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications. Personnel, programs, and functions of Earth Observations and Communications Programs Divs. would be transferred from ossa to new office and ossa would be renamed Office of Space Science (oss). Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator said: “The application of space technology to solving problems here on Earth is perhaps NASA’s most important new thrust. I believe it appropriate to centralize into a single office in NASA Headquarters all of the resources which we can muster to support space applications to Earth.” (NASA Release 71-239)	.
Regional conference at ARC explored application of aerospace technology to community and public problems. Procedures for locating and obtaining technological developments were outlined to potential manufacturers and users. Dr. Joel A. Snow, nsf Deputy Assistant Director for Science and Technology, discussed technology in changing society and application of research to national needs. NASA Technology Utilization Program was described by Jeffrey T. Hamilton, Director of Technology Utilization Office. Dr. Donald C. Harrison, Chief of Stanford Univ. Medical Center Cardiology Dept., discussed NASA-Stanford biomedical technology transfer project. Conference officials noted that of 1200 problems submitted to NASA biomedical and technology application teams to date, 200 had been brought to satisfactory solution through aerospace technology. (nasa Release 71-216; arc pio)
usn announced cause of Dec. 30, 1970, crash of F-14 Tomcat fighter aircraft on second test flight was two pencil-thin hydraulic lines that ruptured after severe vibration. Findings confirmed those of aircraft manufacturer, Grumman Aerospace Corp, usn said problem could be corrected without major redesign or changes. (AP, NYT, 2/15/71, 44)
Impact of aerospace industry slump and termination of lunar excursion module project on Grumman Corp. and Long Island, N.Y., area was described by New York Times. With 26 000 employees, Grumman Corp., “reaches out into every corner of the economy of Nassau and Suffolk Counties and, as one of the nation’s largest aerospace combines, even far beyond those two counties that jointly claim Grumman as their own.” Nearly 1000 subcontractors depended on Grumman’s patronage. Firm was “largest real estate taxpayer in Nassau County, the largest customer for the Long Island Lighting Company and hundreds of smaller corporations. And in salaries for its employes alone it pumps nearly a third of a billion dollars each year into the Long Island economy.” Grumman figures indicated that for every person laid off, 4Y2 persons somewhere in U.S. economy lost their jobs, including 2V2 in Nassau or Suffolk Counties. From December 1969 to December 1970 nearly 5700 persons at Grumman had lost jobs; 14 250 elsewhere on Long Island had lost jobs as result. (Andelman, NYT, 10/21/71, 45)
Identification of galactic x-ray source GX3 + 1 with known star by British astronomers using lunar occulation—new technique employing coordinated observations from two sounding rockets-—had been reported by U.K. Science Research Council, New York Times said. Observations—from Skylark rockets launched from Woomera, Australia, Sept. 27 and Oct. 24, when GX3 + l’s approximate position was known— had indicated two times during which x-ray source had disappeared behind moon. Data had enabled Royal Greenwich Observatory astronomer L. V. Morrison to pinpoint area in which x-ray source lay by using photographic plate of region that contained star. Attempts to confirm identification would be made in next two months but report conceded possibility that x-ray source could he associated with fainter star not visible on existing plates. (NYT, 12/21/71, 22)
First flight model LRV was formally' delivered to NASA in ceremony at Boeing Co.’s Space Center at Kent, Wash. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, msec Director, accepted first of three flight models from Boeing Co. Group Vice President for Aerospace 0. C. Boileau. Model would be shipped to arrive at ksc March 15 for final checks and installation aboard Apollo 15 lm. Delivery would be two weeks before April 1 contract delivery date, (nasa Release 71—38; Boeing Release 3/10/71)
nasa announced reorganization of Office of Manned Space Flight to reflect new management requirements for future manned flight programs. Reorganization established two new technical support offices, Engineering and Operations Office and Quality and Safety Office; established two functional offices, Administration Office and Program Analysis Office; and abolished Mission Operations, Field Center Development, Institutional Operations, and Space Medicine organizations. m/g John D. Stevenson (usaf, Ret.), Director of Mission Operations, became Deputy Director of Engineering and Operations. Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Director of Field Center Development, became Special Assistant to Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Space Medicine Office had been combined with other life science activities under Dr. James W. Humphreys, Director of Life Sciences, as announced Dec. 3, 1970. (nasa Release 71-10)
New Orleans Times-Picayune editorial commented on failure of Soviet Luna 18 mission: “The Soviet’s automated designs and performances are not to be belittled, for they represent research and development toward deep-probe capability. But it is interesting that Western space observers think they have grounds for suspecting that the Soviets are in fact working up a manned lunar program. If so, more than prestige and technological display are involved; it must mean agreement that man operates on the moon with the best cost-benefit ratio.” (New Orleans Times Picayune, 9/17/71)
GAO published Comparison of Military Research and Development Expenditures of the United States and the Soviet Union. Report quoted Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (oecd) as saying much Soviet R&D was likely to have been directed toward military and space programs. Spin-off to civilian industry in U.S.S.R. was considered to have been small because all invention and innovation of military application, while in principle available for civilian use, was surrounded by impenetrable security blanket. Consequently, strain of R&D effort had been much greater for Soviet economy than for that of U.S. (CR, 7/31/71, E8607-81)
msfc announced award of $2 249 700, one-year contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to supply and deliver liquid hydrogen for all Government aerospace use in eastern U.S. (msfc Release 71—55) During March: Prestige of U.S. science was being undermined by assaults from many sides—which might leave U.S. “a second-rate power and a third-rate place to live”-—Lawrence P. Lessing wrote in Fortune article. Funds had been “damagingly cut in such basic areas as the life and medical sciences . . . while a large amount of advanced but abstract technology, which could begin to solve the problems of overcrowding, energy, pollution, transportation, and waste, . . . are going neglected.” New hostility to science and technology had arisen among many “ordinary Americans,” even from within science itself, and among young activists. But if man’s store of knowledge were torn down, man would “backslide not a few centuries but two hundred thousand years.” Severe cutback in research and development because of Vietnam war, inflation, and contracted economy—with Federal r&d expenditures declining in real dollars by more than 20%—possibly endangered whole structure of science. Decline followed post-World War II growth that had produced antibiotics, atomic power, cryogenics, computers, jet planes, rocket vehicles, radar, transistors, masers, and lasers and had spurred U.S. to do its own basic research. “From . . . only a sparse dozen Nobel Prizes in the forty years up to 1940, U.S. scientists went on in the next thirty years to win forty-five.” “While men and talent are . . . going to waste the things that need doing . . . keep piling up.” U.S. was beginning to lag behind other nations in high-energy physics, radioastronomy, plasma physics, conventional energy research, space science, transportation, and life sciences. “With two of the later, more scientifically oriented Apollo moon flights canceled, though equipment is hought and paid for, work on NASA’s forward-looking space station, nuclear-powered rocket, and unmanned planetary exploration vehicles has been so cut back that after 1975 almost nothing will be scheduled. And research funds in life sciences were still lagging 20% behind research capacity—in field that ^ held promises for much safer biological insecticides, genetic repair of congenital defects, and basic attacks on cancer and heart disease. (Fortune, 3/71, 88-9, 153-5)
Nixon Administration’s New Technology Opportunities Program “expected to be announced early next year” was described by New York Times. Basic concept was to define technologies that could help solve domestic problems, establish r&d priorities accordingly, and provide incentives for industry to pursue technological goals. Times said program could be major step toward making Government partner for first time in industries outside aerospace and defense, result in greater Federal r&d funding, and constitute counterattack against “those who increasingly criticize science and technology as disruptive and destructive forces in society.” (Wilford, NYT, 10/31/71, 1)
Editorial in Aviation Week & Space Technology commented on rejection by Government of further sst funding: “The fate of the sst should serve notice . . . that the aerospace industry can no longer survive with its political naivete and aloofness from the fray.” It was “sad day when a deliberate national decision is made to abandon a major frontier of technological advance. But it will be even sadder when the victors in this significant debate gird for their next assault on the space shuttle program.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 3/29/71, 9)
Four extra manned space flight missions to use four Apollo spacecraft and one Saturn V launch vehicle left after 1973 Skylab mission were proposed by msc officials to nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers at nasa Hq. Missions would include one lunar flight and three Saturn IB-launched earth-orbital missions. Houston Chronicle later quoted msc Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., who had presented proposal, as saying msc plan called for one mission of up to nine days in lunar orbit. Astronauts could map 60% of lunar surface and place Nimbus weather satellite in lunar orbit to complete photography of entire moon in one year. (Hill, H Chron, 11/29/71)
NASA issued rfps to major airframe manufacturers for design and fabrication of two experimental transport jet STOL aircraft to start Quiet-STOL program to relieve airport noise and congestion. Aircraft, incorporating propulsive lift principles, would provide technological data and experience for developing environmentally acceptable, economical, and safe fan-jet STOL transport system in NASA—DOT— faa—USAF program. Program would implement major recommendations of joint nasa-dot Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Study by providing industry with basis for stol development, Government regulatory agencies with rules for STOL certification and operation, and usaf with modernized tactical airlift capability. (nasa Release 71-146)
Lowell Observatory astronomers had made first accurate mapping of weather of Mars as result of worldwide cooperation of observatories in NASA-funded ground-based planetary patrol program centered at Lowell, Christian Science Monitor said. Principal investigator Dr. William A. Baum had said object of program, begun in 1969, was to “maintain nearly continuous photographic surveillance of Mars, Jupiter, and Venus during favorable periods.” Mars weather seemed analogous to weather in arid regions of earth. (CSM, 6/24/71)
President Nixon presented National Medal of Science to nine scientists in White House ceremony. Recipients, announced Jan. 27, included Dr. George E. Mueller, Senior Vice President of General Dynamics Corp. and former nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. {PD, 5/24/71, 784)
ost released Final Report of the Ad Hoc Supersonic Transport Review Committee of the Office of Science and Technology, March 30, 1969. Release of previously secret report was prompted, ost said, “by continued public interest and certain impressions that the government may be concealing factual data on the sst program.” Report recommended “termination of the development contracts and the withdrawal of Government support from the sst prototype program.” Reasons given were: sst operating costs would exceed those of then-available subsonic aircraft; “attendant surcharge makes the airline market uncertain”; program was unattractive to private financing and “substantial government involvement is likely to be sought in the supply or guarantee of some S3—5 billion of capital for the certification and production of a U.S. sst”; there was “substantial uncertainty regarding the range and payload and the environmental effects” of sst and “costs and duration of the program are both likely to increase” in attempt to develop production aircraft; there was “substantial doubt that the present configurations of the Concorde and the TU—144 will become commercially viable aircraft”; balance of payments argument was not sufficiently strong to warrant Government investment in sst; U.S. leadership in aviation did not depend upon affirmative sst decision in near future; and, “when the right combination of technology and market demand appears, the U.S. aircraft industry may well decide on its own to proceed with the development and production of an sst.” (Text)
Sen. Joseph M. Montoya (D-N. Mex.) introduced S. 1184, “to establish a Department of Science and Technology, and to transfer certain agencies and functions to such Department.” Bill provided that NASA, nsf, and aec be transferred to new department. Sen. Montoya had introduced similar legislation on Oct. 12, 1970. (CR, 3/10/71, S2800-12; nasa LAR, X/22)
Mrs. E. Margaret Burbidge would become first woman director of Royal Greenwich Observatory in 1972, Washington Post reported. British-born former professor of astronomy at Univ. of California would not inherit title of Astronomer Royal, traditionally bestowed upon Observatory Director. She would direct staff of 200, including 25 women scientists. (Nossiter, W Post, 11/19/71, A26)
Newspaper editorials commented on death of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts: Chicago Tribune: “Any one of a million things could have gone wrong, because there are a million things that have had to go right for each Soviet and American success in space. It is no discredit to Russian scientists that something went wrong at the last moment. It is testimony to the good fortune and skill and care of the United States space program that something of this kind hasn’t happened yet to us.” (C Trib, 7/1/71) Christian Science Monitor:	. . those men who fly such missions are taking the risk for the aspirations of mankind to break the limitations of earth’s gravitational and atmospheric fields. They depend on the accumulating technological knowledge of mankind to protect them. As a result, the Soyuz 11 event argues the more determinedly that nations—for the moment chiefly the United States and the Soviet Union—should share their space research efforts.” (CSM, 7/1/71) Washington Post: “The special sorrow that must be felt at this event does not proceed from their numbers—three deaths next to, say, thousands among the world’s more recently savaged refugees. Nor does it proceed alone from their conspicuous bravery, their willingness to take the ultimate risk in pursuit of a national mission: daily, men in combat make the same commitment and do so minus the glory and unambiguous sense of purpose that cosmonauts and astronauts share. So it is more than the death of three men on a high risk venture that must move the earthbound to a special sorrow: it is the death of these men in pursuit of the ultimate adventure, exploration of the outer limits of human knowledge and endurance—and beyond.” (W Post, 7/1/71) New York Times: “. . . it should be apparent that the staggering dangers of space can be met most effectively by mobilizing all the knowledge and talent available irrespective of nationality. It is time to abandon the wasteful irrationality of prestige-motivated competition. The real lesson of this tragedy is . . . that space exploration ought to be a cooperative endeavor of all nations.” (NYT, 7/1/71) Baltimore Sun: “The three cosmonauts lived in space for almost 23 days, and by all indications the station’s operation came up to its designers’ hopes. Only in the final brief stage, a stage often successful before, did disaster intervene. It is tragedy, but it is not defeat.” (B Sun, 7/1/71)
Senate-House conferees on H.R. 7109, FY 1972 nasa Authorization bill, filed H Rpt 92—368 proposing compromise bill authorizing $3,355 billion. Report authorized $702.7 million for space flight operations, $30 million above nasa request of $672.7 million, and recommended $15 million be spent on Skylab rescue capability and $15 million on space shuttle. (H Rpt 92-368)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had selected msfc to integrate two proposed earth orbital projects, space station and research and applications modules (ram), by supervising definition, design, and verification of design concepts, msfc announced. Development of space station would follow development of space shuttle, ram was family of space payload carrier modules to be delivered to earth orbit by shuttle, (msfc Release 71—118)
President Nixon announced recipients of 1970 National Medal of Science, Federal Government’s highest award for distinguished achievement in science, mathematics, and engineering. Recipients included Dr. George E. Mueller, Senior Vice President of General Dynamics Corp. and former nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Dr. Mueller received award for “his many individual contributions to the design of the Apollo System, including the planning and interpretation of a large array of advanced experiments necessary to insure the success of this venture into a new and little known environment.” Other recipients were: Dr. Richard D. Brauer, professor of mathematics, Harvard Univ.; Dr. Robert H. Dicke, professor of physics, Princeton Univ.; Barbara McClintock, Carnegie Institution of Washington geneticist; Dr. Albert B. Sabin, president of Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovoth, Israel; Dr. Allan R. Sandage, Cal Tech astronomer; John C. Slater, professor of physics and chemistry, Univ. of Florida; Dr. John A. Wheeler, professor of physics, Princeton Univ.; and Dr. Saul Winstein, deceased, formerly professor of chemistry at ucla. (PD, 2/1/71,124)
Dr. Dennis Gabor, winner of 1971 Nobel Prize for physics, said in Bridgeport, Conn., that space exploration was “strictly a dead end occupation.” It was “extremely uninteresting—the only interesting place is earth.” Dr. Gabor made comment during interview at Univ. of Bridgeport honors convocation, (upi, W Post, 11/5/71, A7; W Star, 11/6/71, A7)
Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, MSFC Director, announced establishment of temporary heao Office in MSFc’s Program Management Directorate to plan High Energy Astronomy Observatory. Office would replace heao Task Team formed in spring 1971. (msfc Release 71-148)
Soviet pilots in Egypt were testing “superjets,” probably MiG—23s, according to diplomatic sources quoted by upi in Boston Globe. Aircraft were understood to he capable of reaching altitudes to 24 000 m (80 000 ft) and speeds up to three times speed of sound. They outmatched U.S. F—4 Phantoms used by Israeli air force. (B Globe, 5/5/71, 6)
Role of radioelectronics in space was described in Pravda by Soviet Academician V. Andreyanov: “Radioelectronics might be called the nervous system of cosmonautics. It links our planet by living threads with the spacecraft and apparatuses when they fly to Mars, work on the moon, or study the earth and circumterrestrial space, like the Salyut station. In less than 15 years, research into space and the nearest planets has not only stimulated the development of many fields of science and technology but has also been accompanied by the emergence of new fields of knowledge and technical methods. A ‘spacifica-tion’ of the sciences had been noted. Concepts which were earlier unusual have also appeared in radioelectronics: space radio communications, space telemetry and television, space radionavigation, and radio methods for studying celestial bodies and interplanetary space.” (fbis-Sov-7 1-123, 6/23/71, L5)
Management plans for omsf space shuttle program were announced by NASA: OMSF Hq. in Washington, D.C., would be responsible for overall management, including assignment of responsibilities, basic performance requirements, control of major milestones, and funding allocations to nasa centers. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, had assigned responsibility for program control, overall systems engineering and systems integration, and overall responsibility for definition of elements of total system that interacted with other elements to MSC, which also would be responsible for shuttle’s orbiter stage. MSFC would be responsible for booster stage and shuttle’s main engines. ICSC would be responsible for design of launch and recovery facilities. All three centers would station personnel at MSC for systems engineering and integration activity, (nasa Release 71—104)
usaf X-24A lifting-body vehicle had completed flight-test program and would be reshaped and renamed X-24B, frc announced. Decision to end flight operations and reshape vehicle had been made by joint NASA—USAF flight research team. X-24A was one of three lifting-body vehicles in joint nasa-usaf program managed since 1967 by frc. Vehicle had made 28 flights— 10 glide and 18 powered—since beginning test program April 17, 1969, reaching 1687 km per hr (1048 mph) and 22 000-m (71 000-ft) altitude. New X-24B would be built around existing basic X—24A structure, but outward appearance would be changed dramatically, with sharply pointed flat-iron shape replacing bulbous one. New shape would also have improved hypersonic lift-to-drag ratio that would permit investigation of how well vehicle designed for good hypersonic performance would perform at low supersonic, transonic, and subsonic speeds, with emphasis on landing. Other changes would include 4.6-m (15-ft) extension of nose, removal of rear center fin, 1.5-m (5-ft) widening in rear, and 680-kg (1500-lb) increase in weight. Modifications would be completed by Martin Marietta Corp. in about one year, (frc Release 18-71)
nsf released Research and Development in Local Governments, Fiscal Years 1968 & 1969 (nsf 71-6): Local government r&d expenditures doubled between 1966 and 1969, from $20 million to $40 million. Approximately 50% of funds spent by local governments for r&d came from Federal Government. Life, social, and engineering sciences were largest fields in local government R&D. (Text)
French President Georges Pompidou was passenger aboard Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic airliner, in 75-min flight from Paris to Toulouse. Aircraft reached twice speed of sound. Later, Concorde 002, British prototype, was forced to turn back after taking off from Toulouse because of faulty landing gear. Aircraft circled for half hour at 600 m (2000 ft) but made perfect landing 38 min after takeoff. (Reuters, B Sun, 5/8/71)
Bochum Observatory in West Germany said it had received what appeared to be on and off switching signals from Soviet Mars probes, Mars 2 and 3. (AP, W Post, 11/19/71, A3)
usaf F—111 on test flight from Edward afb, Calif., crashed on gunnery range near Barstow, Calif., killing pilot and copilot, who had ejected. (upi, W Post, 4/25/71, A2)
New $200-million international airport at Kansas City, Mo., was being built under NASA-developed management system, NASA announced. Midwest Research Institute, management consultant for project, was using It Cl Management Information Center—fully equipped briefing room that resembled itsc’s—as repository for reference data on airport project, (nasa Release 71-232)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, summarized reasons NASA proposed space shuttle development as top space priority for 1970s, during Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences nasa FY 1972 authorization hearings: U.S. “should and will continue an active space program from now on” and new approach was needed to make space “practical and economical” for all users—NASA, DOD, other Government agencies, and commercial enterprises. Reusable shuttle, “entirely new concept in space operation,” would deliver and retrieve manned and unmanned payloads; “we will be able to repair, modify, or update payloads in orbit and . . . reduce drastically the costs of payloads by taking advantage of the much larger weight and volume that will be available. . . . When future space programs using the shuttle are compared with those using conventional launch vehicles, the shuttle offers a very real economic advantage.” Shuttle development should proceed in FY 1972 because necessary technology was available, delay in development would widen existing four-year gap in U.S. manned space flight schedule, and shuttle was “keystone to the total plan for the U.S. space program.” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers discussed candidate concepts for space shuttle: “The principle objective in examining various systems is to determine which systems have the greatest potential for low operational costs together with low development costs. The most attractive system ... is the fully reusable system where nothing is discarded in the course of the flight and the orbiter and booster are ‘turned around’ with minimum maintenance for reuse. This concept has been the subject of intense ‘phase B’ definition studies over . .. the past 9 months.” Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, reviewed ossa programs, goals, and motivations: “When PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILM: we speak of ‘space’ science and ‘space’ applications, we are talking about using a new technology ... to enhance scientific progress and its translation into benefits. In this role, NASA is a service agency; we provide the technology, the engineering, the management, and the leadership that make possible the exploration of space and the practical use of space flight. The scientific community, which represents the focus of man’s unceasing drive for understanding, identifies the problems and the unknowns, and designs the experiments that will answer the key questions. Society levies demands upon us for useful services, valuable products, and improvements in the quality of life.” There was no difficulty in identifying needs or new missions; acute problem was to select those offering greatest reward as range of highest national priorities expanded but resources remained limited. (Transcript)
Senate passed H.R. 7960, $706.5 million FY 1972 nsf authorization bill. Bill included $2.5 million for Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) ; $4 million for Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico; $7.7 million for Kitt Peak National Observatory; $2.5 million for Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in Chile; $7 million for National Radio Astronomy Observatory; and $19 million for National Center for Atmospheric Research. Report accompanying bill described program of Research Applied to National Needs (rann) established by nsf during FY 1971 to coordinate research in selected environmental, social, and technological problems. Major research efforts consolidated to form RANN were: weather modification, earthquake engineering, interdisciplinary research relevant to problems of our society (irpos), and other efforts formerly funded under scientific project support. (CR, 6/28/71, S9974-81; S Rpt 92-232)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, reviewed nasa program before 25th annual conference of aiaa Board of Governors in Williamsburg, Va.: “This country needs space programs that move out vigorously to create new technology. A space effort that limps along on yesterday’s knowhow will not do much for the country. A slow program may cost less, but be worth nothing in terms of meeting the country’s needs. And a slow program—or no program—is all we are going to have without the strong support of the public. ... We should invent and fly more self-supporting satellites. We are seeking and getting valuable scientific knowledge from space we could not get in any other way . . . about the Earth and its atmosphere, the sun and the planets, and the universe. And about man himself.” National security was at stake. “It would not be safe for the United States, with its great responsibilities for world peace, to lag behind any other country in space technology. This is an axiom we did not quibble about in the ’60s and should not quibble about in the ’70s.” Space program had proved “excellent hotbed for forcing new technology, which in turn raises our national productivity and prosperity and increases our ability to solve pressing social problems of today’s urban society.” Finally, space exploration was needed as inspiration for modern man. “I think we are inspired, and our children are inspired, to be living in an age when man first moved out into space and began the exploration of our solar system. I think we should be ashamed of ourselves, as a society, if we withdrew from space exploration now after such an auspicious beginning.” (Text)
Bemaining “puzzles” of solar system pattern were discussed by Walter Sullivan in New York Times article: General assumption was that sun, planets, and moons had been formed from “swirling, flattened cloud of material.” But: “Why does Mars have two tiny moons, each only a few miles in diameter, yet our moon is a quarter the diameter of the earth? Why do some of the outer moons of Jupiter go the ‘wrong way’—counter clockwise—around that huge planet? Why is the earth’s moon formed of a different mix of elements from that constituting the earth?” Recent information had “illuminated these questions though it had not resolved them.” Earth’s moon was giving off “far more heat than had been predicted on the basis of assumptions of how it was formed.” Mariner 9 photos of the two Mars moons had shown both to be irregular chunks “rather than systematically spherical bodies in the manner normally attributed to moons and planets.” George Washington Univ. scientist J. Martyn Bailey had proposed that all seven of Jupiter’s outer moons were asteroids captured by that planet’s powerful gravity and that Jupiter’s clockwise moons had been captured when planet was farthest from sun, while counter-clockwise moons had been captured when Jupiter was nearest sun. Lunar Science Institute scientists had agreed there had been sufficient sorting and layering on earth’s moon to produce radioactive crust that could account for heat flow. Information on two Martian moons had indicated that Phobos and Deimos looked much like asteroidal fragments but that did not prove that they were captured asteroids. They could have been formed as spherical moons from material left when Mars was being created and later “battered into their irregular shapes.” (NYT, 12/5/71, 4:8)
Rising volume in aerospace industry production was predicted by David A. Loehwing in Barrons magazine: “nasa is readying some new programs, notably the space shuttle. . . . Airline revenues are climbing, and some pick-up in orders for transports is anticipated.” dod procurement policies “which nearly threw a few companies into bankruptcy” had been revised. “Most important there is a growing awareness that the Soviet arms buildup poses a real threat to U.S. security, which new weapons must be developed to counter.” Persuasive but “cynical” argument for lift in aerospace business in 1972 was political expediency. “Over half-a-million people have been laid off in the industry since 1968, some 200,000 in California,” state with largest number of electoral votes. Barrons quoted political observer as saying, “Starting pretty early next spring, you’re going to see a massive injection of funds into aerospace.” (Barrons, 12/27/71)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, described Apollo 15 crew’s medical status to press at msc. Astronauts James B. Irwin and David R. Scott had suffered brief periods of irregular heart rhythm on moon, probably as a result of extreme fatigue. Irwin also had dizzy spells in space. Arythmic heartbeats and dizziness had not been disclosed to press earlier, Dr. Berry said, because tests were still being conducted and complete information was not known. Until Aug. 13 Irwin was still suffering from effects of weightlessness; he still had mild dizzy spells and, when lying prone, felt as if his bed were tilted downward about 30°. Astronaut Alfred M. Worden’s medical data during transearth coast EVA had been close to predicted, and Worden was adjusting better than Scott and Irwin. None of the three, however, had returned to preflight norms, but there was “no medical danger” as far as crew was concerned. “Things from past space flights were all going in a pattern and now suddenly these guys don’t fit the pattern.” In assessing astronauts’ return to normal it was important to note how Apollo 15 differed from previous manned space flight missions. Important factors were longer time spent on lunar surface, longer lunar orbit stay time, and longer time spent in 100% oxygen atmosphere. Heartbeat irregularities, which had lasted about 10 heartbeats, were usually associated with fatigue, low potassium level, and increased adrenalin flow—all of which were present in astronauts. Because of fatigue levels of which astronauts were often unaware, flight surgeons were considering recommending that first evas on Apollo 16 and Apollo 17 be shortened. (Transcript; AP, NYT, 8/14/71, 1)
nasa announced plans for first launchings of nasa sounding rockets from French Guiana Space Center at Kourou in cooperative France-U.S. upper-atmosphere research project. Project would launch 20 French Centaure and NASA Nike-Cajun rockets to obtain data on structure and circulation of equatorial atmosphere between 30- and 95-km (18- and 60-mi) altitudes. Under agreement between French National Center for Space Studies (cnes) and nasa, ones would provide Centaure rockets with sodium vapor payloads, F— 1 launcher, launch team, and tracking and ground support. NASA would be responsible for Nike-Cajuns with grenade and ozone payloads, one Nike with an inert 2nd stage, and ground support for payloads. Each agency would bear cost of its agreed responsibilities, (nasa Release 71—53)
Mstislav V. Keldysh was reelected President of Soviet Academy of Sciences at general assembly meeting in Moscow. Following reelection, Tass said: “The successes of the U.S.S.R. in the exploration of space have been associated with Keldysh’s work. They included the first Sputniks, the flights to the moon and around it, flights to the planets of the solar system, the first manned space flight, the first experimental orbital station, the return of Luna 16 with lunar soil to the earth and the first Soviet moon rover.” (fbis—Sov—71—102, 5/26/71, LI; Shabad, NYT, 5/31/71, 32)
New York Times editorial advocated reimbursement by Government of airlines’ investment in SST: “The bill which the sst lobby seeks to amend is a Supplemental Appropriations bill that contains money for the Government’s closing costs arising from cancellation of the contract for the plane. The bill does provide an opportunity for the Government to consider its debt of honor to the airlines. They were strongly advised by the Department of Transportation in 1967 to advance money to the Boeing Company, to be credited against the future purchase of sst’s. The airlines realistically recognized that this was risk capital if the plane should prove a technological failure, but in view of the Federal Government’s insistent if unwise pressure in behalf of the plane, they had good reason to rely upon continued Government backing for the project. Although the $58.5-million involved is not a legal obligation, Congress should honor this commitment.” (NYT, 5/11/71)
President Nixon transmitted to Congress World Weather Program, Plan for Fiscal Year 1972. Report described significant activities of program and planned participation of Federal agencies. In message of transmission President said: “Satellite technology is being used with increasing effectiveness to gather global information for earlier, more accurate predictions and warnings of hazardous weather. New stations are being established for long-term measurement of atmospheric change. Computers have been programmed to determine the effect of pollution upon the atmosphere. A major international experiment in the Atlantic Ocean is being prepared under the Global Atmospheric Research Program. During the past year many nations, including the United States, have indicated their support of this tropical experiment and have made tentative commitments to provide ships, aircraft, satellites, and other observing facilities. Linked with an increased computer capability to assess and integrate results, this experiment should be an important step toward attaining a true understanding of the global atmosphere.” (PD, 4/19/71, 630)
lrv qualification test unit, replica of flight lrvs, was delivered to msfc by Boeing Co., prime lrv contractor. Second flight model lrv, scheduled for use on January 1972 Apollo 16 mission, would be turned over to NASA May 12 and stored at Boeing’s Kent, Washington, Space Center until after Apollo 15 mission in July 1971. (msfc Release 71-80)
nasa issued memorandum change to solicit proposals for participation in analysis of space flight data from photography and auxiliary records acquired on Apollo lunar exploration missions. Apollo 15, 16, and 17 would carry three orbital scientific instruments designed to provide photos and supporting data, panoramic camera, mapping camera system, and laser altimeter. Proposals also were solicited for analysis of lunar photography from Apolio 14 and for photos of astronomical objects from Apollo missions 14 through 17. (nasa Memo Change 36)
NASA leaders were “realistic enough to sense that their case for the [space] shuttle must be built on more than chauvinistic appeal to national prestige, which sold the Apollo in the early 1970s,” Jonathan Spivak said in Wall Street Journal. They were “working hard to trim the shuttle’s prospective costs, demonstrate its economic payoff and convince the scientific community that it offers attractive new opportunities for research.” But NASA’s “primary problem” was “convincing the public and the politicians that it still makes sense to go into space at all. The moon is no longer a glamorous goal; Mars is too far distant and expensive, and orbiting space stations to date have made few influential converts.” (WSJ, 6/30/71, 10) During June: Skylab was described in article by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “By far the largest manned spacecraft we have ever built, Skylab will be the forerunner of permanent stations in space. In orbit 435 km [270 mi] above Earth, the Skylab cluster will be 36 meters [118 ft] long and will weigh 82 238 kilograms [181304 lbs]. One of its major components will be a workshop with 362 cubic meters [474 cu yds] of work area. Other parts will include a Multiple Docking Adapter, Airlock Module, Apollo Command and Service Module, and an Apollo Telescope Mount, the last of these a full-fledged solar observatory capable of observing, monitoring, and recording phenomena on the Sun’s surface that cannot be seen from Earth.” Skylab would carry from earth orbit “about 50 scientific, medical, applications, and solar-astronomy experiments. Twenty of these will be in the life sciences, to determine how man performs and adjusts under conditions of prolonged space flight. The study of materials and manufacturing will be another area of interest. By means of an electron-beam generating device and an electric furnace, metals will be melted, molded, and welded, and other metallurgy and crystal tests performed in a work chamber exposed to zero-gravity and the vacuum of space.” (A&A, 6/71, 20-1)
LeRC was studying blown-flap stol aircraft using series of fans mounted atop each flap semispan, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Concept was similar to fan/flap arrangements studied in wind tunnel tests-. Bleed air from main engines was ducted to periphery of each fan nacelle and drove fans through tip turbines. Flow from fans then passed over flaps, which could be deflected up to 60° for landing. (Av Wk, 4/5/71, 44)
nasa’s supercritical wing, flown on TF-8A aircraft piloted by NASA test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, successfully completed 10th flight from frc. Objectives of 40-min flight were to obtain additional pressure distribution and performance data at high subsonic speeds and evaluAugust 27; Noise tests of NASA’s experimental, quieter jet aircraft engine were under way in Peebles, Ohio, the Lewis Research Center announced. The project sought to develop an engine of 97 850-newton (22 000-pound) thrust that would operate at }5 to 20 decibels quieter ikon engines used in present subsonic air transports. In the photo the engine was being checked out before the General Electric Co. noise tests. A probe inserted in the exhaust nozzle (left) measured the smoke produced. ate flutter characteristics at low supersonic speeds. Aircraft reached 12 000-m (40000-ft) altitude, with pressure distribution and performance data obtained from mach 0.80 to 0.97 and flutter characteristics evaluated at mach 1.05 and 1.10. (NASA Proj Off)
President Nixon’s FY 1972 science budget was analyzed in Science: Budget proposed selective increases for r&d which would “start the federal science budget upward again after several years of virtually static financing.” Impact in FY 1972 spending would not be dramatic “since there is a lag of as much as 2 or 3 years between the obligation and actual spending” but budget served as “declaration of intentions.” Nixon Administration showed “inclination to maintain high-quality capabilities for research but to restrain expansion of research and, particularly, of manpower training except in areas judged to contribute to the solution of major nation problems.” Priorities were indicated by choices of agencies and programs for major increases: nsf budget would exceed $600 million for first time, with major portion of increases going to additional support of research grants. New cancer research program would receive $100 million. Substantial increases would provide funds for research on environmental problems, highway safety, air traffic control, and crime reduction, dod r&D spending would be increased with additional funds split between work on strategic and tactical weapons. Obligational authority for total Federal science budget would rise to $16.7 billion from $15.6 billion in FY 1971, but estimated expenditures would rise only from $15.3 to $15.6 billion, nsf would get new obligational authority of $622 million in FY 1972 but would spend estimated $546 million. (Science, 2/5/71, 459-60)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had released market analysis that showed it could sell at least 400 new L-1011 TriStar jet airbuses—about 60% more than needed for firm to break even, Dow Jones reported in Washington Evening Star. (W Star, 7/8/71, B9) Judy 9: nasa began distribution to 24 U.S. scientists of lunar soil samples returned by Soviet Luna 16 spacecraft and exchanged by U.S.S.R. for Apollo 11 and 12 samples June 10. About 50% of total three grams (one tenth ounce) of material would be distributed to principal U.S. experimenters in stages. First lot was about 600 mg (9 grains), or about 20% of total sample. Dr. Paul Gast, chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., had said Soviet scientists had implied samples from Sea of Fertility differed from U.S. lunar samples because regolith was thinner and closer to underlying strata than soil of other lunar mare areas. Dr. Gast said Soviet samples contained wider grains than did U.S. samples, (nasa Release 71—128)
Langley Visitor Information Center was dedicated in formal ceremonies at LaRC. Dr. James C. Fletcher attended, in first official visit of new NASA Administrator to any NASA center. Rep. Thomas N. Downing (D-Va.) said in dedication speech: “Space flight has opened up new vistas of flight and of the mind to understand the universe and our place in it. Our technology has become the world’s best and has brought us prosperity in a highly competitive environment.” Dr. Fletcher said center would give public broad understanding of what was happening in aerospace technology. Science was “part of our everyday life.” Technological society would continue “for the next 100 or perhaps 1,000 years.” Center displayed model aircraft, model spacecraft, lunar sample, and suit used by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., while training for Apollo 14 mission. (Langley Researcher, 5/28/71, 1; 6/11/71, 1: Text)
Assembly of solar radio telescope 10 m (33 ft) in diameter was nearing completion at Baldone, Latvia, Riga Sovetskaya Latviya reported. Parabolic antenna would enable Latvian Academy of Sciences Radio-astrophysical Observatory scientists to study all fluctuations of sun’s radiowaves. (fbis-Sov-70, 10/22/71, L4)
ARC-developed oximeter—device to measure oxygen content of blood by light absorption of blood circulating through ear—was being used by National Cancer Institute’s Leukemia Service for early detection of shock, nasa announced. Device had been introduced to Cancer Institute by Biomedical Application Team (bateam) of Research Triangle Institute. Team was employed by NASA to exchange space-developed technology between physical and medical sciences. Oximeter had been developed in 1960s to study effects of rapid acceleration in centrifuge on subjects, to determine reactions to simulated manned space flight conditions, (nasa Release 71—132)
Senate Committee on Nutrition asked Federal Government to provide emergency food for highly skilled professionals in Seattle, Wash., who had been hit by aerospace industry unemployment. Committee, investigating Seattle situation after Dept, of Agriculture had refused request from State of Washington for free distribution of surplus food in Seattle, said many families were going hungry. (Reuters, W Post, 11/29/71, A6)
usaf X—24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Cecil Powell (usaf) , reached mach 1 and 18 300-m (60 000-ft) altitude during 24th flight from frc in joint nasa-usaf research program. Purpose of powered flight was to determine lateral-directional derivatives with power on and to determine longitudinal derivatives at mach 0.6 (nasa Proj Off)
nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences had agreed on substance and mechanics of future exchanges of medical and biological data on their experience in manned space flight, NASA announced. Agreement’s details were contained in recommendations of joint working group on space biology and medicine which met in Moscow Oct. 9-13. Group—cochaired by Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director for Life Sciences, and Dr. N. N. Gurovsky of U.S.S.R. Ministry of Health and Academy of Sciences—recommended that meetings be held at least once annually, with next meeting held in U.S. during May 1972; working sessions be held to consider ways to predict state of human organism during and after space flights, response of certain body systems to space environment, techniques of dysbarism prevention, methods of preflight and postflight medical observations, and methods and results of biological experiments; and cochairmen explore possibility of an exchange of one or two specialists to work in laboratories doing similar biomedical research in space programs of U.S. and U.S.S.R. (nasa Release 71-251)
Dale D. Myers, Nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during hearings on nasa FY 1972 authorization bill: “With the Apollo 14 scientific instruments operating properly, we now have begun to develop the networks of instrumentation at different locations on the lunar surface which will allow us to use normal triangulation procedures to establish the details of the moon’s structure. We have two passive seismometers and two suprathermal ion detectors in operation, one each at the Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 sites, about 115 miles [185 km] apart. Last week severed moonquakes were reported . . . when the moon reached its perigee. Our instruments pinpointed the location of these events . . . close to the Fra Mauro crater area. “We also have a laser ranging retroflector at the Apollo 11 Tranquility Base and another at Fra Mauro—750 miles [1200 km] apart. The laser ranging team at the MacDonald Observatory in Texas has reported high-quality returns from the Apollo 14 reflector. As the world’s observatories refine their ability to use these instruments, we hope that they will be able to detect random wobbles of the earth’s rotational axis. If so, this may contribute to the ability to predict major earthquakes.” During past year, design and essentially all phases of development testing had been completed for Skylab and flight hardware was in fabrication. Definition of space shuttle was nearing completion. To develop limited capability to rescue Skylab astronauts from space, NASA had initiated design action on modification kit to give Skylab CM capacity to carry two men up to orbit and five men back to earth. Stranded astronauts could use Skylab cluster as shelter while modification kit was installed and Apollo-Saturn IB launch vehicle assigned to next revisit was made ready for launch. (Transcript)
U.S. patent No. 3 608 844, for self-deploying arm to serve as spacecraft boom or antenna, was granted to GSFC engineers William T. Tumulty, Jr., and Wayne P. Sours. Called Minimech, device could also retrieve objects from burning building, serve as escape chute, or erect itself as instant tent pole or instant plumbing. It could be made from various materials depending on purpose. (NYT, 10/2/71; Pat Off pio) Tetr 3 (tetr-d) Test and Training Satellite, carried pickaback on Delta 2nd stage, was ejected into orbit with 571-km (354.8-mi) apogee, 391-km (243-mi) perigee, 94.3-min period, and 33.0° inclination. Primary objective of 45-lb (20.4-kg) secondary payload was to test Manned Space Flight Network and train msfn personnel. Second-stage anomaly of launch vehicle separated spacecraft at pitch angle outside normal sun acquisition limits. For eight hours following orbital insertion, ground controllers manually commanded spacecraft to despin. Pitch angle was then changed to place it within automatic acquisition range. Sail section was commanded to acquisition mode and sail acquired and locked onto sun at approximately 2:00 pin edt. Batteries were then charged. Orbit would permit observations for more than a year. Oso 7, improved over earlier osos, provided for increase in experiment size and weight and power and extended capability in pointed mode, including stability and pointing during night portion of orbit. It was spin-stabilized; weighed 636 kg (1403 lbs); carried six scientific experiments; and had two main sections—wheel (lower), which carried nondirectional scanning experiments and basic support equipment, and sail (upper), which carried pointed experiments. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of preceding oso spacecraft, were provided by gsfc, nrl, mit, Univ. of New Hampshire, and Univ. of California (San Diego). Oso 7 was 8th in series of 11 OSO spacecraft designed to provide direct observations of sun during most of 11-yr solar cycle. Oso 1 (launched March 7, 1962) and Oso 2 (launched Feb. 3, 1965) had passed their six-month lifetimes and together provided more than 8600 hours of scientific information, oso-c (launched Aug. 25, 1968) had failed to reach orbit when booster malfunctioned. Oso 3 (launched Mar. 8, 1967) and Oso 4 (launched Oct. 18, 1967) transmitted on command only. Oso 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1969) had both tape recorders and seven of eight experiments operating satisfactorily after six months in orbit. Oso 6 (launched Aug. 9, 1969) was relaying information from all seven experiments. OSO program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-163; Spacetvam, 10/5/71)
aia Aerospace Research Center published National Technology Support: A Study of Research and Development Trends and Their Implications: New patterns were emerging in magnitude and direction of R&D in U.S. “Recent R&D trends reflect diminishing governmental leadership in R&D which could lead to an erosion of the national research effort. The impact of continued inflation, the higher costs and longer leadtimes associated with increasingly sophisticated projects, plus accelerated efforts to meet specific national goals, suggest an even greater degradation of the total R&D effort than an examination of expenditures would indicate.” Recent growth of industrial financing and leveling of Federal funding indicated shift in direction of national R&D activities. “Whereas industrial research and development has focused primarily upon product improvement and product development, most of the nation’s basic research and the high risk, high cost activity has been financed by the Federal Government. Although their respective r&d programs frequently are complementary, certain technological projects traditionally initiated or sponsored by the Federal Government are beyond the financial scope of private enterprise. Consequently, a reduction in Federal r&d activity could have a negative impact on the level of sophisticated effort nationally.” Investments in higher education, level and nature of Federal r&d support, and utilization of existing manpower “provide some indication of the long-term scientific and technical capability of the nation. Previous Federal support of certain programs has had a feedback effect on the desirability of pursuing certain careers. Thus the failure to consider the long-term relationship among various fields of science implies future imbalances.” Establishment of longer range R&D priorities and well defined national technological strategy was needed. (Text)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of invention of computer by Dr. J. P. Eckert and Dr. John W. Mauchly of Univ. of Pennsylvania. New York Times editorial Aug. 9 commented on anniversary: “Man’s invasion of space, up to and including Apollo 15’s latest feats, would have been impossible without computers. So would much of the rest of modern science and technology.” (Smith, NYT, 8/4/71, 43: NYT, 8/9/71, 28)
NASA announced award of seven-month study contracts totaling $1 387 576 to nine universities and one NASA center to define requirements for seven astronomy experiments for proposed High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao). (msfc Release 71-52)
New York Times editorial praised end of sst: “This action expresses a sound sense of national priority and of concern with ecological values. It also exposes last week’s surprise vote in the House to revive the SST as a political power play that reflects no credit on the leadership of either party. To reopen a major issue without advance warning to opponents was highhanded; to do so without getting up-to-date cost estimates from the Boeing Company was frivolous.” (NYT, 5/21/71) May 21-22: Application of laminar air-flow techniques in medical surgery was discussed during symposium on Clean Room Technology in Surgery Suites at icsc. (nasa Special Release 5/14/71; ksc pao)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by nasa from wsmr carried Dudley Observatory payload to 123.5-km (76.7-mi) altitude to measure particulate matter in upper atmosphere by photometer, microphones, plasma detector, and particle collection. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered as planned, (nasa Rpt srl)
KSC tourist facilities were described in New York Times travel section: “In these days of popular denigration of space exploration, the tourist is likely to approach this vast space-age outdoor science museum in a defensively skeptical frame of mind. Three or more hours later he is likely to leave the center convinced that it was a valuable and exciting experience.” KSC was “one of the least commercialized major tourist attractions of the world.” NASA was “selling ... on tapes and in guide lectures, but not offensively and not at the expense of information you want.” There was little evidence of security “and the guides emphasize that you may photograph anything you see.” (Fried-lander, NYT, 4/25/71)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, enumerated major factors relevant to nasa FY 1973 budget request in speech before aiaa National Capital Section: 1. “Program continuity must be maintained.” NASA could not “shut down major programs for several years and then start them up again efficiently.” 2. NASA programs had helped stabilize U.S. aerospace industry. “This is a very significant reason for maintaining NASA programs up to or near current levels at this time.” 3. NASA would reach minimum “institutional base” requirement for efficient management of approved programs in current fiscal year. “I will strongly resist any further reductions.” 4. Space shuttle was “next logical step to develop our national capabilities for using space more economically and more effectively with manned and unmanned spacecraft, for both civilian and defense purposes.” 5. U.S. was lagging behind in development of new technology for commercial and military aviation. “We killed the sst while Britain and France went ahead to build the Concorde, and the Soviet Union built a competing version. The Europeans—and our Canadian neighbors—are ahead of us in Short Take Off and Landing Aircraft. The question must be asked, how long can we, as a great nation, afford to be mere spectators while others move ahead in aircraft technology?” nasa did not intend “to shift the gears of our space program into the ‘park’ position; we are geared up for continued steady and impressive progress in those areas of space activity which we consider most rewarding scientifically or most important to our national security.” Within few years “there will be no time of day or night, year in and year out, when men are not working in orbit above the earth. And it is up to us, in decisions to be made this year in this capital, whether these men in orbit will include Americans.” (Text)
Newspapers reviewed Of a Fire on the Moon by Norman Mailer. In New York Times Book Review Morris Dickstein said book aimed at confrontation with “brave new world of science and technology.” Mailer found himself “frustrated at every turn. The event seems packaged, distant, unapproachable. . . .” Mailer gave “rather depressed personal account of his attempt ... to make an approach to the mission, especially to the astronauts and their machines.” Mailer felt “betrayed by the gap between his romantic expectations and the gray hut immense realities. Seeking to understand, he turns the book into an account of the other America, the Wasp hinterland.” In end Dickstein concluded, “This is not perhaps the book on the impact of technology that we needed, but it is important nonetheless, and offers much to ponder and prey on.” (NYT Book Review, 1/10/71, 1, 42-45) In Washington Sunday Star, Day Thorpe said: “Mailer wasn’t a passenger on Apollo 11, but in his motel rooms in Houston and Canaveral, and in his home in Provincetown ... he has put together a long and excellent book about the flight, the story not only of what the adventure meant to the three astronauts who lived it but, no less interesting, what it meant to Mailer himself. The bureaucrats Mailer encountered first in hermetic Houston and then in hermetic Canaveral were unlike all other bureaucrats. They were infallibly courteous, considerate and helpful, and they invariably told the truth.” Mailer showed Apollo 11 astronauts as “three human beings, as similar as necessary for their mission, but as unlike one another as experimental prototypes should be.” (W Star, 1/10/71, D 6)
Sen. Edmund S. Muskie (D-Me.) introduced, for himself and cosponsors, S. 1382, “to authorize the Secretary of Transportation to carry out a special program of transportation research and development utilizing the unique experience and manpower of the airframe and defense industries.” (CR, 3/25/71, S3900)
kasa selected Douglas Aircraft Co., Grumman Aerospace Corp., and Lockheed-Georgia Co. for negotiations of three separate $ 1.5-million, six-month contracts for design phase of questol (quiet, experimental stol) program. After completion of design phase one contractor would be selected to fabricate two experimental transport aircraft for flight research program. (NASA Release 71-238) *	Description by Soviet professor of physics and mathematics M. Marov of Mars 2 scientific program to Soviet journalists was reported by Tass: “Registration of various radiations from Mars, ranging from ultraviolet light to radio waves, by sputniks from a comparatively short distance will give much more complete information about Mars. Certain findings which are still quite inadequate are readily available. It has been established that at least nine-tenths of the Martian atmosphere consists of carbon dioxide. Nitrogen is practically absent, while water vapors are very scant. The thin atmosphere of Mars is extremely heterogeneous. Its structure varies widely with seasons, the time of day and night. The structure of the surface in the areas explored is very heterogeneous too.” (fbis-Sov-71-233, 12/3/71, L3)
NASA announced it was expanding its airborne research program by acquiring two Lockheed U-2 high-altitude aircraft under loan agreement with usaf and concentrating flights over four ecological test areas in U.S. Program objectives were to simulate data output of erts scheduled for 1972 launch, collect data simultaneously over various test sites with passes of erts and Skylab after they were orbited, support earth resources survey programs of other agencies, and make observations in astronomy, atmospheric physics, and geophysics for nasa’s physics and astronomy programs, (nasa Release 71-60)
NASA was looking at air bases in the Carolinas, south Florida, and the Bahamas as possible landing site for space shuttle rocket launched from KSC, UPI said in Philadelphia Inquirer. NASA engineers also were considering refueling shuttle booster’s 1st stage in flight so that it could return to launch site for landing, like aircraft. (P lnq,
Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, presented nasa FY 1972 budget request to House Committee on Science and Astronautics: FY 1972 projects—including Apollo 15 and 16, two Mariner spacecraft, first erts satellite, and continuing work toward future flights of Apollo 17, Skylab, earth resources and ats satellites, and Viking probes —represented “the fulfillment of enterprises of the 1960’s, the tailing off to completion of work in progress for many years. By 1974 the number of nasa space launches per year will have declined from 26 in 1966 to eight. After the Skylab missions in 1973, we face at least 4 years in which there will be no United States manned space flight. “Five years ago there were over 390 000 people in industry employed on nasa work. By the end of fiscal year 1971 that figure will be about 108 000. The decline will continue for a few more months, but we expect it to start increasing by the middle of fiscal year 1972, with the end-of-the-year total being about equal to that at the beginning.” U.S. was “running a serious risk of losing too much of the aerospace capability that is an essential ingredient of our long term national strength and security.” There was every indication U.S. would lose leadership in space “unless we move forward now with our space programs for the 1970’s. In 1970 the Soviets launched 88 payloads into space compared to . . . 36 for the United States. Their r&d budget is continuing to increase. They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus and Mars while we have many gaps in our planetary program. We would expect them to use automated vehicles and sample return spacecraft from the planets, while we have no such program. Finally the Soviets have a systematic continuing manned space flight program and have stated that they expect to fly a space station before we do.” U.S. should continue to compete with U.S.S.R. “because accomplishments in space represent a measure of the state of our technology; and in today’s world, the level of our technology is of first importance, strategically, economically, and politically.” Dr. Low believed U.S. could cooperate with U.S.S.R. “in the areas we have under discussion without prejudicing any of our vital national interests.” nasa was reexamining procurement policies and practices and “beginning a serious critical appraisal of the proper size, composition, and organization of NASA’s institutional base.” Position reduction of 1500 in FY 1972 budget was in anticipation that “reduction of this magnitude would be found possible without unduly impairing our ability to carry out the program. Our budget justifications show this reduction as a flat percentage cut—about 5.1%—in all of our major activities. The actual adjustments . . . will be refined as our study of the nasa institutional base proceeds.” nasa program was 1.4% of U.S. budget, contrasting with 53% for domestic programs related to human and physical resources, yet U.S. stood to gain “tremendous benefits now and in the future” from exploration and applications of space science and technology. And whole future “as a nation and as mankind” depended on space science. “For in order to survive in the changing environment on our planet Earth, we must understand the processes that govern our universe.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, said purpose of nasa Meteorology Program was to “develop and demonstrate sensors and spacecraft for making those meteorological measurements that will enable a continued improvement in weather forecasting throughout the world with an ultimate view to a limited degree of weather modification and control of severe weather systems. Projections indicate that by about 1980 it should be possible to reach a global capability to acquire information throughout the atmosphere and to develop comprehensive weather models. Once developed, these models can be used to make 14-day weather forecasts and long-range climate estimates.” Ability to develop weather models would permit basic experimenting in weather control. Space shuttle was key nasa development believed essential in 1970s, Dr. von Braun said, presenting U.S. with its greatest technology challenge for space in this decade. “Preliminary analysis indicates that if the shuttle is used in lieu of current expendable systems, the transportation costs will be reduced by at least a factor of ten. . . . Only by an investment now will we be able to have operational an economical transportation system by the end of the 1970’s to support a vigorous and balanced space flight program.” (Transcript)
Tass announced construction by Soviet scientists of “world’s first operating installation” to convert atomic energy directly into electricity. Installation had produced “several kilowatts” for “new major achievement of Soviet atomic science and technology.” aec said later that, while U.S. had done same thing on smaller scale, U.S.S.R. might be closer to building unit large enough to power giant, multichannel comsats, long-range space missions, or compact power station under sea or in remote places. (Cohn, W Post, 3/26/71, Al)
Training models of Sky lab’s Orbital Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount arrived at the Manned Spacecraft Center from fabrication at the Marshall Space Flight Center. They would be used for training crewmen for the 1973 mission, planned to include three separate crews of three astronauts each—the first crew to stay for 28 days and the next two for 56 days each. The overhead view above shows crew quarters in the 1-g trainer model of the Workshop. At the top is the general control and working area with several experiments. At the right is the wardroom, where crewmen would prepare and eat food and spend leisure time. At the lower center is the waste management compartment, or “space bathroom.” At the left is the sleep compartment. perigee, 116.6-min period, and 74° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/71; fbis-Sov-199-3, 10/14/71, LI; SF, 4/72, 132)
Establishment of joint nasa-dot Office of Noise Abatement was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Office would provide overall leadership and focal point for national program to attack noise problems of current and planned transportation systems. Charles R. Foster, head of dot Office of Noise Abatement, would be Director of joint office. Walter F. Dankhoff, Chief of LeRc Office of Operations and Planning, would be Deputy Director. New office would be responsible to Robert H. Cannon, Jr., Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Systems Development and Technology, and to Roy P. Jackson, nasa Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. It would also integrate programs with other agencies through Interagency Aircraft Noise Abatement Program and was fulfillment of some of recommendations from Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study, (nasa Release 71-213)
National Space Club luncheon honored Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, late nasa Deputy Administrator, physicist, and Director of naca from 1947 to 1958. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, said in speech: “Dr. Dryden held that the decentralization of authority was a desirable goal and dictatorial control of projects, funds, and facilities should be avoided. He knew that ideas and skills would be widely dispersed. Even though the goals of applied research and development projects were concrete and specific, the approach to these goals had to he diversified. Freedom of the agencies and scientists engaged in the work was a necessity here, as it was in fundamental research, if the best use was to be made of their abilities. These concepts have lived and grown, and I believe, still represent the fundamental policy for the management of programs at nasa today.” During luncheon, bust of Dr. Dryden, commissioned by National Space Club and executed by sculptress Una Hanbury, was officially presented to nas President, Dr. Philip Handler. (Text; nsc News Letter)
nasa Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard C. McCurdy testified on research and program management (r&pm) budget request during House Committee on Science and Astronautics hearings on NASA FY 1972 authorization: FY 1972 request was 821 million less than in FY 1971, primarily because of continuing reduction in permanent positions. Request of $697.4 million was based on further reduction of Government personnel of 1500 positions, lowering employment to 28 350—total reduction of 6971 positions from 1967 peak and lowest level since 1963. Cut of “some 20 percent in the 1967—72 period is by a considerable margin the greatest, proportionately, to be made by any Government agency in the period.” Of total NASA force, scientists and engineers made up 44.8%, technicians 26.7%, administrative personnel 13.9%, and clerical 14.6%. Hiring restrictions had reduced number of new college graduates added to work force and raised average age to 41.3, with rate of 8/10 a year each year, endangering health and vigor of NASA. “In the past decade, the aerospace industry, overall as well as that portion serving NASA, has passed through a substantial perturbation. Contractor employment climbed to a high peak, then dropped drastically. The current estimate for industry employment on NASA work at the end of this year and next is about 108,000—less than one-third of what it was at the peak of the space program. But with the major reductions in the space program over the last several years, this is how it must be.” Daniel J. Harnett, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, testified on NASA management of its new technology as “a repository of national resources”: Some 20 000 technical contributions had been disclosed by NASA contractors, 3500 in past year. Another 4000 had been reported by NASA employees from inhouse projects. Contributions reported were evaluated, defined, and published for use by others. Allocations for FY 1972 were increased over previous year as NASA began to work with innovative events of early stages of 1970s R&D programs. (Transcript)
Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport, left Toulouse for Cayenne, French Guiana, on first leg of first transatlantic test flight, to Rio de Janeiro. Flight would promote sale of aircraft in South America and continue performance testing and long-range flying in context of commercial airports. (BAC-Aero-spatiale France Release 17C/71)
Responsibility for NASA space tug activities was assigned to msfc by Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in letter to Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, msfc Director, msfc would manage “inhouse and contracted activities” and provide liaison with DOD and European groups interested in participating in development and use of space tug. Dr. Rees later said Space Tug Project Group would be established within Advanced Systems Analysis Office of Program Development. (msfc Release 71-178)
LaRC awarded $3 934 000 contract to Carey General Contractors, Inc., and Metropolitan Construction Co. of Missouri for joint construction of 4200-sq-m (45 500-sq-ft) Aircraft Noise Reduction Laboratory. Research facility, to be completed by November 1972, would include acoustics physics laboratory, applications area with anechoic room and reverberation room, and external effects simulation laboratory. (NASA Release 71-133)
nsf published Research and Development in Industry, 1969: Funds, 1969; Scientists & Engineers, January 1970 (nsf 71-18). In 1969 industry spent $18.5 billion for r&d—6% above 1968 level of $17.5 billion and 5 times amount spent on r&d in 1953. Increase in 1968-1969 was due to increase in companies’ own funds. Between January 1969 and January 1970 full-time equivalent number of r&d scientists and engineers employed in industry dropped from 387 100 to 380 600. Decline —first recorded by nsf in 13-yr series of reports, was primarily caused by cutbacks in personnel working on Federal r&d programs. Most of r&d unemployment among scientists and engineers occurred in aircraft and missiles industry. Number of R&d professionals in dod programs remained level between 1968 and 1969. Federal Government was source of 47% of r&d dollars spent by industry during 1969, down from 59% in 1959. dod and NASA furnished 89% of Federal r&d funds to industry in 1969 and supported 89% of industrial scientists and engineers working on Federal programs, at average annual cost of $56 200 each. In 1969 industry financed 53% of its r&d with its own funds, increase from 41% in 1959. Industry allocated 3% of its 1969 r&d funds to basic research with more than 50% of this amount spent on physical sciences. (Text)
Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic transport, landed at Rio de Janeiro after successful first transatlantic test flight, piloted by French test pilot Andre Turcat [see Sept. 4]. Turcat told newsmen aircraft had flown at mach 2 for nine minutes during 3240-km (2015-mi) flight. (AP, NYT, 9/7/71, 62)
West Germany’s Bochum Observatory reported Communist China’s second satellite (launched March 3) had stopped transmitting signals on March 23. Scientists did not know whether satellite had failed or had been turned off. (AP, W Star, 3/25/71, Al)
Cambridge Univ. astronomer Dr. David Dewhirst said in Cambridge that irregularities in orbit of Neptune, eighth planet from sun, indicated possible presence of another body. “But I must emphasize that at present this is only a notion.” Dr. Dewhirst said U.S. Naval Observatory had supplied photos for study, (upi, W News, 11/18/71, 15)
Washington Daily News editorial commented on Aug. 25 resignation from NASA of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong: “Offhand, it is regrettable to see any of these accomplished men leave the program they helped make such a smashing success. But Mr. Armstrong will be teaching engineering and it will be no surprise if some of his students wind up in future space exploration. So count his ‘defection’ to education as another spinoff benefit of the space program.” (W News, 8/30/71, 22)
Smithsonian Institution’s revived plans for construction of $40-million Air and Space Museum on south side of Mall in Washington, D.C., were described by Museum Director Michael Collins, Apollo 11 Astronaut, in interview published by Washington Post. Plans for building, to contain exhibit areas and galleries with displays on history of aviation and science and technology of flight, would be presented to National Capital Planning Commission in November. Collins said only best items in Smithsonian’s collection would be exhibited in new museum, designed by architect Gyo Obata, who had designed previous building that would now cost $70 million to construct. Collins said Smithsonian would ask Congress to appropriate funds for new building in FY 1972. (Scharfen-berg, W Post, 10/28/71, Bl)
Astronomers had asked Tucson, Ariz., to modify its outdoor lighting so their view of heavens would not be obstructed by nighttime glare, Science reported. Astronomers at Kitt Peak National Observatory, National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Steward Observatory, Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had complained. (Bazell, Science, 2/5/71, 561))
aiaa Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award was presented to Dr. Hubertus Strughold, former chief scientist of afsc Aerospace Medical Div., during ceremonies at San Antonio, Tex. Citation was for “significant contributions indicative of American enterprise and ingenuity in the art and science of space travel.” Dr. Strughold was cited for establishing rational biomedical functions for manned space exploration. (afsc Newsreview, 1/72, 13)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1, first self-propelled lunar vehicle, ceased operations after 321 days on moon, Tass announced Oct. 9. Eightwheeled vehicle stopped transmitting photos and soil analyses to earth when its isotope heat reserves were exhausted during its 11th lunar night on moon. Depletion of nuclear heat source had caused temperatures on rover to drop during lunar night. Vehicle had been landed on moon in Sea of Rains by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970. Solar-powered Lunokhod 1 had successfully conducted scientific and technical research program with all systems functioning normally. It had traveled distance of 10 540 m (34 680 ft), exploring more than 80 000 sq m (860 000 sq ft) of lunar surface and had produced more than 500 panoramas, 20 000 TV pictures, 25 chemical analyses, and hundreds of probes of physical-mechanical characteristics of lunar soil. Vehicle had been parked on level surface with French-made laser reflector pointing toward earth, to permit continued use of laser for ranging experiments. (fbis-Sov-71—197—3, 10/12/71, LI; 212-3, 11/3/71, L5-6; NYT, 10/10/71, 68; Av Wk, 10/18/71, 17)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar IT. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held news briefing in Washington, D.C. Crew showed film and slides and described mission and preliminary results. To question on future of manned space flight Shepard said: “The relative comparison of the efficiency of the manned versus the unmanned systems, I think we tried over the years to show where we feel that man has his point, has his place in space . . . and with 14, certainly, there were several instances where basic reflexes, basic judgment, and human instincts made it a successful flight where it would not have been successful otherwise. “Obviously, we brought back a lot more rocks than the Lunokhod has brought back. But I don’t think that is the point. I think the point is that we have chosen to exercise part of the expenditures of our money along the areas that we have found to be successful; that is, manned flight. I think we have shown on the 14 . . . that manned space flight can contribute on a scientific basis and contribute efficiently when it comes to assessing the dollar value put on it.” (Transcript)
U.S. technological society was product of past r&d efforts, President. Charles A. Anderson of Stanford Research Institute said in Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial. Current assault on U.S. leadership in science and technology was “both external and internal.” Western Europe, Japan, and U.S.S.R. were progressing in areas traditionally controlled by U.S. “In radio astronomy, high energy physics and conventional energy research we have already been surpassed. Internally, a new national distaste for science and technology is undermining the national research and development effort.” {Av Wk, 10/18/71, 7) Dr. John W. Freeman, Jr., of Rice Univ. referred to results of Apollo 12 and 14 suprathermal ion detector experiments that had discovered water vapor on moon [see Oct. 15]. Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, said neither he nor Dr. Freeman could locate source of tiny moonquakes that released gas from beneath lunar surface, including water vapor seen March 7. Dr. Latham described sudden and large surge from lunar surface detected by seismometer in April during series of moonquake swarms. Though he knew of no volcano on moon, he compared event—largest moonquake yet recorded—to volcanic activity on earth, (msc Release 72-77; Maloney, H Post, 10/19/71; Brett, W Post, 10/21/71, F2)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in Washington that Salyut 1-Soyuz 11 mission was “clear demonstration of the Soviet Union’s continuing interest in manned space flight and represents a further experiment to determine the value of manned earth orbital operations.” He wished Soviet cosmonauts “every success in their mission.” (Reuters, B Sun, 6/8/71)
Rep. Glenn M. Anderson (D-Calif.) introduced Emergency Conversion Loan Act to aid victims of aerospace industry depression. Legislation would immediately qualify jobless engineers, scientists, and technicians for conversion loans from banks in amounts up to 60 °/o of prior salary, but not to exceed $12 000. (CR, 5/24/71, E4915)
Tenth anniversary of U.S.S.R.’s Vostok 1, first manned space flight, piloted by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. Anniversary was celebrated in Moscow with 6000 guests attending memorial meeting in Kremlin’s Palace of Congresses and with Soviet newspapers filled with articles commemorating Sight. At Moscow ceremony Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said U.S.S.R. was looking forward to time “when man will make interplanetary flights. Tremendous potentialities in the study of the earth’s natural satellite were uncovered by the flights of American astronauts to the moon and the development in our own country of new types of automatic lunar stations.” Successful operation of U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover represented start of new era envisioned by Soviet scientists, Keldysh said. U.S.S.R. would emphasize unmanned flights with particular stress on long-term orbiting space stations. Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev told meeting U.S.S.R.’s 1971-1975 economic plans called for 1‘fundamental development of scientific research, with a significant role foT lunar and solar investigation.”
Possibility of using electrically controlled optical sensors and signal processes—techniques used to guide military missiles to targets—was being examined as substitute for sightless eyes by Huntington Institute of Applied Medical Research team led by Dr. Robert H. Pudenz, New York Times reported. Electrical impulses, as coded messages, would stimulate visual cortex of central nervous system and communicate pulses of information to brain by way of optic nerve. Artificial system would bypass eyes and optic nerve and radio signals directly to brain. (Holies, NYT, 4/26/71, 23)
FRC announced award of $211260, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to LTV Aerospace Corp. for design and construction of side fairings for NASA’s supercritical wing test aircraft, modified F-8 jet. Installation of side fairings would improve overall aircraft with area ruling, an aerodynamic design feature that would permit aircraft to fly more efficiently, and provide more desirable test environment for evaluating aerodynamic characteristics of supercritical wing near speed of sound. (frc Release 29—71)
usaf’s X—24A lifting body was shipped by air from frc to Martin Marietta Corp.’s Denver plant, where it would be modified and redesignated X-24B. Modified vehicle, of new shape with improved hypersonic lift-to-drag ratio, would be delivered to frc in early fall 1972. X-24A had completed 28 flights in joint NASA—usaf research program, reaching 1676 km per hr (1048 mph) and 21 600-m (71000-ft) altitude, (frc Release 30-71; SBD, 12/17/71, 215)
Sen. Lawton Chiles (D-Fla.) inserted House Memorial 780 from Florida Legislature in Congressional Record “to request that Kennedy Space Center be the site for construction of the space shuttle.” (CR, 5/25/71, S7680) .......
Marshall Space Flight Center announced retirement of Director of Program Management Lee B. James, effective May 31. James, who would return to academic community, would be replaced in acting capacity by James T. Shepherd, Deputy Director (Technical), Program Management. (msfc Release 71—77) During April: nasa issued Funds for Research, Development, R&D Plant and Scientific and Technical Information, Fiscal Years 1970—1972: Annual Report to The National Science Foundation. In FY 1972 budget, NASA was seeking authorization of $3,271 billion. Effect on programs would be: Funds for basic research would remain at FY 1970 level in FY 1971 and rise in FY 1972, reflecting increased funding for Viking and initiation of outer planets Grand Tour project. In applied research, estimates for FY 1971 reflected 10% increase over 1970 and slight increase in FY 1972, primarily for earth resources surveys and space station. Budget authority for development activities would decline in 1971 and 1972, primarily as result of completion of Apollo program and reduction in nasa—aec nerva program effort, r&d funds were requested in FY 1972 for space shuttle technology and engine development facilities. (Text)
U.S. and Canadian scientists were planning to build $12- to $15-million upper-atmosphere observatory to study relationship of space energy to weather, radio communications, and other phenomena on earth, Science reported. Transmitter and four receivers would be erected near Great Lakes, “where the earth’s magnetic field causes ionized layers of the upper atmosphere to form a low-density ‘trough.’ ” Preliminary engineering studies for observatory, which was scheduled for completion in 1974, were being conducted under $99 950 nsf grant. (Science, 4/16/71, 244)
In international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched NATO’s Natosat 2 military comsat for usaf and NATO, Eole Cooperative Applications Satellite for France, Isis 2 cooperative U.S.-Canada ionospheric satellite, and Ariel 4 ionospheric satellite for U.K. Italian crew trained by NASA launched NASA’s Explorer 45 Small Scientific Satellite and Italy’s San Marco 3 from Italian platform off coast of Kenya. Joint NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings on compatible spacecraft rendezvous and docking system progressed to discussion of possible joint test missions. Data obtained by NASA’s Mariner 9 and Soviet Mars 2 and 3 probes were exchanged under agreement that covered broad range of U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space science and applications. Agreement on future exchanges of medical and biological manned space flight data called for meetings between U.S. and Soviet experts at least annually. U.S. and U.S.S.R. exchanged Apollo 11 and 12 and Soviet Luna 16 lunar samples and Soviet scientists were among 750 experts attending Second Annual Lunar Science Conference at Lunar Science Institute in Houston. First U.S.-U.S.S.R. Conference on Communications with Extraterrestrial Intelligence was held in Soviet Armenia. Joint meeting of NASA and European Space Conference (esc) identified candidate areas for possible European participation in U.S. post-Apollo space programs, including design and development of space shuttle subsystems. International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey at Univ. of Michigan was cosponsored by NASA, Dept, of State, usn, and aid to inform representatives of 51 countries and international organizations of latest techniques for interpreting earth resources data acquired by aircraft and satellite remote sensing systems. nasa’s C-130 aircraft equipped with remote-sensing devices participated in U.S. survey of Jamaica’s natural resources undertaken at request of U.N. and Jamaican government. NASA signed agreement with West Germany for series of barium-ion-cloud (bic) probe launches, and new sounding rocket agreement was signed with France. Under sounding rocket agreement, 20 French Centaure and NASA Nike-Cajun rockets would be launched from Kourou Center, French Guiana, in cooperative France-U.S. upper-atmosphere research project. By end of year NASA had entered into cooperative agreements with 39 countries, including agreements on lunar samples, tracking and data acquisition, and geodetic satellite program. Scientists of 87 countries besides U.S. were participating in cooperative ground-based programs and personnel exchanges and 62 countries were exchanging scientific and technical information. Since the beginning of 1962, NASA had launched 21 satellites under international agreements, in addition to flying 21 international experiments on NASA satellites. Since the beginning of the sounding rocket program, 683 cooperative rockets had been launched for research, (nasa Release 71—245; NASA Int Aff; “Selected Statistics on Int’l Affairs,” 2/17/72; A&A, 1971)
House Committee on Armed Services’ subcommittee investigating Dec. 30, 1970,	crash of usn F—14 Tomcat fighter aircraft during test flight at Grumman facility in Calverton, N.Y., received communication from identified source containing 13 allegations of defects and deficiencies in F—14A design, manufacture, testing, and administrative controls. Rep. F. Edward Hebert (D-La.), as Chairman of investigation subcommittee, ordered full inquiry into charges. (Subcom Rpt, 12/20/71)
Discovery of galaxies Maffei 1 and Maffei 2 about 3 million light years from earth was reported in Astrophysical Journal by team of Univ. of California at Berkeley, Cal Tech, and Carnegie Institution astronomers headed by Robert Landau of Univ. of California at Berkeley. Galaxies previously had been obscured by interstellar dust in Milky Way. Team had begun study after Landau read 1968 report of Italian astronomer Paolo Maffei that two strange objects had been observed on infrared photo Maffei made of region between constellations Perseus and Cassiopeia. Using Mount Palomar and Lick Observatory telescopes and advanced astronomical tools and research techniques, team had located galaxies twice as far from earth as Andromeda, nearest galaxy to Milky Way. Team believed brighter of new galaxies might be larger than either Milky Way or Andromeda and thus possibly largest member of local group of galaxies, measuring 50 000 to 100 000 light years in diameter. (Astrophysical Journal, 1/1/71, L25-31)
MSFC announced new projects in research program on application of remote sensing techniques. Land-use survey of five north Alabama counties would photograph area from air with remote sensing camera to study how land was being used. Results would be used by Top of Alabama Regional Council of Governments. In “ground truth survey” with Alabama A&M Univ., MSFC would supplement aerial photography; university personnel would make sample ground study to correlate remote sensing information, (msfc Release 71—79)
National Urban Coalition released Counterbudget—A Blueprint for Changing National Priorities, 1971-1976. Report noted diminishing public support for science and technology and recommended 4% increase in r&d funding to prevent deterioration of Government’s role in science and technology in national affairs. Space program should be kept at funding level just over $3 billion, rather than $5.9-billion level reached in 1966. Space shuttle and station programs should be continued but on stretched schedule. Mars mission should be undertaken only when it could be done internationally. Value of space program as whole lay in its scientific yield, practical results, and national leadership. (CR, 5/21/71, E4836-98; nuc pio)
Office of Management and Budget had asked nasa to cut FY 1973 budget request “quite a few million dollars” below $3.3-billion FY 1972 budget according to New York Times’ sources, Times said. Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, had said Apollo 16 and 17 “look firm,” but could “be in trouble” if there was significant cut in NASA funding. Other sources had said NASA had alternate plans that included elimination of one or both Apollo flights and curtailment, cancellation, or delay of other projects. (Wilford, NYT, 11/19/71)
NASA and DOT released information given in Joint DOT—NASA Civil Aviation Research and Development Policy Study Report dated March 1971.	Study had been recommended by Congress and made by NASA,
nasa announced appointment of Lee R. Scherer, Apollo Lunar Exploration Director, as Director of Flight Research Center, nasa’s facility for flight-testing high-performance aeronautical vehicles at Edwards, Calif. Appointment would be effective Oct. 11. Until then De E. Beeler, Deputy Director, would continue as Acting frc Director. Scherer had been Assistant Director for Lunar Programs and Manager of Lunar Orbiter Program from its inception in 1963 through its successful completion in 1967. He had received nasa’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1967 and nasa’s Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal in 1969. (nasa Release 71—176)
Completion of arrangements for exchange of four computer programs between NASA and Japan’s Hitachi Central Research Laboratory was announced by NASA. Exchange, negotiated by NASA oart and Computer Software Management and Information Center (cosmic) operated at Univ. of Georgia under NASA contract, would make two Japanese programs available to U.S. users in exchange for two NASA programs that had been available to U.S. public for several years. (nasa Release 71—148)
Dedication ceremonies for (Ac historic launch site at Kennedy Space Center marked the 10th anniversary of the first U.S. manned space flight, fiotun on the Freedom 7 Mercury spacecraft. The first American to go into space, Astronaut Alan B, Shepard, }r.—who also was commander of the Apollo 14 lunar landing mission fan. 31—Feb. 9 this year—stood by the plague marking the site at AauncA Complex 5/6 during ceremonies attended by 3000 guests. The site had been restored to its original condition. DOT, and FAA, with assistance from dod, cab, and eight other Federal agencies. Report concluded that aircraft noise abatement deserved highest priority because of widespread concern for environment and because noise abatement program’s success would affect solution to other aviation problems. Study recommended reductions of at least 10 decibels every 10 yrs until aircraft noise was suppressed into community background noise. Continued Federal support at high level of aeronautical K&D was necessary to ensure strong technical base. Continued R&d was essential if current and future problems of civil aviation were to be solved and if civil aviation was to contribute to such future areas as regional development. Study recommended Government evaluate its regulatory role to be certain that policies were not inhibiting innovations by industry and that NASC develop permanent mechanism to review and recommend policies affecting civil aviation that embraced several agencies. Study called for exchange of middle management personnel between aviation-related agencies like NASA, DOT, DOD, and CAB. (NASA Release 71-82; Text; Av Wk, 5/10/71, 20-1)
nasa announced selection of trw Systems Group for negotiations leading to $70-million contract for development of High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao). Seven-year contract for two spacecraft would be awarded in 1972 and was expected to extend through launch and mission support for orbital operations. NASA planned to launch first heao unmanned scientific satellite from etr on Titan III booster in 1975 and second, 15 mos. later, (nasa Release 71-233; NYT, 11/26/71, 30)
nasa announced it had awarded Bellcomm, Inc., 17-mo, $11.5-million extension to contract for systems analysis, study, planning, and technical support to manned space flight program. Extension, which would continue through May 1972, brought total value of contract since March 1962 to $91 million, (nasa Release 71—17)
NASA announced award of $>4-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract modification to Ball Brothers Research Corp., Inc., for changes in oso—H Orbiting Solar Observatory to increase experiment capacity. Change orders definitized by contract included larger physical volume to handle larger experiment packages, improved command system security, and increased power for instruments. OSO-H would be launched in mid-1971. (NASA Release 71—2)
New York Times editorial commented on Soyuz-Salyut mission: “The latest Soviet spade spectacular follows a long series of indications by Kremlin leaders that their present priority in manned space flight is establishment of a long-lasting station in space. This latest experiment seems an important—as well as expensive—step on the road toward that objective.” But there was no guarantee that space stations would be restricted to benign purposes. “Logically, there should be no national space stations in space. All such facilities should be operated by the United Nations employing crews from many nations and they should all be open to appropriate international inspection.” Principle had been recognized in Antarctic “where the presence of Soviet scientists in American bases and American scientists in Soviet bases has a long, useful and honorable history. With the latest Soyuz and Salyut vehicles in orbit, the sensitive issues raised by space stations must be faced in the nearest future.” (NYT, 4/24/71)
Smithsonian Institution commissioned at Fort Pierce, Fla., the JohnsonSea-Link, five-man submersible research vessel designed to operate in water to depth of 900 m (3000 ft). First of its kind, 8-m (25-ft) vessel could remain under water for up to 48 hrs. (AP, W Star, 1/30/71, A9) January 31-February 9: nasa’s Apollo 14 (AS-509) carried three-man crew on successful lunar landing mission. LM-8 Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro and two astronauts conducted experiments and explored lunar surface for 9 hrs 24 min before rejoining orbiting CSM—110 and returning safely to earth with lunar samples in CM Kitty Hawk. January 31~February 3: Spacecraft, carrying Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot), was launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at 4:03 pm est Jan. 31 by Saturn V booster. Launch was 40 min 3 sec later than planned because of high overcast clouds and rain. Delay caused revision of flight azimuth from 72° to 75.6°. Launch was watched by about 2500 invited guests, including Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Prince Juan Carlos and Princess Sophia of Spain, and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Jr. Spacecraft and S—IVB combination entered parking orbit with 188.9-km (117.4-mi) apogee and 183.1-km (113.8-mi) perigee. Midcourse correction (MCC—1) modified trajectory so spacecraft arrival time at moon would be same as if launch had been on time. CSM separated from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:02 get. Onboard TV was initiated to cover CSM docking with LM, but difficulty in docking was encountered. First five docking attempts by cm pilot Roosa were unsuccessful. Mission Control in Houston, watching on TV, studied problem that could prevent extraction of LM and make lunar landing impossible. Alternate missions also were under study. Astronauts noted catches seemed properly cocked but did not release. Sixth try however, was successful; docking was achieved at 4:57 get, 1 hr 54 min later than planned. Separated S-IVB/iu impacted lunar surface at 83:18 get (2:41 am est Feb. 4) at 7°49' south latitude and 26° west longitude 174 km (108 mi) southeast of planned impact point. Apollo 12 seismometer detected impact and showed vibrations for about 2 hrs. Unscheduled 2-hr 22-min TV transmission from spacecraft was initiated at 10:00 get to troubleshoot probe and drogue of docking mechanism. Crew removed probe and drogue but found no foreign material or abnormal damage. Capture latch assembly was actuated and system performed nominally. Crew and ground were unable to determine why CSM and LM had failed to dock properly, but they found no indication that systems would not work normally again. Officials decided mission would continue as planned [see Feb. 1]. Second midcourse correction, with 10.1-sec sps burn at 30:36 get, increased velocity by 21.7 m per sec (71.1 fps). Following maneuver, crew completed about nine frames of dim-light photography on earth’s dark side and continued to check out systems, get update was performed at 55:40 GET to add the 40 min 3 sec lost by launch delay. MCC—3, scheduled for 60:38 get, was not necessary. Third TV transmission, for 42 min beginning at 60:40 get, showed Shepard and Mitchell transferring into LM and checking out LM systems. MCC—4, at 77:38 get with 0.6-sec sps burn, changed velocity 1.1 m per sec (3.5 fps). Shepard and Mitchell reentered LM and checked out systems before firing rcs thrusters at 104:28 get to separate CSM and lm. Spurious bit in lm guidance computer was corrected to preclude inadvertent January 31-February 9: Propelled into space by the Saturn V, Apollo 14 carried Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell to the moon on the third .successful United States lunar landing mission. After Feb. 5 touchdown, Shepard and Mitchell explored the Fra Mmtro area for 9 hours 24 minutes in two extravehicular periods before the LM Aniares lifted them off to rejoin Roosa in the orbiting cm Kitty Hawk for the return to earth. Prelaunch activities were monitored by Dr. George M. Low (at left below), Acting nasa Administrator, and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in Firing Room 2 at ksc. abort during powered descent, and Shepard controlled descent manually. LM Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro at 108:54 get (4:17 am est Feb. 5) on 8° slope 9—18 m (30-60 ft) short of planned landing point. “We seem to be sitting in a bowl,” Mitchell said. “It’s choppy, undulating. There is a large depression to our right to the north of us, which forms another bowl. And I can see several ridges and rolling hills of perhaps 35 to 40 feet (10 to 12 meters) in height.” First eva began 49 min later than planned because of intermittent plss communications. Shepard started down ladder, deployed mesa containing camera which recorded descent, and stepped on lunar surface at 114:30 get (9:53 am est Feb. 5). Mitchell stepped down six minutes later. “Not bad for an old man,” Mission Control told Shepard as he touched surface. “You’re right,” Shepard replied “I’m on the surface. It’s been a long way and I’m here. The surface on which the forward footpad landed is extremely soft. . . . it’s in a small depression. The soil is so soft that it comes all the way to the top of the footpads, it even folded over the sides to some degree. ... we can see the boulders on the rim. It looks as though we have a good traverse route up to the top of the Cone.” Crew collected 19.5-kg (43-lb) contingency sample; deployed TV, S-band antenna, American flag, and solar wind composition experiment; and photographed lm, lunar surface, and experiments, alsep was deployed about 152 m (500 ft) west of lm and laser-ranging retrorefiector was deployed about 30 m (100 ft) west of alsep. Mitchell conducted active seismic experiment, firing 13 thumper shots into lunar surface. Signals were recorded by geophones and transmitted to earth. Eight of the 21 cartridges misfired, but the 13 fired sent vibrations 18-21 m (60-70 ft) into moon. Crew was granted 30-min extension on EVA and reentered LM after 4 hrs 49 min. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:48 get (3:11 am est Feb. 6)—2 hrs 27 min earlier than planned. Astronauts loaded met with photographic equipment and lunar portable magnetometer (lpm) and proceeded toward Cone Crater, met bounced slightly during traverse but appeared stable. Astronauts’ main problem was lunar dust which stuck to their space suits up to their knees. “We’re filthy as pigs,” Mitchell said. “Everything’s going to be covered with dust before long.” lpm site measurement was made at first stop and lpm traverse measurement was later made near Cone Crater. Geological features were described and materials collected. Crew was unable to reach rim of Cone Crater because slopes were steeper than expected and climb would have required running behind time line by about 30 min. Samples were collected in blocky field near rim. On return leg of traverse crew dug 0.5-m (1.5-ft) trench and collected samples. Unsuccessful triple-core-tube attempt was made and other containerized samples were collected. Alignment adjustment was made to alsep central station’s antenna to improve signal strength being received at msfn ground stations. Crew was unable to perform a number of secondary tasks because of timeline and minor problems. Just before reentering LM Shepard made surprise announcement: “You might recognize what I have in my hand as the handle for the February 4-6; Tracks of the modularized equipment transporter, used for the first time on the Apollo 14 mission, were photographed, (at top left) leading across the lunar surface from the LM Antares. The inverted umbrella of the S-band antenna was positioned by the astronauts to the left of the lm. Lunar dust clung to the legs of Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell (above) as he moved across the surface during extravehicular activity. Meanwhile, in the Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Texas, a seismic reading of the Feb. 4 impact on the moon of the Saturn launch vehicle’s S-IVB stage was examined by Dr. Maurice Ewing (bottom left), Director of Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and Columbia graduate student David Lammlein. The impact released energy comparable to M tons of tht. contingency sample return and it just so happens to have a genuine six iron on the bottom of it.” Shepard dropped golf ball on lunar surface and on third attempt drove ball about 366 m (400 yds). Astronauts reentered LM at 136:26 GET, after 4 hrs 35 min, bringing total eva time to 9 hrs 24 min. While LM was on moon, Roosa, orbiting moon in csm, completed bootstrap photography of Descartes landing site and astronomic photography, including Gegenschein experiment, and prepared for shortened rendezvous technique. Shepard and Mitchell depressurized lm, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 43 kg (94.8 Ihs) of samples at 142:25 get—33 hrs 31 min after landing on moon. During braking phase for docking, telemetry indicated that abort guidance system had failed, but no caution and warning signals were on. Docking was accomplished successfully at 144:13 get (3:36 pm Feb. 6) with no probe-drogue problems. Probe was returned to earth for postflight analysis. Excellent TV during rendezvous and docking showed docking maneuver clearly. Crew transferred from LM to CSM with samples, equipment, and film. LM ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 148:22 GET (7:05 pm est Feb. 6) at 3° 35' south latitude and 19° 40' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 alseps. Transearth injection maneuver, on schedule at 149:16 get, injected CSM into transearth trajectory after 66 hrs 40 min (34 revolutions) in lunar orbit. cm Kitty Hawk separated from sm at 216:12 get. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Kitty Hawk splashed down in mid-Pacific about 7 km (4 nm) from recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans at 216:42 get (4.05 pm est Feb. 9). Astronauts, wearing flight suits and masks, were carried by helicopter from CM to recovery ship, where they entered mobile quarantine facility with recovery physicians and technician. Crew, physicians, and technician would remain inside MQF until ship neared Samoa and would then be transferred to another MQF for flight to LRL quarantine in Houston. CM was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF-CM containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown via Pago Pago to Houston for lrl. Primary Apollo 14 objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected region of Fra Mauro; deploy and activate alsep; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were achieved. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance was near nominal except for docking problems, spurious signals, and an occasional loss of communications. Flight crew performance was excellent. Crew exhibited exceptional poise during CSm/lm docking attempts and while troubleshooting AG computer. Accomplishments included first use of met, largest payload—32 500 kg (71 650 lbs)—placed in lunar orbit, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, largest payload returned from lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time, longest total EVA, first use of shortened rendezvous technique, first active seismic experiment, and first inflight technology demonstrations. Apollo 14 was 11th Apollo mission to date, 8th manned Apollo mission, and 3rd successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969) and Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) had proved capability to land men on moon and retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo 13 (April 11—17, 1970), aborted by sm tank explosion, had demonstrated capability to perform under emergency situation and return crew safely to earth under alternate plan. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245; NYT, 2/1-10/71; W Post, 2/1-10/71; Av Wk, 2/15/71, 19)
U.S.S.R. announced that Soviet supersonic transport Tu-144 had reached designed 2400-km-per-hr (1500-mph) speed at 16 700-m (55 000-ft) altitude during test flight Nov. 12, 1970. {NYT, 3/29/71, 53)
TRW Inc. would develop conceptual designs for manned research laboratory to support communications and navigation experiments under 10-mo, $288 000 contract, msfc announced. Study assumed laboratory would be launched in 1980s and could be flown as research and applications module or as segment of orbiting space station, (msfc Release 71-108)
France’s 90-kg (200-lb) Polaire scientific satellite, launched from Kourou Space Center, failed to enter orbit when 2nd stage of Diamant-B booster malfunctioned. (fbis-Sov-71-234, 12/6/71, T2; SBD, 12/7/71, 163)
John C. Lindsay Memorial Award for 1971 was presented to Harry E. Peters of gsfc Laser Data Systems Branch during gsfc Scientific Colloquium. Award, given annually to gsfc employee who had made outstanding contribution to science or technology, was presented for individual contributions to the advancement of hydrogen maser frequency standards resulting in most stable frequency standards known and making possible dramatic improvement in space tracking and system precision. (Goddard News, 6/14/71, 1) Orbital parameters for Soyuz 11 were apogee, 237 km (147.3 mi); perigee, 163 km (101.3 mi); period, 88.4 min; and inclination, 51.5°. Spacecraft docked with Salyut 1 at 10:45 am Moscow time (3:45 am edt) June 7. Tass announcement said: “In accordance with the Soviet programme of creating long-term orbital stations, the ‘Salyut’ orbital scientific station has started to function as the first piloted scientific station. . . . After successfully docking the Soyuz-11 transport spaceship with the scientific station . . . the crew of Soyuz-11 entered the scientific station. Solved for the first time was the engineering and technical task of delivering a crew to an orbiting scientific station by a transport ship.” Tass said Salyut-Soyuz space system was 20 m (66 ft) long, weighed more than 25 tons, and consisted of compartments containing equipment for scientific and technical experiments, for spacecraft control, and for crew work and rest. Cosmonauts would check out spacecraft subsystems; test orientation and navigation equipment; study geological-geographical objects on earth’s surface, atmospheric formations, and snow and ice cover; study physical characteristics, processes, and phenomena in atmosphere and outer space; and study medico-biological influence of space flight factors on human organism. Cosmonauts checked out systems, conducted experiments, and sent messages of thanks to scientists, engineers, and workers who took part in creation of space station system. TV transmissions showed crew performing duties in spacecraft. After one week in orbit, crew was in good health and had completed first phase of experiments with all systems functioning normally. Crew was allowed one-day rest before continuing experiments. By 1:00 pm Moscow time (6:00 am edt) June 13 Salyut-Soyuz station had completed 100 orbits of earth. Cosmonauts continued to follow preplanned program of work, rest, and two hours of exercise per day and reported they were in good health. Experiments included communications with ground via orbiting Molniya I comsat, astronomical observations, medical experiments, observation of cyclone in Pacific near Japan, and experiments with plants in hothouse on board. They reared tadpoles into frogs and grew cabbages and onions. By 12:00 noon Moscow time (5:00 am edt) June 22 station had completed 245 orbits of earth. Station completed 18th day in orbit June 24, surpassing 17-day 17-hr endurance record set by Soyuz 9 June 2—19,1970. On June 29 cosmonauts completed flight program and prepared for reentry. Crew transferred equipment to Soyuz 11 and undocked from Salyut 1 at 9:28 pm Moscow time (2:28 pm edt). Crew reported successful undocking and said all systems were functioning normally. At 1:35 am Moscow time June 30 (6:35 pm edt June 29) spacecraft’s braking engine was fired for prescheduled period. At end of engine firing communication with Soyuz 11 crew ceased. Tass said: “According to the program, after aerodynamic braking in the atmosphere the parachute system was put into action and before landing—the soft-landing engines were fired. The flight of the descending apparatus ended in a smooth landing in the pre-set area. Landing simultaneously with the ship, a helicopter-borne recovery group, upon opening .the hatch, found the crew ... in their seats, without any signs of life. The causes of the crew’s death are being investigated.” (gsfc SSR, 6/30/71; fbis-Sov-71-109-126, 6/7-30/71; Newsweek, 7/12/71)
At Paris Air Show Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa met in Soviet Pavilion with Vostok 4 Cosmonaut Pavel R. Popovich and Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Vitaly I. Sevastyanov and Andrian G. Nikolayev. Astronauts saw models of Baykonur launch complex, Vostok 1, and Soyuz spacecraft; examined display devoted to 10th anniversary of first space flight by Yuri A. Gagarin on April 12, 1961; ascended to Soyuz cm; and admired Lunokhod 1 lunar vehicle and Luna 16 unmanned spacecraft that had returned lunar samples to earth. Later astronauts and cosmonauts went to U.S. Pavilion where cosmonauts were shown Apollo 12 spacecraft and other exhibits. Cosmonauts presented astronauts with model of Soyuz spacecraft; astronauts reciprocated with small Soviet flag they had carried to moon aboard Apollo 14 and NASA astronaut badges. (fbis-Sov-7 1-108, 6/4/71, FI; NYT, 6/3/71, 41)
Pioneer-F, 250-kg (550-lb) spacecraft, was expected to be ready for launch from ETR in late February or early March 1972 and would fly by Jupiter in December 1973, nasa scientists announced at jpl press conference. Pioneer-G was to be launched in 1973 and fly past Jupiter in 1974. nasa Director of Planetary Programs Robert S. Kraemer said Pioneer flights would be “vital precursor” to future Grand Tour flights to outer planets. Pioneer spacecraft would be first to penetrate vast asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter and first to study planet’s intense radiation belts. (Wilford, NYT, 11/17/71, 26)
NATO intelligence had reported U.S.S.R. was flight-testing swing-wing supersonic strategic bomber designed to fly at twice speed of sound and equipped for low-level penetration of enemy defenses, New York Times said. Aircraft, christened “Backfire” by NATO, could become operational late in 1973. Western military intelligence specialists believed Backfire marked “emergence of entirely new Soviet air weapons system.” (Szulc, NYT, 9/5/71, 1)
Award by Communist Party Central Committee and Council of Ministers of U.S.S.R. of 1971 state prizes for achievements in science and technology was announced by Tass. State prize for celestial mechanics had been awarded to unidentified scientists “who have developed new methods of plotting the movement of natural and artificial space objects.” Research provided “a theoretical basis for the solution of engineering problems ... in the flight of space objects and their orientation in orbit.” Later, Pravda published article by Soviet Academy of Sciences President Mstislav V. Keldysh describing prize-winning research. “A cycle of works by Ye. P. Aksenov, G. N. Duboshin, and others is devoted to research into the various astronomical, mechanical and mathematical aspects of formulating high precision theories of the strongly perturbed motion of artificial and natural satellites of the planets and also of asteroids.” (fbis-Sov—71-217, 11/10/71, LI; 218, 11/11/71, LI)
Univ. of Tokyo’s Space and Aeronautics Institute successfully launched Japan’s second satellite, 63-kg (139-lb) Tansei (MST—1), from Uchinoura Space Center with four-stage Mu-4S booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 1110 km (689.7 mi); perigee, 990 km (615.2 mi); period, 106 min; and inclination, 29.7°. Purpose of mission was to conduct “engineering test for the launching of scientific satellites.” Tansei, “Light Blue,” was named for Univ. of Tokyo colors. First satellite, Ohsumi—named for district from which it was launched— had been launched Feb. 11, 1970. (UN General Assembly Release 71— 03697; SBD, 2/17/71, 211; nasa Off Int Aff; W Star, 2/16/71, A7)
Soyuz 11 accident in which crew lost lives [see June 6-30] might have been “greatest setback in Soviet space flight activity in past several years,” Space Business Daily reported. October, traditionally “bumper month for Soviet flight programming” had seen “relative depression” this year. In October 1970 U.S.S.R. had recorded 12 missions. This year, “up to last Week, there had been only 4 missions recorded.” (SBD, 10/26/71, 194)
