NASA announced issuance by Ames Research Center of request for proposals for studies on four proposed Pioneer-class missions to Venus in late 1970s. Proposals would cover design studies for entry probes and orbiting spacecraft. Two contractors would be selected to perform parallel, $500 000 design studies, (nasa Release 72—53)
New York Times editorial criticized Apollo 17 TV coverage: “One might have thought that the Apollo 17 moonwalks would be thoroughly covered by television as they took place. But the published television schedules indicate that the networks have chosen to dish out their usual commercial fare while giving only minimal live coverage to moonwalks that will make history. It is a poor choice from the point of view of public service.” (NYT, 12/12/72, 46) December 12—13:	Review of plans for space shuttle external tank and solid-fueled rocket booster was held at Marshall Space Flight Center for 350 industry and Government representatives. Attendees heard presentations by NASA and North American Rockwell Dec. 12. NASA officials conducted separate briefings Dec. 13.	(Marshall Star, 12/12/72, 1)
President Nixon had directed that regulations on travel of U.S. ships and aircraft (Transportation Order T-2) be changed to permit valid U.S. aircraft and vessels to visit People’s Republic of China, White House announced. {PD, 11/22/72, 1688) November 23:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, during visit to Lewis Research Center told staff NASA’s direction in coming years would include increased emphasis on sharing expertise with other Federal, local, and state government agencies and continued high performance in space-flight exploitation with an eye on the purse strings. He said, despite Federal budgetary restrictions, “I don’t see a great change at NASA and feel we can continue in the direction we set forth this past year.” (Lewis News, 12/15/72, 3)
Federal Electric Corp. had received 1-yr, $19.9-million extension of contract with nasa, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Contract was for instrumentation and communications support services to Kennedy Space Center for Apollo and Skylab launches. Extension brought total value of contract to $113.9 million. (Av Wk, 7/3/72, 20) July 4:	NASA released mid-year review of items of collateral space technology which had been adapted to improve quality of life on earth. Items included compact, automatic gas analyzer that measured air in lungs to monitor human pulmonary and cardiovascular activity; temperature-activated remote thermistor alarm that sounded at nurse’s station when infant’s breathing stopped in hospital room; electroencephalograph helmet to diagnose hearing defects in children; powered prosthetic hand; portable light indicator for blind persons; ear oximeter to measure oxygen content of blood by noting red and infrared light absorption; analyzer to record intensity of sleep; and computer motion pictures that projected three-dimensional image of heart areas for study by physicians. Items used in industry included compound to prevent fogging of lenses; low-voltage switching circuits; fire-retardant or nonflammable foams, paints, fabrics, and glass fiber laminates; rapid-scan infrared tire tester; land-surveying system using laser and telescope that viewed laser pulse above obstructions; and management system develJuly 4:	NASA’s mid-year review of collateral space technology benefits on the earth described a compact, fully automatic, mobile medical gas analyser (above). The analyser measured composition of air breathed in and exhaled from the lungs to monitor pulmonary and cardiovascular activity in patients, f tula stria! items included an uitrathin, two-volt switching circuit for buildings. Low-volt circuits were displayed at the Second Annual Urban Technology Conference in San Francisco July 24-26, oped by NASA to supply daily updated information in Apollo program. (NASA Release 72-132)
Appointment of Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, Director of Air Force Materials Laboratory, as Director of Science and Technology for Air Force Systems Command was announced by Gen. George S. Brown, afsc Commander. (afsc Release 104.72) September 6:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans for series of 20 water-entry simulation tests with solid-fueled rocket casing assembly. Tests would provide valuable data for assessment of parachute water recovery of space shuttle booster and aid in preliminary solid-fueled rocket motor design. Rocket assembly—representing 77% scale model of shuttle booster—was 30 m (100 ft) long, weighed 39 000 kg (43 tons), and was from previously fired motor, (msfc Release 72—120)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden participated in pregame pageant at 1972 Orange Bowl Classic football game in Miami. Pageant, “The First Decade,” was dedicated to U.S. space program. (NASA Activities, 2/15/72, 35) January 2:	Research in U.S. was shifting from pure to practical, Thomas O’Toole wrote in Washington Post. “Changes that stress practicality have already been made to parts of U.S. science, but they’re scarcely detectable against the $16 billion the federal government spends every year to support U.S. science and technology. One of the few programs of any size begun by the Nixon administration is a $49 million project at the National Science Foundation code-named rann—for Research Applied to National Needs, rann supports a host of small programs aimed at improving things like subways, cancer treatment, earthquake forecasts and sewers.” Changes within NASA required “little new money, but they serve to spotlight the emphasis the Nixon administration places on the practical goals of science. In the last six months NASA has taken on study projects from the Departments of Commerce, Interior, and Transportation— none of which involves space exploration. The space agency also has a contract from the National Science Foundation to investigate the use of solar cells (used on most unmanned spacecraft) to electrify homes and buildings. It has another contract from the Department of Housing and Urban Development to look into ways an apartment complex might recycle its sewage and water the way future astronauts will do inside their spacecraft.” (W Post, 1/3/72, Al) 9-12 in experiments, demonstrations, or activities to be performed by astronauts during 1973 Skylab missions. NASA would select 25 proposals on basis of compatibility with Skylab requirements. Selectees and their teachers would attend Skylab Educational Conference and award presentation at Kennedy Space Center at Skylab launch time. NASA would build required hardware in consultation with students. Regional and national selectees would be announced in April, (nasa Release 72-1)
Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) flight unit was being readied for threemonth, post-manufacturing checkout at Marshall Space Flight Center. ATM would be moved in May from Quality and Reliability Assurance Laboratory to Astronautics Laboratory for vibration tests and would be delivered to Manned Spacecraft Center June 1 for thermal and vacuum tests, atm would be launched on first Skylab mission in 1973. Series of preliminary Skylab experiment planning simulations was being conducted by flight controllers, flight planners, and other experts at MSC. Purpose of simulations was to exercise basic plans and procedures necessary before detailed simulations with Skylab team could begin, (msfc Release 72-8; MSC Release 72-32)
Director Bruce T. Lundin of Lewis Research Center announced major organizational changes to strengthen and streamline LeRC for its assumption of greater leadership in aeronautics, space communications, and electrical power field. Changes—which had yet to be formally approved by NASA—included creation of new position of Deputy Director, Management, filled by Henry C. Barnett, and creation of two new directorates: Space Communications, headed by J. Howard Childs, and Launch Vehicles, headed by Edmund R. Jonash. Dr. John C. Evvard was named Chief Scientist to provide “greater organizational visibility” in basic research. Laser power group and applications group were established, strengthening of computer management was begun, several divisions were restructured, and new offices were established. Lundin said changes would strengthen LeRC coordination and parallel research organization at NASA Hq. (Lewis News, 3/24/72, 1; Lundin Off)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Chairman Daniel J. Haughton told annual meeting of shareholders in Van Nuys, Calif., that he expected higher net earnings on lower sales volume in 1972. He predicted that Lockheed would receive substantial orders for L—1011 TriStar transport in coming years. (Pearlstine, WSJ, 5/2/72, 17; Lockheed pio) May 3—11:	Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space met to plan program for parent Committee. Italian space expert Franco Fiorio asked 28 members present if scientists from smaller countries would be allowed to stand in line and buy tickets to board Soviet or U.S. manned space laboratory. Dr. Fernando Mendonca of Brazil said advances in space technology were providing data that could help speed economic development in poorer countries but U.N. itself had neither technical manpower nor finances to assist these countries in using data. During debate over remote sensing by satellite, Sweden tried to open discussion of what U.N. could do to protect economic interests of small nonspace power from possible commercial exploitation by countries collecting data from satellites. Only Argentina supported Swedish view; majority, including U.S. and U.S.S.R., said such discussions were premature. Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, renewed U.S. pledge that data from satellites would be shared with other countries without discrimination. All members of Subcommittee were invited by NASA to inspect data processing center at Goddard Space Flight Center but only six countries accepted. (Teltsch, NYT, 5/14/72, 15) May 4:	Areas ozone sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 60-km (37.3-mi) altitude to measure performance of new parachute deployment technique and measure payload pendulation below parachute. Technique provided greater parachute opening shock and was expected to reduce parachute fouling experienced with older techniques. Parachute and payload performed nominally and experimental objectives were met. (nasa proj off)
Soviet news agency Tass reported completion of Polar Morning—joint U.S.S.R. and France experiment at E. T. Krenkel Hydrometeorological Observatory in Arctic. During three-month expedition, series of meteorological rockets 'had carried Soviet and French payloads to altitudes between 90 and 180 km (56 and 112 mi) during period of transition from winter to summer and from polar night to polar day. Data were obtained on atmospheric temperature, wind speed and direction, cloud formations, corpuscular radiation, and solar activity. (FBIS-Sov, 6/16/72, LI) June 15:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Apollo 16 Astronauts Charles M. Duke, Jr., John W. Young, and Thomas K. Mattingly II met with President Nixon at White House to discuss April 16-27 Apollo 16 mission and joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975. Following discussion Dr. Fletcher and astronauts held press conference. Dr. Fletcher said President was “very pleased” with progress made toward joint mission. “The President particularly wanted to emphasize that . . . this is only the beginning of what he conceives as a long association with the Soviet Union in many other areas of space cooperation. ... we are busy working on other kinds of things that we can do together . . . perhaps through the turn of the century, doing things together for economic reasons and because he feels strongly that the international aspect of this is important in improving relationships. If we can do this together, we can do other things together.” President also emphasized worldwide space cooperation. As areas for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in future, Dr. Fletcher thought “the ones we can be sure of” were “the cooperative program on Mars [and] a new cooperative program on Venus, where we explore the upper atmosphere and the entire atmosphere and they explore the surface. We are going to be doing that together.” (Other nasa officials explained later these would be coordinated efforts rather than joint missions.) July meeting of principals at Manned Spacecraft Center would “iron out the management” of joint docking mission. Astronaut Young said that “real problem” was communication; “once we solve that problem we can prove that we can work together in a lot of other areas besides.” Dr. Fletcher said plans for joint astronaut and cosmonaut training had not been concluded, “but it is going to be absolutely essential that the cosmonauts come over here and train on our equipment and vice versa. That much has been agreed to.” Training program probably would start “within about a year.” Dr. Fletcher summed up progress made on joint mission since May 24 signing of cooperation agreement: “We have set up the agenda for the meeting which will primarily involve the management aspects. ... We also have, at home, worked out some of the details of the specifications . . . and now are waiting approval.” Perhaps most “spectacular” progress had been “great enthusiasm from Congress for the mission, particularly when we told them this was not going to cost any more money.” (Transcript; WSJ, 6/16/72)	.
American Association for the Advancement of Science was beginning broad new program under National Science Foundation grant to enhance public understanding of scientific enterprise, Science editorial said. Program would include seminars for government officials and managers of mass media, new approach to science on television, critical journal to examine science and mass media, experimental project to interest AAAS members in more collegial activities, and modest research program into sources and cures of public misunderstanding of science. (Science, 8/4/72, 391)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of $82 000 fixed-fee contract to Howard, Needles, Tammen and Bergendorff for preliminary survey of Launch Complex 39 as proposed site for Space Shuttle Landing Facility, (ksc Release 150-72)
Industrial Research magazine’s IR—100 award for 1972 had been awarded to Lewis Research Center and Arthur D. Little, Inc., for process for producing pure, very-high-strength, single-crystal, refractory ceramic fibers, LeRC announced. Award, given annually to developers of 100
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by Cecil Powell, completed 24th flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Flight objectives were to check out pilot and to obtain stability and control data at mach 1.1 and mach 0.9. All objectives were met. Vehicle reached 21000-m (69 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.25. (nasa proj off)
NASA TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, resumed flight program at Flight Research Center after three-week halt for improvement of fuselage area distribution and installation of pressure survey rakes. Purpose of flight— 28th in series—was to check out new instrumentation and angle-of-attack and airspeed calibrations. Aircraft reached 10 700-m (35 000-ft) altitude, instrumentation was activated, and calibrations were made at mach 0.90, 0.95, 0.97, 0.99, and 1.2. (nasa proj off)
Two NASA research aircraft, each equipped with five cameras, were photographing State of Arizona—area of more than 295 000 sq km (114 000 sq mi)—from 20 000-m (65 000-ft) altitude. NASA, Dept, of Interior, and State of Arizona project to develop land use inventory system for natural resource management included acquisition of film for development of orthophotoquads—large photographic maps of entire state— for use by Arizona agencies. Arizona Land Use Experiment would make comprehensive analysis based on remotely sensed data; document social and economic benefits of experiment; prepare manual on application of remote sensing to solving resource management problems; and provide plan for updating information by including data from spacecraft, high- and low-flying aircraft, and ground surveys. Arizona had appropriated $400 000 to project. Film processed by Ames Research Center was sent to U.S. Geological Survey laboratories, where orthophotoquads were to be prepared. (NASA Release 72-129)
Aerospace industry outlook for 1972 was described in Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial: “Much of the political miasma and public criticism . . . appears to be dissipating. The cruel bite of unemployment . . . has made it politically less attractive to attack technology. The legislators who were glad to equate their anti-technology votes with a blast at skin cancer now find these votes equated with stimulating unemployment. The industry will continue to be under vigorous public and legislative scrutiny and deserves it. But it has shown the first signs of fighting back and beginning to state its own very valid case. Hopefully, this will continue during the election year in an effort to force politicians to assess technology more accurately in their appeals to the electorate.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 1/3/72, 7)
Sen. John G. Tower (R-Tex.) introduced S.J.R. 238 requesting President Nixon to designate July 20, 1972, as “National Moon Walk Day.” Resolution was referred to Senate Committee on the Judiciary. {CR, 6/2/72, S8712) June 3:	Lewis Research Center announced award of four fixed-price contracts for four-month studies of methods to measure pollution due to aircraft emissions in upper atmosphere. American Airlines would receive $11 697, Trans World Airlines $14 177, and United Air Lines $19 699 to study costs of installing and servicing pollutionmeasuring instruments on. commercial aircraft. Boeing Co. would receive $31 350 to determine aircraft modifications needed to install instruments, data recorders, and support systems. Studies were in support of Global Air Sampling Program (gasp), managed by LeRC. (LeRC Release 72-39)	,
International Business Machines Corp. outlined variety of computers used in launching and tracking manned spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center for Judge David N. Edelstein, who was hearing Justice Dept, antitrust suit against IBM [see Nov. 23]. Judge and party would leave ksc for Goddard Space Flight Center Dec. 7 to examine computer operations there. {Today, 12/7/72)
GTE International, Inc., subsidiary of General Electronics Corp., announced it had received contract valued at about $4 million from Western Union International, Inc., for construction of satellite communications earth station in People’s Republic of China. Station would be ground link for first direct communications satellite between China and Europe, (gte Release) Primary objective of Explorer 48 was to measure spatial and energy distribution of primary galactic and extragalactic gamma radiation— within sas program to make investigations of celestial sphere from above earth’s atmosphere and search for sources inside and outside our galaxy, radiating in x-ray, gamma ray, ultraviolet, infrared, and other regions of electromagnetic spectrum. Gamma ray telescope was first satellite version of evolution of digitized spark-chamber telescopes that had begun with balloon-borne instruments. Advanced detector could establish gamma ray event and reject events that simpler instruments might identify erroneously. It could study gamma rays exceeding 20 mev in energy, in region of electromagnetic spectrum able to penetrate galactic and extragalactic matter. On Nov. 19 half of experiment’s high-voltage supplies were turned on and experiment was pointed toward earth. Real-time data acquisition indicated proper functioning of experiment, with detection of earth albedo gamma rays. Remaining high-voltage power was turned on Nov. 27. Experiment and spacecraft control section were functioning normally. Spacecraft was cylinder 59 cm in diameter and 51 cm high (23-in dia by 20). When deployed, four solar paddles—27 cm wide and 135 cm long (10.5 by 53 in)—provided raw power. Unique was separate development of spacecraft control section and experiment package, which had permitted flexible concurrent development of experiments and minimized costs by fabrication of standardized control section. NASA provided booster and satellite; Italian team was responsible for cost-reimbursable launch preparation. Goddard Space Flight Center and Applied Physics Laboratory crew performed ground test and checkout. Satellite was designed and built at gsfc, which managed project. Langley Research Center managed Scout. (NASA proj off; NASA Release 72—204; gsfc proj off) November 16:	Briefing on results of low-cost-design concept completed by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. under NASA contract was held at Marshall Space Flight Center. Study had been conducted under NASA Low Cost Evaluation Project begun in May by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator. Information from panels was to be correlated and incorporated into program planning and execution. (msfc Release 72-147)
Space shuttle concept endorsed by President Nixon made it “all but certain” that Kennedy Space Center would be selected for shuttle’s launch site, New York Times said. Space experts seemed to feel that only by “converting the assembly buildings, launching pads and communications center” at ksc “would it be possible to develop a shuttle port for $300 million.” (NYT, 1/7/72, 7)
Vladimir A. Kirillin, Chairman of U.S.S.R. State Committee for Science and Technology, and Soviet space expert Academician Boris Petrov, held Moscow press conference following signing of U.S.-U.S.S.R. space and science and technology agreements. Petrov said: “It is difficult to overestimate the importance of these works, this research, which has pursued humane goals of ensuring the safety of space flights. The concluded agreements give ground for the belief that these directions in Soviet-American cooperation in outer space will develop successfully in the future.” Kirillin said of science and technology agreement: “I think that if we get down to the realization, to the implementation of this agreement, it will definitely yield positive results.” (Transcript) May 25:	NASA’s Mariner 9 spacecraft, in its seventh month in Mars orbit, was in period of both sun occultation (April 2-June 4) and earth occultation (May 6-June 24) for short periods of each orbit. Sun occultations—when spacecraft passed into shadow of Mars and was powered by onboard battery—were declining from peak total time of 97 min. Only data from celestial mechanics and earth occultation experiments and engineering telemetry were being received. Battery was recharging satisfactorily twice daily and spacecraft was in good condition. Earth occultation—when Mars was between spacecraft and earth— varied from 43 to 90 min orbit. Resumption of limited data acquisition from scientific instruments would begin in June to conserve attitude control gas. (NASA Special Release)
NASA announced selection of RCA Aerospace Systems Div. for negotiation on $175 000 fixed-price contract to produce long-range laser traversing system. Nicknamed “Smokey,” system had been developed at Goddard Space Flight Center for U.S. Forest Service. Two back-packable, 18-kg (40-lb) units contained vertical-firing laser and telescope receiver that viewed laser pulse above all obstructions, permitting surveyors to lay out property lines over terrain obstacles faster and cheaper than by previous methods, (nasa Release 72—79)
M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, completed 14th flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Objective of powered flight was to check out command augmentation system and engine accumulator modification. M2-F3 reached 17 300-m (57 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.86. Flight was first for M2-F3 since its removal from flight status in January for installation of command augmentation fly-by-wire system. (NASA proj off)
Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov had attributed 15-mo hiatus in Soviet manned space flight to major changes being made in Soyuz spacecraft, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Changes to improve cosmonauts’ living conditions were believed to include retrofit of miniaturized control and communications equipment for more space in command module. Dr. Sedov had said faulty hatch system had been corrected and spacecraft was ready for 30-day orbital laboratory mission. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 11)
President Nixon’s “enthusiastic support” of space shuttle had “pumped fresh breath of life” into NASA, “buoyed the spirits of a flagging aerospace industry and lost no friends in politically vital West Coast and southern states,” Robert Gillette said in Science article. Shuttle endorsed by President was “considerably less ambitious, and at least a billion dollars cheaper, than the shuttle NASA has fought for” but “in basic outline it remains unchanged. . . .” Shuttle “and its presidential stamp of approval stand as a tribute to NASA’s deft and persistent salesmanship, a talent marked by careful acquiescence to political and economic realities and by a willingness to bleed other programs, including Apollo, to keep the shuttle alive.” While “some budget bureau officials are said to be unhappy with the magnitude, the design, and the pace of the shuttle project as it now stands,” prospects for “scuttling the shuttle are slim.” Shuttle possessed few of sst’s intrinsic weaknesses. Central moral issue raised by the sst was “the propriety of government subsidy for an essentially commercial enterprise.” Shuttle “has no such commercial overtones, and, by any measure, it is a more truly national enterprise.” Congressional attack on supersonic transport program, while largely based on project’s economics, had drawn strength from “vast and vocal public constituency aroused by alarms ... of environmental damage.” No such catalytic issue seemed likely to arise in shuttle debate. Gillette quoted unidentified Senate aide as saying, “Unless we can pull together the kind of public campaign that brought down the SST, the shuttle is going to get by this year without a thorough examination and without an adversary hearing in Congress.” (Science, 1/28/72, 392-6)
National Science Foundation released National Patterns of R&D Resources: Funds and Manpower in the United States 1953-1972 (nsf 72—300). Research and development expenditures were expected to reach $28.0 billion in 1972, up from $26.8 billion in 1971, increase of 4.3%; 1970 to 1971 increase had been 2.1%. r&d was expected to account for 2.5% of estimated 1972 U.S. gross national product (gnp), down from 2.6% in 1971. In 1964, r&d and gnp ratio reached 3.0%. Approximately 54% of national r&d effort was supported by Federal funds, primarily from Dept, of Defense and NASA. Industrial sector was second largest source. Companies were expected to provide two fifths of total U.S. r&d funds in 1972, up steadily from 31% in 1964. Estimated 519 000 scientists and engineers in U.S.—more than one third—were employed in r&d during 1971, 5% fewer than in 1970. Nearly 70% of these professionals worked for industrial firms. Basic research expenditures for 1972 were projected at $4.1 billion, with applied research at $6.4 billion. In 1971, $4.0 billion and $6.1 billion had been spent on these activities. Universities and colleges were expected to perform more than 55% of national basic research effort during 1972, up slightly from 1971. (Text)
Apollo 10 command module and mock-up of Apollo lunar roving vehicle were part of exhibition “Research and Development in the U.S.A.” that opened in Moscow. Exhibit had been in Ibilisi, capital of Soviet Georgia, earlier, in scheduled tour of six Soviet cities. (Reuters, NYT, 3/23/72, 6)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by John A. Manke, completed 23rd flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft to evaluate command augmentation system. Additional flight objectives were to obtain stability and control data at mach 1.1, mach 0.8, and mach 0.7 and to check out pitch-reaction augmentation system. M2—F3 reached 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.3. All objectives were achieved, (nasa proj off)
Legislation to rename Jet Propulsion Laboratory as H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory effective Jan. 4 [see Oct. 21] had set off negative reaction, Los Angeles Times reported. “General feeling” among JPL scientists and engineers was that Laboratory and its work should not be involved with politics. Protest petition had been signed by 210 students of California Institute of Technology, which operated Laboratory for NASA. Cal Tech officials were surprised and concerned at not having been consulted about change and planned to talk to Government officials in Washington, D.C. {LA Times, 11/5/72) * Spokesman for Cape Kennedy local of International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees said Boeing Co. officials had defied union demands to submit wage dispute to Federal arbitrators. Attorney Bernard Mamet said 60 members of local had vowed to walk out by Dec, 5 if their request was denied. He said Boeing had halted negotiations in eight-month dispute and had refused to resume talks before Nov. 14. Boeing technical writers were asking at least partial restoration of April 1971 wage cut. Dispute had raised “slim threat” of walkout on eve of Apollo 17 launch, Orlando Sentinel said later. Sympathy strike by other locals of union could cause “serious problems.” (0 Sen, 11/8/72) November 6:	NASA selection of five potential landing sites on Mars for two unmanned Viking spacecraft in summer 1976 was announced by Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs, in telephone interview. NASA also released Mariner 9 photos of sites-— two at edge of Nix. Olympics slopes, another near slopes of three smaller volcanoes north of canyons along Martian equator, fourth on desert plain, and fifth in region of flattened craters at edge of highland terrain. Observations from Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) had shown sites were low, relatively warm regions, possibly moist, where life form was most likely to be discovered. Prime objective of Viking missions was to determine if Mars harbored life or potential for life. In choosing sites, project scientists had eliminated nearly one third of Mars because of high elevations. In mountainous regions, Viking parachutes would not have sufficient atmosphere to brake spacecraft descent. Scientists also had rejected areas where surface appeared too soft for spacecraft landing, too hard for retrieval of soil samples, or so steep that spacecraft might tip over on landing. Attention had centered November 6:	Selection of five potential landing sites on Mars for mass's two unmanned Viking spacecraft in 1976 was announced. The map showing the sites was based on photos televised from Mariner 9, launched May 30, 1971, and in orbit around Mars since Nov. 13, 1972. All the sites were fairly smooth areas near scientifically interesting geological features and were in regions of the planet where warmer temperatures and greater likelihood of water increased chances of finding evidence of life. The first map of the entire globe of Mars, prepared by the VS. Geological Survey from 1500 of 7000 photos taken by Mariner 9, was published Nov. 27. on broad Mars equatorial band with brightest sunlight and highest temperatures, which increased chance of finding water vapor in atmosphere and thus of finding biological activity. Landing zones were about 65 km (40 mi) wide and 650 km (400 mi) long. Precise sites would be selected after further analysis of Mariner 9 photos. U.S. and Soviet scientists 'would meet during winter to compare Mars landing targets. There was “no use in landing on top of each- other. We would also like to optimize the coverage of Mars.” (Wilford, NYT, 11/7/72, 61; NASA pio)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. began seventh round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks in Helsinki, Finland. (Hamilton, NYT, 3/29/72, 3) March 29:	Apollo 16 spacecraft, loaded with propellants, completed countdown demonstration test at Kennedy Space Center, (ksc Release 55-72)	' ' _
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial commented on launch of Copernicus (Oao 3) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory [see Aug. 21—29]. “It’s fitting that the satellite should be named for Copernicus . . . father of modern astronomy. The new satellite should add appreciably to man’s knowledge of the universe, but sophisticated as it may be, it all began with that incomparable genius almost five centuries ago.” (P Bull, 8/24/72) August 25:	Observations by Pioneer spacecraft during major explosions on sun [see Aug. 2 and 7] had differed from scientists’ expectations and had provided new data on solar atmosphere, NASA announced. Measurements made by Pioneer 9 and 10, 212 million km (132 million mi) apart on direct line to sun, had shown that ionized gases traveled more slowly and increased in temperature as they moved away from sun. Pioneer 9, orbiting sun inside earth’s orbit, had observed record solar wind speeds of 3.6 million km per hr (2.2 million mph) and had counted particles at levels 4000 times higher than usual. By time solar winds reached Pioneer 10, en route to Jupiter and 328 million km (204 million mi) from sun, winds had slowed to half speed measured at Pioneer 9 and temperatures had risen to 2 000 000 K (3 600 000°F), far above usual 100 000 K (180 000°F). Although solar region 331 had rotated out of sight of earth, data were still being collected by Pioneer 6, 7, and 8. (nasa Release 72—179)
Navy F—14 fighter aircraft crashed into Chesapeake Ray during test flight from Patuxent River Naval Air Station, Md. Cause was unknown. Pilot, listed as missing, was identified by Navy as William H. Miller, who had piloted first F—14 to crash, Dec. 30, 1970. (AP, NYT, 7/2/72, 10) During June:	Discovery of new energy source from data returned by Office of Naval Research’s ONR-001 ionospheric research experiment launched on Air Force Sesp 1971—2 satellite Oct. 17, 1971, was announced by onr. Experiment’s low-energy energetic-ion spectrometer had observed intense fluxes of heavy ions precipitating into atmosphere at low-altitude edge of auroral zone during Dec. 17, 1971, magnetic storm. Fluxes were observed over entire energy rate of spectrometer on 24 satellite passes in two days. New source could aid understanding of Van Allen Relts and ionospheric processes affecting radio and radar propagation. (Naval Research Reviews, 6-7/72, 32-33)
Task Force on Energy of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Energy Research and Development. Report called for immediate implementation of “greatly increased national energy research and development effort” with adequate funding and technical manpower; national energy r&d effort as part of overall policy with White House as focal point; establishment of operating agency to manage Government-supported R&D; increased r&d for environmental protection and energy conservation; and establishment of priorities in basic research, materials research, and solar, geothermal, and nuclear energy research. (Text) During 1972: U.S. orbited 39 spacecraft in 30 launches—including Apollo 16’s 4 payloads and Apollo 17’s 3. U.S.S.R. orbited 89 payloads in 74 launches. Italy launched one satellite for NASA on NASA booster. And Japan launched one spacecraft on its own booster. U.S. total included 16 payloads orbited by Dept, of Defense in 13 launches and 23 by NASA in 17 straight flawless launches—NASA’s first perfect annual launch record. nasa’s Apollo program came to successful conclusion with Apollo 17, most productive of all NASA lunar landing missions and most scientifically rewarding. Apollo 17, sixth successful manned landing mission, set records for longest manned lunar landing flight (301 hrs 51 min), largest lunar sample return (115 kg; 250 lbs), longest total extravehicular activity time (22 hrs 5 min), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Earlier in year Apollo 16 also produced valuable data from surface and lunar orbit investigations. Unmanned NASA program was highlighted by Pioneer 10, first spacecraft to fly beyond Mars orbit, first to penetrate Asteroid Belt, first intended to look at Jupiter close up, and first destined to escape solar system. At year’s end Pioneer 10 had passed safely through three fourths of Asteroid Belt. Mariner 9, launched in 1971, had circled Mars 698 times, photographing Martian moons and completely mapping planet’s surface before Oct. 27, 1972, shutdown. Findings revised previous concepts of Mars, showing planet to be geologically active, with volcanic mountains higher than any mountain on earth, with a crevasse three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, and with indications that free-flowing water might once have existed on Mars. Erts 1, first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, laid groundwork for glohal inventory of earth’s resources and environment. Copernicus (Oao 3) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, with largest telescope placed in space, set new standards of pointing accuracy and opened new channels of information on far reaches of universe. Nimbus 5 meteorological satellite demonstrated new techniques for daytime and nighttime temperature readings through clouds at all levels in atmosphere. Other unmanned missions included Explorer 47 (imp) to study earth-sun interactions from orbit halfway to moon, Explorer 48 (sas; launched for NASA by Italy) to survey gamma ray sources, Noaa 2 weather satellite for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Triad 01—IX Transit satellite for Navy. Two dozen spacecraft orbited in earlier years continued to return data on solar system and universe beyond. All components of Skylab manned orhital research satellite were assembled at Kennedy Space Center for 1973 launch. Three flight crews and two backup crews began training. Final space shuttle design was selected and prime contract for shuttle orhiter development was awarded, as well as main engine contract. Contractors had progressed U.S. AND U.S.S.R. SPACE PROGRAMS, 1957-1972 Selected Cumulative Totals Through December 1972 World Total Successful launches into orbit or beyond........... Spacecraft launched (including multiple payloads on single boosters)................................ Spacecraft still in orbit.......................... Lunar missions (that reached or passed moon)....... Planetary and interplanetary probes................ Manned space flights............................... Number of crewmen who have flown in space..... Total manned space-flight duration............ Total man-hours in space...................... Total extravehicular activity (eva) Duration on moon..................... Man-hours on moon.................... Total time lived on moon...................... International launches **.......................... Launched for other nations.................... Launched for international organizations or Launched by other nations with U.S. aid....... Launched by other nations for U.S............. 3526 hrs		2097	hrs 9500 hrs		4403	hrs 96 hrs 2	min	1	hr 12 min 177 hrs 7	min	1	hr 12 min 80 hrs 39	min	0 161 hrs 18	min	0 301 hrs		0 1216 (incl. 20 by other nations) 1472 (incl. 21 by other nations) 600 (inch 34 belonging to other nations) * Does not include spacecraft launched for other nations. ** In addition to experiments carried for other nations and to launches of cooperative sounding rockets. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 well into system definition, design, and early development. Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base were selected as shuttle launch and landing sites. M2-F3 lifting body completed 27th and last scheduled flight in joint NASA and Air Force program begun July 12, 1966. During 14 lifting-body flights in 1972, maximum speed of 1718 km per hr (1066 mph) and maximum altitude of 21 800 m (17 500 ft) were attained. In aeronautics, Flight Research Center celebrated 25th anniversary of its creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing was flown in configuration planned for future flights. Digital fly-by-wire computerized control system was demonstrated in series of flights from frc. System, for potential use in space shuttle, enhanced aircraft handling and reduced pilot workload. NASA awarded contract to refine design of quiet, jet, propulsive-lift, experimental aircraft QUESTOL in major effort to develop technology for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to relieve airport congestion. Progress was made in quiet jet engine, techniques to reduce aircraft emissions, composite materials, avionics, aerodynamics including supercritical and antisymmetrical wings, general-aviation safety, supersonic and hypersonic research, and research in basic materials and structures. In sounding rocket program, more than 80 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; to make astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum; for special projects; and for support. NASA flew 61 balloon flights in its program to study near-earth phenomena, including balloon that lifted 545 kg (1200 lbs) of scientific equipment to 45 000-m (148 000-ft) altitude. U.S.S.R. launches decreased from record 83 in 1971 to 74. The 89 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 3 Intercosmos, 1 Luna, 3 Meteor, 2 Prognoz, 3 Molniya I, 3 Molniya II, 1 Venus, and secondary payload Sret 1 (launched for France). Japan launched Denpa Radio Explorer Satellite. (NASA Releases 73—48 and unnumbered of 12/27/72; NASA Lifting Body Off; gsfc Sounding Rocket Br.; gsfc SSR, 11/31/72; 12/31/72; A&A 1972; Myers testimony, 2/27/73)
r/a William M. Harnish (usn) assumed command of Pacific Missile Range in ceremony at Pt. Mugu, Calif, (pmr Missile, 8/11/72, 1) August 12-13: Chicago Daily News editorial said there appeared to be “conspiracy” to keep details of Apollo 15 commercialism from public. “Not only were public and press barred from the five-hour committee hearing [see Aug. 3]; a curtain of silence was imposed after the session.” Paper reminded “both NASA and the committee that they work for the public. Let’s quit playing cozy and bring the facts into the open so the public can make its own judgment.” {C Daily News, 8/12-13/72) Primary objective was to evaluate effectiveness of bumper-protected multisheet spacecraft structure for protection against meteoroid penetration in first inflight test. Data would be compared with data from single-sheet structures launched previously. Secondary objectives were to obtain data on meteoroid impact velocity and measure impact flux of small mass meteoroids. Satellite had been designed, fabricated, and tested by Langley Research Center. It carried three experiments: bumper penetration experiment with 12 panels, each 48 cm wide and 3 m long (19 in x 10Y2 ft), containing 8 pressurized cells; impact flux experiment containing 65 thin-film capacitance penetration sensors arranged in groups of 3 and 5 on various parts of spacecraft; and meteoroid-velocity experiment consisting of 2 plates of sensors and timer to measure time meteoroid traveled distance between plates. By Aug. 22 spacecraft experiments and telemetry systems were operating and good data were being obtained, but half of panels in bumper experiment apparently had not deployed. Spacecraft was spinning at 3 rpm as planned, but because of panel deployment anomaly and resulting spin axis 90° to that planned, spacecraft battery temperature had risen from 299 K (79°F) past 308 K (95°F) design temperature to 337 K (147°F) Aug. 22. Battery was still providing voltage and all experiments were functioning satisfactorily. During spacecraft’s second pass Aug. 22, telemeter A, powered by battery, came on as commanded but telemeter B, backup system operated by solar-cell power, went off unexpectedly. Officials decided to discontinue interrogation of telemeter A so that data from telemeter B would not be jeopardized. As a result, no data were being received from secondary experiments and no housekeeping data were received. About 2000 impacts by submicrometer particles had been detected during telemeter A operation, providing sufficient data for impact experiment. No data had been obtained from meteoroid-velocity experiment. By Aug. 28, 3 of 48 pressurized detector cells successfully deployed had been punctured and primary experiment was continuing to provide good data, (nasa proj off)
President Nixon telephoned Apollo 17 crew at Kennedy Space Center to extend best wishes on eve of Apollo 17 mission. (PD, 12/11/72, 1735)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced completion of largest solarcellarray system for electric power ever devised for spacecraft. Two arrays, with almost 236 sq m (2540 sq ft) of surface area, would use sunlight to power electrical systems of Orbital Workshop, Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), and other major components of Skylab cluster scheduled for launch in 1973. Each array could provide 10 500 w of power— more than twice average level needed for three-bedroom house—-‘at 328 K (130°F) during 58- to 69-min portion of each 94-min orbit. (msfc Release 72-54)
National Science Foundation reported rise in share of Federal research and development (r&d) expenditures on functions other than space and defense. During 1963—1973, 10 other budget functions shifted upward in R&d program emphasis. Until 1966 space research and national defense spent 90% of Federal R&d total. Joint share of these two functions was expected to be 77% in FY 1973. Share of other 10 functions had risen 5% between 1970 and 1973 alone, (nsf Highlights, 4/25/72, 1)
U.S.S.R. said it would conduct missile-carrier tests in Pacific through Dec. 31. It warned ships and aircraft to steer clear of area about 2400 km (1500 mi) east of Japan. (Tass, FBis-Sov, 11/24/72, Al; AP, B Sun, 10/24/72, 6) November 24:	Twenty-fifth anniversary of first launch of Aerobee sounding rocket on Nov. 24, 1947, from White Sands Missile Range. Launch had been unsuccessful; rocket carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. payload had veered off course and had been destroyed. But since then arrowshaped Aerobee had been busiest booster in U.S. space program, with launch rate of almost one per week and few failures out of 900 launches to date. Aerobees carrying scientific payloads to altitudes as high as 480 km (300 mi) had been launched by NASA, Air Force, Navy, and Federal scientific groups. Launches were mainly from NASA’s Wallops Station, White Sands Missile Range, and Fort Churchill Range in Manitoba, Canada. Aerobee—most widely used rocket in astronomy—had carried delicate instruments through blanket of air and dirt surrounding earth to area of greater visibility. Instruments launched June 13, 1969, by NASA on Aerobee 150 from Natal, Brazil, had detected x-ray star only 16 km (10 mi) wide that weighed as much as sun. Scientists at Univ. of California who conducted experiment had said stellar object might be first direct evidence of neutron star and first time size of x-ray source from deep space could be determined. Other scientific payloads aboard Aerobees had measured Crab Nebula, collected micrometeoroids, taken temperatures aloft, and recorded air densities. In 1952 Air Force Aerobee carried two monkeys and two mice in biomedical experiments. Rocket originally weighed 700 kg (1600 lbs), was 5.8 m (19 ft) long, and carried payloads under 45 kg (100 lbs). Over years Aerobee had grown to be 15 m (50 ft) long, powered by four clustered, liquid-fuel engines and solid-fuel booster. Largest Aerobee could blast 400-kg (900-lb) payload to altitude of 200 km (125 mi). (Lyons, NYT, 11/26/72, 39; A&A 1915-1950)
Marshall Space Flight Center engineers John R. Rasquin and M. F. Estes had received copies of patent issued to NASA for Rasquin-Estes invention—adaptation of magnetomotive hammer to diamond-making process —MSFC announced. Hammer, developed for Saturn V program, had been used to remove distortions from rocket tank sections misshapen by welding. In process developed by Rasquin and Estes, hammer was mounted on copper plate atop hardened steel horn. Hammer created shock wave in horn with sufficient energy to produce pressure and temperature necessary to change graphite to diamonds. (MSFC Release 72-1)
Chemical & Engineering News published views and plans of presidential candidates for science and technology beyond general pledges in Democratic and Republican Party platforms. Same set of questions had been submitted to campaign organizations of Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S.D.) and of President Nixon. President Nixon said he would continue general pattern of previous years on Federal research and development funding; its division among defense, space, and civilian sectors; its possible link to gross national product (gnp) ; and appropriate balance for basic research, applied research, and development. Pattern would include increasingly effective program in civilian sector R&D, “prudent space program, and a sufficient defense R&D budget.” Administration believed r&d funding should be based on opportunities for effective programs and necessity for creating new opportunities through fundamental studies and that R&D resources, excepting basic research, should be allocated to areas that provided “greatest opportunity for leverage or that satisfy an immediate future need.” Sen. McGovern recommended increased Federal R&D funding. Principal problem was “government spending that has masqueraded as R&D, yet has little technical content. For example, when an Apollo is launched ... all of the kerosene and liquid oxygen that it uses comes out of the federal R&D budget. Only a very small percentage of the federal R&D budget actually represents laboratory investigations, instrument design, feasibility studies, and other technical efforts that involve scientists and engineers.” Sen. McGovern would emphasize civilian sector R&D and strong military R&D program as “good investment for long-term national security. My space program would emphasize unmanned planetary exploration and scientific satellites and also earth resource and communications satellites.” Nixon Administration would continue to maintain “strong and up-to-date defense force” and to capitalize upon past space investments. Both candidates recommended increased priority on developments of new energy sources. Nixon Administration was opposed to S. 32, reconversion bill introduced by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy to amend National Science Foundation Act of 1950 to establish framework of national science policy. Bill would focus policy and U.S. scientific talent and resources on Nation’s priority problems. Administration believed segment of S. 32 that would establish independent agency within nsf was “particularly unwise” because it would “divorce the R&D from the departments of Government responsible for using its results” and “would divert attention from the primary mission of nsf—to support fundamental and basic research.” Sen. McGovern would continue to support S. 32. “In its original form, before compromise to get Republican support, it would have provided $1.2 billion for a new NASA-type Civil Science Systems Administration that would fund genuine r&d across a broad range of civilian technology needs.” Administration did not believe in Cabinet-level science department or “supra” agency, nor that “existing science apparatus is totally adequate. As with all human and governmental institutions, it too should be dynamic and subject to change as conditions and events dictate.” Sen. McGovern felt “more centralized federal science management and funding apparatus might be useful, but the key need is not to change the institutions but rather to give them more power in the Federal Government.” He favored establishment of Office of Technology Assessment [see October 13] which would “assess each new technical program with an eye toward cost efficiency and effectiveness, and domestic betterment.” Asked if federally owned laboratories should be expanded to deal with problems of health and environment, Nixon Administration pointed out that NASA Centers were “closely involved with the R&D components of other federal agencies in an effort to solve pressing national problems.” Sen. McGovern believed Federal laboratories and research facilities had “plenty of problems in their immediate areas” with which to cope. “I have no intention of taking the easy route and putting them on safe subjects.” (Chemical & Engineering News, 10/23/72, 14-19) October 23-27:	Conference on high-energy astrophysics was held at Cal Tech by division of American Astronomical Society. Dr. Kenneth I. Kellerman of National Radio Astronomy Observatory said most baffling phenomenon observed by radiotelescopes was speed at which objects seemed to be moving. If measurements taken in past two years were accepted at face value, objects associated with quasars were speeding away from each other faster than speed of light. Such speed had been considered impossible. Cal Tech astronomer Dr. W. L. W. Sargent said strange blue objects sighted in sky by Hale Observatory astronomers might be newly formed galaxies “about 100 million years old, and they seem to be made up of very young stars.” Discovery indicated that galaxies might still be forming. Dr. Herbert Gursky of American Science and Engineering, Inc., said astronomers using Uhuru (Explorer 42 Small Astronomy Satellite launched by NASA Dec. 12, 1970) had spotted several x-ray objects that could not be detected by wavelengths other than x-ray. Impact of x-ray astronomy might be that “this new wavelength range may show some different aspects of stars and galaxies.” Through x-ray astronomy scientists “hope to . . . learn something about these objects that radio and optical observations can’t tell us.” Evidence of black hole—star whose gravity field was so strong that light could not escape from it—in constellation Cygnus was reported by Dr. Kip Thorne of Cal Tech, Dr. J. P. Ostriker of Princeton Univ., and Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of American Science and Engineering. Evidence had come from photos taken at Hale Observatory that showed bright blue line near source Cygnus X-l and from data gathered by XJhuru (see also Sept. 2). Scientists thought line in photos might be result of superhot gas being drawn from neighboring star in black hole. If finding was accurate, Cygnus X—1 would be first black hole discovered. Existence of black holes had been predicted by Einstein as part of his theory of relativity. (Cooke, Pasadena Star-News, 10/24/72; West, LA Times, 10/27/72; O’Toole, W Post, 10/28/72, A3; W Star & News, 10/28/72) October 24:	Soviet news agency Tass announced opening of Soviet National Conference on Space Biology and Medicine at Kaluga, U.S.S.R. Conference would hear papers on use of “terrestrial” atmosphere in spacecraft cabins, food and water regeneration, and establishment of bacterial medium in which future cosmonauts could live and work on extended space missions. Conference also would discuss weightlessness, crew selection and training, radiobiological aspects of flight, and psychophysiology of space crew work. Soviet Academician Oleg Gazenko had presented paper on topical problems of space biology and medicine at opening session. (fbis-Sov, 10/25/72, LI)
Laser Doppler airspeed indicator 10 times more precise than best systems in commercial aircraft was being tested by Ames Research Center in Global Atmospheric Research Program, nasa announced. System— proved accurate to one tenth of one per cent—focused carbon dioxide laser beam 18 m (60 ft) ahead of aircraft where air was undisturbed by bow wave, detected backscatter from small aerosols, and measured Doppler shift in frequency proportional to aircraft’s airspeed. Doppler shift was then measured digitally and recorded by digital data system. (nasa Release 72-228)
Retirement of Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees as Marshall Space Flight Center Director and appointment of Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, to succeed Dr. Rees in January 1973 were announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Dr. Rees, with Dr. Wernher von Braun, had pioneered U.S. space and rocket activities. He had succeeded Dr. von Braun as msfc Director in 1970. Dr. Petrone had been Apollo Program Manager at Kennedy Space Center before becoming Apollo Program Director at NASA Hq. in 1969. Dr. Fletcher commended Dr. Rees for “successful completion of the Marshall Center’s role in the Apollo program. The performance of the Saturn launch vehicle . . . has been magnificent. The development of the Lunar Roving Vehicle and its performance ... is a tribute to his leadership.” (nasa Release 72-244)
St. Louis Globe-Democrat editorial commented on high level of Soviet space activity: “It is fine to talk about devoting activities in space to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind, as the United States has done. But the talk is hollow when the space scorecard shows the Soviets at an all-time high in military launches, and the United States at a low point, with the trend still further downward.” There was urgent need for U.S. “to develop military space weapons capable of neutralizing Soviet supremacy.” (St Louis G-D, 3/27/72) March 27-April 3:	Working Group of NASA and Soviet engineers met at Manned Spacecraft Center to discuss technical details of docking mechanisms. Talks continued U.S.-U.S.S.R. study of compatible rendezvous and docking systems for spacecraft. (NASA Release 72—69; msc pao) March 28:	Space leaders endorsed shuttle in supplement published by Washington Daily News: Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said shuttle would “produce substantial flight economies, ease strictures on spacecraft design, lower manufacturing cost, remedy malfunctions in orbit, and afford a built-in versatility that will alter the nature of space planning and operations in major ways.” Editorial writer had described shuttle’s impact on space program as transition from dramatics of a countdown to an airport routine, Dr. Fletcher said. “The dramatics will be fondly remembered by many of us, but nostalgia will not obscure the hard fact that the routine and economic access to space, of which the shuttle is the hinge pin, is the practical and commonsense means by which we shall reap the great harvest of benefits that space holds for mankind.” Supplement interview quoted Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, as eagerly looking forward to shuttle flight. “By the time the first passenger shuttle flies I’ll be 68. I think flying into space in a shuttle will be just like being a passenger in an airliner, only smoother.” Dr. von Braun foresaw use of shuttle for travel to Mars “probably around 1990, or at least before the end of the 20th Century.” Flight probably would begin with Mars spacecraft being hauled, piece by piece, in space shuttle cargo bays, to be assembled in orbit. “I think the only way to fly to Mars is with nuclear power, and because we would never want to ignite a nuclear rock on earth, we’ll have to begin the journey from orbit.” Dr. von Braun saw shuttle preparing way for manned exploration by ferrying small, unmanned spacecraft into orbit and launching them toward Mars in late 1970s and 1980s. Article by Rep. James W. Symington (D-Mo.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said shuttle offered opportunity “not only to the United States to advance its own aerospace science and technology, but also to countries which could not finance a complete shuttle system. The advantages will be mutual and conducive to needed international scientific cooperation.” Proper use of shuttle “can help us in our efforts toward the resources management necessary to make this planet fit to house future generations of man.” James J. Harford, Executive Secretary of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said in article that guessing shuttle’s significance was “like trying to predict what the DC—3 would lead to in air transportation six years before its first flight. The space shuttle could be that powerful and more.” If shuttle performed the way NASA intended it to—“and NASA’s Apollo track record has to impress even the cynical”—shuttle would “help to create entire new industries and . . . hundreds of thousands of new jobs.” [W News, 3/28/72, 27, 29)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had designed and built compact shower assembly for use on Skylab earth-orbital missions beginning in 1973. Astronauts would step inside ring on floor and raise fireproof beta cloth curtain on hoop and attach it to ceiling. Flexible hose with push-button shower nozzle could spray 2.8 liters (3 quarts) of water from personal hygiene tank during each bath. Used water would be vacuumed from shower enclosure into disposable bag and deposited in waste tank, (msfc Release 72-38)
Press commented on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement. U.S. would “be doing virtually all of the cooperating” in joint space mission called for under new U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreement, William Hines said in Washington Sunday Star. “While negotiations were underway ... it was assumed that the 1975 joint manned space flight envisioned . . . would be a 50-50 proposition. The Americans would build the hardware . . . and the Russians would provide a small space station in which experiments could be carried out.” Instead, U.S.S.R. had “pulled back their item—the Salyut station— and changed the nature of the mission.” This had relieved U.S.S.R. of considerable expense and “left Uncle Sam holding a $250 million bag, this sum being the estimated cost of the hardware our side will have to build anyway.” (W Star, 5/28/72, A6) St. Louis Post-Dispatch: “An agreement between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. . . . ought to be just the first step toward full international co-operation in space. Countries which lack space programs of their own should be encouraged to participate in space ventures as limited partners.” Other countries had scientific expertise to contribute. “Beyond this they ought to receive the full benefits of whatever information is gained through space research. Historically, science never has been the exclusive domain of a single nation or even a small group of nations. It has served all mankind and this is the way it should be in space.” (St. Louis P—D, 5/28/72)
President Nixon in message transmitting FY 1973 budget to Congress said: “We have been reordering our research and development investments in defense and space. We have reassessed the space program and placed it on a firm future footing with increased attention to practical and economical applications of space and reductions in the cost of manned space flight. “. . . we have strengthened our defense research and development capability to insure that the country will not face the possibility of technological surprise or lack of the deterrent power necessary to protect our national security.” Therefore budget authority requested for Dept, of Defense research, development, technology, and engineering (rdt&e) was at all-time high. President proposed measures “to emphasize this Administration’s strong belief that science and technology can make significant contributions to the quality of American life and to economic growth”; to encourage private investment in R&D, including investment by small firms with innovative ideas; to use NASA and Atomic Energy Commission talents on clean, economical energy and safe, fast transportation— “this year we shall have the agency which sent men to the moon and back begin to assist the Department of Transportation in finding better ways to send people downtown and hack”—and to review economic policies which might restrict utilization and development of technical advances. President also said human resources spending would be 45% of FY 1973 budget, while defense programs would total 32%. Outlays requested for major environmental programs in 1973 were $2.5 billion, “more than three times the 1969 level.” {PD, 1/31/72, 104-17)
Manned Spacecraft Center’s Cellular Analytical Laboratory had developed system to improve early detection of illness and assess flight crew health before and after Skylab missions, nasa reported. Unique medical research effort under direction of Dr. Stephen L. Kimzey used sophisticated instrumentation in spectrophotometry, cytofluorometry, and electron microscopy to supplement existing laboratory analyses in detection and identification of cellular elements of blood by structural and chemical analysis. Laboratory would coordinate Skylab Ml 10 hematology experiment series of five experiments and seven scientific investigations outside NASA and would complete one experiment, M115 (special hematologic effects). Experiment would evaluate influence of long-duration space flight on mem’s immunological and hematological systems. Program would use complete electron microscopy facility to examine red blood cells for structural changes and x-ray analysis to detect alterations of internal electrolyte composition. Red cell represented model system to evaluate functional state of other body tissues and processes. Laboratory would improve medical care available to public by cooperating with medical schools in msc area and with Government agencies throughout U.S. Studies with Univ. of Texas Medical Branch had applied Laboratory’s procedures to evaluation of lymphocytes of burn patients to determine their cellular resistance to infection; early detection of disease program was under way with Baylor Univ. College of Medicine; and work with Texas Children’s Hospital would evaluate changes in muscle potassium and sodium concentrates associated with malnutrition. Joint effort with Environmental Protection Agency and Oak Ridge Laboratory would identify and quantitate early response of sputum cells exposed to agents having carcinogenic potential, (nasa Special Release)
About 150 engineering students from universities in Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee, and Mississippi attended special Fluid and Thermal Engineering Seminar at Marshall Space Flight Center, held to acquaint them with hardware and system developments in fluid and thermal engineering related to their studies. Group included 22 foreign students representing 6 foreign countries, who were students at Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute, (msfc Release 72-21)
NASA launched two Nike-Javelin III sounding rockets carrying Naval Research Laboratory cesium cloud experiments from Wallops Station at 5:04 am and 5:06 am est. Huge pinkish-white clouds were formed and were visible along East Coast. Launches were last in series of five that began March 25 to study atmosphere in 97-km (60-mi) region. (WS Release 72-4; WS pao) April 4:	U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1—20 comsat and France’s Sret 1 (Satellite de Recherches et d’Environment Technique; Satellite for Environmental and Technical Research) from Baykonur on one RD— 107B booster. Molniya 1-20 entered orbit with 39 911-km (24 799.6-mi) apogee, 442-km (274.7-mi) perigee, 717.7-min period, and 65.5° inclination. Satellite would ensure “operation of a remote telephone-telegraph radio-communication system, as well as . . . the transmission of Soviet central television programs to stations of the Orbita network.” Sret 1 entered orbit with 39 250-km (24 388.8-mi) apogee, 458-km (284.6-mi) perigee, 704.6-min period, and 65.6° inclination. The small, 15-kg (33-lb), autonomous satellite would study characteristics of solar batteries for space operations and degeneration of solar cells from cosmic ray exposure in Van Allen Belts. It was first of three sret satellites planned for launch in French-Soviet cooperative program. sret 2 would be launched in late 1974 or early 1975 and sret 3 one year later, (gsfc SSR, 4/30/72; Sov Aero, 4/10/72, 108; fbis—Sov, 4/5/72, LI)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, completed 16th flight from Flight Research Center. Objectives—to expand flight envelope and to obtain stability and control data at mach 0.95—were achieved. M2-F3 reached mach 1.3 and 20 400-m (67 000-ft) altitude, (nasa proj off)
Dr. William W. Duke, twin brother of Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., replied in letter published by Washington Post to April 26 article by Post columnist Nicholas von Hoffman that criticized astronauts and Apollo 16 mission. “My brother stated publicly that he would go to the moon anonymously. He sought no personal gain. No one will recall the names of these space explorers, but each time one mission is completed, the next is easier. I am sure the second, third, or one hundredth man to sail around the world found it easier than the one preceding. Who is to judge what is to be gained now or one hundred years hence in and from space?” (W Post, 5/10/72, A15) May 10—24:	Committee on Space Research (cospar) held 15th meeting in Madrid. First firm indication of water ice on Mars from photos returned by Mariner 9 (launched by NASA May 30, 1971) was announced by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist Dr. James A. Cutts. He and team had noted that residual south polar cap 320 km (200 mi) wide was unchanged throughout southern summer but was hidden by thin carbon dioxide frost that covered region 3200 km (2000 mi) in diameter during winter. In spring, it appeared that dry ice again evaporated and cap shrank to 320-km zone of water ice. Working sessions on terrestrial planets and outer planets were held by NASA and Soviet scientists to discuss programs for exploration of Venus, Mars, Saturn, and Jupiter. Discussions fulfilled recommendation of August 1971 nasa-U.S.S.R. Working Group that planetary exploration be discussed jointly at international colloquia. Space Science Board of National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council submitted United States Space Science Program: Report to COSPAR. Report, covering 1971, summarized analyses and observations from experiments on board spacecraft, sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft. (Miles, LA Times, 5/11/72; Text; NASA Int Aff; NASA Release 72—106; W Post, 5/23/72, A10)
President Nixon sent $246.3-billion FY 1973 budget request to Congress— increase of $9.6 billion over FY 1972. National total included research and development budget of $17.8 billion (increase of $1.4 billion), with $3,740 billion requested for civilian and military space R&D. Total request for NASA new obligational authority (noa) of $3,379 billion (1.3% of total U.S. budget) was $83 million more than FY 1972 NOA of $3,296 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to increase by $11 million, against decline of $200.9 million in FY 1972. Increase to $3,192 billion reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle engine and airframe. Of budget request, $2.6 billion would go for R&D, $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $701 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $472.5 million, to $128.7 million, reflected completion of Apollo program with Apollo 16 and 17 scheduled for launch during calendar year. Manned space flight operations—including $540.5 million for Skylab, $200 million for space shuttle, and $23 million for orbital systems and experiments—would increase from $682.8 million in FY 1972 to $1,094 billion in FY 1973. Space life sciences would receive $25.5 million and development, test, and mission operations would receive $305.2 million, including funds for detailed design and development of shuttle airframe and engine. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring total for manned space flight (including Apollo) to $1,224 billion, down $61 million from FY 1972. Funding for NASA space science and applications programs would increase $123.7 million, from $740.4 million in FY 1972 to $864.1 million in FY 1973. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program for High Energy Astronomy Observatory ($59.6 million in FY 1973) and orbiting explorers ($32 million) ; to lunar and planetary exploration (up $29.7 million, to $321.2 million, with $229.5 million for Viking project, $31.6 million for Mariner-Venus/Mercury 1973, and $18.7 million for supporting research and technology advanced studies) ; and to launch vehicle procurement. Funding for Pioneer planetary exploration program would decrease from $12.8 million in FY 1972 to $10.2 million. Increase of $7.2 million in applications programs, to $194.7 million in FY 1973, included $48.4 million for earth resources survey, $61.2 million for ATS, and $28.3 million for Nimbus. Total requested for NASA aeronautics and space technology programs increased from $212.8 million in FY 1972 to $249.3 million. Aeronautical research and technology funding would increase from $110 million in FY 1972 to $163.4 million, including $27.5 million for quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft and $3 million for vertical takeoff and landing (vtol) research/ experimental vehicle programs. Nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) development was terminated in favor of reoriented program to define smaller nuclear rocket system. Tracking and data acquisition funding would fall $4.9 million, to $259.1 million. Dept, of Defense FY 1973 budget of $83.5 billion was all-time high, $6.3 billion above FY 1972 budget authority, 30% of total Federal outlays for FY 1972, and 6.4% of Gross National Product—-but percentage of gnp had dropped from FY 1972’s 7%. dod total included $8.6 billion for research, development, technology, and engineering, $1.1 billion increase over FY 1972. Of requested Rdt&e total, military astronautics—with major programs including military comsats, first spaceborne ballistic missile early warning system, continued flight experiment programs, and applied research and technology programs— would receive $454 million (up $49.4 million). Military sciences would receive $572.7 million (up $34.9 million). Aircraft rdt&e would receive $1,948 billion (down $36.8 million) and missiles rdt&e $2,383 billion (up $437.8 million). Major DOD increases were programmed for undersea long-range missile system (ulms) to supplement and eventually replace Poseidon-Polaris fleet ($942.2 million, up $802 million), B-l advanced strategic bomber ($444 million, up $74 million), F-15 air superiority fighter ($910 million, up $490 million), airborne defense warning and control system (awAcs) ($470 million, up $331 million), and Safeguard antiballistic missile program ($1,483 billion, up $366 million). Some $299 million was requested for advance procurement of components for new nuclear-powered CVAN-70 aircraft carrier. Increases were also programmed for prototype development of vertical or short takeoff and landing aircraft for Navy, stol transports for possible C-130 replacement, Air Force SCAD strategic bomber penetration decoy, and engines for future transport and fighter aircraft. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration FY 1973 budget included $39.9 million for meteorological satellite operations, $6.8 million more than FY 1971 allocation of $33.1 million. Funding would complete financing of fourth satellite in ITOS series, continue financing of fifth and sixth ITOS satellites and one Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes), and initiate procurement of seventh itos. Dept, of Transportation budget request of $8.56 billion was decrease of $91.5 million over FY 1972. dot funding would start 10-yr, $10-billion program to improve urban mass transportation and reduce highway congestion. Federal Aviation Administration would continue efforts to reduce aircraft noise, ensure that advanced aircraft engines did not adversely affect atmosphere, and design safer and more productive airport system. Atomic Energy Commission FY 1973 budget request of $2.56 billion, up $247 million over FY 1972, would be used for development of liquid-metal fast-breeder power reactor and for controlled thermonuclear fusion research. National Science Foundation FY 1973 budget request of $653 million would cover basic scientific research, experimental program to test incentives to stimulate non-Federal R&d investment, program to analyze effect of R&D on national economy, continuation of research applied to national needs in advanced technology and environmental problems, program to improve research management at institutions of higher learning, and funding for astronomy to permit development of very large array of antennas for radio astronomy, (omb, Budget of US Govt, FY 1973; omb, US Budget in Brief; omb, Special Analysis; NASA budget briefing transcript; dod budget briefing transcript; dot budget briefing transcript; aiaa Release 72-3; nsf Release 72-106; Kelly, W Star, 1/24/72, A14; Av Wk, 2/14/72, 14)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of nine-month $140 090 contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study operational processing of space shuttle payload carriers at KSC space shuttle launch site. Study would develop objectives, technical information, and recommendations for flexible, cost-effective procedures for shuttle processing, (ksc Release 86-72)
Development of small-scale water-reclamation units for home use from NASA-developed technology was forecast by Langley Research Center scientist Richard H. Weinstein in Astronautics & Aeronautics. NASA had begun in late 1950s to develop regenerative systems for purifying and recycling water for long-term space missions. “Research programs have been concentrated on . . . physio-chemical systems. . . . Using largely existing water-processing concepts, the development has gone toward making the concepts efficient on a small scale and adapting them, where necessary, to zero gravity.” NASA systems were “far cry from the integrated, simplified systems needed for domestic water reclamation of the future” but provided “base from which to work.” (A&A, 3/72, 45-51) April 1:	Soviet news agency Tass reported Washington, D.C., interview with Dr. Philip Handler, President of U.S. National Academy of Sciences. Dr. Handler had praised scientific cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R: “Collaboration with their Soviet colleagues in so many fields—high energy physics, space research, and medical sciences, among others—promises markedly to benefit the work of U.S. scientists. ... We are pleased that new opportunities are being arranged for joint enterprises ... in space exploration, cardiovascular and cancer research, environmental monitoring, while we continue to explore the unique opportunities for mutual benefit in the broader enterprises in the international scientific unions.” (fbis-Sov, 4/1/72, LI)
Prominent Soviet astrophysicist Kronid A. Lubrasky had been sentenced to five years in labor camp for anti-Soviet activities, dissident sources in Moscow said. (AP, H Post, 11/1/72) During October:	Lunar Science Institute released Post-Apollo Lunar Science, report of July study by LSI scientists who met at Univ. of California at San Diego. Study had examined progress in lunar science, identified objectives for future work and drafted preliminary plan for long-term lunar science. Major recommendations were that NASA continue to “preserve and describe the samples, data, and photographs, and to make them available to the scientific community” through Lunar Receiving Laboratory at Manned Spacecraft Center; that Apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep) network and subsatellite be operated continuously as long as they provided significant new findings; that selected raw photographic observations be processed to ohtain usable scientific product; that lunar science program be continued at “substantial” level; that advisory panels be continued and augmented to emphasize geophysical and photographic data analysis; and that “small, selective program of mission planning be maintained” concurrently with instrument definition program “to provide the desired continuity between the present and the future.” LSI also recommended high priority for high-inclination orbital mission to determine geophysical, geochemical, and geological variables on planetwide scale, and joint and multinational lunar missions. (Text)
Role of satellite in weather forecasting was described by Howard W. Pollock, Deputy Administrator of National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, in speech before Ninth Space Congress at Cocoa Beach, Fla. Invention of earth satellites “might well be called the greatest single technological advance in meteorology since the invention of the balloon.” Geostationary and orbiting satellites had provided National Weather Service with “fantastic tools, immense amounts of information, and far greater capabilities than it has ever had before.” With orbiting satellites “we now have the potential for vertical temperature profiles at a theoretically infinite number of points around the world.” With satellite data “we foresee the day when we will . . . determine . . . the initial state of the world atmosphere in all essential details.” no A A was studying disaster warning satellite able to reach every home in every part of U.S. Every home could have a small inexpensive receiver. When natural disaster was forecast, satellite would he instructed to turn on receivers in area to be affected and broadcast appropriate warning with instructions about actions people should take. Fundamental technology for disaster warning satellite in coming decade was “largely available now” and planning was under way. (Text) papers of 20 students selected from 69 who applied. (Lettc Release 72-26; LeRC pao) April 20:	NASA TF-8A aircraft, piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry and equipped with supercritical wing, completed three performance evaluation flights from Flight Research Center. Aircraft flew at speeds ranging from mach 0.60 to 1.10 at 10 700-m (35 000-ft) altitude on one flight. On another it tested performance from mach 0.70 to 0.99 at 7300-m (24 000-ft) altitude and from mach 0.90 to 0.99 at 11 000 m (36 000 ft). On third flight, aircraft flew at mach 0.96 and 0.98 at both 7600 m (25 000 ft) and 10 700 m (35 000 ft) and mach 0.95 to 1.18 at 13 700 m (45 000 ft). Aircraft,' with experimental wing designed to decrease buffeting at high subsonic speeds, would continue test flights through May 19 and would have new side fairings installed beginning May 22. (nasa proj off)
National Science Foundation published Federal R&D Funding Continues To Rise (nsf 72—314): Upward trend since 1970 in Federal research and development support was clearly established. Federal R&D obligations, exclusive of plant, were expected to rise from $15.5 billion in FY 1971 to $16.8 billion in FY 1972 and to all-time high of $17.8 billion in FY 1973. Figures showed increase of 8% in FY 1972 and 6% in FY 1973. Upward trend reversed downward trend from FY 1967 through 1970. (nsf Highlights, 8/11/72)
President Nixon announced appointments to General Advisory Committee to Atomic Energy Commission: National Bureau of Standards physicist Dr. Evans V. Hayward; Stanford Univ. physicist Dr. Hubert Heffner; Dr. Michael M. May, Director of Lawrence Radiation Laboratory of Univ. of California at Livermore; and physicist Dr. Walter H. Zinn, former director of Argonne National Laboratory. (PD, 10/9/72, 1492) October 8: Earth passed within 113 000 km (70 000 mi) of comet Gia-cobini-Zinner’s orbit as U.S. and Canadian scientists on NASA’s Convair 990 observatory aircraft Galileo studied comet fragments. Aircraft was flying at 12 000-m (40 000-ft) altitude oyer Bering Sea. Experiment to use light spectra to identify percentages of sodium, calcium, magnesium, and iron in Giacobini meteors was part of 12-day scientific mission during which Galileo was flown from Alaska as experimental station. Main objectives of flight series were to observe meteor showers, measure polar winds in upper atmosphere, observe barium ion cloud experiment, and measure auroras. Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Dudley Observatory experiment to 109.4-km (67.9-mi) altitude to collect and identify cosmic dust particles from Giacobini meteor shower. Launch was first in series of three. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained, (arc Release 72-98; frc X-Press, 10/27/72, 2; NASA Rpt srl)
Portable, high-intensity light to illuminate Skylab workshop interior for motion picture photography during long space missions was being tested at Marshall Space Flight Center. Developed by iota Engineering, 8-kg (17-lb) light produced concentrated illumination of proper color balance for use with fast daylight film scheduled for Skylab. (msfc Release 72-15)
NASA and Dept, of Interior dedicated Merritt Island National Wildlife Refuge at Cape Kennedy. Under agreement signed by NASA Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley and Assistant Secretary of the Interior Nathaniel P. Reed, all land not used for rocket launch and launch support at Cape Kennedy would be used for wildlife management. Citrus grove and fish camp leases formerly managed by NASA for Army Corps of Engineers would be administered by Interior Dept.’s Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife. Agreement added to existing refuge 16 200-hectare (40 000-acre) property at northern tip of Kennedy Space Center that included Indian burial ground, 1830 Army fort, and Civil War sugar mill. {Today, 6/3/72; M Her, 6/4/72)
House Committee on Public Works favorably reported H.R. 16645, bill to amend Public Buildings Act of 1959 to provide for construction of Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial Bicentennial Civic Center in District of Columbia. Committee in Report recommended honoring certain members of Congress by naming public works buildings for them, including renaming Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., “H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory.” New name would honor Rep. H. Allen Smith (R-Calif.), who would be retiring after 16 yrs in House. Laboratory was operated by Cal Tech for NASA. (H Rpt 92-1410)
Extremely sensitive low-light-level image-intensification tube was being used by Hale Observatory astronomers to aim 500-cm (200-in) telescope atop Mt. Palomar at most distant objects in universe. Tube, developed to detect enemy troops in Vietnam, amplified faint light from remote celestial objects 2000 or more times. Tube had been adapted to astronomical use by Dr. Edwin W. Dennison of Hale Observatory and Cal Tech, (latns, W Post, 11/23/72, H9)	_ _
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed flight from Flight Research Center. Flight was made with wing vortex generators off at constant g of 200 from mach 0.50 to 0.99 and altitudes of 4800 to 14 000 m (16 000 to 46 000 ft). Windup turns and a few stick pulses with augmentation system off were performed. Pilot reported no significant differences in handling qualities and buffeting between flight with vortex generators on and off but said pitch seemed softer with generator off. (NASA proj off)
NASA announced appointment of J. Lloyd Jones, Jr., as Director of Aerodynamics and Vehicle Systems Div., Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, effective Aug. 6. Jones had heen Research Assistant to Director of Ames Research Center since 1970. (nasa Release 72—147)
San Francisco Examiner editorial praised U.S. Pay Board’s veto of 12% wage increase for aerospace workers: “Even in its ailing state the aerospace industry has continued as a major American exporter. It has thus prevented the serious deficit in this country’s balance of trade from Becoming truly horrendous. But it holds no monopoly on aerospace technology. Unless it can maintain high productivity and competitive wage costs, foreign-made planes will become as common in our skies as foreign-made cars are on our highways.” (SF Exam, 1/7/72) January 8:	Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) said in press release that President Nixon’s decision to proceed with space shuttle development was “a great mistake, and an outrageous distortion of budgetary priorities” and “the last thing we need at this time.” It would keep NASA and aerospace industry occupied but “it will also insure a steady and very substantial drain on the federal budget. And it will insure that other needs will continue to go unmet.” (Text)
nasa’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by John A. Manke, completed 20th flight from Flight Research Center. Objectives—to check out pilot and to obtain stability and control data at mach 0.70— were achieved. M2-F3 reached mach 0.70 and 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude, (nasa proj off)
nasa announced start of development of space experiment to test equivalence principle of Einstein’s general theory of relativity. Principle asserted that pull of gravity and oppositely directed mechanical acceleration could not be distinguished in small region of space. Thus, when two identical clocks were in areas with different gravitational pull, clock rates would appear to be different, although rates themselves would not change. Gravitational Redshift Space Probe Equipment would be launched from Wallops Station on Scout-D rocket in late 1974.	“Gravitational redshift” was term for decrease or shift toward red spectrum as a light wave escaped from strong gravitational field of sun or other massive body toward weaker gravitational field. Clock in experiment would follow 3%-hr elliptical flight trajectory over Atlantic and would always be in weaker gravitational field than identical clock at Bermuda ground station. Frequency of clock in probe, as observed by telemetry, should appear greater than frequency of clock on ground and rate should appear to increase as strength of gravitational field decreased up to 18 000-km (11000-mi) altitude and decrease as it returned to stronger field at lower altitudes. Difference between experimental and ground-based clock rates would be compared with shifts predicted by Einstein’s theory. Hydrogen maser clocks for experiment would be developed by Smithsonian Astro-physical Observatory under direction of Marshall Space Flight Center. (nasa Release 72-105)
Hayden Planetarium in New York announced it was showing serigraphs created by photographer Len Gittleman from photos taken by panoramic camera on Apollo 15 spacecraft. (Am Mus-Hayden Planetarium Release) December 14:	President Nixon issued statement following liftoff from moon of Apollo 17 lunar module Challenger: “As the Challenger leaves the surface of the moon, we are conscious not of what we leave behind, but of what lies before us. The dreams that draw humanity forward seem always to be redeemed if we believe in them strongly enough, and pursue them with diligence and courage. Once we stood mystified by the stars; today we reach out to them. We do this not only because it is man’s destiny to dream the impossible, to dare the impossible, and to do the impossible, but also because in space, as on earth, there are new answers and new opportunities for the improvement and the enlargement of human existence. “This may be the last time this century that men will walk on the moon. But space exploration will continue, the benefits of space exploration will continue, the search for knowledge through the exploration of space will continue, and there will be new dreams to pursue based on what we have learned. So let us neither mistake the significance nor miss the majesty of what we have witnessed. Few events have ever marked so clearly the passage of history from one epoch to another. If we understand this about the last flight of Apollo, then truly we shall have touched a ‘many-splendored thing.’ ” {PD, 12/18/72, 1758-9)
Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, received Hermann Oberth Award of Huntsville, Ala., Chapter of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics for outstanding scientific achievement in aeronautics and astronautics. He was cited at awards banquet in Huntsville, for his “many valuable contributions to lunar science, planetary formation, and better understanding of the origin of the solar system through the Apollo program; high resolution astronomy through the Stratoscope and lst (large space telescope) programs; the science of our sun through the ATM . . . program; stellar astronomy, earth resources, and life sciences through the Skylab program; the future of high energy astronomy through HEAO . . . and the promising possibilities for scientific payloads through the Shuttle program.” (msfc Release 72-14)
Aerospace Employment Project to transfer idled talents from aerospace industry to other endeavors in public sector began phase-out. Project had started in 1971 under $1.3-million contract from Dept, of Labor, Dept, of Housing and Urban Development, National League of Cities, and U.S. Conference of Mayors. Project had found reemployment for 297 out of 371 candidates—194, or 65%, in city, county, or state government work. (NYT, 7/16/72, 15) September 1:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base on Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with 381-km (237-mi) apogee, 142-km (88-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 110.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 30. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 9/6/72, 3)
Dr. Robert T. Jones of Ames Research Center stood by the wind-tunnel model of a conceptual aircraft being developed in computer and wind-tunnel studies. The fan jet transport’s wing would rotate <15” or more above a center pivot as the speed increased, in attempt to achieve supersonic speed without high fuel consumption and noise. By taking off with the wing perpendicular to the fuselage, the aircraft would require one fourth the takeoff energy of comparable delta-wing transports. would continue theoretical computer and wind-tunnel studies using models “flown” at speeds to mach 1.4. (NASA Release 72-104)
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed flight from Flight Research Center. Performance data were obtained at 10 700-m (35 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.95-0.99. Wing pressure distributions were recorded at altitudes from 8800 to 9100 m (29 000 to 30 000 ft) at mach 0.95-0.99. (nasa proj off)
Ames Research Center scientist Dr. Robert T. Jones was testing theory that antisymmetrical wing pivoting on center point might convert aircraft to supersonic transport without high fuel consumption and noise of conventional sst, NASA announced. Aircraft would have conventional straight wing at right angles to fuselage during takeoff on medium-length runways and would require about one fourth the takeoff energy needed by comparable delta-wing jet transports with similar payloads. As aircraft reached speed and altitude where swept wings were efficient, entire wing would rotate about 45° so that wing on one side would point in direction of flight and wing on other side would trail. Studies had indicated that cruising in this configuration at supersonic speeds to mach 1.2 would not produce sonic boom and could be accomplished with fuel economy similar to that of current jet aircraft at subsonic speeds. Conceptual aircraft could cruise up to mach 1.5 over ocean where sonic effects were not detrimental, arc
Kennedy Space Center minority and female employees increased steadily. During first 18 mos of ksc Equal Employment Opportunity—from April 1971 through September 1972—contractor employees increased by 249, to 11 382. Female employment increased by 128 persons, to 1240, an 11.5% increase. Minority personnel members increased from 609 to 847, 39.1%. During third quarter 1972, ksc contract personnel increased by 162 and minority employees increased by 70 to peak 7.44% of ksc contractor work force. Minority population in Brevard County, based on 1970 census, was 9.4%. (ksc Release 348-72)
Dr. George R. Carruthers of Naval Research Laboratory received nasa Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal at special NASA Hq. ceremony. Dr. Carruthers—outstanding black astrophysicist who had developed rocket-borne instrument that detected molecular hydrogen in interstellar space for first time in 1970—was cited for development of far-ultraviolet camera-spectrograph for Apollo 16 mission. Instrument had taken nearly 200 pictures of earth, Milky Way, and other galaxies in far-UV wavelengths not observable from earth and was providing new information on structure of universe. (NASA Release 72-149)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced issuance of requests for proposals on space tug systems. Tug—space shuttle 3rd stage—would extend capability of shuttle booster and orbital stages by adding propulsion for higher orbit. Propulsion would be provided by temporary use of existing rocket stage adapted for launch from shuttle cargo bay or by use of interim tug. Studies of rocket stage use were under way. rfps had been issued for possible interim tug development. Three $750 000 contracts would be awarded—two for work on cryogenic tug using liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants and one for study of tug using storable propellants. Proposals were due Dec. 22, with contracts to be awarded during first quarter of 1973. Air Force would assist in funding cryogenic tug studies and in selection of contractors and study management. Interim tug would be developed for use in space shuttle’s first flight scheduled for late 1970s. (msfc Release 72-155)
Lunar Nomenclature Committee of International Astronomical Union, meeting in Paris, decided to name lunar crater after internationally known astrophysicist Dr. Charles G. Abbot to honor Abbot’s 100th birthday May 31. Abbot became 13th exception to rule that lunar sites must be named only for persons deceased. Other 12 exceptions were astronauts and cosmonauts. Soviet members of Committee had proposed Abbot’s name in 1967 under mistaken impression he had died. (Casey, W Post, 5/11/72, Cl) May 1:	Ames Research Center C—8A Buffalo augmentor-wing research aircraft completed first flight from Boeing Co. Seattle, Wash., plant. Aircraft, piloted by Boeing test pilot Thomas E. Edmonds and equipped with wing planned for use on short takeoff and landing aircraft, reached 1980-m (6500-ft) altitude during 51-min flight. Primary objectives—■ to functional checkout and evaluate systems operation, aircraft’s structural integrity, and flight characteristics—were achieved. Aircraft would he used in cooperative project between NASA and Canadian Dept, of Industry, Trade and Commerce, (arc Astrogram, 5/11/72, 1; AF Mag, 8/72, 46)
NASA officials met with 25 national winners in Skylab student project competition at Marshall Space Flight Center to discuss design of students’ space experiments and demonstrations. During visit students toured msfc laboratories and Alabama Space and Rocket Center. (nasa Release 72-94; msfc pao) May 9:	Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) said in Washington, D.C., that arguments for space shuttle development had become “classic case of bureaucratic deception and waste.” He would offer amendment to cut off all shuttle funds. (NYT, 5/11/72)
U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C., dissolved temporary restraining order it had issued June 29 and refused to grant preliminary injunction against NASA reduction in force of 503 employees at Marshall Space Flight Center. Suit brought by American Federation of Government Employees charged NASA with violations of Civil Service Commission rules applicable to reductions in force. (Bell, Birmingham [Ala.] Post-Herald, 7/11/72)
Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of dod and Interagency Affairs, became Deputy Associate Administrator (Engineering) in Office of Space Science. Rosen had joined NASA in 1958 after 18 yrs with Naval Research Laboratory, where from 1947 to 1955 he was head of Rocket Development Branch. Rosen had proposed and developed Viking Upper-Air-Research Rocket and in 1955 proposed Vanguard Earth Satellite Project. He served as Technical Director during its development. (nasa Ann; NASA Release 72-237)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $9.8-million contract modification to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for work on backup Skylab Workshop. Modification included production completion and post-manufacturing verification of backup hardware and launch site support operations through completion of second manned mission, (msfc Release 72-5)
Paralytic patients at Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Tex., were using system developed at Langley Research Center to adjust their immediate environment, United Press International reported. System used paddles and switches activated by patients’ eye movements and breath to control room lights, radio, TV, and other electronic devices. (C Trib, 1/29/72)
Harmon International Aviation Trust named winners of awards. Harmon Aviation Trophy for 1971 would be awarded jointly to chief test pilots of Anglo-French Concorde supersonic airliner, Brian Trubshaw of England and Andre Turcat of France. Trophy for 1972 would go to U.S. Air Force pilots l/c Thomas B. Estes and l/c Dewain C. Vick for unprecedented long-distance nonstop flight at three times speed of sound in usaf SR-71 strategic reconnaissance aircraft. Geraldine Cobb was named winner of Harmon Aviatrix Trophy for series of humanitarian flights over Amazon Basin in 1972. (AP, NYT, 10/16/72)
Naval Research Laboratory announced discovery of huge clouds of carbon monoxide in galaxy M-33 by nrl scientist Dr. Philip R. Schwartz and Aerospace Corp. scientists Dr. William J. Wilson and Dr. Eugene E. Epstein. Team had used National Radio Astronomy Observatory radiotelescope at Kitt Peak, Ariz., in first detection of extragalactic molecular emission line by radioastronomy. Finding indicated that presence of complex molecules in interstellar medium was not unique to earth’s galaxy. Galaxy M-33 was 1.5 million light-years from center of Milky Way galaxy, (nrl Release 60-72-10)
NASA conducted successful trial run of airborne visible-laser opticalcommunications (avloc) flight tests to determine effects of atmosphere on vertical transmission of laser beams. Two-month series of tests using WB-57 aircraft at 18 000 m (60 000 ft), above 95% of earth’s atmosphere, would be operated by Manned Spacecraft Center over ground station at Redstone Arsenal near Marshall Space Flight Center. Tests were part of overall NASA program to develop optical communications systems for use during 1970s. Similar visible-light experiment was planned for Applications Technology Satellite ats-g, to be launched by NASA in 1975. In trial test, experiments, checking out pulsed-laser radar acquisition-and-ranging system, located aircraft flown from Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., and tracked it to 18 000 km (58 000 ft) but did not attempt laser communications, (msfc Release 72-109)
Gerhard B. Heller, Director of Space Science Laboratory at Marshall Space Flight Center, died in Nashville, Tenn., at age 58 of injuries received in automobile accident. Heller had begun career in 1940 at Peenemuende Rocket Center in Germany. He had come to U.S. with Dr. Wernher von Braun’s rocket group after World War II and worked with Army Ordnance Corps until transfer of group to msfc in 1960. During nasa career Heller had pioneered in thermal control of earth satellites. He had served as director of Space Sciences Laboratory’s Thermophysics Div. before becoming Laboratory director in 1969. (msfc Release 72-128)
Number of visitors taking Kennedy Space Center tours had risen from 47 220 in May 1971 to 72 890 in May 1972, Today reported. Total of 519000 visitors had taken tour in first five months of 1972 ; 398 000 had taken tour in same 1971 period. (Today, 6/4/72)
Envelopes carried to moon aboard Apollo 15 and later sold to stamp dealers had been ordered by Harold G. Collins, Chief of Kennedy Space Center Mission Support Office, Manager John H. Jacobs of Brevard Printing Co. told press. Collins had asked that bill be sent to Hughes Enterprises in Las Vegas, Nev. Associated Press said Collins and NASA officials and astronauts at Manned Spacecraft Center had declined to comment on Jacobs’ statement because matter was under investigation by Dept, of Justice. (AP, W Post, 9/19/72, A3)
Proposed general reorganization of Flight Research Center was approved by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Under new organization frc would be divided into four directorates and subdivided into divisions and branches, (frc X-Press, 5/12/72, 2)
Plans for Upper Atmosphere Observatory for U.S. and Canadian scientists were described in Science by Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist J. V. Evans. Ground-based observatory would be close to U.S.-Canadian border, near magnetic 60° latitude. It would provide first opportunity to measure all parameters important in upper atmosphere—■ altitude to 1000 km (620 mi) over north-south expanse of 1000 km. Users could observe two distinct parts of upper atmosphere and transition between them, one part coupled to earth by magnetic field and second part loosely held and subject to particle bombardment from outside earth. Observatory’s applications would include long-distance radio communications, long-range weather prediction, and international cooperation in research and education. Facility, costing $14 million, would complement Global Atmospheric Research Program (carp). {Science, 5/19/72, 463-72)
Col. Thomas G. Lamphier (usa, Ret.), veteran pilot and former Deputy Administrator of Veterans Administration, died in San Diego, Calif., at 82. He had helped Charles A. Lindbergh plan routes for first U.S. passenger airline in 1928 and had served as Vice President of first airline—Transcontinental Air Transport—after retirement from Army in 1929. Col. Lamphier had testified in defense of Gen. William (Billy) Mitchell at general’s court martial for insubordination in 1925. (AP, NYT, 10/12/72, 46) October 9—15:	International Astronautical Federation held 23rd Congress in Vienna. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director, of National Science Foundation, stressed Congress theme “Space for World Development” in opening address: “This is the year of ever-increasing cooperative interests in space ventures, including the joint, manned space effort by the Soviet Union and the United States. Thanks to the genius of our early pioneers, . . . results of an era of experimentation now show us clearly the promise which the orderly and determined use of space and space vehicles has to offer.” (Text; Congress Release, 10/9/72) Soviet attendance at Congress was limited to 21 including Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Valery N. Kubasov. More than half of scheduled Soviet participants failed to arrive or to send papers. Proxy readings of Soviet papers that were included eliminated most opportunities for clarification and discussion by panelists. Lack of Soviet participation had been attributed by Western scientists to U.S.S.R.’s downgrading of iaf in wake of increased space cooperation with U.S. and France and to Soviet budgetary hold-down. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, President of System Development Corp. and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in interview following opening session that it would be technically feasible to put crews of mixed nationalities on Mars within 20 to 30 yrs. “Even the money is there. It’s getting it allocated for the project that’s difficult.” He envisioned crew of 12 or more in giant spacecraft possibly powered by nuclear energy taking 12 to 18 mos to reach Mars. Special shuttle would be needed to carry supplies. “Such an expedition will require lots of resources . . . best . . . supplied by the world as a whole.” (Reuters, B Sun, 10/10/72) Dr. James H. Bredt of Advanced Missions Program Office in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight described new space processing experiments for Skylab missions in 1973. Experiments would broaden scope of experiments to correspond to program’s increased area of interest, to gain experience with new techniques in order to develop advanced equipment for future missions, and to enable materials scientists and engineers to demonstrate value of space laboratories for applied materials research. Apparatus and experimental samples would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center for installation in spacecraft during first week of December. Experiments were to be performed by third and final Skylab crew in November and December 1973. Analysis of samples would begin immediately after their return to earth, and principal investigators probably would present preliminary reports of results at 25th iaf Congress. (Text) Frank J. Malina, Chairman of International Academy of Astronautics’ Manned Research on Celestial Bodies (marecebo) Committee, told 5th Lunar International Laboratory Symposium Oct. 10 that 1964 estimate of 1975-1985 decade for initiation of permanent lunar laboratory might have been “too optimistic.” Men and machines had provided “great deal of hard working knowledge on the Moon and on men working there,” but people and governments needed to be convinced that necessary funding should be provided. (Text) Manned Spacecraft Center Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht discussed mission’s rescue capability during 5th International Space Rescue Symposium. Special kit to be installed in Skylab command and service module (csm) would permit CSM to rendezvous and dock with orbital workshop, using two-man crew. CSM then would be able to accept three stranded astronauts from workshop, undock, and reorbit with five persons on board. Rescue could be effected 48 days after alarm early in mission and as quickly as 10 days late in mission. Reason for variation in time required was that 22 days were needed to refurbish launch umbilical tower after previous launch. (Text) Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp)—joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975—was discussed at Oct. 10 press conference. Participants were Cosmonauts Filipchenko and Kubasov; Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; and Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. Dr. von Braun said transition from lower pressured Apollo spacecraft to higher pressured Soyuz would be easy for astronauts, while Soviet cosmonauts would have to spend about two hours in airlock to adjust to Apollo system. Dr. Sedov said U.S.S.R. had not accepted invitation from U.S. for joint mission when first proposed because of sensitive political situation. With successful Moscow summit meetings in May, situation had become “favorable.” (iaf Release, 10/10/72) Scout launch vehicle system was discussed in paper at Congress prepared by R. D. English of Langley Research Center and M. Green of LTV Aerospace Corp., presented by Green. Since inception of program in 1959, Scout vehicle had successfully launched 67 payloads. Studies had been made to ensure that system would provide flexibility for “unique missions to supplement the space shuttle.” (Pamphlet reprint of Text) Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) studies of space tug had been discontinued but NASA studies were continuing. “Our present belief is that the required technical advances combined with the budgetary demands that the space shuttle will make . . . will make it impossible to develop within this decade the ‘full capability’ that we feel will eventually be necessary.” NASA was investigating alternate approaches “to providing a Space Shuttle third stage which will give us a reduced but acceptable capability for the delivery of payloads during the early years of shuttle operation.” Alternatives being considered were: to modify existing stage for use as expendable third stage; to make major modifications to existing cryogenic- or storable-propellant stage to enable it to carry payload to geosynchronous orbit and return to shuttle orbit for reuse; or to build new vehicle with less capability than needed, as part of evolutionary program leading to vehicle with required capability. Studies of first alternative were under way; contracted studies within next year were expected to examine latter two alternatives. (Text) Sixth International History of Astronautics Symposium, held Oct. 13, was chaired by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. In introduction Dr. Emme pointed out that 57 men had flown in space since October 1957, 10 had walked on lunar surface, 22 had flown around moon, and 2 (Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John W. Young) had traveled to moon twice and made two earth-orbiting flights. Papers presented included “Hungarian Rocketry in the 19th Century” by Istvan G. Nagy, “Origins of Astronautics in Switzerland” by A. Waldis of Swiss Transport Museum, and “Development of the Technology of Rocketry and Space Research in Poland” by M. Subotowicz. Papers read in absentia were “Astronautic Pioneers” (analysis of rocket achievements of F. A. Tsander) by L. S. Dushkin and Ye. K. Moshkin and “Basic Stages of the Development of the Theory of Ramjet Engines” by I. A. Merkulov of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Memoir papers presented included “From galcit to Explorer 1, 1944-57” by Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory; “From Wallops Island to Mercury, 1945-58” by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and “The Viking Rocket” by Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs. (Program; iaf Release) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1972 was presented to Dr. Reimar Luest, Director of Max Planck Institute and astrophysicist known for work on solar winds and interplanetary matter. (Program; iaa Annual Rpt, 8/31/72) tunities. Atmospheric pressures of cabins would be adjusted while spacecraft were docked, to avoid necessity of prebreathing pure oxygen before transfer of crewmen from Soyuz to Apollo cabins. Soyuz pressure would be lowered from its normal 101 kilonewtons per sq m to 69 (from 14.7 psi to 10); Apollo pressure would remain at 35 kilonewtons per sq m (5 psi). First joint crew training session was scheduled for summer of 1973, with cosmonauts visiting U.S. for several weeks. Astronauts would train equal time in U.S.S.R. in fall of 1973. Soviet two-fifths scale model of docking mechanism would be tested with U.S. model during Moscow meeting in December 1972. Further consideration of extravehicular crew transfer would be deleted; if any emergency prevented return of crewmen to their own ships, they would land in spacecraft they were visiting. Sufficient propellant would be budgeted for Apollo spacecraft to allow it to maintain attitude control while docked. Exchange of working groups would be more frequent, with meetings at msc in November, in Moscow in December, and at msc in March 1973. U.S. delegation included representatives of prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. and three of five working groups established in July 6-18 meetings at msc to define mission elements. Working group members included Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford. NASA delegation was headed by astp Director Glynn S. Lunney. Senior member of Soviet delegation was Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R.’s astp Director, (nasa Releases 72-198, 72—207, 72-211; AP, C Trib, 10/20/72) October 10:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Titan HID booster at 11:03 am pdt (2:03 pm edt). Satellite entered orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 159-km (99-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, 96.4° inclination and reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 10/16/72, 19; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
Results of Apollo 16 far-ultraviolet camera and spectrograph experiment on lunar surface were described in Science by Naval Research Laboratory scientists Dr. George R. Carruthers and Dr. Thornton L. Page. A major objective of experiment had been to obtain spectra and imagery of terrestrial atmosphere and geocorona in 500 to 1600 A range. Among data obtained were images and spectra in wavelength below 1600 A. These had provided spatial distributions and relative intensities of emissions due to atomic hydrogen, atomic oxygen, molecular nitrogen, and other species—some observed by spectrograph for first time. (Science, 9/1/72, 788-91)
Termination notices effective June 29 were sent to 198 employees at Marshall Space Flight Center; 115 were downgraded or reassigned in manpower reduction that would bring msfc employment level to 5317 by June 30. Further reduction of 103 was planned for June 1973. (Huntsville Times, 5/11/72)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics unanimously approved H.R. 14070, $3.429-billion FY 1973 NASA authorization bill, $50 million above NASA budget request of $3,379 billion. Bill, reported to House April 11, allocated $2,651 billion for research and development (r&d), $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $700.8 million for research and program management. NASA budget request of $163.4 million for aeronautical research and technology was increased $48.5 million to $211.9 million. In House report, Committee scored previous cut in funding for aeronautics and recommended increase to support 1971 Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study of NASA and Dept, of Transportation by expediting solution of “major problems in aviation today: noise pollution and safety.” Bill allocated $41 million of the increase (for $50-million total) toward R&D to retrofit civil aviation fleet with noise reduction modifications and $7.5-million increase (for $24.7-million total) for aviation safety. Of safety funds, $3.8 million was for technology to modify civil aircraft to use Federal Aviation Administration’s new microwave landing system by 1978, $700 000 for turbulence research, and $3 million for research on aircraft collision avoidance. Bill increased NASA budget request for technology utilization from $4 million to $5.5 million. Of increase, $1.2 million was to be spent in applying NASA technology to problems in urban structures, fire safety, transportation systems, and energy conversion and $300 000 for applications engineering products and patent licensing. Committee deleted $4 million from $59.6-million NASA request for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and restored $4 million deleted by Office of Management and Budget for Earth Observation Satellite (eos), follow-on development to Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts). Committee said it was expressing concern that NASA placed “higher priority upon certain expensive scientific projects . . . than it does upon space applications project which Congress considers most important.” Committee considered level of funding for space applications “inadequate” and urged “a substantial increase in the budget for fiscal year 1974.” (H Rpt 92-926; Com Off)
Need for national technology policy was urged in Science article by Dr. J. E. Goldman, Senior Vice President for Research and Development of Xerox Corp. As U.S. began to channel technical efforts toward programs of social significance, “we must remember one of the important lessons of our recent past; the history of the space program ... is a lesson in the mastery of the institutional technique necessary to bring together the segments of the intellectual, industrial, and technological community needed to fulfill goals in a timely fashion. If we choose to ignore this, if we set aside the space program’s experience as nothing more than a $20-billion waste, then by our irrationality we will endanger the ultimate achievement of such important societal objectives as better housing and the renewal of our inner cities.” (Science, 9/22/72, 1078-80) September 23:	Washington Post reported that U.S.—U.S.S.R. environmental protection committee established by May 23 treaty would permit placement by both nations of seismic devices on each other’s territories. Purpose would be to predict earthquakes but Post said devices also could detect underground nuclear tests and distinguish them from earthquakes. If used for test detection, “devices could close the last possible gap in an extremely controversial field.” U.S. had maintained that underground tests could not be banned because of inability to monitor adherence to ban by both sides. Post said cursory check of Dept, of Defense and Arms Control and Disarmament Agency sources had yielded “no one who knew that the pact contained this provision.” (Berger, W Post, 9/23/72) September 25:	NASA was instrumenting areas in five national parks to monitor any adverse effects of sonic boom generated by test flights of two YF—12 aircraft being operated by NASA, (frc, Flight Operations; Av Wh, 9/25/72, 11)
First results of new radar astronomy technique for accurately measuring lunar topography from earth were described in Science by Haystack Observatory astronomer Stanley H. Zisk. Earlier techniques had measured radar backscattering properties by analyzing lunar echo simultaneously in both time and delay Doppler frequency. New technique extended earlier technique to three-dimensional measurement using radio-interferometer receiver for lunar echo signals. Technique had been used to measure lunar area that included craters Ptolemaeus, Alphonsus, and Arzachel and portions of Mare Nubium. Results had shown evidence of late episode of volcanism that had partially filled two craters through crustal fault of Imbrian origin. Other features coinciding with local gravitational anomalies could be correlated with flow events. Science cover photo of lunar topography showed floor of crater Ptolemaeus to be higher than large mare to its left. Lunar elevations were indicated by lighter shades of gray on black-to-white /photo. (Science, 12/1/72, cover, 977-80)
Lewis Research Center issued requests for proposals for first phase of three-phase effort to demonstrate that lower aircraft engine emissions could be reached without sacrificing combustion efficiency or combustor’s ability to reignite in flight. Firm selected would receive 15-mo contract to conduct screening tests of various combustor designs and modifications. Contractor would consider LeRC-developed “swirl can” design, which provided many fuel-injection points and premixed some fuel and air and could be operated to temperatures twice as hot as standard combustors with significant reductions in pollutants. Second phase of project would test best designs from phase one. Third phase would test best design as part of a complete engine, (nasa Release 72-38)
Asteroid discovered in constellation Leo by Crimean Astrophysical Observatory scientists had been named after late Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin—first man in space, on Vostok 1 April 12, 1961— Spaceflight reported. (SF, 12/72, 457)
Symposium on significant accomplishments in sciences was held at Goddard Space Flight Center. GSFC scientists presented papers covering their studies and experiments in astronomy during 1970. Dr. Norman H. MacLeod said imagery obtained by high-resolution infrared radiometer on Nimbus 3 (launched April 14, 1969) could now be handled quantitatively and might permit estimations of the location, amount, and seasonal changes in water available. Data could be used by governments for better management of natural resources. Study of effect on earth’s surface temperature and climatology of climatic modification by carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and aerosol was discussed by Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool. Study had indicated that “runaway greenhouse effect” from accumulation of man-made carbon dioxide alone probably was not possible. But, as aerosol dust in air increased, albedo increased “very fast, compared to the opacity in the infrared; as the albedo increases, the solar radiation decreases, and the surface temperature goes down.” Temperature could decrease in next 30 yrs as much as about 3 K [5.4°F], Several climatologists had suggested that “3K decrease in global temperature is sufficient to trigger an Ice Age!” (Transcript)
Dr. Nicholas C. Costes of Marshall Space Flight Center Space Sciences Laboratory received Norman Medal, highest award of American Society of Civil Engineers, at asce annual meeting in Houston. Award was for paper “Apollo 11: Soil Mechanics Results,” published by asce in 1970. (Marshall Star, 10/18/72, 1)
Second F—111 swing-wing fighter-bomber was lost over North Vietnam. First had been lost Sept. 28. U.S. Command in Saigon had no comment on North Vietnamese report that aircraft had been shot down. (AP, NYT, 10/19/72, 18) October 17—19:	Results of NASA research on powered-lift short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft were presented at Ames Research Center Conference. Papers were presented on short-haul transportation systems, aerodynamics, loads, flight dynamics, operation aspects, and quiet stol propulsion by authors from arc, Flight Research Center, Langley Research Center, Lewis Research Center, Federal Aviation Administration, and Army Air Mobility Research and Development Laboratory. (nasa Release 72-201; nasa SP-320)
Dismantling of Saturn Launch Complexes 34 and 37, sites of Saturn I and IB launches at start of Apollo program, was begun at Kennedy Space Center by Southern Contractors Service. Firm had hid $15 051 for structures built at cost of $147 990 581. Dismantling would he completed within seven months. NASA spokesman had said total of $53 856 403 had been saved in equipment and structures from complexes, “one of the highest returns ever” for such a program. NASA Centers would receive salvaged equipment for active programs. Equipment valued at $5 891 866 would he given to Atomic Energy Commission; Depts. of Commerce, Interior, and Agriculture; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; and universities with Government research grants. Launch control rooms in Launch Complex 34 and 37 blockhouses would be retained in launch configuration for historical and public information purposes. Historical marker outside would inform visitors of past events. Seven Saturn I and IB vehicles had been launched from Complex 34 culminating in Apollo 7, first manned command and service module launch, Oct. 11, 1968. Complex also had been scene of tragic Jan. 27, 1967, fire that took lives of three astronauts. Eight Saturn I and IB vehicles had been launched from Pad 37B, terminating with Apollo 5, first Apollo lunar module launch, Jan. 22, 1968. (M Her, 4/29/72; ksc Release 88-72; ksc Hist Off; ksc memo to NASA Hist Off)
North American Rockwell Corp. Downey Div. announced receipt of $5 500 000 contract from Air Force Systems Command’s Space and Missile Organization (samso) to build one-of-a-kind satellite for late 1973 launch. Spacecraft would be orbiting base from which quartet of instruments would gather scientific data for several Government agencies. (NR Release) September 22-25:	NASA launched Explorer 47 (imp-h) Interplanetary Monitoring Platform from Eastern Test Range at 9:20 pm edt by three-stage, long-tank, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Satellite entered transfer orbit with 237 796-km (147 759.6-mi) apogee, 246-km (152.9-mi) perigee, 7365-min (5.11-day) period, and 28.6° inclination. Primary objective was to provide more detailed understanding of dynamics of regions discovered and broadly surveyed by previous earth-orbiting imps and lunar imp by obtaining scientific data during period of decreasing solar activity. Explorer 47 would continue studies of interplanetary radiation, solar wind and energetic particle emissions, and magnetic fields in earth’s environment from orbit halfway to moon. Apogee kick motor was fired Sept. 25 to place Explorer 47 in circular orbit with 235 639-km (146 419.3-mi) apogee, 201599-km (125 267.8-mi) perigee, 12.3-day period, and 17.2° inclination. Ry Sept. 25, 10 experiments had been commanded on and were operating satisfactorily. Three remaining experiments would be turned on about Oct. 5. Explorer 47 was drum shaped, weighed 378 kg (833 lbs), and carried 13 experiments to measure energetic particles, plasmas, and magnetic and electric fields. Experiments were provided universities, industry, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Atomic Energy Commission, and Goddard Space Flight Center. Explorer 47 was ninth spacecraft in imp series. First—Explorer 18 (imp—a)—had been launched Nov. 26, 1963, and most recent—Explorer 43 (imp—i) . —had been launched March 13, 1971. Four of the eight previously launched spacecraft were still operating, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-185) September 22:	Skylab Orbital Workshop, scheduled to carry three-man crews in earth orbit in 1973, arrived at Kennedy Space Center after two-week barge trip from McDonnell Douglas Co.’s Huntington Reach, Calif., plant. Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) was flown to KSC from Manned Spacecraft Center, where it had been undergoing thermal testing since mid-July. Airlock module (am) and multiple docking adapter (mda) were scheduled to arrive at ksc Oct. 9 and instrument unit Oct. 22. (upi, NY News, 9/23/72; ksc Releases 268-72, 270-72)
Flight Research Center announced successful remote-control landing of 1600-kg (3500-lb) modified Piper Comanche (PA-30) aircraft at FRC. Safety pilot was on board aircraft. Landing test demonstrated new technique to provide safer and more economical means of testing advanced aircraft and spacecraft when risk to aircraft or pilot was high or when costs precluded manned full-scale flight test vehicle. PA-30 was equipped with preliminary version of system that used telemetry to send control commands to aircraft and flight information to pilot displays in ground “cockpit” several miles away. Ground pilot used TV and radar to navigate aircraft. In later tests, large-scale models up to 9 m (30 ft) long would be launched from carrier aircraft. Test pilot on ground would “fly” remotely piloted research vehicles (rprv) using TV and telemetry, (frc Release 16-72)
Manned Spacecraft Center awarded North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. $200 000, fixed-price, research and development contract to study feasibility of manned and unmanned multipurpose spacecraft to provide support for spacecraft in geosynchronous orbit. Spacecraft in geosynchronous orbit were stationed at 37 800-km (23 500-mi) altitude, where they conducted communications, earth observations, and navigation experiments, (msc Release 72-141)
StarQuest Ltd., nonprofit firm to promote values of space exploration to U.S. public, had rented $350 000 ocean liner for cruise off Cape Kennedy during Apollo 17 launch Dec. 6, Chicago Sun-Times reported. Firm’s honorary board included science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke and former astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell. Firm intended to make motion picture of Apollo 17 launch. (Ziomek, C Sun-Times, 10/2/72)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carried Spanish and Goddard Space Flight Center experiments to 122km (75.7-mi) altitude to study ion composition in D- and E-regions of ionosphere. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Launch was fifth of six launches to study ionosphere under July 30, 1970, Memorandum of Agreement between NASA and Comision Nacional de Investigation del Espacio (conie). (nasa Rpt SRL)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics announced election of 19 new Fellows, including Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Bruce T. Lundin, Lewis Research Center Director; and Harris M. Schurmeir, Jet Propulsion Laboratory Project Manager. Fellows would be honored at annual banquet during Jan. 8-10, 1973, annual meeting and technical display. Dr. Fletcher had been cited for “pioneering work in missile guidance systems and for his farsighted administrative leadership of this nation’s aeronautical and space research and development programs.” Lundin citation was for “contribution to research in turbojet and ramjet engine technology and his management of many aircraft, missile and spacecraft research programs.” Schurmeir was cited for “basic work in systems engineering for lunar and planetary spacecraft and in particular for his leadership of the Ranger photographic missions to the moon and the Mariner missions to Mars.” Assistant Secretary of the Air Force Grant L. Hansen had also been elected AIAA Fellow, for “contributions to the electronic design of the Nike, Sparrow, Thor and Skybolt Systems, management and direction of the Centaur program and his perceptive leadership in military research and development.” (aiaa Release)
Use of M518 multipurpose electric furnace developed by Marshall Space Flight Center for Skylab would permit increase in number of metals and metal-processing experiments to be carried on earth-orbiting station in 1973, NASA announced. New furnace would accommodate original composite casting experiments and 10 others to explore possibility of manufacturing and processing materials in zero g. Furnace would be delivered to NASA in December by principal contractor Westinghouse Corp. It would facilitate experimentation in solidification, crystal growth, composite structures, alloy structural characteristics, and other thermal processes that altered materials in weightlessness, (nasa Release 72-196)
Smithsonian Institution opened exhibit “Ballooning: 1782-1972” at Arts and Industries Building in Washington, D.C. Exhibit, depicting ballooning and brave aeronauts, was described by New York Times as prototype show for National Air and Space Museum, “appropriately headed by Michael Collins, the ‘anchor astronaut’ for man’s first landing on the moon in 1969.” (Robertson, NYT, 2/29/72, 14) During February:	NASA selected three life scientists to receive first grants under NASA life scientist program. Dr. Roger P. Maickel, professor of pharmacology at Indiana Univ., would study effects of stressful or otherwise abnormal environment, such as space travel, on action of selected therapeutic drugs. Dr. Walther Stoeckenius of San Francisco Medical Center Cardiovascular Research Institute would conduct exobiology research to determine physiologic role of bacterial membrane dependent on high salt concentration. Dr. William A. Bonner, professor of chemistry at Stanford Univ., would conduct exobiology research to develop means for detecting measurable, optically active molecules in remote regions of space. Program had been established in July 1971 to increase cooperation among university and NASA life scientists in contributing to advancement of life sciences disciplines related to NASA mission. Scientists and their graduate students would spend one third of their time at a NASA center. (NASA Release V2—41)
Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Director of National Atmospheric and Oceanic Administration’s Environmental Research Laboratories, outlined space modification techniques at international meeting of Society of Engineering Science in Tel Aviv, Israel. Techniques would modify nearearth space environment to make it safe for manned space flight. “In the last few years experimenters have artificially modified the space environment. We can now produce artificial aurorae. We can change the population of the Van Allen radiation belt. We can artificially modify the ionosphere from the ground and our other ideas about artificial experiments for the future stretch as far as trying to copy the sweeping action being carried on naturally by Jupiter’s moons.” Other possible man-made changes in near-earth space environment included releasing beam of energetic particles from satellite to produce electromagnetic waves in space, injecting thermal plasma at high altitudes to change radiation population in space, and transmitting electromagnetic waves from earth to disturb particles trapped in Van Allen belt. Experiments would provide data on natural processes that caused geomagnetic storms on earth, permit improved predictions of radar clutter and quality of polar radio communications in future naturally occurring storms, permit modification or attenuation of naturally occurring storms, and enable scientists to make near-earth space environment safe for prolonged manned space flight and study. (noaa Release 72^83)
NASA launched Javelin sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center fields and particles experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily but scientific objectives were not met. (SR list)
NASA and National Science Teachers Assn, (nsta) announced approval of experiments proposed by 19 high school students from 16 states for Skylab space station. Experimenters were from 25 finalists selected from 3409 proposals submitted to NASA by U.S. secondary school students as part of Skylab Student Project. Six other finalists could not be accommodated because of Skylab performance requirements and schedule constraints. Medallions would he awarded to finalists, sponsors, and schools during Skylab Educational Conference at Kennedy Space Center at Skylab launch time, (nasa Release 72—146)
Lunar science press conference at Manned Spacecraft Center discussed Apollo 16 data and portent for Apollo 17 mission, scheduled for launch Dec. 6. Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook reported that analysis of pea-size Apollo 16 rock fragments had shown them ranging in age from 3.98 billion to 4.25 billion yrs. Rocks had crystallized some 300 million yrs after moon’s formation. It was possible that Apollo 17 site would yield “very young rocks . . . , young volcanics. So one may be able to extend the mare type ages . . . and see just how long it took the surface of the moon ... to crystallize before it was a rather hard crust . . . with very little, if any, igneous activity.” Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg of Cal Tech reported Apollo 16 rock No. 65015 seemed to have undergone two distinct melting steps. Bulk of this “two-history rock” had 'crystallized 3.93 billion yrs ago but had retained some crystals that had been formed between 4.40 and 4.48 billion yrs ago. First crystallization probably had been associated with great heat during moon’s formation but scientists had no clue to cause of second melting period and subsequent recrystallization. Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said “fundamental conclusion” was evolving from new understanding of moon gained “largely out of the Apollo program.” Scientists “have to now look at each individual planet and somehow or another infer its chemical composition.” They were beginning to see chemically heterogeneous solar system. Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Apollo 17 lunar module pilot, described Apollo 17 landing site in moon’s Taurus-Littrow area on rim of Serenitatis Basin: “It’s in that general geographic ring that resembles the Apennine front near where Apollo 15 landed. It has, however, some very distinctive characteristics .... There is no clear evidence that we are close to mare. The nearest obvious mare surface is several hundred kilometers [100 km equals 62 mi] to the . . . northwest—in the Mare Serenitatis. We are landing on a plain that seems to overlie a slightly elevated flat surface that predates the mare. And it seems when you look at all of the basins on the moon, that that surface, a correlative surface in other basins, is somehow related to the formation of the basin. There are comparable plains around all of the big circular basins, and there is a flat floor that predates the mare that is cut by graben faulting .... Also in the site we have the . . . north and south massifs. These are large aggregates of peaks and mountains that . . . are part of the range structure of the Orientale basin.” Dark cover over valley floor and portions of highlands was younger than mare and was as little as 0.5 m (1.6 ft) thick. Radar data had shown cover was “finely fragmented mantle material” that was “ubiquitous in all of the low areas and locally is covering portions of the highlands.” Dr. Schmitt said mantle, although of not as high a priority as the crustal examination in the south massif, had “potential of giving us our most fundamental evidence for studying this evolutionary model.” Potential was high that “dark mantle material has sampled some significant portion of the crust. At least it has sampled its source area, and that source area is very probably deep within the moon.” Dr. Schmitt told press that to be able to say that man was “on the verge, if not already there, of understanding the evolution of another planet is something that is really unprecedented in the history of man. And I think that’s the thing that’s the news of Apollo. That is what we have done.” (Transcript)
Federal Pay Board rejected contract settlements that would have provided first-year increase of 12% to more than 100 000 aerospace industry workers in 1973. (Shabecoff, NYT, 1/6/72, 1)
Senate confirmed nominations of Kenneth Rush as Deputy Secretary of Defense and of Eberhardt Rechtin as Assistant Secretary of Defense (Telecommunications). {CR, 2/3/73; dod Directory, Spring 1973) February 4:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of one-month $l-million interim contract extension to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for space shuttle main engine. Contract was awarded pending completion of General Accounting Office review of original $500-million contract awarded July 13, 1971. Review had been requested by competing contractor, United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., on Aug. 3, 1971. (msfc Release 72-9; A&A 1971)
AP quoted scientists as saying new mirror being installed in Boyden Observatory at Mazelspoort, South Africa, would provide most powerful telescope in Southern Hemisphere. Scientists planned to use telescope to flash laser beam to moon. {W Post, 5/14/72, D5)
Swing-wing Fitter-B fighter-bomber aircraft never before seen outside U.S.S.R. had been delivered to Egypt by U.S.S.R. shortly before Egyptian government ordered Soviet pilots and military advisers to leave Egypt in July, New York Times reported. Some U.S. Government analysts believed aircraft, version of fixed-wing Sukhoi aircraft which U.S.S.R. had supplied to Egypt for several years, had heightened Egyptian disillusionment with U.S.S.R. “The Egyptians wanted an advanced fighter-bomber and thought they had Russian promises to get some. But what was delivered is barely better than the Sukhoi-7, except that the swing-wings allow it to take off from a shorter field.” (Beecher, NYT, 9/29/72, 19) or structural problem with stand pipe in tank. Additional tests were September 28-29: Oxidizer tank of Apollo 17 command and service module (csm) reaction control system was overpressurized during test at Kennedy Space Center. Preliminary data indicated no bladder leak scheduled but problem was not expected to delay Apollo launch scheduled Dec. 6. (nasa pao; SBD, 10/2/72, 139) September 28—30:	Symposium on High Energy Phenomena on the Sun was held at Goddard Space Flight Center to present recent findings to scientists from U.S., Australia, U.K., France, and Japan. Detection of first direct evidence of nuclear reactions on solar surface, during Aug. 4 and 7 by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory (launched Sept. 29, 1971), was reported by Univ. of New Hampshire physicist Dr. Edward L. Chupp and team. Evidence had been obtained from two gamma-ray emission lines—radiation indicators of nuclear processes—during first observation of these radiations from sun. Findings proved that nuclear reactions did occur in large solar flares, and might contribute to goal of generating pollution-free electrical power from sustained thermonuclear reactions in laboratory, (nasa Release 72-193) September 29: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 521 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1014-km (630.1-mi) apogee, 976-km (606.5-mi) perigee, 105.0min period, and 65.9° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; SF, 3/73, 114) • Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, spoke at dedication ceremony for Univ. of Kansas Space Technology Center and at joint University and Chamber of Commerce luncheon in Lawrence, Kan., celebrating dedication. At dedication he said ceremony marked final step in nasa-sponsored program to build space-oriented research facilities at U.S. universities under Sustaining University Program started in 1960s. Univ. of Kansas Center was 37th and last facility to be completed. Dr. Fletcher said program had accomplished its mission “extremely well. These splendid facilities give our Nation the means of performing research that would be virtually impossible without them.” Program’s projects had been “invaluable in the successful accomplishment of many of our greatest achievements in space.” NASA had found in universities “a concentrated source of one of the irreplaceable ingredients of advanced research programs—highly trained intellects. And now that they can work in facilities to match, we are expecting even more productive results.” Dr. Fletcher discussed universities’ role in NASA activities in luncheon speech: “We work with large and small universities in aeronautics and space programs supporting projects . . . relevant to NASA’s mission and . . . compatible with university interests and capabilities. We encourage the use of NASA laboratory facilities and the exchange of information between university faculty and nasa scientists.” More than 900 university experimenters had used space data, more than 300 investigators from 42 universities had analyzed lunar samples, 25 universities had conceived Apollo mission experiments, and 2500 active research grants and contracts had been issued to universities by NASA. “As we look beyond this decade we can be confident that we have a mechanism, through the space shuttle, to provide quick and easy access to space and at a cost that should encourage new opportunities and initiatives, particularly from the university community.” (Texts)
NASA Flight Research Center was testing new curved, steep, instrument landing approach for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to reduce noise discomfort and airport congestion. Approach could begin at various locations close to airport and would provide better aircraft separation, more landings per given time, less en route time, and lower airline operating costs by shortening terminal-to-terminal times. Approaches began at altitudes between 1200 and 1500 m (4000 and 5000 ft) and were flown to approximately 15 m (50 ft) above ground, (frc Release 7—72)
Discovery that calcium chloride concentration in brackish waters of ponds in Victorialand region of Antarctica—most Mars-like area on earth— prevented growth of microorganisms was announced by NASA. Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists Dr. Roy E. Cameron and Frank A. Morelli had concluded that any water found on Mars might be as salty and sterile. They had successfully grown microorganisms in Antarctic soil samples, but no form survived when kept in pond water. “In this environment,” Dr. Cameron said, “the capacity of life to adapt and survive is pushed to its limit and beyond. The concentration of living things around water sources in the dry valleys and their thinning out and final disappearance on the cold, dry slopes may provide the model for the distribution of life we may . . . someday find on Mars.” (nasa Release 72-90)
Semiannual survey released by Aerospace Industries Assn, said sharp three-year decline in aerospace industry employment had leveled off at slightly more than 900 000. Between June 1972 and June 1973, aerospace employment was expected to decline from 923 000 to 914 000, or one per cent. During previous three years more than 500 000 employees—one third of total aerospace work force—had been dropped from payroll. Survey projected December 1972 employment at 917 000, somewhat above earlier forecast of 887 000. Between June 1972 and June 1973, production workers were expected to decline by 1.8%, scientists and engineers by 0.6%, and technicians to increase by 1.6%. By June 1973 estimated 157 000 scientists and engineers would be employed; 1967 peak had been 235 000. (Text)
Panel of Geophysics Research Board of National Research Council released Summary Report of the Ad Hoc Panel on (NOx) and the Ozone Layer. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration had asked Panel to review paper by Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist Dr. Harold S. Johnston [see Aug. 1] and to consider research to resolve uncertainties that existed in Dr. Johnston’s hypothesis that nitrogen oxides from exhausts of supersonic transport aircraft could have destructive effects on ozone concentration. Uncertainties existed because dynamic processes might distort chemical equilibrium model based on static atmosphere, rates of some reactions in scheme of chemical kinetics might not be known, and estimations of SST engine exhaust products seemed uncertain to order of magnitude, at least. Panel had concluded: “There appears to be general agreement that Harold Johnston’s conclusions . . . are credible, but with the reservations cited.” Possibility of serious effects on the normal ozone could not be dismissed. “To the extent that existing information permits, Johnston has done a very careful and detailed analysis.” It was evident “that we suffer from serious ignorance of many fundamental aspects of the chemistry and dynamics of the stratosphere when we attempt to make quantitative assessments of the pollution consequences of high-altitude aircraft operations.” (nas—nrc-nae News Rpt, 10/72, 2)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, completed 18th flight after air-launch from B-52 aircraft over Flight Research Center. Objectives—to expand flight envelope, obtain stability and control data at mach 0.95, and check out pitch reaction control— were achieved. M2-F3 reached 21 000-m (68 000-ft) altitude and exceeded planned mach 1.34 speed, (nasa proj off)
Aerospace industry sales increased for first time since 1968. Sales for 1972 were $23.5 billion, up 5.9% over 1971. Commercial aerospace sales increased 11.6%, to reach estimated $4.8 billion. Increase reflected increase in deliveries of helicopters and general-aviation aircraft. Major aerospace sales included $13.8 billion to Dept, of Defense, up from $12.6 billion to DOD in 1971; missile sales to DOD at $5.2 billion, up from $4.7 billion; and military aircraft sales at $8.1 hillion, up from $7.4 billion. Space sales continued to decline in 1972, to $3.0 billion from $3.2 billion in 1971. Utility and executive aircraft sales increased from $321 million in 1971 to $500 million—up 55.8%. Units delivered increased 23.2%. Civilian helicopter sales increased from $69 million in 1971 to $95 million in 1972, gain of 37.7% Aerospace exports declined for first time since 1964—from $4.2 billion in 1971 to $3.9 billion, 6.6% decrease. Major reason for decline was drop in military aerospace exports—down 23.8% from $1.1 billion in 1971 to $854 million in 1972. Aerospace imports in 1972 were valued at $500 million, increase of 34.0% from $373 million in 1971. Aerospace industry profits were expected to increase from 1.8% in 1971 to 2.2%. Aerospace industry employment declined from 924 000 in December 1971 to estimated 917 000 in December 1972, but industry remained Nation’s largest manufacturing employer, (aia Aerospace, 3/73, 3)
U.S. patent No. 3649 921 was issued to Langley Research Center technician David F. Thomas for backpack harness that future astronauts could fasten with one hand, leaving other hand free for stabilization purposes in zero-g environment. Harness was pressure plate device with reinforced straps that encircled user’s body automatically when his back was pressed against plate. Commercial applications might include use as safety belt in automobiles and aircraft and use by handicapped persons. (Biggins, Newport News, Va, Times-Herald, 4/6/72; Pat Off Pio) March 15:	Cosmos 478 was launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk. Orbital parameters: 282-km (175.2-mi) apogee, 176-km (109.4-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 65° inclination. Satellite reentered March 28. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/72; SBD, 3/17/72, 98)
Team of Naval Research Laboratory and Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory scientists had discovered chemical technique for stabilizing meteorological mists, nrl announced. Discovery had been made during attempts to eliminate fog. Release of certain organic compounds into atmosphere had been expected to diminish for intensity; instead, chemicals reduced fog evaporation rates. Findings might be used to change intensity and distribution of rainfall, (nrl Release 48-72-9)
Second press briefing on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement was held at NASA Hq., following White House briefing. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said: “This is not the culmination but a very major milestone in the long period of negotiations with the Soviet Union on space cooperation. And in my judgment this is at least one of the most important missions that NASA has and that is to promote international cooperation.” Mission was, as well, “an important part of the new program of NASA for the 70’s.” Rendezvous and docking mission could be accomplished in context of constant NASA budget. “This constant budget . . . and the programs . . . now planned, the Skylab, the shuttle and now the international rendezvous and docking mission show I think the kind of program that we envision for the rest of this decade.” Program had congressional support “at least partially because of the strong international flavor that NASA has in manned space.” Dr. Fletcher said crew for joint mission had not yet been selected. Assistant Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale Myers and Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager, explained details of plans in response to press questions. (Transcript)
Newspaper editorials praised Apollo 17 performance as astronauts worked on moon’s surface following Dec. 11 touchdown: Cleveland Plain Dealer: “On time and on target, the Apollo 17 mission has made it to the moon and provides further proof of excellence in American space technology. The temptation is to dismiss such performance as routine, but there is nothing at all routine about the assignments of the men and equipment on this far journey.” Apollo 17 was “establishing even more clearly the high degree of expertise and • perfection that is built into the American space exploration effort. It is doing so, however, with Schmitt and Cernan continuing the very unroutine work begun by astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin Jr. on the moon three years ago.” (Cl PD, 12/12/72) Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “With all the other firsts of this last Apollo mission to the moon, there is tinge of sorrow mingled with the superlatives of performance.” To realize this was “last time humans will visit the moon in the foreseeable future is to feel a certain loss along with the sense of accomplishment.” (P Bull, 12/12/72) Miami Herald: “Knowledge gleaned from the Apollo program . . . is upsetting long-held theories. The venture thus is contributing to the demise of dogmatism, and encouraging open-mindedness which may lead mankind to many new truths.” (M Her, 12/12/72)
NASA launched Astrobee F sounding rocket from Wallops Station, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center performance test payload. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Photos taken by far-ultraviolet camera-spectrograph trained on earth from moon during April 16-27 Apollo 16 mission had supported theory that photosynthesis by green plants was less important as oxygen source than commonly believed, Naval Research Laboratory reported. Experiment indicated “that solar effects on the earth’s water that evaporates to the high atmosphere may provide our primary supply of oxygen.” NRL principal investigator for spectrograph experiment, Dr. George R. Carruthers, said new photos provided much greater detail about geocorona than had been inferred from earlier measurements, (nrl Release 30-72-7; AP, NYT, 7/12/72, 24)
Grumman Corp. and American Aviation Corp. had agreed in principle to merge American Aviation with Grumman’s commercial aircraft programs, Wall Street Journal reported. American manufactured sport, utility, and training aircraft. Grumman manufactured, sold, and serviced Gulfstream II corporate jet, and Ag-Cat agricultural aircraft. (WSJ, 9/6/72) September 7:	Skylab Orbital Workshop was delivered to Marshall Space Flight Center Director, Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. President Walter F. Burke in Huntington Beach, Calif., ceremony attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Workshop would be moved to U.S. Naval Facility at Seal Beach Sept. 8 for transfer to U.S.S. Point Barrow and 14-day voyage to Cape Kennedy. Workshop, weighing 25 000 kg (55 000 lb), was largest section of Skylab experimental space station scheduled for 1973 launch. (nasa Off Admin; Miles, LA Times, 9/8/72)
Japanese space budget for FY 1973 was approved. Of 24 080 million yen ($80 million), Y19 810 million ($66 million) was for further development of N rocket and satellites by Science and Technology Agency for use by National Space Development Agency. FY 1972 space budget had been Y8630 ($28 million). (SF, 4/72, 121)	'
Lewis Research Center scientists Dr. John V. Dugan, Jr., and Dr. Herman Mark told meeting of Northeast Ohio Congressional Council in Cleveland that space scientists and engineers dismissed because of aerospace recession should be hired for expanded programs to solve environmental and other societal problems. The LeRC scientists were invited by Rep. John F. Seiberling, Jr. (D-Ohio), to testify before House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (McCann, Cl PD, 9/23/72)
NASA launched two sounding rockets. Nike-Tomahawk was launched from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center fields and neutral winds experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Nike-Tomahawk was launched from Wallops Station, carrying Univ. of New Hampshire energetic particle experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific requirements were not satisfied. (SR list)
Kennedy Space Center awarded $4.7 million contract to MorrisonKnudsen, Inc., to develop ksc facilities for Viking spacecraft encapsulation. Contract provided for modification of an addition to one structure and construction of new building in ksc Fluid Test Facility area, (ksc Release 346-72)
Second delegation of scientists from People’s Republic of China—seven specialists in physical and biological sciences—arrived in Washington, D.C., to begin four-week tour of major U.S. research centers and universities. Delegation included Chien Wei-chang, professor of Engineering at Chinghua Univ. in Peking, who had worked at Jet Propulsion Laboratory from 1940 to 1946. At National Academy of Sciences press conference Chien said: “We welcome and congratulate the work on space done by American scientists. We also congratulate you on the success of this problem; this is why we pay so much attention to work on space.” In answer to question, Chien said his country was seeking to develop communications satellites but had no plans to put men in orbit. Visit was sponsored by National Academy of Sciences, Social Science Research Council, and American Council of Learned Societies. Delegation of physicians from PRC had toured U.S. in October. (McGehan, B Sun, 11/22/72; Schmeck, NYT, 11/22/72, 43)
NASA was working with Dept, of Transportation (dot) to define characteristics of clear-air turbulence (cat) better and to develop methods of detecting it in flight, Flight Research Center announced. Instrumented B-57 aircraft—equipped with dot prototype radiometric sensor able to detect cat up to 80 km (50 mi) ahead of aircraft—was being flown at altitudes up to 15 000 m (50 000 ft) in areas over western U.S. where cat was expected. Aircraft also carried Univ. of Wyoming aerosol and ozone detector to determine relationship between presence of aerosols or ozone, or both, and atmospheric conditions that caused cat. Since tests began one year before, B-57 had completed 13 flights. February 2r Flight. Research Center flew a B-57 aircraft equipped v.’ith Department of Transportation prototype radiometric sensor and Univ. of Wyoming aerosol ozone detector in a nasa-dot program to develop methods of detecting clear-air turbulence. When cat was encountered, 30-min flight pattern was flown to record data in turbulent area, (frc Release 1—72)
Germ-control and dust-purging technique developed by NASA and aerospace industry was being used by St. Luke’s Hospital in Denver, Colo., to lower infection risk in surgical procedures. Concept, based on technique to sterilize spacecraft assembly and self-contained life support systems, used portable equipment to remove dust and germs continually from surgical area. Equipment included helmets like those worn by astronauts and specially treated surgical garments that bacteria could not penetrate, collapsible plexiglass and aluminum enclosure, and air-circulating units that forced air through filters before air flowed from rear of enclosure to front. Enclosure fitted inside conventional surgical room, (nasa Release 72-47)
l/g August Schomburg (usa, Ret.), former Commandant of Industrial College of the Armed Forces and former Commander of Ordnance Missile Command at Redstone Arsenal, died at age 63. He had served as consultant to NASA Administrator 1967-1970. (W Post, 1/16/72, Dll) January 15:	Pioneer-F spacecraft to probe Jupiter’s environmental and atmospheric characteristics arrived at Kennedy Space Center to begin final checkout before Feb. 27 launch. Pioneer-F 3rd stage had been erected Jan. 7 and overall vehicle interface test had been conducted Jan. 10. Pioneer-F would mark first use of Atlas-Centaur booster in Pioneer program and first use of Atlas-Centaur with 3rd stage— TE-M-364r^l solid-propellant engine with 66 750-newton (15 000-lb) thrust, (ksc Release 7-72; NASA Release 72-25)
Large Space Telescope (lst) status briefing was held at Marshall Space Flight Center for representatives of potential industry participants in program to develop multipurpose telescope for launch by space shuttle in 1980s. lst feasibility studies would end in December. NASA expected to invite industry proposals on preliminary design and definition phase in early 1973. LST would operate from earth orbit to pick up galaxies 100 times fainter than those observed by most powerful ground-based optical telescopes. It would weigh maximum 11 000 kg (25 000 lbs) and have diffraction-limited mirror with 3-m (10-ft) diameter, (msfc Release 72-142)
Washington Post published first of series of articles on U.S. energy crisis. Population had doubled in 50 yrs, while energy use had almost quadrupled. Per capita electricity consumption had doubled five times— twice in last 15 yrs. Nationwide environmental movement had halted Government’s Plowshare program to release trapped oil and gas by nuclear explosions, delayed Alaska pipeline, and forced near-moratorium on dam building. Ecologists had “forced power companies to abandon scenic river and lake sites in 10 states and have caused more than 20 delays in the construction of nuclear power plants.” Disagreement was “rampant” over changes wrought by environmental movement. But ecologists had caused no shortage of energy in U.S. thus far. Many energy experts believed technology would “bail us out by letting us tap new, clean fuels and by cleaning up existing fuels.” Mitre Corp. had recently completed exhaustive energy study. Its Senior Vice President Charles Zraket had said, “We believe the physical resources and technical options exist to get us out of this crisis in 10 years.” (O’Toole, W Post, 11/26/72, Al) November 27:	NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and new fuselage fairings, was flight-tested at constant dynamic pressure of 9580 newtons per sq m (200 psf). Pressure distribution and wake survey measurements were made with instrumentation at outboard station. All tests with new fuselage fairings had been made with vortex generator off. Generators would be reinstalled and drag measurements made for direct comparison with previous tests with original fairings and vortex generators on and with wind tunnel results. Some measurement of shock wave dynamics was being made with microphones installed on wings. (NASA proj off)
Swiss Transport Museum in Lucerne had record 608 000 visitors— increase of about one third over 1971. Museum was considered most active museum in Switzerland and Europe’s most popular transport museum. Planetarium rated second to New York’s American Museum-Hayden Planetarium in number of annual visitors. Swiss Transport Museum’s Air and Space Wing was dedicated July 1. Dedication ceremonies were attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A Armstrong; and Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. During year, James E. Webb, former NASA Administrator, officially presented model of Goddard Space Flight Center’s computer facility to Museum. (Dir Swiss Trans Museum letter to nasa Hist Off, 2/19/72; A&A 1972)
Catholic Review article by Frank Moriss criticized lack of religious reference on Pioneer 10 plaque: Plaque summarized “our place in the universe, the ingenuity of our escape from our own planet’s gravity, the physical nature of man and woman.” Unrevealed was “that people sending that probe for the most part acknowledge a Divinity. ... It includes everything but God, which is to say it includes only that which is irrelevant in the long run.” (Catholic Review, 3/10/72) March 11—24:	NASA launched European Space Research Organization’s TD-1A (Thor-Delta 1A) astronomical observatory satellite from Western Test Range at 5:55 pm pst (8:55 pm est) by long-tank, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. TD-1A entered sun-synchronous orbit with 539-km (334.9-mi) apogee, 531-km (329.9-mi) perigee, 95.3-min period, and 97.6° inclination. NASA objective was to place spacecraft in earth orbit that would permit successful achievement of scientific objectives and to provide tracking and telemetry support. By March 24 all experiments had been turned on and mission was adjudged successful by NASA. Box-shaped, 472-kg (1038-lb) spacecraft carried seven experiments from six European universities and research organizations to study high-energy emissions from stellar and galactic sources and sun that were not visible to ground-based observatories. TD-1A was first European-built spacecraft with three-axis stabilization system, which would permit directional viewing by experiments and permit solar panels to point at sun for electrical power to operate spacecraft. TD—1A was sixth scientific spacecraft launched by NASA for ESRO in program that began with orbiting of Iris 1 May 16, 1968. Most recent launch in program had been Heos 2 launched Jan. 31. esro would reimburse NASA for Thor-Delta booster, launch, and launch-support services. Spacecraft would be controlled from European Space Operations Center (esoc) and tracked by European Space Tracking (estrak) stations with NASA support, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72—60; esro pio)
Dept, of Defense was trying to develop nuclear warhead that could evade Soviet missile defenses, Wall Street Journal reported. DOD spokesman had said USAF had been working on “evasion technology” for several years but program—budgeted for $42.1 million over past two years— was in early r&d stages. (WSJ, 2/22/72, 7) New plan—necessitated by budgetary restrictions and congressional recommendation, and endorsed by National Academy of Sciences— National Research Council’s Space Science Board—would launch two spacecraft in 1977 on trajectory that would carry them by Jupiter and then Saturn during rare alignment of planets. Spacecraft for mission would be based on Mariners developed to explore inner planets Mars, Venus, and Mercury. They would have large antennas for longdistance communication, be powered by radioisotope thermoelectric generators, carry more than 68 kg (153 lbs) of instrumentation including TV cameras, and be launched by Titan-Centaur-Burner III boosters and accelerated by Jupiter’s gravity and orbital velocity for flight to Saturn. Possible Saturn encounters included flying close to planet’s satellite Titan—larger than planet Mercury and only satellite known to have atmosphere. Spacecraft would encounter Jupiter in about IV2 yrs and Saturn about 3% yrs after launch. Mission plan flexibility would permit selection of different flyby trajectory at Saturn for second spacecraft based on data from first. Plan would maintain option to use Pioneer-class spacecraft for Jupiter and Saturn orbiters in late 1970s. Project responsibility had been assigned to Jet Propulsion Laboratory. In other testimony, Dr. Naugle said NASA had developed heat sterilization techniques for Viking lander and new thermoradiation techniques expected to have future space and industrial applications. Program initiated measures to ensure that all planetary missions had “acceptably low probability of impacting or contaminating the target planets.” (Transcript; NASA Release 72-42)
Officials of NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast) testified during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology’s final hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. William H. Woodward, Director of Space Propulsion and Power, cited importance of isotope power systems to NASA planetary program: “The ability of nuclear electric power systems to operate for long periods . . . without consideration to distance from the sun is the primary feature which makes nuclear systems mandatory for outer planet missions. This self-contained energy input characteristic also provides a relative insensitivity to the operating environments encountered and this capability may be important on many missions, e.g., lander missions on planetary surfaces or missions which encounter high natural radiation fields.” Power requirements of most missions could be satisfied with low-level isotope power systems using radioisotope thermoelectric generators (rtgs). “Currently, rtg’s are scheduled for flight on the Pioneer Jupiter Flyby and the Mars Viking Lander missions and in addition, are planned for use in future outer planet programs.” Associate Administrator for oast Roy P. Jackson testified that solar energy could prove important energy resource. National Science Foundation’s rann (Research Applicable to National Needs) program had budgeted $4 million for solar energy investigations in FY 1973. Atomic Energy Commission, Dept, of Interior, and NASA were conducting inhouse studies. Solar Energy Subcommittee had been established by Federal Council on Science and Technology Committee on Energy Research and Development Goals to assess benefits to recommend r&d funds and programs. Subcommittee was first time solar energy had been considered at this level of national planning. NASA was evaluating concept for generating electric power from solar cells in space and transmitting power to earth via microwave beam, which would deliver more concentrated solar energy than naturally received on earth’s surface. Collecting in space also could be continuous, rather than having to stop at night or in cloudy weather. Edwin C. Kilgore, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management, described oast manpower problems and methods to alleviate them. Though oast manpower applied to aeronautics had increased 90% since 1966, manpower for all other efforts had decreased by 56%. Growth in aeronautics could not be provided continuously by transferring personnel from space projects. “In the short term we will continue to meet the increased need for aeronautics manpower by retraining and reassignment of personnel at the Research Centers. For the Ions: term we have initiated a program to encourage the training of students interested in aeronautical sciences. ... we are continuing the cooperative NASA/university graduate research and study program begun in FY 1971 where faculty and students are working with the Research Centers.” R.	D. Ginter, Director of Technology Applications, testified on NASA and National Science Foundation cooperation in applications: nsf’s rann program contained “two broad areas of mutual interest: Advanced Technology Applications and Environmental Systems Resources. One of our senior people has been assigned to focus this effort, coordinate task selection, and provide program management. During the next year we intend to expand our problem definition activity and prepare specific proposals for NSF consideration.” (Transcript)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight held hearing on policies and procedures governing disposal of real property under NASA Administrator’s control. Purpose was to determine whether legislation should be enacted to require formal reports to Congress on real estate disposed. General Services Administration surveys had determined that certain lands at Wallops Station, Langley Research Center, and Lewis Research Center were excess to NASA needs. Congress had not previously been apprised of plans for property’s disposal by gsa. Subcommittee heard testimony of NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Bernard Moritz. GSA was surveying LeRc’s Plum Brook Station, Wallops Station, LaRC, and Marshall Space Flight Center. Final decisions had not been made. (Transcript)
Washington Daily News editorial urged space shuttle funding by Congress: Shuttle was “gamble worth taking—not just because it will provide 50,000 new jobs in the depressed aerospace industry, but because it offers a window on the universe at a relatively modest cost.” To retreat from space “after so many billions have been spent and so many men have risked their lives” would be “small credit to a nation that prides itself on perseverance, a pioneering spirit and common sense.” (W News, 4/21/72)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body completed 21st flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Flight objectives were to check out pilot, John A. Manke, and to obtain stability and control data at mach 1.1 and mach 0.9 for stability augmentation systems only. Flight objectives were achieved. Vehicle reached 21 600-m (71 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.24. (nasa proj off)
President Nixon signed ratification of Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation and urged prompt action on other measures to combat international terrorism. Convention required extradition or prosecution of persons committing sabotage or violence against international civil aviation. Other measures were draft convention for prosecution or extradition of persons who attacked foreign officials, convention suspending air service to countries who failed to punish or extradite aircraft hijackers or saboteurs, and convention requiring prosecution or extradition of persons who injured, kidnaped, or killed innocent civilians to blackmail any state or international organization. (PD, 11/6/72, 1608) November 2:	American Astronautical Society presented its 1971 awards and honored newly elected fellows at Washington, D.C., luncheon. Flight Achievement Award was presented to Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar B. Mitchell for “achievements in flight testing which have contributed significantly to the advancement of manned space flight.” Lloyd V. Berkner Award was presented to Willard F. Rockwell, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of North American Rockwell Corp., for “outstanding contributions to the commercial utilization of space technology.” Space Flight Award went to Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., Grumman Aerospace Corp. President, for “outstanding efforts and achievements which have contributed significantly to the advancement of space flight and space science.” Victor A. Prather Award was presented jointly to Robert E. Breeding of United Aircraft Corp. Space Systems Dept, and Leonard F. Shepard of ilc Industries, Inc., for “outstanding contributions in . . . extravehicular protection in space.” Randolph Lovelace II Award went to Dr. Maxime A. Faget, Manned Spacecraft Center Director of Engineering and Development, for “outstanding contributions in space technology.” Melbourne W. Boynton Award for “significant research contributions to space flight safety” was presented to Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, Deputy Director for Medical Operations at msc, and Dr. Harald J. von Beckh, Naval Air Development Center Director for Medical Research. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan were among newly elected Fellows. (aas Release)
Arthur B. Freeman, Director of Administration at Ames Research Center and arc’s first employee, died at age 62. Freeman had begun his Government career with National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (naca) at Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory (predecessor of Langley Research Center) in 1935 and had joined ARC when it was founded in 1941 as Moffett Field Laboratory. (Marshall Star, 6/14/72, 1)
Pravda published interview with unidentified designer of U.S.S.R.’s Venus 8 Venus probe (launched March 27). “The vehicle was designed for prolonged work on the planet’s surface. Everything is aimed at delaying the apparatus’ ‘thermal death.’ New devices and additional scientific instruments were fitted to the descent apparatus. Therefore, the task was to reduce some of the weight and lighten the apparatus chiefly at the expense of the body. A new system for releasing the cover from the parachute section and an improved parachute system are used on the . . . descent apparatus. The parachutes were tested on a special stand . . . like a wind tunnel with a gas current heated to 500 degrees [centigrade; 773 kelvins] being blown through it. Carbon dioxide—the chief component of the Venusian atmosphere— was passed through the tube. With the help of sensors and a movie camera the testers thus had the opportunity of observing the behavior of the parachute system under near natural conditions.” Spherical capsule had been repeatedly tested in high-pressure chamber that simulated physical conditions of Venus landing. (fbis-Sov, 8/8/72, L2)
NASA authorized construction of two additional buildings to augment visitor facilities at Kennedy Space Center. Buildings, designed by Charles Luckman Associates, would add some 3580 sq m (38 600 sq ft) of air-conditioned space for exhibits, films, lectures, snack bar, and ticket sale area. Extension of facilities, necessitated by increased public attendance, had been authorized by Congress, (ksc Release 298-72)
NASA announced appointment of Raymond J. Sumser as Director of Personnel, effective Jan. 21, 1973. Sumser had been Personnel Director at Goddard Space Flight Center since July 1967 and was awarded NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1972. (NASA Ann) “if private enterprise finds it profitable to do so after paying all costs, including any environmental costs imposed by third parties.” He opposed governmental subsidizing of sst because “a governmental decision to produce an sst largely at its own expense is a step toward socialism and away from free enterprise.” Committee Chairman, Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), criticized failure of Administration witnesses to testify on possible sst plans. “If nothing is planned, why don’t they come forward and say so?” (Testimony; upi, W Post, 12/28/72, A7)
Sophisticated TV systems were being used by some of world’s largest telescopes to record planetary atmospheres, faint galaxies, and quasistellar objects, Science reported. Astronomers had been criticized for being less receptive to new technologies than other physical scientists. “At a time when automation of many stages of data-taking is standard procedure . . . automation of large telescopes is just becoming fashionable.” (Metz, Science, 3/31/72, 1448-9) During March: nasa released Funds for Research, Development, R&D Plant and Scientific Technical Information, Fiscal Years 1971-1973: Annual Report to the National Science Foundation. Report, for inclusion in government-wide survey published by nsf for Congress, White House, Government agencies, and scientific community, showed distribution of nasa funds based on FY 1973 budget estimates. It reflected nasa’s total direct obligations incurred in FY 1971 and budget estimates for FY 1972 and FY 1973. In FY 1973 nasa would fund approximately 19% of Federal Government’s total research and development effort and provide 23% of funds for research, alone. When Dept, of Defense was excluded from computation, nasa was expected to conduct 36% of total civilian R&D effort. Total research in FY 1973 was expected to show 4% increase over FY 1971. For first time since FY 1962 research would represent over 50% of nasa funding for Research and Development. Increase in research resulted in decreased funding for development, with impending completion of Apollo and Sky lab development; decrease was offset to a degree by funds applied to begin space shuttle development. Analysis of funding showed decline in engineering funds of about 7% of total, with increases in physical and life sciences. Reduction in engineering reflected anticipated completion of Apollo. High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) program effected increase in astronomy, and Viking program, increase in chemistry and biology. (Text)
NASA announced establishment of joint Civil Aeronautical Research and Development (card) Review Group by National Aeronautics and Space Council, Dept, of Transportation, and NASA to help maintain close relationships among agencies with interests and responsibilities in aeronautics, (nmi 1052.160)
Former Congressman H. Allen Smith of California was quoted as having said in letters to Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Cal Tech that he would not seek to enforce law passed Oct. 21 to change jpl name to H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Smith had written: “I have no intention of bringing any lawsuit or any other action to force this name change. There are many laws on the federal books which are not enforced.” Wall Street Journal said it was “doubtful” that Congress would reverse itself on measure. NASA officials had already found House Committee on Science and Astronautics “unwilling to help provide relief.” (WSJ, 11/24/72) Nov. 24-Dec. 8: U.S.—U.S.S.R. Working Groups 2 and 4, meeting at Manned Space Center on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp), defined antenna locations on Soyuz and confirmed that U.S.S.R. would build antennas; negotiated interface signal characteristics for radio communication and ranging systems and confirmed 428-km (266-mi) ranging capability; agreed on end-to-end compatibility tests of radio and hardline communications; resolved U.S. very-high-frequency amplitude-modulation implementation requirements for Soyuz systems, defined design of cable communications systems including cable lengths, junction boxes, and Soviet supply responsibilities; and discussed intercenter control communications, establishing basis for March negotiations. (NASA proj off)
Development by Ames Research Center scientists of simple aperture method that made microscopic details of atomic dimensions clearly visible under transmission electron microscopy was announced by nasa. Method permitted perception of distances of one angstrom instead of resolutions of three angstroms normally obtained with standard electron microscopes. Cancer researchers had obtained best results using nasa technique, (nasa Release 72-59)
Newspaper editorials commented on U.S. space program. Baltimore Sun on post-Apollo space program: “While it is tempting to contemplate what improvements could be financed here on earth from the billions being spent in space, it is well to bear several factors in mind. One is the decline in space spending from a $5.25 billion peak in 1965 to the present plateau of $3.35 billion a year. Another is the Nixon administration’s decision to proceed cautiously on the rush-rush manned Mars expedition advocated by Vice President Agriew three years ago. Still another is the American-Soviet agreement on a rendezvous-and-docking mission for mid-1975, a concept once relegated to political science fiction. Finally, there is the very real prospect that experiments and programs conducted from space shuttles will be of use in improving the environment on earth. More accurate weather forecasting, air pollution studies, better communications—these are some of the more obvious opportunities. These trends surely justify reasonable financial support to continue a desired momentum in space technology.” (B Sun, 12/3/72) New York News on last Apollo mission: “The Apollo program is being phased out before its time, a victim of what we consider false economy, and the horizon is barren of any prospect for manned exploration beyond the boundaries of Earth orbit. Even unmanned probes will be few and far between as things look now.” (NY News, 12/3/72)	_ # Chicago Tribune on future space program: Cost of Skylab, Viking, and space shuttle programs would £e far less than amount put into space since 1958. “The national priorities have been reordered and, we believe, properly so. Future space exploration should be a part of, but should not dominate, our national effort to improve the lot of Americans.” (C Trib, 12/3/72) December 4:	Technicians at Kennedy Space Center’s Apollo 17 launch site loaded helium used to pressurize lunar craft’s descent rocket system. Liquid hydrogen and oxygen were pumped into command module fuel cell system, source of spaceship’s electricity and water supply. Countdown, which began Nov. 30, continued on schedule with liftoff scheduled for 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. (Wilford, NYT, 12/5/72, 1)
Lewis Research Center Deputy Director Eugene J. Manganiello was introduced as new President of Society of Automotive Engineers at SAE banquet in Detroit. (NASA Activities, 2/15/72, 35)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced establishment of Sortie Can Task Team to plan project definition phase for sortie can—low-cost, space shuttle payload carrier for manned research and applications studies in earth orbit. Team would be managed by Fred E. Vreuls, with Hans R. Palaora as chief engineer, (msfc Release 72-41) Marshall Space Flight Center announced request for proposals for nine-month space tug operations and payload support study. Contractor selected would define flight operations to be conducted by tug after deployment from space shuttle and define interface between tug and automated payload or satellite that tug was delivering or returning. Proposals were due by April 10. (msfc Release 72-39)
Science and Technology Div. of New York Public Library was closed after failing to meet $86 000 budget deficit by $9000. Library officials had said previously they expected to raise required funds and reopen by mid-January. (Andelman, NYT, 1/1/72, 18; nypl pio)
In international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched European Space Research Organization’s Heos 2 to study interplanetary space and magnetosphere, Esro 4 to investigate solar ionosphere, and TD—1A astronomical observatory satellite, that carried seven experiments from six European universities and research organizations. NASA also launched Anik 1 (Telesat A) domestic communications satellite for Telesat Canada, Aeros scientific satellite in joint U.S.-West German project, and Oscar 6 (developed by U.S., German, and Australian radio amateurs) for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp.—in addition to two International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium comsats. Italian crew trained by NASA launched NASA’s Explorer 48 Small Scientific Satellite from Italian platform off coast of Kenya.
Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, was chosen President of American College of Preventive Medicine at annual meeting in Atlantic City, NJ. (NASA Activities, 12/15/72; NASA Pio) November 14:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, visited Kennedy Space Center for briefings on ksc plans for 1970s. Programs included Apollo 17, Skylab, U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, space shuttle, applications programs, and Viking unmanned Mars missions for 1975 launch. Dr. Fletcher’s visit included Vehicle Assembly Building, to see Saturn V Orbital Workshop and Saturn IB launch vehicle for Skylab. (ksc Release 320-72)
NASA anounced retirement of Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, effective July 1 when he would become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries. Dr. von Braun had joined NASA in 1960 when Army Ballistic Missile Agency development team which he headed was transferred to NASA and formed nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Born in Germany, Dr. von Braun became director of German army portion of Peenemuende Rocket Center. Near end of World War II he led group of scientists to West, surrendering to allies. In 1945 he went to U.S. under contract to U.S. Army to direct high-altitude firings of V—2 long-range ballistic missile at White Sands Missile Range. As Director of Development Operations Div. of abma, Dr. von Braun led development of Pershing Army missile and Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missile, whose nosecone reentry test vehicle Jupiter-C was used to launch first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1 (Jan. 31, 1958). Dr. von Braun was msfc Director from July 1960 to February 1970, when he assumed his current position. He had received numerous awards and honors, including Dept, of Defense Distinguished Civilian Service Award, Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, British Interplanetary Society Gold Medal, Herman Oberth Award, NASA Medal for Outstanding Leadership, Galabert International Astronautical Prize, NASA Distinguished Service Medal, American Society of Mechanical Engineers Man of the Year Award, and Associated Press Man of the Year in Science Award. Dr. von Braun said he would leave NASA “with a deep feeling of gratitude for the wonderful and unique opportunities the agency has given me during the last 12 years . . . [and] with the knowledge that NASA has enough well thought out plans to keep it moving ahead for many years to come.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said Dr. von Braun’s retirement was “a source of regret to all of us. ... For more than a quarter of a century, he has served the United States as a leader in space rocket development. His efforts first put the United States in space” with Explorer 1 and as director of msfc “he directed the development of the world’s most powerful rocket, the Saturn V. All of us at NASA will miss the daily stimulation of his presence, but we are confident that we will continue to have the benefit of his inspiration and counsel in the continuing exploration and use of space.” (nasa Release 72—113; NASA biographical data)
Marsall Space Flight Center issued requests for proposals for development of visible laser communications experiment for ATS—G Applications Technology Satellite mission in 1974. Contractor selected would begin designing experiment in July and would build and test experiment and provide ground support through experiment’s two-year lifetime, (msfc Release 72-17)
rca announced it had received NASA contracts totaling nearly $1.5 million for four Skylab color tape-recording systems. Recorders— similar to those on Erts 1 (launched July 23)—would help provide home viewers with color TV coverage of astronauts conducting experiments. Contracts had been awarded to rca Government Communications Systems by Marshall Space Flight Center, (rca Release) August 10:	International Institute for Strategic Studies in London released Reconnaissance, Surveillance and Arms Control. Study found that verification by observation satellites and electronic reconnaissance systems of adherence to terms of Strategic Arms Limitation agreements had greatly reduced possibility of one nation’s cheating on another. “Therefore the risk of the Soviet Union achieving a strategic advantage as a result of a . . . treaty is a very low one.” (upi, NY News, 8/11/72, 6)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said “real increase in productivity in space” would come with shuttle, in speech before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. “. . . we have built more than 80 launch stands in this country, 50 of which are still either active or on standby . . . [and] we are using 17 different combinations of boosters and upper stages . . . today. The shuttle will allow us to consolidate most of these. . . .” Shuttle, “major investment in a new tool for space exploration,” had been designed for productivity “in terms of launch services, . . . access it will provide to space, . . . [and] the way it will let us operate in space.” (Text)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $26 923 contract to Huntsville (Ala.) Hospital to equip room with NASA-developed devices to test applications in aiding quadriplegics. When room was completed, immobile patient would be able to open and close doors and windows, control room temperature, change channels and control volume on TV set, dial telephone, adjust bed position, signal nurse at remote station, and turn pages in a book. Devices provided by msfc included sight switch operated by looking into sensor on eyeglass frame, panel switch operated by touching panel with head, foot switch, breath switch operated by blowing against small paddle, and pneumatic switch operated, by rolling head against pillow to depress airbag behind ear. Contract expenses would be shared, with msfc contributing $15 450 and hospital and Univ. of Alabama at Huntsville contributing balance. (msfc Release 72-25)
Four-stage Javelin sounding rocket, launched hy NASA from Wallops Station, carried 5.9-kg (130-lb) National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 852-km (529.4mi) altitude to study upper atmosphere. Onboard instruments measured ion composition and concentration and solar-wind neutral hydrogen atoms during 16%-min flight. Data would be correlated with ground observations. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (WS Release 72-1)
Apollo 17 crew had selected mission emblem to emphasize beginning of golden age of space flight that final Apollo flight would usher in Dec. 6, NASA announced. Emblem showed Apollo gazing toward planet Saturn and a galaxy, symbolizing that man’s goal in space would someday include planets and even stars. Suspended behind Apollo image was American eagle with four red bars on wing, representing U.S. flag. Three white stars represented Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt. Eagle’s wing overlying moon suggested moon had been conquered by man. (nasa Special Release)
Deployment tests of Skylab Workshop meteoroid shield were under way at Astronautics Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Shield, thin sheet of aluminum wrapped around outer wall, would protect Skylab crewmen from micrometeoroids and ensure comfortable temperature in space, (msfc Release 72-19)
House and Senate conferees submitted conference report on H.R. 15093, FY 1973 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-space-science-veterans appropriations bill that contained $3.408-billion NASA appropriation. Conference recommended $2.601-billion appropriation for NASA research and development, instead of $2,550 billion proposed by House and $2,624 billion proposed by Senate, and included $24 million for aeronautical research in noise abatement and aviation safety as proposed'by Senate. Recommended appropriation for construction of facilities was $77.3 million as proposed by Senate, instead of $69.8 million proposed by House—and included $5.5 million for modification of manufacturing and final assembly facilities for space shuttle as proposed by Senate and $8 million for facility planning and design as proposed by Senate, instead of $6 million proposed by House. Appropriation for research and program management remained unchanged at $729.45 million. (H Rpt 92-1261; NASA Off Administration)
Events leading to President Nixon’s endorsement of space shuttle development were reported by Aviation Week & Space Technology: “The struggle between NASA and omb [Office of Management and Budget] officials reached the point of acrimony when the latter suggested design changes and demanded to know from NASA engineers the dollar savings that would result. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, finally appealed directly to the office of the President with a complaint that omb was attempting to design the U.S. space shuttle rather than merely budget it.” President Nixon had removed omb accountant from conference with NASA and demanded shuttle agreement. “The dispute culminated in Fletcher’s triumphal flight to San Clemente ... to join in the announcement that the space shuttle had been approved by the Administration.” (Av Wk, 1/10/72, 15)
nasa launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload to measure spectrum of planetary atmosphere. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
After series of meetings in U.S. and abroad, esro decided to develop sortie laboratory to fly with NASA’s space shuttle in 1980s. President Nixon announced new policy making U.S. launch assistance available to interested countries and international organizations for satellites intended for peaceful purposes. Third Annual Lunar Science Conference at Lunar Science Institute in January was attended by more than 600 researchers from U.S. and 17 foreign countries. Participating Soviet scientists consulted with U.S. scientists, examined lunar samples, and helped select Apollo 14 samples to return to U.S.S.R. as part of U.S.-U.S.S.R. exchange agreement. Apollo 15 lunar soil samples were exchanged for soil samples collected by U.S.S.R.’s Luna 20. Apollo 16 materials were distributed to scientists in 15 foreign countries, and Apollo 17 samples also would be distributed to other nations for analysis and display. NASA launched 29 sounding rockets in cooperative international program to test weather data systems for France, Japan, and U.S. Program was sponsored by United Nations World Meteorological Organization’s Commission for Instruments and Methods of Observation, Since beginning of international program in 1962 with launch of U.K. satellite Ariel 1 (April 26) and Canadian satellite Alouette 1 (Sept. 29), number of foreign countries and international organizations with which NASA had participated in space activities had reached 134. Total of 55 foreign agreements included cooperative flight projects with 25 countries, earth resources survey with 39, lunar sample analysis with 20, tracking and data acquisition with 22, and reimbursable launchings with 4. Scientists from 85 countries and organizations had worked with NASA—80 in meteorological research, 41 in personnel exchanges, and 52 in other space projects. Total countries and organizations exchanging scientific and technical information with NASA reached 63; total sending visitors to NASA reached 126, and total cooperating in some form with NASA reached 94. (nasa Release, 12/27/72; A&A 1972; Fletcher, NASA Activities, 1/15/73, 2-3; nasa Int Aff)
Adm. Thomas H. Moorer (usn), Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff, warned of possible U.S.S.R. nuclear superiority in testimony before closed session of Senate Committee on Armed Services considering FY 1973 military authorization bill: “The mere appearance of Soviet strategic superiority could have a debilitating effect on our foreign policy and our negotiating posture. It could erode the confidence of our friends and allies in the deterrent power of our strategic forces, upon which the entire structure of free world defense essentially rests.” (Corddry, B Sun, 2/17/72, A4) February 17:	First fully automatic landings hy full-scale manned helicopter at predetermined spot had been made by team of Langley Research Center engineers and pilots at Wallops Station, NASA announced. Accomplishment was milestone in research program aimed at permitting helicopters and future vertical takeoff and landing aircraft to fly routine missions under poor visibility. Landing approaches were fully automatic from 3 to 5 km (2 to 3 mi) from intended landing spot. Automatic system was engaged in level flight at 96.5 km per hr (60 mph) at 244-m (800-ft) altitude. When helicopter intercepted landing guidance path, system automatically locked on to start landing approach. At predetermined range helicopter began automatic deceleration to zero ground speed, came to hover 15 m (50 ft) above landing spot, and descended vertically to touchdown, (nasa Release 72-34)
Map of entire globe of Mars—first detailed map of another planet, prepared by U.S. Geological Survey from 1500 of 7000 photos taken by Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) and processed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory—was published by New York Times. Map showed entire Martian surface in Mercator projection at scale of 1 to 25 million at equator and in two special polar projections. Other maps were being prepared for even more detailed study of Mars. Map reprinted in Times would be released by U.S. Geological Survey early in January. Times commented that map was produced in Flagstaff, Ariz., few miles from mountain-top observatory where Dr. Percival Lowell in 1877 observed presumed canals on Mars that “inspired so many tales of Martians,” canals that were “nowhere to be seen on the map of Mariner 9.” (Wilford, NYT, 11/27/72, 1, 30; usgs Map Info Off)
Subcommittee on NASA Oversight submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics Space Shuttle-—Skylab: Manned Space Flight in the 1970’s, status report prepared by Committee staff at request of Subcommittee Chairman, Rep. Olin E. Teague, from information from NASA space flight Centers and key industrial contractors. Conclusions on Skylab program were that program was within projected costs; bulk of equipment and systems were meeting design requirements in performance and reliability; and, despite some problems in procuring and integrating experiments, schedules were being met and no flight delays or significant cost increases were anticipated. Serious consideration was recommended for several options: possibility of flying backup Skylab B in 1974-1976 period; possible revisits to Skylab A after first three flights; and use of remaining Saturn IB launch vehicles in earth resources and applications flights after Skylab A program, during 1974-1978 period. Conclusions on space shuttle program were: Sufficient technology existed to undertake development of fully reusable, low-operation-cost, earth-orbital shuttle. Number of design possibilities had been studied, covering range of development costs. Regardless of design chosen, as development costs were reduced, system recurring operating costs increased. In addition to reducing cost of near-space operations by order of magnitude, shuttle offered many opportunities for increased flexibility of earth resource surveys and management, space manufacturing, and short-term rapid-response laboratory facilities. And shuttle could also be used to improve national security position. (Text)
Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ. Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, principal investigator for Apollo seismic experiments, said seismic signals from May 13 crash of meteorite onto moon had confirmed that moon had crust 61 km (38 mi) thick over a mantle and, possibly, a core. Lunar crust measured near Apollo 14 site in Fra Mauro region was about twice as thick as crust on earth. Lunar highlands appeared to have solid rock beneath thick regolith. Change in reflected seismic waves below crust to 8.2 km per sec (5.1 mps) showed moon had mantle similar to earth’s. Measurement of same layer during Apollo 15 mission had been 9 km per sec (5.6 mps), but 8.2 km per sec was more nearly valid and more consistent with known rock types at pressures expected at that depth. Rocks rich in ferromagnesian minerals such as olivine and pyroxene were dominant in earth’s mantle and also produced seismic velocities of about 8.2 km per sec. Signals also appeared to show change of state in lunar material at depth of 1000 km (600 mi), suggesting possibility of core, (msc Release 72-126)
Langley Research Center’s award of contracts to study technology requirements for future supersonic commercial aircraft was announced by NASA. One-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts—$316 415 to Boeing Co., $259 000 to McDonnell Douglas Aircraft Corp., and $231 015 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp.—were for independent and systematic assessment of existing aeronautical technology to determine state of readiness of supersonic transport and identify areas for additional research. Studies would seek ways to use advances in aerodynamics, propulsion, structures, materials, flight controls, and configurations to reduce sst noise and air pollution. Studies were part of NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology advanced planning to ensure existence of technology to maintain U.S. leadership in world aircraft market. Parallel studies in advanced propulsion technology would be managed by Lewis Research Center, (nasa Release 72-203)
National Science Foundation released Federal Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities, Fiscal Years 1970, 1971, 1972 (nsf 71-35). Federal obligations for research and development (r&d) in 1970 totaled $15.3 billion excluding plant; slight rise to $15.4 billion was expected for 1971. Figure was decrease of 5% in constant dollars. Basic research obligations were expected to rise from $2.1 billion in 1970 to $2.2 billion for 1971 and $2.4 billion for 1972. Federal support for basic research declined in 1970 but was expected to reach new record highs for 1971 and 1972. Bulk of Federal basic research, 81%, was funded by NASA; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; National Science Foundation; Atomic Energy Commission; and Dept, of Defense. NASA had led in basic research support since 1961, with 29% of total in 1971. Applied research obligations totaled $3.5 billion in 1970 and were expected to rise to $3.8 billion for 1971, increase of 8%. Total was expected to reach $4.2 billion in 1972—all-time high in current dollars. dod, hew, and NASA continued to dominate Federal applied research effort and would account for 78% in 1971. Obligations for development totaled $9.7 billion in 1970 and would decline 3%, to $9.4 billion, in 1971. In 1972, Federal development total was scheduled to rise to $10.0 billion, or 1966 level, dod, nasa, and AEC were most prominent in Federal development effort in 1960-1972, accounting for 92% in 1971. dod funded 63%; nasa share had declined since 1965 to expected 19% for 1971. Although total Federal R&D obligations were expected to increase 9% from 1970 to 1972, nasa and aec decrease continued. NASA estimate for 1972, however, was smallest reduction since downward trend began in 1967. Report noted increases in key programs—Skylab, space shuttle, Viking Mars explorations, and unmanned missions to outer planets—had almost offset decreases in Apollo program. (Text)
President Nixon and Secretary General Leonid I. Brezhnev of Soviet Communist Party’s Central Committee signed “Basic Principles of Relations” outlining agreements made between U.S. and U.S.S.R. during May 22-29 summit meetings in Moscow. They then released joint communique at conclusion of President’s visit to U.S.S.R. Communique described agreements on cooperation in science and technology and space: “It was recognized that the cooperation now underway in areas such as atomic energy research, space research, health and other fields benefits both nations and has contributed positively to their over-all relations. It was agreed that increased scientific and technical cooperation on the basis of mutual benefit and shared effort for common goals is in the interest of both nations and would contribute to a further improvement in their bilateral relations.” In peaceful exploration of space, “both Sides emphasized the importance of further bilateral cooperation.... In order to increase the safety of mam’s flights into outer space and the future prospects of joint scientific experiments, the two Sides agreed to make suitable arrangements to permit the docking of American and Soviet spacecraft and stations. The first joint docking experiment of the two countries’ piloted spacecraft, with visits by astronauts and cosmonauts to each other’s spacecraft is contemplated for 1975.” NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences would plan and implement flight “according to principles and procedures developed through mutual consultations.” (PD, 6/5/72, 945-51)
Saturn IB stage for Skylab 2 arrived at Kennedy Space Center on NASA barge Orion. Saturn IB would launch command and service module to join orbiting Skylab Workshop day after Workshop launch as Skylab 1 in 1973. Stage would Be processed in Vehicle Assembly Building and would be erected on Mobile Launcher Aug. 31 at ksc. Arrival of stage marked first time in nearly four years that a Saturn IB had been in processing at ksc and first time vehicle would undergo flight preparation in Vab. Last mission for a Saturn IB was Apollo 7 earth-orbital mission Oct. 11, 1968. (ksc Release 246-72)
Nike-Javelin III sounding rocket, carrying Naval Research Laboratory cesium cloud experiment, was launched by NASA from Wallops Station at 5:08 am est. Launch was second in series of five to collect atmospheric data; first launch had been conducted March 25. (WS pao; WS Release 72-4)
Ames Research Center. Langlev Research Center, and Manned Spacecraft Center had received over 250 proposals for using space-related technology to solve problems of air pollution, water pollution, solid waste management, and clinical medicine, NASA announced. Proposals were in response to reauest for ideas to demonstrate possible applications of NASA-developed technology to public problems. They would be reviewed by experts and one or more projects in each category might be selected for maximum $75 000 contract, (nasa Release 72-3)
Space in the Age of Aquarius,” hour-long special on space program, was shown on nationwide Columbia Broadcasting System TV. Program, produced and emceed by actor Hugh O’Brian, included interviews with NASA scientists on benefits of space exploration. Comedian Jonathan Winters played part of numerous skeptics opposed to space program and new technology. In Baltimore Sun Judy Bachrach later commented that “gist of program could be found in Mr. O’Brian’s very last rhetorical question, ‘Do we go or do we stop?’ We go on, we go on.” By end of program “you could have just about died of shame for ever having dared to think anything perverse about our space program. NASA couldn’t have got better propaganda if it had produced the show itself.” (upi, C Trib, 4/10/72; B Sun, 4/14/72) April 10—11:	NASA Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel reviewed all aspects of Skylab program during meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center. Skylab program managers and key personnel briefed panel. Panel would later advise NASA Administrator on any hazards in program’s operation or facilities, (msfc Release 72^10; msfc pao) April 11:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 485 from Plesetsk into orbit with 462-km (287.1-mi) apogee, 267-km (165.9-mi) perigee, 91.8-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 30. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/72; 8/31/72; Sov Aero, 5/17/72, 120)
Newspaper editorials commented on close of Apollo program with Apollo 17 launch. Los Angeles Times: “Thanks to the marvels of satellite communications, 3,000 European doctors were able recently to ‘attend’ a medical meeting in San Antonio via television. A computer designed for the space agency is helping Detroit design safer steering linkages in cars and trucks. A technique for clarifying spacecraft photos of the moon is being used by hospitals to provide much sharper x rays. The thousands of men and women who have participated in the Apollo program, and the American people who supported it, have all cause for great pride in Apollo. It has been one of the best investments this country ever made, one of the most rewarding adventures it ever undertook.” (LA Times, 12/6/72) Christian Science Monitor: “To the layman, what has been learned about the moon and space has been an extension of our knowledge of the universe, not a radical departure. In this light, it is comforting to think that the Apollo program, remarkable though it has been historically, may illustrate that even the farthest reaches of today’s unknown may prove to be no more than the captive of tomorrow’s familiar.” (CSM, 12/6/72)	_ New York Times: “Even as the world awaits this final launch, debate continues about the wisdom of the entire Apollo project. Some consider the moon landings the most brilliant scientific achievement in history; others still look at the whole venture as a waste of resources needed for urgent requirements here on earth. Yet one fact about the venture is beyond dispute: in the years 1969-72 men landed on another celestial body for the first time and showed they could live and work in the bizarre and literally inhuman conditions on that foreign planet. Long after most other developments of the twentieth century are forgotten, future generations will recall this as the century in which men broke the bonds of terrestrial gravity and began their cosmic destiny.” (NYT, 12/6/72, 42) Spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan (commander), Ronald E. Evans (command module pilot), and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt (lunar module pilot and geologist)—was launched at 12:33 am EST Dec. 7, with illumination from S-IC 1st stage creating brilliance of morning sun. Liftoff, witnessed by crowd estimated at 500 000 and by nationwide and foreign TV viewers, was visible to naked eye as far as South Carolina to north and Cuba to south. Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 170-km (105.6-mi) apogee and 168-km (104.4-mi) perigee. Following checkout, spacecraft was inserted into trajectory lor moon at 3:13 ground elapsed time (get) as planned, csm separation from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:42 GET and docking with lm at 3:57 get were shown on TV. During docking possible ring latch malfunction was indicated. Troubleshooting revealed latches 7, 9, and 10 were unlocked. Latch 10 was locked by pushing on handle; latches 7 and 9 were locked and manually fired to lock handles. Following hatch replacement, csm/lm combination was ejected from S-IVB stage at 4:45 get. S-IVB lunar impact maneuver targeted stage to strike moon’s surface Dec. 10. Midcourse correction (MCC-1) was not necessary because of nominal trajectory. MCC—2 maneuver was performed on time at 35:30 get, changing velocity 3 m per sec (9.9 fps). Cernan and Schmitt entered LM at 40:10 get and discovered docking latch 4 improperly latched. Evans moved latch handle 30°^t5°, disengaging hook from docking ring. Mission Control and flight crew decided to wait until second LM entering at 59:59 get for further action on latch. Remainder of LM housekeeping was nominal and LM was closed out at 42:11 GET. Heat flow and convection demonstrations were conducted as planned; results were satisfactory. MCC-3 and -4 were not required because of near-nominal trajectory. LM housekeeping was resumed at 59:59 get and completed at 62:16 get with all systems nominal. Evans, following ground instructions, stroked docking latch 4 handle and succeeded in cocking latch. Latch was left in cocked position for csm-lm rendezvous. Planned trajectory was modified continually because of late liftoff; coast toward moon was accelerated to ensure arrival of spacecraft at lunar orbit insertion (loi) at scheduled GMT time. GET clock was updated 2 hrs 40 min at 65:00 get to place all events on original flight plan schedule. Crew began one-hour visual-light-flash phenomenon observation at 68:19 GET and reported seeing bright to dull light flashes. Cernan reported continuing gas pains during private consultation via separate radio link with Dr. W. Royee Hawkins, Manned Spacecraft Center Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations. He was told to continue taking antigas pills and to alter diet. Crew jettisoned scientific instrument module (sim) door at 84:12 GET and said SIM bay looked good. S-IVB 3rd stage impacted on lunar surface at 89:39 GET (3:32 pm EST Dec. 10) at 4° 12' south latitude and 12° 18' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 seismometers. Evans described crew’s excitement at reaching vicinity of moon: “We’re breathing so hard, the windows are fogging up.” Schmitt interrupted running commentary on lunar topography with shout: “Hey I just saw a flash on the lunar surface!” When assured by Mission Control that impact of possible small meteor would have been masked on seismometers by S-IVB 3rd-stage impact, Schmitt groaned: “Just my luck.” Cernan—who had orbited moon during May 18-26, 1969, Apollo 10 mission—described sight as “still just as impressive.” Descent orbit insertion (DOI-1) was performed at 90:31 get. CSM and LM undocked and separated on schedule at 107:48 get. Circularization maneuver placed csm in orbit with 129-km (80.2-mi) apolune and 100-km (62.1-mi) perilune. DOI-2, at 109:50 get, inserted lm into orbit with 111-km (69.0-mi) apolune and 11-km (6.8-mi) perilune. Powered descent was initiated and Challenger touched down on Taurus-Littrow site at 113:02 get (2:55 pm est Dec. 11). Cernan descended lm ladder four hours later, at 117:02 get, and said: “As I step off at the surface at Taurus-Littrow, I’d like to dedicate the first step of Apollo 17 to all those who made it possible.” Schmitt, first geologist to walk on moon, followed and asked, “Hey, who’s been tracking up my lunar surface?” Cernan said surrounding hills looked like “wrinkled skin of an old, old, 100-year-old man.” Astronauts deployed lunar roving vehicle. Cernan made short test drive and said, “Hallelujah, Houston! Challenger’s baby is on the roll.” As Cernan and Schmitt set up TV equipment, Cernan called to Schmitt: “Hey, Jack, just stop. You owe yourself 30 seconds to look up over the South Massif and look at the Earth.” Schmitt replied: “What? The Earth? You seen one earth, you’ve seen them all.” Cernan unfurled U.S. flag on lunar surface while Schmitt took his picture. Cernan said, “It’s got to be one of the most proud moments of my life.” Flag had “flown in the mocr [Mission Operations Control Room] since Apollo 11. And we very proudly deploy it on the Moon, to stay for as long as it can, in honor of all those people who have worked so hard to put us here and to put every other crew here and to make the country, the United States and mankind, something different than it was.” While preparing to traverse to Apollo lunar surface experiment package site, Cernan inadvertently knocked extension off of lrv right rear fender and repairs were made with tape. Astronauts crossed to alsep site, where they deployed alsep. Color TV camera beamed live telecast to earth. LRV fender again fell off during traverse to Steno Crater, lunar station 1A. Crew deployed surface electrical properties experiment and explosive packages during 7-hr 12-min lunar surface exploration. First eva ended at 124:13 get. Second eva began 1 hr 20 min late, at 140:35 get (6:28 pm est Dec. 12). Cernan and Schmitt, on instructions from Mission Control, improvised replacement for lost lrv fender extension. Four chronopaque maps were taped together and held in place by two portable utility lamp clamps. “Call me the little old fender maker,” Cernan said. Cernan and Schmitt visited lunar stations 2, 2A, 3, 4, and 5. They deployed explosive packages, obtained photos, and collected and documented soil samples. At station 4, Shorty Crater, Schmitt shouted: “There is orange soil! It’s all over! Orange!” Cernan confirmed finding: “Jack that is really orange. It’s been oxidized.” Schmitt dug trench and extracted sample which he described to Mission Control: “An essential portion of the zone . . . actually has a crimson hue, or red hue. Outside of that it’s orange. And outside of that, it’s gray.” Scientists on ground immediately speculated that soil might have originated from volcanism on moon as recently as 100 million yrs earlier. If so, it would contradict “dead moon” theory that moon had always been cold and inert. Dr. Robin P. Brett, head of MSC Geochemistry Branch, told press, “What we have been witnessing may be one of the most significant finds of Apollo geology.” Schmitt revisited ALSEP site to verify that lunar surface gravimeter had been leveled properly. EVA-2 ended at 148:35 get (2:05 am EST Dec. 13), after 7 hrs 37 min. Total distance covered during second eva was 19 km (12 mi). Third eva began 50 min late at 163:35 GET (5:26 pm est Dec. 13). Cosmic ray detector was retrieved before start of traverse to prevent exposure to low-energy solar protons from small solar flare. Cernan and Schmitt took black and white and color photos and collected 66 kg (145.9 lbs) of samples. Samples included blue-gray breccias, finegrained vesicular basalts, crushed anorthositic rocks, and soils. EVA-3 ended at 170:48 get {0:41 am est Dec. 14), after 7 hrs 16 min. During EVA—3 Evans, orbiting in CSM 113 km (70 mi) above lunar surface, identified series of volcanic domes in Aitken Grater, on moon’s far side. Before entering Challenger for last time, Cernan and Schmitt stepped before TV cameras. Cernan said: “To commemorate not just Apollo ITs visit to the Valley of Taurus-Littrow but as an everlasting commemoration of what the real meaning of Apollo is to the world, we’d like to uncover a plaque that has been on the leg of our spacecraft.” He read inscription: “Here man completed his first exploration of the Moon, December 1972 A.D. May the spirit of peace in which we came be reflected in the lives of all mankind.” Dr, James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, congratulated astronauts from Mission Control at msc and conveyed Godspeed message from President Nixon. As astronauts boarded LM, Cernan said: “I believe history will record that America’s challenge of today has forged man’s destiny of tomorrow. And, as we leave the moon at Taurus-Littrow, we leave as we came and, God willing, as we shall return, with peace and hope for all mankind. God speed the crew of Apollo 17T Total time for three EVAs was 22 hrs 5 min 4 sec, during which Cernan and Schmitt traveled 35 km (22 mi) in LRV, collected 115 kg (250 lbs) of samples, and took 2120 photos. Good-quality TV transmission was received throughout evas. Astronauts depressurized lm and discarded excess equipment, im lifted off lunar surface at 188:02 get (5:55 pm EST Dec. 14). TV cameras in CSM provided excellent picture in Mission Control as lm approached. Cernan in lm said, “Good to see you .... It’s been a good trip.” Evans replied, “Good to have you all back up here.” Observing that “America and Challenger are . . . good tight Navy formation,” Cernan told Evans, “Command module looks as good as the day they put it on the pad.” Evans answered, “And, you know, so does Challenger.” CSM and lm docked in lunar orbit at 190:17 get and Cernan and Schmitt transferred to csm with samples and equipment, lm ascent stage was jettisoned as planned. Impact of stage on lunar surface at 195:57 get was recorded by four Apollo 17 geophones and Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 alseps. Explosive packages were detonated and events were picked up by lunar seismic profiling geophones. Flash and dust from EP 7 explosion were seen on TV. Insertion into trajectory for earth began at 236:42 get, after csm’s 147 hrs 48 min in lunar orbit. December 17-19:	Spacecraft left moon’s sphere of influence at 250:40 get, traveling at 1173 m per sec (3851 fps). Evans left CSM at 257:34 get (3:27 pm est Dec. 17) for 1-hr 7-min inflight eva to retrieve lunar sounder film and panoramic and mapping camera cassettes in three trips to sim bay. TV pictures relayed to Mission Control showed him cavorting in weightlessness in stiff white pressure suit and attached to 7.6-m (25-ft) line. Following space walk, astronauts settled down for final two days of mission. cm separated from sm at 304:04 get, 15 min before entry interface at 121 920 m (400 000 ft). Drogue and main parachutes deployed normally and cm splashed down in mid-Pacific 6.4 km (4.0 mi) from prime recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga at 304:31 GET (2:25 pm est Dec. 19). Recovery helicopter dropped swimmers, who installed flotation collar and attached life raft. Astronauts were transported to recovery ship for postflight examination. They would be flown to Houston via Samoa the following day. CSM was retrieved by recovery ship for transport to San Diego, Calif. Apollo 17 achieved primary objectives—to make selenological survey and sampling of materials and surface features in preselected area of Taurus-Littrow region, emplace and activate surface experiments, and conduct inflight experiments and photography. Launch vehicle and spacecraft system performances were near nominal throughout mission. Only minor discrepancies occurred, with no effect on safety or mission objectives. Flight crew performance was good. Mission was judged officially to be “a great success.” Accomplishments included sixth manned lunar landing and return, first geologist-astronaut on lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time (74 hrs 59 min 38 sec), longest single lunar surface eva (7 hrs 37 min 22 sec), longest total lunar surface EVA time (22 hrs 5 min 4 sec), longest total lunar distance traversed with LRV (35 km; 22 mi), longest Apollo mission (12 days 13 hrs 51 min), most samples returned (115 kg; 250 lb), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Apollo 17 was 14th and last scheduled mission in Apollo series and 11th manned Apollo mission. Apollo 16 had flown April 16-27. Highlights of Apollo program had been first manned orbit of moon by Apollo 8 (Dec. 21-27, 1968), first landing of men on moon during Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969), and first use of lunar roving vehicle on moon during Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug 7, 1971). Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight. Manned Spacecraft Center was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Kennedy Space Center for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under overall direction of Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-220K; msc Transcript 07629; NYT, 12/8-20/72; W Post, 12/8-20/72; nasa pio) December 7:	President Nixon sent message to Apollo 17 crew following successful launch: “With the final mission of the Apollo lunar exploration series man completes another step in his quest for knowledge of his universe and of himself. Those who come after will stand on the shoulders of the men of Apollo and their dedicated support team. I wish you good luck and Godspeed.” {PD, 12/11/72, 1734-5)
Nimbus 5 (Nimbus-E) meteorological satellite was successfully launched by NASA from Western Test Range at 11:56 pm EST by two-stage, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Satellite entered near polar orbit with 1101.3-km (684.3-mi) apogee, 1089.5-km (677.0-mi) perigee, 107.2-min period, and 99.95° inclination. Solar array lock-on and three-axis stabilization were achieved as planned. Activation was proceeding. Nimbus 5 carried new and improved instruments to extend observation into cloudy areas and higher altitudes, making first vertical temperature and water vapor measurements through clouds of earth’s atmosphere. Assigned primary objectives were to improve and extend capability for vertical sounding of temperature and moisture in atmosphere with particular regard to altitude coverage and cloud interference, providing nearly total global coverage for first time, and to demonstrate improved thermal mapping for 10 wks. As secondary objectives spacecraft would determine feasibility of using passive microwave remote sensing techniques to obtain earth observational data and would demonstrate capabilities of improved selective chopper radiometer (scr), provided by United Kingdom, to obtain atmospheric soundings. Butterfly-shaped 769-kg (1695-lb) satellite carried six meteorological and earth resources experiments: scr; infrared temperature profile radiometer (itpr) ; Nimbus E microwave spectrometer (nems) ; electrically scanning microwave radiometer (esmr) ; surface-compositionmapping radiometer (scmr) ; and temperature-humidity infrared radiometer (thir). Nimbus 5 was sixth of seven spacecraft designed to provide atmospheric data for improved weather forecasting. With added sophistication program had grown to include wide range of earth sciences. Sensors aboard Nimbus 5 would map Gulf Stream off east coast of U.S. and Humboldt Current off west coast of South America. By knowing locations of streams, shipping interests could make substantial saving. Nimbus 5 would also provide information about El Nino— change in Humboldt Current. El Nino had been causing great economic damage by warming coastal waters, killing nutrients and fish. Nimbus 2 (launched May 15, 1966, with design life of 6 mos) had returned data for 32 mos, for detailed study of effect of water, carbon dioxide, and ozone on earth’s heat balance. Vertical temperature measurements of Nimbus 3 (launched April 14, 1969) had been termed by meteorologists as one of most significant events in meteorological history, providing worldwide atmospheric information. Six of nine experiments on Nimbus 4 (launched April 8, 1970) could still provide atmospheric data. Nimbus program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under NASA Office of Applications direction, (nasa proj off; gsfc proj off; NASA Release 72-234)
U.S.S.R. had begun staging electronic-intelligence-gathering reconnaissance flights off U.S. East Coast, with aircraft returning to air base near Havana, Cuba, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Some U.S. officials believed U.S.S.R. was establishing precedent for using Cuba as base from which to launch and recover reconnaissance satellites. In first reported incident two naval reconnaissance versions of Tu-95 Bear turboprop aircraft made 12-hr flight from Cuba up route 80 km (50 mi) off U.S. coast to point north of Norfolk, Va. Flights had been detected by radar on U.S.S. Forrestal and had been monitored by F-4 and A-7 aircraft. Although Tu-95s had flown off U.S. East Coast for past several years, they had not taken off from Cuba, flown mission, and then returned to Cuba before. (Av Wk, 9/18/72, 11) September 18—21:	Twentieth International Congress of Aviation and Space Medicine was held in Nice, France. More than 500 scientists from 54 countries participated. Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director for Life Sciences, discussed human problems in long-duration space flights: Long-term bedrest data offered some clues to potential effects of weightlessness on physiological systems. There were indications that some zero-g effects were self-limiting. Collection of good inflight data for longer periods, coupled with ground-based experiments, was vital in planning for longer duration space flight. Vestibular problems had not been great enough for U.S. crews to require preadaptation program. “Such a program must, however, be considered as the number of potential crewmen is increased, particularly as scientists with no test pilot experience are added to crews. However, I do not at the present time see any physiological requirement for the addition of artificial gravity for long duration space flight.” Soviet delegation was headed by Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Institute of Space Biology of Soviet Academy of Sciences. (Text; fbis-Sov, 10/3/72, A7)
Wall Street Journal article criticized “strange aspects to NASA’s push for the shuttle.” Economic estimates of cost were “troublesome.” Some critics had charged that development costs might be “two to four times the $6 billion estimate of NASA. And the operating cost may not be as cheap as NASA says.” “Strangest” aspect of NASA argument was “agency’s almost total silence on the one space project for which the shuttle makes real sense—the permanent orbiting space station.” It had been assumed space station would be “keystone of any long-range space effort involving men” from beginning of space program. Project had been “shoved aside” in favor of manned lunar landing but “the moment that race was won . . . NASA pulled the space station plans back out.” It was easier to sell public $6-billion research and development program for “useful” space shuttle than $40-billion program for space station. But NASA’s “selling spiel” was “somewhat misleading.” Once $6-billion development program was finished shuttle would go into routine operation. “Plans call for 30 to 40 flights a year for 10 years. At $10.5 million a flight this comes to $30 billion to $40 billion— about the same in time and money as proposed for the space station.” Paper later acknowledged its arithmetical miscalculation and corrected total to “$3 billion to $4 billion,” but said corrected figure also was “misleading.” NASA estimate had projected $35 billion for shuttle program through 1990, including $12 billion for shuttle and $23 billion for payloads. (WSJ, 6/16/72, 10; 6/20/72)
Special awards ceremony marking outstanding success of NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars mission was held at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator—assisted by Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, and Dr. Harold Brown, President of California Institute of Technology—presented 32 NASA medals. Dan Schneiderman, Manager of Mariner Project, was awarded NASA Distinguished Service Medal for “creative leadership in conception, organizational planning, and management of a highly efficient Mariner 9 team which . . . achieved all objectives of the most successfully productive mission to Mars.” (JPL Release 624)
Eugene W. Wasielewski, Associate Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, died at age 59 after long illness. Wasielewski had been principal official for institutional management of gsfc and for operation of worldwide tracking and data-acquisition network. He had joined gsfc in 1960 after career in private industry. (W Post, 7/19/72, C4)
July 31:	Volunteers at Lewis Research Center were being trained to recognize odor intensity and character of jet engine exhaust gases. Project— Jet Combustor Exhaust Study—was part of overall program at LeRC to determine emissions of pollutants from jet aircraft and was being conducted by LeRC and Arthur D. Little Co. Findings were expected to help in reducing odors around airports caused by jet engine exhaust. Other studies were checking possible correlation between combustion efficiency and odor intensity. Project director Helmut F. Butz said best instrument “for attacking the odor problem ... is still the human nose, but the nose has to be trained.” Volunteers, on cue, opened sniffing port in special odor chamber, took short whiff, and recorded what they smelled. Classes of chemical compounds responsible for odor would be determined by analytical tests. (LeRC Release 72-78)
Senate passed H.R. 14070, $3.444-billion NASA FY 1973 authorization bill, after adopting amendment by Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.) that increased allocation for aeronautical research and development by $24 million. Increase included $21 million for program to design and demonstrate certifiable modifications to retrofit existing civil aircraft for quieter performance and $3 million for aircraft collision avoidance. Senate rejected, by vote of 61 to 21, amendment by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) to delete $228 million requested for space shuttle development. (CR, 5/11/72, S7698-7763)
Five Soviet aviation officials toured Kennedy Space Center and were briefed on current and future NASA programs. They were among first Soviet citizens to visit ksc. Poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko had visited ksc and witnessed Apollo 16 launch as NASA guest April 16. (ksc pao) November 17:	Successful radio tracking of solar energetic particles through interplanetary space was reported in Science by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists Dr. Joseph Fainberg, Larry G. Evans, and Robert G. Stone. Satellite observations by Explorer 6 (launched Aug. 7, 1959) of ejection of energetic sun particles at long radio wavelengths had provided means of investigating gross magnetic field configuration over distances of one astronomical unit. (Science, 11/17/72, 743-5)
Grove Webster, NASA Director of Personnel, died at age 48 after long illness. Webster had joined NASA in 1959 after working for Air Force and Civil Service Commission. (NASA Special Ann) The 941-kg (2075-lb), butterfly-shaped satellite carried RBV camera system, MSS subsystem, data-collection system (dcs), and two wideband video tape recorders (wbvtr). Launch was first step in merging space and remote sensing technology to manage earth resources more efficiently. Satellite would be able to cover earth with 500 pictures— 1000 times fewer than 500 000 needed to cover earth from high-altitude aircraft. Each picture would cover 34 000 sq km (13 000 sq mi). Satellite would view 185-km (115-mi) strip of earth with global coverage every 18 days, crossing equator daily at about 9:30 am local time. Solar array lock-on to sun and three-axis stabilization were achieved as planned. By July 25 instruments had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily. Initial imagery from RBVC system and MSS was excellent and showed detail. Data were being transmitted to stations at Fairbanks, Alaska; Goldstone, Calif.; and Greenbelt, Md.; and would be sent to data-processing facility at Goddard Space Flight Center. Ground station at Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, constructed and operated by Canadian government, would also receive data. Data would be distributed in form of high-quality film images or digitized data on computer-readable magnetic tape. Unlike previous unmanned programs where principal investigators had own instrumentation on board spacecraft and were responsible for own data analysis, all Erts 1 investigators had access to all data from onboard instruments. The 300 investigators from 43 states, District of Columbia, 31 foreign countries, and two international organizations would be assisted by 25 specialists assigned by NASA to analyze results. To carry out research required to evaluate satellite techniques, NASA was working with user agencies—including Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, and Interior, Environmental Protection Agency, and U.S. Corps of Engineers—and state and local organizations. Extensive cooperative earth resources projects had been established with Canada, Brazil, and Mexico, using Erts 1 and NASA earth observations aircraft. erts program was managed by gsfc. under direction of NASA Office of Applications, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-137)
Houston Chronicle editorial commented on Apollo 17 mission and crew: “To some, the Moon trip is already looked upon as routine and there is less public anticipation than ever before. Nonetheless, there is no way to diminish our pride that these are Americans making this flight, that our nation has bridged space and that these men call the Houston area home.” (H Chron, 11/20/72) November 21-30:	NASA successfully launched European Space Research Organization’s Esro 4 by four-stage Scout-D launch vehicle from Western Test Range at 4:17 pst. Satellite entered orbit with 1187-km (737.6-mi) apogee, 253-km (157.2-mi) perigee, 99-min period, and 91.1° inclination. Primary NASA objectives were to place spacecraft—eighth in esro flight program on U.S. vehicles—in earth orbit that would permit investigations of phenomena in polar atmosphere and to provide tracking and telemetry support. By Nov. 30, flight data indicated objectives were met and mission was adjudged success. Esro 4 carried six experiments from four countries: study of positive ions in ionosphere (United Kingdom) ; study of composition and total mass density of natural gas in upper atmosphere and exosphere (West Germany) ; study of low-energy-particle precipitation in auroral zones (Sweden); investigation of polar-cap-absorption events (Netherlands) ; measurement of flux and energy spectrum of solar flare particles, trapped particles in lower radiation belt of earth, and galactic and nonsolar energetic particles (West Germany); space-flight qualification of infrared horizon-sensing instrument for altitude measurements of spinning satellites (Netherlands). European-designed and -built spacecraft weighed 114 kg (251 lbs) and was cylindrical, with body-mounted solar cells and four booms. esro would reimburse NASA for launch under December 1966 Memorandum of Understanding. NASA Office of Space Science directed project for nasa; Langley Research Center managed Scout program. (NASA proj off; NASA Release 72—214)
Hall of Science, visited by some 5 million persons during 1964-65 World’s Fair in Flushing, N.Y., was reopened with exhibits including NASA satellite and Apollo mockup. Hall had been revived and remodeled as free scientific exhibition for public under grants from Rockefeller and Ford Foundations. (Andelman, NYT, 11/2/72; NY Visitors Bur) November 20:	Apollo 17 crew underwent preliminary medical checks and men were reported in good shape, while final test countdown for mission, begun Nov. 14, proceeded smoothly at Kennedy Space Center. Crew was not present as propellants were pumped into Saturn V rocket, to avoid risk. They planned to participate in dry run Nov. 21 after flammable oxygen and hydrogen had been drained from rocket. (UPI, NYT, 11/21/72, 46)
Tristate Regional Planning Commission had reached agreement with NASA for astronauts aboard Sky lab to photograph New York metropolitan area after launch from Cape Kennedy in April 1973, New York Times reported. Planning Agency would use infrared and standard photographs taken from height of 435 km (270 mi) for planning in three-state region. Photographs of housing trends and streets within 100-km (60-mi) radius of Times Square would complement those already taken by Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23) and would be used to prepare computergenerated maps and charts available to any state, county, or local planning agency. (NYT, 11/12/72, 32) November 13:	Space shuttle program requirement review was held by prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. at Downey, Calif. Work on shuttle orb iter stage under $2.6-billion contract had been accelerated and design of system had been altered to trim rising weight and cost of both orbiter and overall system. Orbiter weight had increased from 114 800 kg (253 000 lbs) to 125 600 kg (277 000 lbs); gross weight of overall system was up from 2.2 million kg (4.8 million lbs) to 2.4 million kg (5.3 million lbs). NR Space Div. Vice President and Program Manager Bastian Hello said orbiter currently planned would be about 38 m (126 ft) long, with 25.6-m (84-ft) wingspan. Manned Space Flight Center Space Shuttle Program Manager Robert Thompson announced schedule for shuttle flights: first horizontal flight (orbiter only), 1976; unmanned vertical flight, 1977; first manned orbital flight, early 1978; first operational flight, early 1979; regular operations (60 flights per year), end of 1982. Program officials said program cost was estimated at $5.15 billion. (Miles, LA Times, 11/27/72; NR pio)
NASA announced publication of The Experiments of Biosatellite II (NASA SP-204), edited by Joseph F. Sanders. Book described first successfully completed Biosatellite mission, which carried plants, frog eggs, amoeba, and seeds on earth orbital mission Sept. 7-9, 1967, to determine effect of space flight on living organisms, (nasa WR, 5/1/72, 5; A&A 1967) May 1—4:	Fourth meeting of Joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Editorial Board for preparation and publication of space biology and medicine review convened in Washington, D.C. Cochairmen were Dr. Melvin Calvin of Univ. of California at Berkeley and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Ministry of Health. Under Oct. 8, 1965, Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, Board reviewed research from the two countries for publication, (nasa Release 72-89) May 2:	Apollo 16 rock and photography briefing was held at Manned ' Spacecraft Center. Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said first few weeks of preliminary examination of Apollo 16 samples would be occupied with opening bags and weighing, dusting, photographing, and examining rocks. Catalog, including photos, of all samples should be completed by end of May. Rocks examined to date appeared to be breccias. One rock—collected during third extravehicular activity and described on moon by Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., as “an honest to goodness igneous rock”—was different in texture and appearance from other typical breccias, but had not yet been precisely classified. “Zap pits” on the surface indicated rock had been lying on one side. It was flattish with very fine, silverish crystals in finer grain matrix with no vesicules. Dr. Gast said rock could be rapidly crystallized igneous rock, very-high-grade metamorphic rock, or metamorphic rock that had been at temperatures of 1000°C (1300 K) long enough to be completely recrystallized. Dr. William R. Muehlberger of Univ. of Texas and U.S. Geological Survey expressed surprise at “the tremendous number of clasts [rock fragments]” within rocks. Clasts represented “crustal material hauled in from somewhere and that’s a tremendous plus beyond what we had originally conceived of as getting. ... So whether it’s volcanic in origin and therefore . . . this is crust from straight under somewhere or whether it’s impact origin and therefore crustal material thrown in from some distance doesn’t matter.” By selecting Descartes as landing site, NASA*had obtained extra sampling, “maybe even a better sampling,” than in other highlands missions. “And we may even have sampled another quadrant of the Moon that we wouldn’t have gotten in any other way. ... we may have a good deal more than the 15 percent or so of the highlands represented in these rocks and we may have a much older segment of the time scale represented.” (Transcript)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans to implement Center reorganization, pending NASA Hq. concurrence. Reorganization, necessitated by changing msfc roles and missions, included elimination of Program Management (pm) with major program offices reporting to Office of msfc Director; creation of Space Science Projects Office to ' furnish management and technical direction to High Energy Astronomy Observatory and Large Space Telescope projects; reassignment of Michoud Assembly Facility to Saturn Program Office; redesignation of Administration and Technical Services Directorate as Administration and Program Support; and consolidation of Contracts Office with Purchasing Office to become Procurement Office, (msfc Release 72-82)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Aerojet-General Corp., Lockheed Propulsion Co., Thiokol Chemical Co., and United Technology Center to receive separate, two-month, $150 000 study contracts to analyze possible use of solid-fuel motors with 305- and 396-cm (120- and 156-in) diameters to power space shuttle booster. (msfc Release 72-4)
One consequence of President Nixon’s Feb. 17-28 state visit to People’s Republic of China could be indefinite ban on overflights of mainland China by reconnaissance drones and high-altitude U-2 aircraft engaged in intelligence-collecting missions, Aviation Week & Space Technology article said. “If the anticipated decision is made, it presumably would end any consideration of flying Boeing’s upcoming long-endurance Compass Cope drone on proposed 24-hr missions over Communist China.” (Av Wk, 2/28/72, 11) February 28-March 24: City of Memphis and Shelby County, Tenn., conducted “Space and Science Awareness Month” to inform citizens about national space program. Project—sponsored by greater Memphis area school systems and supported by NASA Hq. and Marshall Space Flight Center—was opened £y Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart and NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly. Program exhibited space-related displays—including moon rock, lunar roving vehicle mockup, and models and displays on several NASA programs—at Pink Palace Museum. Also included were displays of educational literature on space technology in 250 school libraries; lectures at 65 schools and at various club meetings by NASA officials; 14 seminars and workshops for teachers; showing of 25 films at elementary schools, on Memphis educational TV station, and to adult groups; and presentation of series of programs on etv station. Memphis awareness month was largest space information program ever held by U.S. city, (msfc Release 72-16)
Congressional restraints on sale of military aircraft and equipment to developing nations were “not working,” and had cost U.S. aerospace industry “more than $800 million and 70,000 to 90,000 jobs in the last two years,” Copley News Service reported. Denied credit purchases of jets and other modern aeronautical equipment, nations once dependent on U.S. had turned to United Kingdom, France, Italy, Scandinavian countries, and Japan. U.S.S.R. was “trying to push its way into the market, particularly in Latin America.” (San Diego Union, 4/9/72, 20) April 10:	Six-day countdown for Apollo 16 began at 8:30 am est at Kennedy Space Center. Spacecraft was scheduled for launch at 12:45 pm est April 16. (AP, NYT, 4/11/72, 15)
NASA U—2 reconnaissance aircraft from Ames Research Center, equipped with high-resolution cameras using black-and-white and infrared film, photographed forest fire raging in Big Sur country of California’s Monterey County. It was first use of U—2 for forest fire reconnaissance. Photos made from altitudes of 20 000, 14 000, and 8000 m (65 000, 45 000, and 25 000 ft) were used by forestry officials to make plans for fighting fire. Photos and dense fog cover had helped firefighters contain 50% of fire by Aug. 3 and eventually fire was extinguished, (arc Release 72-55; LA Times, 8/4/72, 18; jpl Hist Off)
Lyudmila liquid-hydrogen chamber at joint nuclear research institute in Dubna, U.S.S.R., had been completed, Tass reported. Institute scientist Aleksander Baldin had said chamber would be used with world’s largest nuclear accelerator at Serpukhov to study photo-birth of particles—crushing of one proton by high-energy protons, (fbis-Sov, 1/10/72, LI)
Total eclipse of sun over northern Canada was studied by Marshall Space Flight Center physicists Dr. Robert J. Naumann and K. Stuart Clifton and five Johns Hopkins Univ. physicists. Observation period of 90 sec marked last opportunity in North America to observe total solar eclipse until 1979. Team recorded shadow bands on either side of totality in first attempt to use low-light-level TV to obtain actual images of bands. Bands were extremely difficult to photograph because contrast between bands and surrounding light was faint, msfc participation had been requested because of Center’s experience with low-light-level TV observations of transient phenomena during meteoroid research and study of barium clouds and aurora. Team made observations from schoolyard near Cape Chat, Quebec. In second experiment 24 scientists from Los Alamos (N. Mex.) Scientific Laboratory rendezvoused in Air Force cargo aircraft with eclipse totality at altitude of 12 000 m (39 000 ft) northwest of Churchill, Manitoba. Scientists observed solar corona using telescopes, cameras, and radiation-measuring devices. Eclipse extended from north of Japan, across Siberia and Alaska, eastward through Canada, and ended in Atlantic Ocean south of Azores. It was partial throughout U.S. (msfc Release 72-84; Rensberger, NYT, 7/10/72, 35; O’Toole, W Post, 7/10/72, A3; AP, B Sun, 7/11/72, A3; msfc pao)
Flight Research Center received F-lll aircraft from Air Force for joint NASA—usaf supercritical flight program. Aircraft, 13th F-lll built, would be flown by frc project pilot Einar Enevoldson to check out systems before NASA F-lll went off flight status until mid-June for instrumentation. It would then be flown with conventional wing to collect baseline flight data for comparison with future supercritical wing data. (frc X-Press, 2/18/72, 2; frc pao)
m/g Don R. Ostrander (usaf, Ret.), former NASA Director of Launch Vehicles, died at Andrews Air Force Base hospital, Md., of cancer at age 58. He had retired from Air Force as Vice-Commander of Ballistics System Division in 1965 and became Vice President for Planning, Bell Aero Systems Corp., until 1971. Gen. Ostrander had been appointed to NASA position in 1959. (W Post, 10/28/72, B10; Rosholt, Administrative History of NASA) October 26—27:	California newspapers reported reaction at Jet Propulsion Laboratory to news of renaming facility for retiring California Congressman H. Allen Smith (D-Calif.) [see Oct. 3 and Oct. 21]. News had come as surprise to officials, who had refused to comment. JPL engineer Charles D. Hepburn had said that several engineers deplored renaming of facility for political office holder when there were many great local scientists who had contributed to space program. Hepburn had said it was “insult to technology .... Our work has to do with the physical universe, not with the meanderings of a political career.” (LA Times, 10/26/72; Pasadena Star-News, 10/27/72) October 27: U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 13 weather satellite from Plesetsk to obtain “meteorological information needed for the operative weather forecast service.” Orbital parameters: 891-km (553.6-mi) apogee, 866-km (538.1-mi) perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.2° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; fbis-Sov, 10/30/72, LI; SBD, 10/30/72, 266)
Mariner 9 mission ended as attitude-control gas supply was depleted and engineering telemetry signal ceased during 698th Martian orbit of spacecraft launched May 30, 1971. Mariner 9 had reached Mars Nov. 13, 1971, and was 383 675 000 km (238 416 000 mi) from earth when engineers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory sent 45 960th, and last, command—to turn off radio transmitter. Spacecraft was expected to remain in Mars orbit some 50 yrs. During 349 days (more than one half Martian year) of orbital activity, Mariner 9 had maintained instrumented surveillance of Mars and made first closeup photos of Martian moons Phobos and Deimos. Major findings had included: geologically active planet with volcanic mountains and calderas larger than any on earth, equatorial crevasses more than 3000 km (2000 mi) long and three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, indications that free-flowing water might have existed in Mars’ geologic history, evolution of monumental dust storms that raged to altitudes of 50 to 60 km (31 to 37 mi) above Mars surface, and realization that dust storms and cloudiness accounted for much of variability of Mars’ appearance over years. Mariner 9 was first man-made object to orbit another planet. Mariner project, managed for NASA’s Office of Space Science by jpl, had been planned as two-spacecraft mission to Mars but Mariner 8, launched May 8, 1971, failed to enter orbit when Centaur stage of Atlas-Centaur booster malfunctioned after normal countdown and liftoff from Eastern Test Range. Spacecraft had reentered earth’s atmosphere. Plans had been revised and Mariner 9 had been launched successfully to conduct missions of both Mariners. Data from Mariner 9 experiments would provide groundwork for 1975 Viking lander mission to search for evidence of life on Mars, (jpl Release 634; A&A 1971)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced appointment of Dan Schneiderman, former manager of Mariner Mars 1971 Project, as manager of Civil Systems Program Office. He would manage JPL effort to develop applications of laboratory capabilities to problems in medical engineering, public safety, urban land use, and transportation, (jpl Release 622)
Apollo 16 countdown demonstration test (cddt) without propellants began at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for launch toward moon April 16. (ksc Release 55-72)
Houston Post editorial commented on international aspects of space program: “The history of the world has provided few efforts more conducive to worldwide participation than space exploration. Its benefits are mutual. The space shuttle is emerging as a practical, selfsupporting project and needs wider participation. Meanwhile, space investigations need to be continued. An international space agency would seem to be a practical way to perpetuate what the U.S. and Russia have started.” (H Post, 12/8/72)
Symposium on use of electronic computing machines in production management was held in Moscow by Soviet specialists and U.S. engineers from Digital Equipment Corp. Digital Equipment Corp. Vice President Theodore Johnson later told Tass correspondent that agreements signed between U.S. and U.S.S.R. in science and technology May 24 would widen firm’s contacts in U.S.S.R. (fbis-Sov, 5/26/72, LI)
Advanced technology aircraft to evolve from increased NASA, Dept, of Transportation, and Dept, of Defense use of research and experimental aircraft were described in Astronautics & Aeronautics by Langley Research Center Director Edgar M. Cortright. “nasa, in coordination with DOD and DOT, plans a program to design and manufacture two STOL transports. Although these aircraft probably will be smaller than anticipated production models, they will suit the needs of developing promising stol augmented-lift concepts, control systems, and crosswind landing gear. They will be able to operate within acceptable noise limits to and from stol strips about 2000 ft [610 m] long.” Joint NASA-Army plan “should lead to advanced helicopter and tilt-rotor research vehicles. Although oriented primarily toward military applications, the research results will apply to commercial vtol transports.” Advanced subsonic transports of the 1980s “will incorporate most of the applicable advanced technology . . . with significant gains in productivity. A longer range, higher capacity SST [supersonic transport] would fill a need on the transatlantic routes and the longer routes across the Pacific. And no forecaster can discount the possibility of a hypersonic transport (hst) for the 1990s.” (A&A, 1/72, 30-4) February 1:	NASA released preliminary timeline for Apollo 16 manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 16 would be launched from Kennedy Space Center at 12:54 pm est April 16—with lunar module landing on moon at 3:41 pm est April 20 and lifting off moon at 4:39 pm est April 23. Returning command module would splash down at 3:30 pm est April 28. (ksc Release)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released statement from San Clemente, Calif., following President’s announcement of decision to proceed with development of space shuttle. Decision was consistent with NASA FY 1972 budget and was “a most historic step in the nation’s space program—it will change the nature of what man can do in space. By the end of this decade the nation will have the means of getting men and equipment to and from space routinely, on a moment’s notice if necessary, and at a small fraction of today’s cost. This will be done within the framework of a useful total space program of science, exploration, and applications at approximately the present overall level of the space budget.” Dr. Fletcher described shuttle as “airplane-like orbiter, about the size of a DC—9 . . . capable of carrying into orbit and back again to earth useful payloads up to 15 feet [4.6 metersl in diameter by 60 feet [18 meters] long, and weighing up to 65,000 lbs [29 500 kg]. Fuel for the orb iter’s liquid-hydrogen liquid-oxygen engines will be carried in an external tank that will be jettisoned in orbit.” Orbiter would be launched by unmanned booster and would operate in space for one week, during which crew could launch, service, or recover unmanned spacecraft; would perform experiments; and, in future, would resupply and restaff space modules brought to space by shuttle. He cited reasons “space shuttle is important and is the right step in manned space flight and the U.S. space program.” First, “the shuttle is the only meaningful new manned space program which can be accomplished on a modest budget. Second, the space shuttle is needed to make space operations less complex and less costly. Third, the space shuttle is needed to do useful things. Fourth, the shuttle will encourage greater international participation in space flight.” Dr. Fletcher said NASA and contractors would focus until late February on technical areas, including comparisons of pressure-fed liquid- and solid-fuel rocket-motor options for shuttle’s booster stage, before NASA issued requests for proposals in the spring. “This summer we will place the space shuttle under contract and development work will start.” At press conference in San Clemente following release of shuttle statements, Dr. Fletcher and Dr. Low discussed President’s decision. Dr. Fletcher said President was “particularly anxious that I stress the international aspects of this. This program will be open to all nations of the world, and it is his hope some day that foreign visitors from all over the world will be able to participate by moving to and from space in the space shuttle.” NASA anticipated that “at its peak, the direct employment on the space shuttle will be of the order of 50,000 individuals. Of course, a great many of those will be employed in this area.” Responding to question, Dr. Fletcher said decision on shuttle launch site, “which will be the same as the landing site,” depended on recommendation of launch site selection group. “It is not necessarily Cape Kennedy or any other site at this time.” (Text: Transcript)
Special Achievement Awards to Naval Research Laboratory scientists Richard L. Staffer and Dr. Bruce J. Faraday for technique to prevent solar-cell overheating in satellite power systems were announced by nrl. Technique improved satellite efficiency and could extend satellite life by fabricating solar panels of unique materials that allowed cooler operation. Technique—already incorporated on nrl satellites built by nrl Space Systems Div.—increased available power, decreased satellite weight, and promised cost savings for building and operating solar-cell power-supply subsystems, (nrl Release 34-72-7)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced contract awards for space shuttle work. Three companies had been awarded six-month extensions to contracts for continued development of new surface materials for shuttle orbiter stage. McDonnell Douglas Corp. received $350 000, General Electric Co. Aerospace Group $346 000, and Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. $345 000. Companies would deliver to msc sample tiles of rigidized reusable surface insulation for special testing. cci Aerospace Corp. Marquardt Co. had been awarded $181 846, cost-plus-fixed-fee, research and development contract to study helium regulator systems that could be used by shuttle orbiter. Martin Marietta Corp. had received $130 000, firm-fixed-price, R&D contract to design, build, and test couch to be used by passengers on shuttle, (msc Releases 72-145, 72-146, 72-148)
California Lt. Gov. Ed Reinecke in press release announced progress in application of NASA-developed technology to management of California’s environment. Reinecke, chief aide to Gov. Ronald Reagan in developing use of new technology for solution of state problems, said Gov. Reagan had pronounced NASA technology vital to resource management. Series of symposia held in cooperative effort by State of California, Ames Research Center, and Univ. of California at Berkeley was examining environmental problems, including smog, (arc Release 72-16)
Decision that space shuttle booster stage would be powered by recoverable, reusable, solid-fueled rocket motors in parallel burn configuration, rather than by pressure-fed liquid-fueled rocket motor, was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Announcement was also released to press during morning and Dr. Fletcher held press conference in afternoon. Dr. Fletcher said both solid- and liquid-fueled boosters had been found technically feasible but “choice was made in favor of the solid parallel burn because of the lower development cost and the lower technical risks. Cost estimate for shuttle development was now $5.15 billion instead of earlier $5.5-billion estimate. Request for proposals would be issued about March 17. nasa expected to select shuttle launch and landing site shortly. At press conference he said: “I think we have made the right decision at the right time. And I think it is the right price.” Dr. Fletcher said it was likely NASA would want to launch and land at same coastal site and possibly from sites on both coasts. Inland sites were unlikely because of requirement for booster recoverability. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at conference there would be eight-week response time to request for proposals to become prime contractor for shuttle development. NASA would evaluate proposals in another eight weeks and would be ready for choice of contractor in early July. Requirements had been developed jointly with Air Force and “we have a shuttle that meets the user’s requirements, both in NASA and in the Air Force.” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, estimated breakdown of 580 shuttle flights projected over 12-yr period for newsmen. Out of 100% of missions, 26% would be manned or man-tended, 74% unmanned. Of that 74%, 27% would be for applications (including NASA and other agencies or commercial applications), 25% for science, and 22% for Dept, of Defense missions. (Hearings transcript; Press conference transcript)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced agreement with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Huntsville Div. to provide facility design and construction support as needed by msfc for space shuttle program, (msfc Release 72-61)
NASA announced immediate changes in key personnel. Director Joseph F. Malaga of Resources Analysis Div. became Assistant Administrator for Institutional Management. Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly became NASA Comptroller. Malaga had received William A. Jump Memorial Foundation Meritorious Award for exemplary achievement in public administration and NASA Exceptional Service Award in 1966. Lilly, former Director of Program Control in Office of Manned Space Flight, had received NASA Exceptional Service Award in 1965 and 1969. (nasa Ann)
S.R. 193, joint resolution to redesignate Cape Kennedy as Cape Canaveral, was introduced by Sen. Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.) and Sen. Lawton M. Childs, Jr. (D-Fla). Resolution would retain name John F. Kennedy Space Center for NASA facilities on Merritt Island. Sen. Gurney said it was from ksc, “and not from the Cape itself, that President Kennedy’s dream was realized.” Desire of Cape’s residents for restoration of 400-yr-old name Canaveral and “desire of a lasting memorial to the President” could be accomplished through adoption of resolution. “From a historical standpoint, no greater justice could be done.” (■CR, 2/1/72, S862^)	_
National Science Foundation published Federal Scientific, Technical, and Health Personnel in 1970 (nsf 71—47).	Federal scientists, engineers, and related nonprofessional personnel numbered 271000 in October 1970, 1% below 274100 employed in October 1969. Figure for 1970 included 79 300 scientists and 83 000 engineers—about 10% of total scientists and engineers in national economy. Decline of professional and nonprofessional personnel in Federal Government in 1970 followed several years of relative stability. Decrease in Federal scientists and engineers between 1969 and 1970 centered in Dept, of Defense, largest employer of such personnel. In 1970 dod employed 74 400 scientists and engineers, 3% below 76 000 in 1969. NASA decline was from 13 900 in 1969 to 13 400 in 1970. Engineers accounted for almost all of 1% decrease in Federal scientists and engineers from 1969 to 1970. Figures for engineers were 84 100 in 1969 and 83 000 in 1970. dod engineers declined 3%—from 53 800 to 52 300. Largest decline among other agencies was at NASA and Dept, of Interior. DOD scientists declined from 22 200 in 1969 to 21200 in 1970. NASA scientists declined from 5100 to 4800 (nsf Highlights, 2/22/12, 1)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, completed 26th flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Objectives were to evaluate reaction augmentation system and to obtain stability and control data at maximum mach number. To obtain maximum speed, M2-F3 was launched from 14 300 m (47 000 ft) rather than usual 13 700 m (45 000 ft). Landing rockets were used during climb. M2-F3 reached 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.5. (NASA proj off)
Shuttle Program Office, managed by Roy E. Godfrey, was formed at Marshall Space Flight Center. Office would be staffed by Shuttle Task Team until July 1, when team would be abolished and some members assigned permanently to office. (Marshall Star, 5/17/72, 1; msfc pao)
New York Times editorial praised “encouraging response” of public and major corporations that would enable Science and Technology Div. of New York Public Library to reopen Jan. 17 after shutdown for lack of operating funds [see Jan. 3]. “But it is evident that the fate of the privately financed research divisions has merely been deferred— unless continuous and long-range efforts are made to put this vital facility on a sound financial footing.” (NYT, 1/10/72, 32) January 10—13:	Third Annual Lunar Science Conference held by NASA and Lunar Science Institute at Manned Spacecraft Center was attended by more than 600 researchers from U.S. and 16 foreign countries. Foreign visitors included Soviet scientists Y. I. Belyayev, M. S. Chupakhin, and K. P. Florenskiy, who participated in conference, consulted with U.S. scientists, looked at lunar samples stored at msc, and helped select samples to return to their colleagues in U.S.S.R. NASA provided three grams (one tenth ounce) of lunar material collected on Apollo 14 mission as part of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements for exchange of samples. Samples included chip from widely studied crystalline rock, small piece of 9-kg (20-lb) boulder, and core samples soils, and polished thin sections. Conference papers dealt with scientific results of Apollo lunar landing missions, analysis of Soviet Luna 16 samples, and results of study of lunar surface by U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1. Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden discussed their observations of lunar surface made from lunar orbit during July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission. Dr. N. C. Costes, Marshall Space Flight Center representative of Apollo Soil Mechanics Investigation Science Team, discussed mechanical properties of lunar soil. Washington Post later compared conference with First Lunar Science Conference in 1970, when “there were few facts available and many theories.” At third conference, “situation seemed to have reversed.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said, “You’re not throwing facts out into a vacuum any more.” Among facts stated at conference were: moon once had strong magnetic field, of which remnants remained to suggest moon once had metallic core up to 280 km (175 mi) thick; lunar crust was 65 km (40 mi) deep and layered; existence of extinct plutonium 244 in Apollo 14 samples indicated plutonium had been trapped when lunar crust solidified shortly after origin of solar system; and Copernicus Crater had been gouged 850 to 950 million yrs ago, making process one of more recent major lunar events. Dr. James R. Arnold of Univ. of California at San Diego reported that moon’s radioactive elements were concentrated in two broad plains, Ocean of Storms and Sea of Rains. “As we go away from this region ... we drop to quite low levels of radioactivity.” Scientists agreed that these radiation emissions should not prove hazardous to astronauts who might visit for short period. Dr. Isidore Adler, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, reported that map of lunar surface chemistry produced from Apollo 15 x-ray data indicated highlands of moon contained more aluminum than did plains. Finding supported hypothesis that moon’s early crust was rich in feldspar. Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ., Apollo Program chief seismic investigator, debated presence of volcanoes on moon with Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold. Dr. Latham said that while main episode of lunar vulcanism seemed to have ceased 3 billion yrs ago, “it’s by no means certain that we do not have continuing vulcanism on a very minor scale on the moon.” Dr. Gold continued to support theory that moon was dead, rigid body with basins of compacted dust. Dr. Leon T. Silver of California Institute of Technology proposed theory of “parentless lead” on moon to explain presence in some lunar locations of more lead than could have been produced by decay of radioactive uranium. In moon’s extreme vacuum it was possible for vaporized lead to travel great distances from its parent, uranium. Dr. Silver said other materials could be distributed over lunar surface in same way, all of which could confuse analysis of moon’s age. Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory discussed tiny piece of green glass among Apollo 14 samples that scientists had nick-named “Genesis bean.” Bean and other glass fragments were almost identical chemically to rare meteorites, Howardites. Evidence suggested green glass had originated on moon and not from meteorite impacts on earth and thus might be some of earliest material of solar system. Consensus of conference on bulk composition of moon was summarized by Dr. Gast: feldspar-rich highland material with anorthosite as one prevalant component, basalts (solidified lava, low in radioactive elements and relatively young) in plains and basins, and KREEP (highly radioactive material rich in potassium, rare earth elements, and phosphorus). Conference closed with discussion of geologic setting of Apollo 16 Descartes landing site and plans for mission’s extravehicular activity. Soviet scientists returned to U.S.S.R. Jan. 23 with lunar samples for Soviet Academy of Sciences, (msc Release 72-06; NASA Release 72—18; Marshall Star, 1/12/72, 1; Wilford, NYT, 1/14/72, 22; NASA Trans Sect) January 11:	Apollo 16 lunar module pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., was released from Patrick Air Force Base Hospital where he had been treated for bacterial pneumonia since Jan. 4. (AP, B Sun, 1/11/72)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of $19.9-million contract extension to ITT Federal Electric Corp. to provide communications and instrumentation services at ksc. Contract would expire June 30, 1973. (ksc Release 145—72; DJ, W Star, 6/26/72, A13)
Wallops Station announced award of $1074 000, one-year contract renewal to Computer Sciences Corp. for engineering support services at Wallops. (WS Release 72-9) In past, NASA had been forced to develop expensive equipment for one-time use. “Today we have 52 operating civilian spacecraft. By the end of next year we will launch 35 more, for a total of 87” representing “43 different spacecraft types—on the average each spacecraft [type] is flown only twice!” But payloads had become more complex, while launch costs decreased. “We are no longer as limited in weight and volume as we were ten years ago; with the shuttle, weight and volume constraints will be non-existent for many missions. This means that we should now optimize our payloads for low cost and high reliability, and not for minimum weight and maximum performance. ... I am convinced that if we do this, we can drastically reduce the cost of doing business in space. And this ... is as great a technological challenge as everything else that we have done in space.” (Text) Air Force initiatives in controlling system cost were summarized by Gen. George S. Brown, Commander of Air Force Systems Command: prototyping to avoid high developmental costs, joint operational technical reviews to identify tradeoffs that would reduce acquisition costs, contracting techniques to reduce acquisition costs, full support of program managers to reduce acquisition costs, improvement in life-cycle costing technique to identify actions that would minimize total cost of ownership, and positive actions to achieve reliability and maintainability goals for increasing system effectiveness and decreasing cost of ownership. (Text) August 17:	Plans for regional earth resources information system were announced at Marshall Space Flight Center by team of msfc Summer Faculty Fellows headed By Dr. Reginald I. Vachon of Auburn Univ. and physicist Herman G. Hamby of msfc Environmental Applications Office. System—Earth Resources Information Storage, Transformation, Analysis and Retrieval (eristar)—would gather and correlate data from instrumented packages into data cross-sections useful in industrial development, conservation of natural resources, and pollution reduction. Information would be made available to Alabama Earth Resources Information Committee. Developed by team during 11-week stay at msfc, system would assist in disseminating information from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite, launched July 23. (msfc Release 72-105)
John Stack, engineer who had helped develop first high-speed wind tunnel in 1930s, died at age 65 after fall from horse. Stack had joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory (predecessor of Langley Research Center) in 1928 and had been head of high-velocity airflow research at Laboratory in 1939, NASA Director of Aeronautical Research from 1961 to 1962, and Vice President for Engineering at Fairchild Industries until his retirement in 1971. He had received numerous awards for his work in supersonic technology, including Robert J. Collier trophy in 1947 for work with X—1 rocket aircraft. (AP, NYT, 6/20/72, 38; frc X-Press, 7/21/72, 2) June 18-July 30: Exhibit of kinetic art of Dr. Frank J. Malina—artist, astronautical engineer, and past Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory (1944^1946)—was held at Univ. of Texas Institute of Texan Cultures in San Antonio. Catalog noted Dr. Malina was “pioneering on the new frontier of man’s adjustment to the explosive impact of science, technology and the exploration of space on the world.” Artist believed “man must understand this world in order to survive in it, and that this understanding must be both intellectual and emotional.” Paintings included impressions of space phenomena. (Catalog)
House passed H.R. 16645, bill for construction of District of Columbia civic center that contained amendment to change name of Jet Propulsion Laboratory to H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory [see Sept. 19]. House then substituted Senate-passed bill, S. 3943, after amending it to contain language of House bill as passed. (CR, 10/3/72, H9027-51)
Apollo 16 astronauts were honored with luncheon and hour-long ceremony at Kennedy Space Center. Astronauts greeted KSC employees who had worked to make mission successful. (O Sen, 5/18/72; KSC pao)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Apollo 16: While space program had been “worth the money,” it was “just a well that this is the next to last manned mission; the most promise henceforth will be in earth-orbital projects. The Soviets appear to be investing much more heavily in those than the United States.” (W Star, 4/15/72, A4) April 15—16:	Wallops Station held open house as part of joint program of Federal activities. Displays included moon rock and Apollo spacesuit. Television set was available for visitors to watch Apollo 16 launch on April 16. (Wallops Release 72-5) Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 175.9km (109.3-mi) apogee and 166.7-km (103.6-mi) perigee. Insertion into trajectory toward moon was achieved at 2:34 get in spite of minor anomalies—leak in instrument unit (iu) temperature control system’s gaseous nitrogen bottle pressure and malfunction of S—IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) helium regulators, which caused continuous venting. CSM separation from Lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:05 GET and docking with LM was shown on color TV for 18 min. First S-1VB APS burn was near nominal, but because of helium depletion and potential trajectory disturbances, second bum was not made and S-IVB lunar impact operations were terminated. Tracking of stage ended at 27:09 get when IU signal was lost. S-IVB impacted lunar surface at 75:08 get (4:02 pm EST April 19) at point estimated to be 1.8° north latitude and 23.3° west longitude. Impact was detected by seismometers at Apollo 12, 14, and 15 sites. Unexplained light-colored particles streaming from LM close-out panel during docking were reported by crew at 7:18 GET. Young and Duke entered lm, powered up, and found all systems normal. Grasslike particles, shown on cm TV, were later identified as shredded thermal paint, but degraded thermal protection was not expected to affect LM operations. First midcourse correction (MCC—1) was canceled because spacecraft trajectory was near nominal. Electrophoresis demonstration began on schedule at 25:05 get and appeared to be successful, from crew’s description of reaction of charged particles in liquid. Ultraviolet (uv) photographs of earth from 107 300 km (66 700 mi) and 216 600 km (134 600 mi) were taken as planned. Duke reported “spectacular” view of half earth from 201 000-km (125 000-mi) altitude when he could see sun shining on only half of planet. During MCC-2, made at 30:39 get, services propulsion system (sps) tank pressure anomaly that had occurred earlier in mission was tracked and minor leak in transducer reference cavity was located. Procedures were sent to crew to account for transducer reading. Visual light flash experiment was started about two hours late, at 49:10 get, because of problem in aligning spacecraft. Duke counted 70 white, instantaneous light flashes that left no after-glow, uv photography of earth at 327 800 km (203 700 mi) was completed as planned. Young and Duke entered lm at 53:50 get for two-hour checkout of LM systems. All system checks were nominal. Scientific instrument module (sim) door jettisoned at 69:59 get. csm—lm undocking and separation maneuver was conducted on schedule at 96:14 get. When Young and Duke came from behind moon in lm, Duke told Mission Control his helmet was full of orange juice. Duke’s microphone apparently had become entangled with tube through which he drank juice stored in his spacesuit. “Every time I turn my head I get orange juice. It’s delicious . . . hut it’s better in your mouth than floating around the cockpit. I’ve already had an orange shampoo.” When Mattingly came from behind moon in csm he reported he had not conducted circularization burn because of malfunction in SPS yaw gimbal servo loop. While flight controllers evaluated problem, LM-powered descent-initiate maneuver was delayed, and LM and CSM maneuvered into station-keeping mode prepared to dock or continue landing procedures. Analysis of problem identified malfunction in secondary circuit that would not preclude lunar landing. Second separation maneuver by CSM with RCS burn was performed and LM began descent to moon on 16th revolution. LM Orion touched down in moon’s Descartes region 230 m (755 ft) northwest of planned target point at 104:30 GET (9:23 pm EST April 20). “Wow, down. Old Orion is finally here, Houston. Fantastic,” Duke exclaimed. “All we’ve got to do is jump out the hatch and we’ve got plenty of rocks.” Duke and Young said site was rolling country surrounded by mountains and covered with big boulders. Sunlight was so bright it washed out moon’s colors and made lunar surface appear white. Since LM had stayed in lunar orbit six hours longer than planned it was powered down to conserve electrical power and first extravehicular activity (EVA-1) was rescheduled to follow sleep period. EVA-1 began at 119:05 get (11:59 am est April 21). Young climbed down ladder and stepped onto lunar surface. “Okay, Cayley Plains,” he said, “Apollo 16 is gonna change your image.” Duke followed and astronauts began deploying experiments. Because of problems with LM antenna astronauts’ first steps on moon—for first time—were not beamed back to earth. Once Young and Duke set up portable antenna, TV signal and communication with ground controllers were received clearly on earth. TV pictures showed bleak, pale surface resembling Apollo 15 site, with flat-topped Smoky Mountain to north and Stone Mountain to south. Astronauts said site was rockier, more hilly, and more cratered than previous landing sites. Soil was firm, with rocks scattered over 30% of the surface and small craters covering 70%. During deployment of Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep) Young tripped over heat flow experiment (hfe) cable, pulling it from connector after Duke had drilled first bore hole. Mission Control later developed way to repair $1.2-million experiment, but procedure was not used because it would have been too complex and too time consuming and included some risk to other ALSEP components. U.S. flag and remaining ALSEP components were deployed successfully and functioned nominally. Crew deployed lrv and found ampere readings for battery No. 2 off-scale low and rear steering inoperable. About 40 min later, after loading, all meters and rear steering operated properly and LRV performed nominally throughout remainder of EVA. Young and Duke explored Flag, Spook, Plum, and Buster Craters and collected 20 kg (44 lbs) of samples, including number of white rocks. One crystalline rock coated with bluish glass appeared to have same texture as anorthosite “Genesis rock” collected on Apollo 15 mission; another was pure white. Some were flecked with green and black glass, some were black and gray, and one weighed about 6% kg (14 lbs). EVA-1 terminated at 126:16 get after 7 hrs 11 min 11 sec. After resting inside LM and reviewing plans for second EVA, astronauts left LM at 142:51 get (11:33 am est April 22). They explored Survey Ridge and Stone Mountain and said ridge was pockmarked with small, subdued craters, most about one meter {three feet) wide and some containing smaller craters within main crater. Area around South Ray Crater was strewn with sharp boulders and resembled crater in Nevada where astronauts had trained. Young and Duke turned on lrv TV so viewers could watch them walking and collecting samples high up on slope of Stone Mountain. They reported seeing more of previously discovered white soil under gray surface layers and said soil was very loosely consolidated. While ascending ridge and traversing very rocky terrain, LRV rear wheels failed to respond at full throttle, lrv continued to move, hut front wheels were digging in. Troubleshooting procedures identified mismatch of power mode switching. After change in switch configuration lrv worked properly. Astronauts took core samples and collected rocks that appeared to be volcanic, a greenish rock shaped like a snake’s head, and pure crystalline rocks. EVA was televised in color with lrv camera and was extended 20 min. During crew’s return to LM, 5-cm (2-in) portion of Young’s portable life support system (plss) antenna broke off, causing 15- to 18-db drop in signal strength. EVA—2 ended at 150:14 get after 7 hrs 23 min 26 sec. Third eva began 30 min early at 165:45 get (10:27 am est April 23)	to allow additional time near North Ray Crater and two other stations. Astronauts chipped off samples from enormous basalt rock the size of a house. All planned activities were accomplished, but astronauts had trouble configuring cosmic ray detector for stowage and return to earth, lrv covered 9% km (6 mi) and reached 17 km per hr (11 mph) going down 15° slope. TV coverage was excellent throughout eva. Total EVA-3 time was 5 hrs 40 min 14 sec—bringing total eva time to 20 hrs 14 min 54 sec and total distance traversed to 27.1 km (16.8 mi). While LM was on moon, Mattingly, orbiting moon in Casper, completed lunar and astronomic photography and prepared for rendezvous. He radioed information to geologists at Mission Control to help them plan EVA—3 exploration of Stone Mountain and determine best way to approach North Ray Crater. He located radioactive hot spot on eastern edge of Ocean of Storms south of Apollo 14 landing site and gamma spectrometer identified thorium, potassium, and uranium. Mattingly also discovered, on far side of moon, volcanic lava flows that resembled maria flows and spilled out over northeast rim of crater high in mountains near lunar equator. Two areas resembled volcanic flows around Flagstaff, Ariz., where crew had trained. Many large basins on moon’s far side appeared to be covered with same kind of material that covered area around Apollo 16 site. Young and Duke depressurized LM, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 96.6 kg (213 lbs) of lunar samples at 175:44 get (8:26 pm est April 24). Liftoff was photographed in color by camera on LRV left on moon and was seen by millions of TV viewers. Spacecraft docked successfully and LM crew transferred samples, film, and equipment to CSM. For first time docking was not seen on TV, because LM steerable antenna was inoperable. LM jettison was delayed one day so that astronauts could rest. After LM jettison at 195:12 GET, LM lost altitude and began tumbling, apparently because circuit breaker in attitude-and-translation-controller assembly’s primary guidance and navigation system had accidentally been left open. LM ascent stage remained in lunar orbit and was expected to impact lunar surface in about one year. Boom that carried instrument to measure atmosphere of moon was jettisoned because it would not retract and might have broken off. Orbit-shaping maneuvers were canceled to avoid firing of SPS because of degraded backup SPS thrust vector control. Scientific Subsatellite was launched at 196:14 get (4:56 est April 24)	into lunar orbit with 123.3-km (76.6-mi) apolune and 97.9-km (60.8-mi) perilune. Hexagonal, 40-kg (90-lb) satellite 77 cm long and 36 cm in diameter (30 x 14 in) carried three experiments. Subsatellite extended three 1%-m (5-ft) booms, two with magnetometer sensors to measure interplanetary and earth magnetic fields near moon and third for stabilization. Spacecraft also carried particle shadows and boundary layer experiment to collect data on plasmas and solar flares and S-band transponder to detect variations in lunar gravity caused by mascons. Expected lifetime was 6 to 9 mos—shorter than 12 mos planned because shaping burn to optimize orbit had not been performed—but Subsatellite crashed into moon May 29. Transearth injection maneuver at 200:33 get put CSM on trajectory for earth after 114 hrs 5 min (65 revolutions) in lunar orbit. April 25-27:	Good-quality TV pictures of receding moon from inside CM and of lunar surface from LRV on moon were transmitted between 227 and 229 get. At 243:35 get (3:43 pm est April 25) Mattingly left CSM for inflight EVA to retrieve panoramic and mapping camera film cassettes from SIM on SM. Mattingly made two trips, during which he observed condition of instruments, reported that insulation paint near rocket nozzle was blistered, and deployed and exposed microbial ecological evaluation device (meed) experiment for 10 min. He reentered CSM after 1 hr 24 min. Scheduled TV press conference began at 268:13 GET and ended at 268:31 GET. Astronauts briefly described moon’s far side, including crater Guyot, which seemed to be so full of material that it overflowed and spilled down side of the crater. CM separated from SM at 290:08 GET, 15 min before entry interface at 121900-m (400 000-ft) altitude. Drogue and main parachutes deployed normally and CM splashed down and flipped upside-down in mid-Pacific about 5 km (3 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga at 2:44 pm EST April 27, after 11-day 2-hr (265-hr 51-min) mission. After flipping spacecraft upright by inflating air bags, astronauts, wearing fresh flight suits, left CM and were carried by helicopter to biomed area on recovery ship for postflight examinations. After being declared in excellent condition, astronauts were flown on following day to Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii, and to Ellington afb, Tex. Young had lost 3% kg (7% lbs); Mattingly, 3 kg (6V2 lbs); and Duke, 2% kg (5% lbs), but all were “euphoric, hungry and thirsty, and walking well.” CM was retrieved and placed in dolly on board recovery ship. Lunar samples, data, and equipment were flown to Ellington afb and cm was off-loaded at San Diego. Mission achieved primary Apollo 16 objectives: to make selenologi-cal survey and sampling of materials in preselected area of Descartes region; emplace and activate surface experiments; evaluate capability of Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar surface stay time, increased EVA operations, and surface mobility; and conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar orbit. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance were near nominal except for lack of rate feedback in thrust vector control and yaw oscillations that delayed lunar landing, caused revision of lunar surface activities, and necessitated end of mission one day earlier than planned. All anomalies were quickly analyzed and resolved or compensated for by workaround procedures developed to permit mission to continue. Flight crew performance was excellent. Minor errors made by crew were attributed to fatigue and did not preclude mission success. Mission was officially judged a success. Accomplishments included largest payload (34 518 kg; 76100 lbs) placed in lunar orbit, first cosmic ray detector deployed on lunar surface, first use of far-UV camera on lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time (71 hrs 14 min), longest lunar surface EVA (20 hrs 15 min), and largest amount of lunar samples brought to earth (96.6 kg; 213 lbs). In addition, astronauts returned 3793.5 m (12 446 ft) of exposed film used on lunar surface and in lunar orbit. Apollo 16 was 13th Apollo mission to date, 10th manned Apollo mission, and 5th successful manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 15 had been conducted July 26-Aug. 7, 1971. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight. Manned Spacecraft Center was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Kennedy Space Center for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under overall direction of Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-64K; NYT, 4/16-30/72; W Post, 4/16-28/72; W Star, 4/16-28/72; B Sun, 4/18/72, Al; AP, New Haven Register, 4/21/72) April 16:	Soviet poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko—first Soviet dignitary to accept invitation to watch Apollo launch—described his reaction to launch to press at Kennedy Space Center. “It was beautiful, it was poetry. It was a great impression.” Yevtushenko said he had been even more impressed on his midnight visit to the floodlit launch pad with astronaut David R. Scott, “It’s really a beautiful show, this white tender body of a rocket, supported by the clumsy but sometimes tender hands of the red gantry tower. I absolutely had the feeling of one big brother embracing his sister before a long way, a long road. It was wonderful. Silence, not people. No press. Nothing. The sky, the ground, the rocket. It was so beautiful.” (Witkin, NYT, 4/17/72, 24)
NASA had spent $800 000 on North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. study and design of system to permit rendezvous and docking of U.S. and Soviet spacecraft in orbit, Associated Press reported. Study envisioned 14-day mission with Apollo command and service module linking special docking module with Salyut orbiting laboratory and Soyuz command spacecraft. NR had received $300 000 for method study and $500 000 for hardware design. No contract had been issued for hardware. (CSM, 2/19/72) February 20:	Tenth anniversary of Friendship 7 mission, first U.S. manned orbital space flight. Piloted by Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., Friendship 7 had circled earth three times during 4-hr 55-min mission. Since Glenn’s flight—which was third U.S. manned space flight and sixth flight in Project Mercury—30 U.S. astronauts had flown in space total of 7700 hrs, 51 min—nearly 46 wks. Anniversary was observed at Kennedy Space Center Feb. 22, with 3000 guests and dignitaries invited to attend ceremony at Launch Complex 14, where commemorative plaque was unveiled. Glenn said space flight was “not a pleasure cruise for an individual. It’s research at the highest level and it is difficult to tell where it will go from here.” (ksc Release 37—72; B Sun, 2/23/72)
NASA announced personnel actions: l/g Marvin L. McNickle (usaf, Ret.) was named Special Assistant to Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight at nasa Hq. effective Dec. 3. l/g Carroll H. Dunn (usa) was elected Chairman of Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel to succeed Dr. Charles 0. Harrington, who was retiring, (nasa Release 72-237; NASA Ann)
President Nixon transmitted to Congress 26th annual report on U.S. participation in work of United Nations. He noted in transmission message that 26th U.N. General Assembly had endorsed two treaties sponsored by U.S., Convention on the International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects and Convention on the Prohibition of Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. International Civil Aviation Organization conference had adopted Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation. {PD, 9/11/72, 1351-2) September 8—9:	Twenty-fifth anniversary of NASA Flight Research Center at Edwards, Calif., celebration included open house and Sept. 8 ceremony honoring original 14 employees who had participated with Air Force in successful 1947—1951 X-l rocket aircraft program to exceed speed of sound in level flight. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented plaques to seven original employees who attended. Since creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, predecessor of NASA, frc had participated in advanced aircraft research programs that had extended boundaries of manned aeronautical flight from subsonic speed to 7200 km (4500 mi) per hr achieved by X—15 aircraft between 1959 and 1968. Other frc programs included rocket-powered D-558 II Skyrocket, first aircraft to fly twice the speed of sound; X-5, forerunner of F—111, F—14, and B-l aircraft; lunar landing research vehicle, prototype of Apollo lunar landing trainer; and XB-70 aircraft that had takeoff weight of more than 226 800 kg (500 000 lbs) and mach-3 cruising speed, frc programs were continuing effort to improve safety, utility, and flying qualities of general-aviation aircraft; M2, HL-IO, and X-24A lifting-body flights to validate concepts for future manned spacecraft and aircraft; YF-12 program to acquire inflight data for future supersonic military and commercial aircraft; supercritical wing program to evaluate new NASA-developed wing’s ability to permit modified F-S aircraft to cruise economically at higher speeds; and digital fly-by-wire aircraft program to evaluate use of electronic flight control system to control aircraft completely. Fly-bywire system was being considered for space shuttle use. (NASA Release 72-173; frc Release 15-72; frc X-Press, 9/15/72) September 9:	Tass reported results of Venus 8 probe that had landed capsule on Venus July 22 after four-month flight. Wind had moved descending capsule horizontally in same direction as planet’s rotation on its axis. Wind speed had declined from 48 m (160 ft) per sec at 45-km (28-mi) altitude to 2 m (6 ft) per sec at 11 km (7 mi). Key question during landing was whether sunlight reached Venusian surface or was absorbed completely by atmosphere and clouds. Preliminary data on changes in illumination at different altitudes showed that Venusian atmosphere considerably weakened sunlight but some sunlight did reach surface. Atmosphere consisted of 97% carbon dioxide, less than 2% nitrogen, and less than 0.1% oxygen and contained 0.01-0.1% ammonia at altitudes between 33 and 46 km (20 and 30 mi). Surface in landing area resembled earth granite rock in radioactive composition with 4.0% potassium, 0.0002% uranium, and 0.00065% thorium. (fbis-Sov, 9/13/72, L7)
Instruments to be used globally to monitor air pollution in upper atmospheric airways were being flight-tested on Convair 990 at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Lewis Research Center announced. Instruments—candidates for nasa Global Air Sampling Program (gasp) under direction of LeRC—would be installed on 10 to 15 foreign and domestic commercial aircraft to monitor gaseous and particulate pollutants. Particulates would also be collected by sampling device and later would be analyzed by electron microscopy and other methods. (LeRC Release 72-106)
First Lady Patricia Nixon visited Ames Research Center. She was received by ARC Director, Dr. Hans Mark; witnessed demonstration takeoff and landing by arc augraentor-wing jet, short takeoff and landing (stol), research aircraft; and was taken for “ride” in flight simulator for advanced aircraft, (arc Astrogram, 9/28/72, 1)
Langley Research Center awarded $9 400 000 contract to LTV Aerospace Corp. Vought Missiles & Space Co. for 15 Scout launch vehicles, to be delivered one per month beginning in November 1973. Rocket motors for boosters would be furnished under separate $3 819 000 contract with ltv Aerospace Hampton Technical Center. (LaRC Release 72—7)
Agreement on Cooperation in the Fields of Science and Technology was signed in Moscow by U.S. Secretary of State William P. Rogers and U.S.S.R. State Committee for Science and Technology Chairman Vladimir A. Kirillin. Main objective was to “provide broad opportunities for both Parties to combine the efforts of their scientists and specialists in working on major problems, whose solution will promote the progress of science and technology for the benefit of both countries and of mankind.” Cooperation might include exchange of scientists and specialists; exchange of scientific and technical information; joint development and implementation of programs and projects in basic and applied sciences; joint research, development, and testing, and exchange of research results and experience between scientific research institutions and organizations; organization of joint courses, conferences, and symposia; and help in establishing contacts and arrangements between U.S. firms and Soviet enterprises. Agreement would establish U.S.-U.S.S.R. Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation to meet at least annually, in Washington and Moscow alternately. Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, said at Washington, D.C., press conference following Moscow signing that Agreement would “enable Soviet and American specialists to solve some major common problems.” Cooperation would produce “more vigorous activities here ... on research, management and systems science, wide use of natural resources, weather modification, superconductivity, high energy physics and basic science.” U.S. and U.S.S.R. had already derived major benefits from cooperation in fusion technology and “in the magneto hydrodynamic area, the breeder reactor area and in the solar energy area, we are doing things . . . that are of interest to the Soviet Union.” (PD, 6/5/72, 921-2; Transcript)
Establishment of Institute for Computer Applications in Science and Engineering (icase) at Langley Research Center was announced by NASA. Institute would be operated by Universities Space Research Assn., consortium of 51 U.S. universities, as cooperative research effort. Purpose was to solve aeronautical and space-related problems, develop efficient use of newest-generation computers, and help universities use LaRC advanced computer facilities for research, (nasa Release 72—202)
West German government was preparing blueprint for aerospace development for remainder of decade, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Basic document for government financing and support would establish priorities in military and civil aerospace development and provide government and industry with “idea of how much room remains for maneuver in regard to implementing new projects.” Theme would be “multi-national cooperation.” (Av Wk, 4/24/72, 32-41) April 24-25: American Physical Society held annual spring meeting in New York. Team of Columbia Univ. scientists reported observations made with 1971 rocket experiment to study x-rays from Crab Nebula had supported view that pulsars were hurling high-energy particles, or cosmic rays, into space constantly at close to speed of sound. Experiment had shown that rays were polarized. X-rays from space could not penetrate atmosphere. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/26/72, 11) project, membership would receive unclassified resume explaining proposed study. If 10 or more members from at least 2 scientific institutions considered project inappropriate, they could present case to NAs’s governing body. Resolution on foreign policy asked President Nixon and . Congress to develop and apply science and technology in industry, agriculture, and health for furtherance of human welfare and called for de-emphasis on reliance on military force, direct or indirect. nas James Craig Watson Medal of Science was presented to Dr. Andre Deprit, NRC postdoctoral resident research associate at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Citation was for “adaptation of modern computing machinery to algebraic rather than arithmetical operations.” Award consisted of gold medal and $2000 honorarium. (Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/27/72, 27; W Star, 4/23/72, D3) April 25:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved H.R. 14070, $3.420-billion FY 1973 nasa authorization bill after inserting amendment that decreased by $9 million authorization of $3,429 billion passed by House April 20. As approved by Senate Committee, authorization was $41 million above original NASA budget request of $3,379 billion and $12.5 million above amended budget request of $3,420 billion. Bill, reported to Senate May 3, allocated $2,613 billion for research and development (r&d), $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $729.5 million for research and program management. House recommendation of $211.9 million for aeronautical research and technology was reduced to NASA request level of $163.4 million. In Senate report, Committee praised increase in aeronautical R&D motivated by 1971 Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study of NASA and Dept, of Transportation, but said it doubted additional funding of $48.5 million approved by House could profitably be spent during FY 1973. Committee disapproved cancellation of development of 333 600-newton (75 000-lb)-thrust rocket engine in Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application (nerva) program and recommended new authorization of $8.5 million as requested by NASA, plus allocation of $16.5 million in unused FY 1972 funds, for engine’s development in FY 1973. Senate bill restored $4 million deleted by House from funds for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and allocated total of $156.6 million—NASA-requested level—for Physics and Astronomy program. Bill added $12.5 million to NASA request of $194.7 million for space applications and stipulated $5 million out of total of $207.2 million be used for small applications technology satellite project. But it disapproved $4 million House had added for Earth Observatory Satellite project. Committee recommended that NASA present space shuttle as separate program item on FY 1973 budget request, restructure manned space flight budget for “better visibility of total effort,” and formulate vigorous program to study development of terrestrial uses of solar energy. (S Rpt 92—779; Com Off)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Harvard College Observatory solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
nasa Associate Administrator Dale D. Myers—following detailed presentation on space shuttle decision announced by Administrator James C. Fletcher [see above]—moved to testimony on Apollo program, during Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. In new Apollo 16 lunar surface experiments, far-ultraviolet camera/spectograph would photograph celestial objects or areas emitting or absorbing energy from atomic hydrogen. Data would provide information on “composition, density, distribution, and motion of interplanetary, interstellar, and intergalactic gas clouds which will . . . enhance our understanding of the structure and evolution of the galaxy.” Data, recorded on film and returned from lunar surface by astronauts, would be “first attempt to evaluate the Moon as a platform from which to make future celestial observations.” Second new experiment, cosmic ray detector, would acquire data on origin and source mechanism of high-velocity cosmic rays and solar particles beyond effects of earth’s atmosphere and magnetic field. (Transcript) March 15:	NASA Associate Administrator jar Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers, Administrator James C. Fletcher, and Deputy Administrator George M. Low (left to right) explained space shuttle plans at a press conference following the announcement that the shuttle booster stage would be powered by recoverable, reusable, solid-fueled rockets. In the artist’s drawing, the rockets are dropping away for recovery. NASA TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed 29th flight from Flight Research Center. Purpose of flight was to check out new instrumentation and angle-of-attack and airspeed calibrations. Fixed rakes and rotating survey probes were checked out and angle-of-attack calibrations were obtained at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude from mach 0.9 to 1.1. (nasa proj off)
NASA launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from White Sands Missile Range. First rocket carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., solar physics experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific objectives were not met. Second rocket carried Naval Research Laboratory solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Federal support to universities and colleges had reached $3.5 billion in FY 1971, increase of $253 million (8%), National Science Foundation reported. Total academic science activities were up $148 million, or 7%, to $2336 million. Federal funding of academic research and development increased by 7%, to $1544 million. Support of life sciences projects constituted 48% of total Federal obligations for academic R&D and 53% of all Federal support for fellowships, traineeships, and training grants. Total Federal obligations (exclusive of loans) to institutions of higher education increased 2% in constant dollars for first time since 1967. (nsf Highlights, 9/22/72)
Edgar M. Cortright, Langley Research Center Director, advocated development of supersonic transport in speech before National Security Industrial Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “The day will come when virtually all intercontinental and some transcontinental air traffic will be supersonic—or faster.” U.S. “must develop a supersonic transport or abdicate its enviable position as master builder of the world’s commercial aircraft.” If U.S. reentered sst competition, next sst “must be better than the one we canceled. It must be quieter, have a greater payload fraction, and have longer range—transpacific if possible.” Because of lost time, competition “will not be the Concorde, Sut a follow-up super-Concorde of unknown characteristics.” U.S. should “proceed with a sense of urgency” in developing necessary technology to produce a superior aircraft. “I believe that there is a remarkable unanimity in the aircraft and air transport industries that a good sst would be a winner for the United States—creating jobs and National income.” (Text)
Apollo 17 spacecraft atop Saturn V booster, scheduled for launch toward moon Dec. 6, was rolled to Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at Kennedy Space Center. Roll-out was watched by about 5000 persons, including Apollo 17 astronauts. (Benedict, M Her, 8/29/72)
NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center fields and neutral winds experiments. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Achievement Award of Small Business Assn, was presented to Kennedy Space Center for its aid to President Nixon’s Minority Business Development Program for FY 1971. (NASA Activities, 8/1/72, 171) July 2:	U.S. had been using weather control for military purposes, Washington Post reported. Previously ignored passage in Pentagon papers Dept, of Defense report on Vietnam war released by press had indicated Indochina had been “test battleground, the site of purposeful rain-making along the Ho Chi Minh trails.” Report by DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa) called Nile Blue had been cited as prime evidence of dod rainmaking. Post said report was computer study of how man-made changes might affect world’s year-to-year climate. AHPA Director Stephen J. Lukasik had told Senate Committee on Appropriations that Nile Blue was established in FY 1970 to achieve U.S. capability to evaluate consequences of possible actions to manipulate climate, detect changes in global circulation, and determine means to counter deleterious climatic changes. (Cohn, W Post, 7/2/72, C2) July 3:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, believed U.S.S.R. was working toward year-long manned space mission in earth-orbit, Aviation Week & Space Technology article reported. Opinion was based largely on “intuition,” Dr. Fletcher had said, but long-duration flight would be necessary before either U.S. or U.S.S.R. could attempt manned planetary mission. “I don’t know what the optimum flight time would be before we could be sure man could survive extremely long missions.” (Strickland, Av Wk, 7/3/72, 21)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in Christmas message to NASA staff: “We are nearing the end of a historic and decisive year for NASA. We have completed the first great era of space exploration and use and begun a promising new one, with more emphasis this time on use. Well done, Apollo! Well begun, Shuttle!” (Text)
Mariner 9 probe (launched by NASA May 30, 1971) completed 232 orbits of Mars. Primary mission objective of photographing Mars from south pole to northern hood had been completed. Jet Propulsion Laboratory was preparing to assemble map of Mars, using more than 100 overlapping pictures taken by Mariner 9 and data from onboard instruments for corresponding surface and atmospheric characteristics. (nasa Release 72—48)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director for Life Sciences, discussed spinoff of nasa biomedical research in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Ames Research Center (arc) was evaluating changes in lung tissue of coal miners in collaboration with Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare to pinpoint possible damage to astronauts’ lungs from particulate contaminants in atmosphere. Study results suggested “cell destruction can be induced by release of intracellular digestive enzymes into the cell cytoplasm following penetration of the cells by particles, in the case of coal miners, silicates.” Joint NASA and TJ.S. Bureau of Mines program would develop carbon monoxide detecting system, arc and U.S. Dept, of Agriculture would develop hydroponic system for spacecraft to accelerate plant growth under space flight conditions. “The medical information needed to assure man’s safe journey into and return from space has led to the development of many items of information and equipment of great value to terrestrial medicine.” NASA life sciences program “exemplifies the success which can be achieved by combining the special talents of Government, industry, and university scientists.” Dr. Berry also reported there had been “no findings in the manned space flights to date by the United States or U.S.S.R. that would preclude the commitment of man to longer duration missions. Therefore ... we feel confident in committing man to a 28-day mission.” Apollo 16 and 17 and Skylab experiments would study physiological response of body before commitment to 56-day Skylab mission. Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Advanced Missions in omsf, testified on space shuttle orbital systems and advanced missions definition and planning: In areas of payloads, research and applications modules (ram), advanced missions, and advanced development, “principal effort is directed toward developing . . . understanding and planning the use of the shuttle.” In RAM program, “we will be continuing the study of concepts of a family of payload carrier modules suitable for transport in the Shuttle Orbiter cargo bay.” Modules would range from “austere shuttle ‘Sortie Can’ with relatively simple laboratory equipment . . . through more sophisticated, dedicated laboratory and observation facilities, including automated free-flyers serviced by the Shuttle.” Sortie mission using orbiter as platform for short-duration experiments was among most promising shuttle operating modes. Mission would use advantages of shuttle in payload design, development, and operation, and, “for the first time, permit the investigator to accompany his experiment into space.” Sortie missions would be modeled after arc Airborne Research Program in which Convair 990 aircraft was used as airborne laboratory. “The goal in developing procedures for managing the Space Shuttle Sortie Missions will be to retain the relatively simple, flexible and highly responsive aspects of the ‘990’ program.” (Transcript)
Dept, of Justice charged 20 major U.S. aircraft companies and Manufacturers Aircraft Assn., Inc., with violating Sherman Antitrust Act by agreeing to suppress competition in research and development of aircraft and patentable components. Alleged agreement “hindering and delaying” development of new inventions dated back to 1928, Justice Dept, charged. Civil suit filed in U.S. District Court in Manhattan, N.Y., asked dissolution of manufacturers’ association and injunction against aircraft companies entering into future agreements to restrict research or reduce competition in R&D by patent policies. Suit said U.S. manufactured nearly $8 billion worth of aircraft in 1967, more than half of which was military, and that four largest companies accounted for 60% of work, and eight largest for 88%. Manufacturers Aircraft Assn., Inc., and Boeing Co. later said charges were “completely unfounded in fact and law.” (Shanahan, NYT, 3/30/72, 1)
The UFO Experience: A Scientific Inquiry by Northwestern Univ. astrophysicist Dr. J. Allen Hynek was reviewed in Science by Dr. Bruce C. Murray of California Institute of Technology Div. of Geological and Planetary Sciences: Book was “more than just an attempt to justify scientific interest in ufo [unidentified flying object] phenomena.” Dr. Hynek had criticized 1968 report of Univ. of Colorado physicist Dr, Edward U. Condon and group that said further study of UFOs could not be justified “in the expectation that science will be advanced thereby.” Air Force, which sponsored Condon study, had terminated ufo Project Blue Book investigation following Condon report recommendation. Hynek book was “Hynek’s version of what the Condon report should have been.” Book discussed 80 ufo sightings, drawn mainly from Project Blue Book files, many unexplained by Condon. Book advocated “sufficient scientific respectability for the UFO subject to permit modest federal research funds to be awarded to it and new data to be gathered without fear of ridicule.” Dr. Hynek had “won reprieve for UFO’s with his . . . provocative unexplained reports and his articulate challenge to his colleagues to tolerate the study of something they cannot understand.” (Science, 8/25/72, 688-9) August 26:	Work reductions in manned space flight area announced by NASA Aug. 22 would eliminate about 1400 contract support personnel positions at Manned Spaceflight Center, Los Angeles Times reported. Kennedy Space Center was expected to dismiss about 500 workers after December launch of Apollo 17, and another 2000 technicians and engineers at end of Skylab program. Reductions necessitated by budget restrictions would force closing of KSC flight crew training after Apollo 17, reduction in force at White Sands Missile Range, and eventual'closing of Space Environmental Simulation Laboratory, astronauts underwater training facilities, and altitude test chamber at msc. “Even distribution of moon rocks . . . for display purposes” would be curtailed. (Chriss, LA Times, 8/26/72)
Areas sounding rocket launched by NASA from Antigua, West Indies, carried Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 55.8-km (34.6-mi) altitude to measure ozone in upper atmosphere in conjunction with overpass of Nimbus 4 satellite and to validate new parachute deployment system further [see May 4]. Payload was ejected successfully, parachute inflated properly, and good ozone data were acquired. (NASA Rpt srl)
Lewis Research Center engineers were running first pure jet engine designed and assembled at LeRC to power single- and twin-engine light aircraft, Cleveland Press reported. Prototype of engine—expected to usher in generation of safe, easy-to-fly aircraft that could cruise at 644 km per hr (400 mph) and costing less to produce than current piston-engined aircraft—was about 31 cm (12 in) in diameter and 122 cm (48 in) long. (Cl Press, 3/1/72)
Marshall Space Flight Center began crafts apprentice program in which 20 persons would work at msfc and study at Calhoun Technical College in Decatur, Ala., during alternate periods, msfc would pay for books and tuition during college period and would pay wages for work done at Center. Participants in program would be predominantly veterans, with many from minority groups. They would be trained to become machinists, sheet metal workers, or electrical technicians. (Marshall Star, 3/29/72, 1; msfc pao)
Air Force unveiled F—15 air superiority fighter aircraft in ceremonies at McDonnell Douglas facility in St. Louis, Mo. F-15 was fixed-wing, single-place aircraft in 18 000-kg (40 000-lb) class, with maximum mach 2 speed, (afsc Release 080.72) Organization’s Research and Technology Center, estec had been asked by esro to determine resources required by Europe if European Space Conference decided to develop space shuttle sortie lab [see June 14]. NASA told estec officials Europe should view sortie lab as nearly uniquely European as possible, with dependence on U.S. held to minimum. If U.S. agreed to let Europe build system to U.S. design, U.S. would insist on completely new qualification program to qualify source and system. NASA found esro and estec representatives “eager” to undertake sortie lab program. (NASA omsf, Memo for Record, 9/7/72) June 27:	Eole transponder—radio receiver/transmitter developed for French-built weather satellite Eole (launched by NASA for France Aug. 16, 1971)—had sailed on American yawl Foolscap during Newport Bermuda race, Goddard Space Flight Center announced. Objective was to test its potential for locating lifeboats by satellite. Transponder had sent position data to Eole as satellite passed 800 km (500 mi) over Foolscap. Information, transmitted to tracking station operated by French Center for Space Studies (cnes), was processed and tele-typed to gsfc. Foolscap’s up-to-date location was then plotted and sent on to U.S. Coast Guard in Miami, Florida, and race committee in Bermuda. Test, sponsored by gsfc engineers, had proved highly successful and indicated that small inexpensive transponders might become standard equipment on ship and aircraft lifeboats, (gsfc Release G—10-72; gsfc proj off)
U.S. planned to build world’s largest and most sensitive radiotelescope, Washington Post reported. President Nixon’s FY 1973 budget request for National Science Foundation contained $3 million toward construction of $62.5-million array of 27 antennas, 35 km (22 mi) deep, that could pick up signals from outer space. Array had been designed by National Radio Astronomy Observatory, at Green Bank, W. Va., and was expected to take 6 to 10 yrs to build. (Cohn, W Post, 1/14/72, A3)
Soil sample collected by Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., from natural hole beneath 3-m (lO-ft)-high “Shadow Rock” on moon had been found to have characteristic resonance identical to that of sunlit soil near by, Naval Research Laboratory announced. Scientists were agreed that sample had not been in direct sunlight since being buried by rock propelled by ancient meteorite collision creating North Ray Crater on moon, nrl investigators were considering two explanations for similarity between soil under rock and exposed soil. Either North Ray Crater had been formed relatively recently or tens of millions of years of solar heat had not affected characteristic resonance. Either way, experiment had revealed that resonance of North Ray Crater soils probably contained fossil record of thermal and weathering histories of those soils during or immediately after North Ray collision, (nrl Release 53-72—9)
NASA officials at Manned Spacecraft Center celebrated successful completion of last Apollo mission, following splashdown of Apollo 17. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director since 1969, said mission “goes into the record books as the most perfect mission, the most sophisticated science mission ever conducted.” Apollo 17 “closes a golden chapter in the age of space exploration. In a way, it brings a close to what has been a very romantic era in space exploration. But . . . the book is still being written. The next chapter will open the age of exploiting and utilizing space for other benefits.” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said, “All great things must come to an end so we can move on to even greater things.” Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director, said he had “never seen a more perfect mission” than Apollo 17. Apollo program had been greatest engineering feat of all our lifetimes.” Before Apollo, “my mind, like most of us, was bound to earth. It’s certainly not that way anymore.” nasa spokesman at msc told press Apollo 17 was “the last, longest, and most successful of seven manned lunar landing missions.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/20/72, 1; AP, B Sun, 12/20/72, 1; upi, W Star & News, 12/20/72, A4)
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing, completed two flights from Flight Research Center. Objective was to check repeatability with two different pilots—Thomas C. McMurtry and Gary Krier. Wake surveys and pressure distributions were run at constant dynamic pressure of 9600 newtons per sq m (200 psf) and mach 0.90, 0.95, 0.97, and 0.99. (nasa proj off)
President Nixon signed H.J.R. 1227, ratifying U.S.-U.S.S.R. Interim Agreement with Respect to the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms. He said treaty was “beginning of a process that is enormously important that will limit now, and, we hope, later reduce the burden of arms, and thereby reduce the danger of war.” (PD, 10/2/72, 1474) During September:	Four rare stellar explosions within Milky Way galaxy were recorded by observations in various parts of the world, beginning with Univ. of Toronto discovery by Dr. Philip C. Gregory [see Sept. 2j. Observations were made by radiotelescopes and other instruments and by x-ray scanners aboard Oao 3 (Copernicus) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (launched by NASA Aug. 21), Explorer 42 (Uhuru) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched by Italy for NASA Dec. 12, 1970), and Dept, of Defense Vela satellite. Observations and speculations as to meanings were so extensive, Walter S. Sullivan said in New York Times article, that British journal Nature Physical Science devoted entire Oct. 23 issue to subject. Explosions were radio emissions from gas cloud expanding at about half the speed of light, Sullivan said, but were “clearly not those of a supernova, since they were observed only at radio wave lengths and they recurred several times.” If, as some astronomers suspected, explosion source was also source of x-rays being emitted in 288-min cycle, object exploding probably was spinning once every 288 min and was “about the size of a star.” (NYT, 11/1/72, 1; Nature Physical Science, 10/23/72)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced issuance of requests for proposals for design and construction of mobile ground-station receiver for visible laser communications experiment, scheduled to fly on ATS—g Applications Technology Satellite in mid-1975. Proposals were due July 17. (msfc Release 72-78)
The first fully automatic landings by a manned helicopter at a predetermined spot were announced by NASA, A Langley Research Center team had made the landings at Wallops Station the second week in February in a research program to permit helicopters and future vtol aircraft to fly under conditions of poor visibility. highlight in 1971 astronomy program had been observations made by x-ray astronomy satellite Vhuru (Explorer 42), which was making map of universe in x-ray wavelengths. One hundred sixteen x-ray sources had been studied. “Space” science, Dr. Naugle said, was no different from research man had been doing on earth . . . since he became man: “Man does love to wonder—to explore and understand his environment. The ability to wonder—the desire to extend one’s horizon—is a measure of the mental health and vigor of an individual or a society. The ability of a nation to educate its youth and provide them with the necessary tools to explore our environment, whether it be the innermost secrets of the nucleon or the outermost regions of the universe, is one measure of that Nation’s vigor and its capability to better understand, and in turn guide and control, its destiny.” (Transcript) * House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight began hearings on H.R. 12824, FY 1973 NASA authorization bill. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, described Apollo 15 mission (July 26-Aug. 7, 1971) as “most rewarding mission so far.” Mission “demonstrated the operational maturity of the [Apollo] program .... Because of its greatly increased capability for astronaut mobility, surface exploration, sample return, and orbital science, Apollo 15 added as much new data as that gathered by the three previous missions combined.” Mission had marked first use of Lunar Rover and of orbital science experiments to collect lunar-wide information. “The scientific returns from lunar orbit and surface have significantly increased our accumulated knowledge of the moon and by extrapolation of the data from this vacuum-packed laboratory, knowledge of the solar system, including our earth.” Upon completion of Apollo program with Apollo 17 in December, “we will have accumulated a vast treasure of lunar data. Many exciting scientific results have already been published; however, an adequate assessment of the total body of data will require scientific effort for years to come. “As Apollo draws to a close, we are concentrating our activities in earth orbit—the primary field of manned space flight during this decade.” Skylab was “first step in this direction” and “one of the most significant benefit-oriented programs of the space age.” Skylab was four times larger than Soviet Salyut spacecraft and weighed 77 180 kg (170 000 lbs) with total 344 cu m (12 150 cu ft) pressurized volume. Skylab typified variety of activities that could be accomplished in space. “Several years ago we began to look at this total space arena in a different way. . . . While we were driving toward our goal of a manned lunar landing ... a distinction was made . . . between manned and unmanned flight programs.” Distinction “really does not exist” in nasa’s program for 1970s. “The transition is already underway in Skylab.” Survey of total space activity had also led to shuttle concept. “We started with a fully reusable system . . . using winged flyback booster and orbiter stages with all fuel carried in internal tanks.” Studies confirmed feasibility. Estimated development costs were close to $10 billion, but cost per flight, at $4.1 million, “made it extremely attractive.” Problem was lack of funds. NASA “learned that there were cost advantages in using an expendable liquid hydrogen tank for the orbiter.” This became baseline with booster configuration unchanged except for modification. While process reduced development costs, expendability of tanks increased flight costs. NASA found “additional savings could be made if we placed both the hydrogen and the oxygen tanks outside the orbiter.” In efforts to economize on booster development, NASA first considered “flyback booster incorporating F—1 engines and phasing orbiter systems” and later “unmanned ballistic boosters.” Leading candidates were recoverable and reusable pressure-fed liquid-propellant booster and booster with solid-fueled rocket motors. Contractors were completing studies, and decision would be made shortly. Mathematica report of study for NASA in May 1971 had shown shuttle with flyback manned booster was cost-effective when averaging 39 flights a year. Myers submitted new edition of report, incorporating refined data and changes in shuttle configuration, which showed shuttle cost effective with traffic as low as 30 flights per year. “I believe that practically all of this country’s future earth-orbital space activities will use the Shuttle’s capability in exploiting the potential benefits of space and providing the taxpayer as large a return of his space investment as possible.” (Transcript)
Federal Grand Jury in Dallas, Texas, indicted General Dynamics Corp. and four officials for conspiring to defraud Government by charging Air Force for defective parts for F—111 fighter-bomber aircraft. Indictment said defendants had concealed from Air Force unauthorized production procedures by subcontractor Selb Manufacturing Co. Dept, of Justice said defective parts—carry-through plates for center sectioir of wings and longerons or main fuselage braces—had not been turned over to Air Force. (AP, B Sun, 5/31/72, A9) May 31:	NASA announced completion of major preflight verification test of Skylab Workshop at McDonnell Douglas Corp. Huntington Beach, Calif., plant. Two teams of six astronauts each had performed checkout activities in two six-hour shifts daily for three days, activating Workshop to demonstrate that it could support all activities planned for missions. Test was one of last two major tests for Workshop, 14.6 m (48 ft) long, 6.7 m (22 ft) in diameter, and scheduled for launch in early 1973. Flight demonstration would be conducted before spacecraft was shipped to Kennedy Space Center during summer, (nasa Release 72-117)
President Nixon’s January decision to proceed with development of reusable space shuttle keyed transition in U.S. space program from space exploration to space exploitation for practical and immediate benefits to mankind. While budget restrictions and national emphasis of technology applications to improve conditions on earth brought early end to Apollo program, U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreement opened new era of international space cooperation. Agreement inspired intensive planning for 1975 joint rendezvous and docking mission of Soviet Salyut and U.S. Apollo spacecraft in orbit. Apollo program—major drive of U.S. space program since 1961, triumphantly concluded in 1972—had begun to give clear picture of moon, how it had evolved and its relationship to sun and earth, and would contribute to understanding of how earth had evolved. Apollo program had also given man new awareness of earth and had given Americans self-confidence in ability to achieve gigantic goal. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 Picture of a manned spaceship ... (courtesy of NASA) During 1972: Conclusion of the Apollo program was commemorated by Scott Long’s cartoon, published in the Minneapolis Tribune Dec, 6, The maimed lunar explorations had given man a new awareness of the earth and the need to preserve it, as well as a wealth of information on the moon and possible origins of the earth and solar system. New space program for 1970s was designed to be funded at constant budget level over several years—yet to maintain space flight capability, contribute to national security, increase opportunities for new scientific knowledge, encourage international cooperation, address problems of society and environment, and continue U.S. leadership in aeronautics. Reusable shuttle was expected to give “routine access to space” by cutting complexity and cost of launches and multiplying uses of satellites. It could be used for both manned and unmanned missions and, in military use, could serve national security. Revision of NASA FY 1972 program to phase in new programs while holding expenditures to $3.4-billion budget level required basic changes in planning. Further stretch-out of period over which NASA long-term objectives in space and science could be achieved was necessary. Shuttle configuration costs were pared to about half of original cost estimate; plans for Grand Tour missions to explore all five outer planets in late 1970s were cut back to focus on Jupiter and Saturn with less expensive spacecraft; and NASA and Atomic Energy Commission’s nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program was terminated. Emphasis on aeronautics was increased at urging of congressional committees, but $44.9 million of $50.5-million NASA FY 1973 appropriation for aircraft noise suppression program, engine retrofit studies, and quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program was impounded by Office of Management and Budget. Tight NASA funding and end of Apollo program brought reductions in personnel, especially at manned space-flight Centers. NASA total in-house personnel decreased by 1181 from Dec. 31, 1971, to 27 801 persons Dec. 31, 1972, with further cuts scheduled for 1973. Marshall Space Flight Center employment was reduced by 258, to 5501 persons; Manned Space Center 159, to 3882; and Kennedy Space Center 123, to 2518. Employment in aerospace industry throughout the Nation also declined slightly, from 924 000 workers at end of 1971 to 917 000 at end of 1972, despite infusion of space shuttle program. Aerospace industry remained largest manufacturing employer, however, and industry sales increased for first time since 1968. To emphasize transition from Apollo to Skylab and shuttle activities, NASA established new Mission and Payload Integration Office within Office of Manned Space Flight. Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force. Apollo Program Office became Apollo/ASTP Office to prepare for 1975 U.S.—Soviet mission. Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart) was renamed Office of Aeronautical and Space Technology (oast) to emphasize increasing NASA aeronautical activity. Office of Applications had been separated from Office of Space Science at end of 1971 to increase emphasis on use of space technology for benefits on earth. Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight since 1968, headed new Office of Applications. Dr. Wernher von Braun retired as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning to become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., after more than quarter of century as leader of space rocket development in the U.S. His NASA career had begun in 1960 when his Army Ballistic Missile Agency team—which had launched first U.S. satellite, Explorer I in 1958—was transferred to form nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. von Braun had served as MSFC Director from 1960 to 1970, where Saturn V launch vehicle for Apollo moon missions was his major engineering achievement. In technology utilization, NASA continued to distribute information about aerospace technology to private and public sectors of national economy at ever-increasing rate. NASA-developed technology was being used in medicine, nondestructive testing, and engineering design. NASTRAN computer program to analyze structures under stress was used by more than 70 industrial firms, universities, laboratories, and government agencies to solve structural engineering problems. Technology and interpretive systems developed by NASA in cooperation with other agencies prepared way for worldwide environmental pollution and monitoring network. NASA FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion was equivalent to budget request and $110 million above FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion. Increase reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle. (A&A 1972; Fletcher testimony, 2/28/73; aia Aerospace, 3/73; NASA Pocket Statistics, 3/72, 1/73)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, completed 15th flight from Flight Research Center. Objective—to investigate stability and control at mach 0.95—was achieved, (nasa proj off)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, completed 100th flight of lifting-body program and 19th flight of M2-F3 from Flight Research Center. Objectives—to obtain stability and control data at mach 0.95 and to check out pitch-reaction augmentation system—were achieved during “outstanding flight.” M2-F3 reached mach 1.4 and 20 000-m (65 000-ft) altitude. First manned lifting-body flight had been made July 12, 1966, in M-2 piloted by Milton O. Thompson. (nasa proj off; frc Release 17-72)
Wall Street Journal article asked if U.S. supersonic transport revival was imminent: “Administration planners insist the U.S. will eventually build a supersonic transport, NASA researchers work up advanced ‘second generation’ designs, differing from the downed Boeing version. Backers claim progress against the sonic boom problem, plus the promise of developing a more profitable plane.” (WSJ, 9/1/72, 1) September 2:	Navy Triad OI—IX Transit satellite was launched by NASA for Navy from Vandenberg Air Force Base by four-stage Scout booster. Orbital parameters: 838-km (520.7-mi) apogee, 743-km (461.7-mi) perigee, 100.6-min period, and 90.1° inclination. Objective of mission was to simplify navigation procedures by correcting long-term drift in satellite oscillator, reducing data-gathering time for navigation fix, demonstrating capability of experimental disturbance compensation system (discos), obtaining performance data on radioisotope thermoelectric generator (rtg), evaluating environmental survey panel and thermal coating experiment, and providing operational satellite for Navy Navigation Satellite System. discos forced satellite to adhere to highly predictable orbit uninfluenced by forces of external atmospheric radiation. System, developed by Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory and Stanford Univ., compensated for external forces by providing equal and opposite thrust force. Success of discos might lead to navigation satellites with orbits so precise and unchanging that their paths could be published in reference tables that would facilitate calculation of navigational fixes. Triad, 01—IX weighed 93.9 kg (207 lbs), was 1.7 m long and 0.8 m wide (5.5 x 2.5 ft), and was powered by Atomic Energy Commission RTG that would provide 30 w of power for five years. With three components—spacecraft, Discos, and rtg—extended separately in orbit, overall length was 3.7 m (24 ft). Satellite was transmitting data on nominal frequencies of 400 and 150 mhz. After six-month experimental phase satellite would be available to all Transit system users. NASA would be reimbursed by Dept, of Defense for cost of launch vehicle and services, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; dod Release 632-72; NASA Scout Prog Off; Pres Rpt 73)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II began three-week preflight quarantine at Kennedy Space .Center to minimize exposure to disease or illness that could delay launch toward moon, scheduled for April 16. (AP, B Sun, 3/28/72, A6)
Measurement of speed of light “more accurately than ever before” with infrared laser was announced by National Bureau of Standards, nbs scientists using laser that generated extremely pure light heam, uncluttered by jumbled frequencies and wavelengths, had arrived at new light speed figure of 299 792.472 km per sec (186282.396 mps). New value was 100 times more accurate than value that had been November 21; A telescape-mounted laser instrument teas beamed at exhaust stacks of an industrial plant in tests proving the laser’s ability to detect suck air pollutants as sulfur dioxide. Remote detection from as far as one kilometer (3300 feet) was possible by the laser, developed at Langley Research Center. Tests were being conducted at the Carolina Power and Light Co. plant in Asheville, N.C., which had offered to cooperate in the LaRC and Environmental Protection Agency program, accepted for past 15 yrs and had opened up “new possibilities for an increase of 1,000 times in the number of frequency bands” used in communications, (nbs Release)
NASA launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. One carried Massachusetts Institute of Technology x-ray astronomy experiment. Second carried Goddard Space Flight Center cosmic ray experiment. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
President Nixon informed Congress of plans for six-month International Exposition on the Environment to be held in Spokane, Wash., in 1974. {PD, 8/21/72, 1237) August 15—16:	Symposium on composite structural materials for space shuttle application, at Marshall Space Flight Center, reviewed progress and facilitated exchange of space shuttle composites information originated by NASA Centers and contractors, (msfc Release 72—107)
Symposium “A Progress Report on Flight Investigations of Supercritical Wing Technology” was held at Flight Research Center for engineers and scientists from Government, industry, and airlines. Meeting included interim report of NASA supercritical wing flight-test program and report on evolution of F-8 supercritical wing configuration. Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, head of 8-Foot Tunnels Branch at Langley Research Center and developer of supercritical wing concept, commented on correlation of wind-tunnel and flight-test results. Flight tests of nasa supercritical wing on TF-8A aircraft had demonstrated that new airfoil shape increased flight efficiency at speeds near mach 1. Since its first flight March 9, 1971, TF-8A had carried supercritical wing on 27 flights and had reached mach 1.2 (1274 km per hr; 792 mph) and 15 500-km (51 000-ft) altitude, nasa test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry said flight-test program had indicated that piloting procedures and tasks at near-sonic cruise speeds should be as routine as present jet transport operations and that introduction of supercritical wing was not expected to cause any serious problems. Future plans for supercritical wing included addition of side fairings for increased area ruling, determination by simulation of effects of wing roughness from manufacturing imperfections, and development of plans for follow-on flight programs to further the readiness of new technology for industry applications, (frc Release 2—72; frc X—Press, 2/18/72, 2)
Selection of Kennedy Space Center in Florida and Vandenberg Air Force Base in California as launch and landing sites for space shuttle was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in Washington, D.C. ksc site would be used for research and development launches, to begin in 1978, and for all operational flights into easterly orbits. NASA would provide facilities for shuttle users at ksc by modification of existing facilities. Vandenberg afb site would be phased in toward end of decade for shuttle flights requiring high-inclination orbits. Dept, of Defense would provide basic shuttle facilities. NASA Site Review Board studies had shown Kennedy-Vandenberg combination had cost, operational, and safety advantages over all other U.S. sites. Cost of establishing facilities at ksc was estimated at $150 million; at Vandenberg, $500 million. Decision to use KSC was “most gratifying to NASA’s launch organization” and ensured “continued utilization of this base and the supporting Eastern Test Range,” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, said in statement read at KSC press briefing following announcement of shuttle site selection. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, explained at ksc briefing why site construction at Vandenberg AFB would cost more than at ksc : “At Kennedv we can make full use of the Saturn V launch complex—Complex 39. The Shuttle will be brought back in there after flight, . . . refurbished there, . . . mated with its booster ... in the vab [Vehicle Assembly Building], taken on the trawler transporter to the existing launch pad and launched.” ksc modifications would be minor but at Vandenberg “launch facilities . . . are not yet as well suited to the shuttle.” Larger modifications would be required, “and this is where the cost is.” Selection between KSC and Vandenberg for a particular launch would depend on required launch azimuth, Dr. Low said. “If we launched something toward the east . . . then it makes sense to launch it from the east coast, whether it is for the Department of Defense or for NASA or for civilian users. When you launch into a polar orbit, or a high-inclination orbit, then it makes more sense to launch from the west coast so you don’t overfly land.” In response to question, Dr. Low said NASA did not plan to mate Air Force-supplied booster with shuttle, “nasa will develop, or have developed under NASA contract by industry, the full shuttle including the orbiter, its large tanks, and the solid rocket motor.” NASA did have “clear understanding” with dod that it would use shuttle when it became available and if it met requirements. (NASA Release 72-81; Transcript)
Clocks were turned back one second at midnight Greenwich Mean Time at Royal Greenwich Observatory, England; Naval Observatory in Washington, D.C.; National Bureau of Standards in Boulder, Colo.; and NASA tracking stations around the world. Radio time signals worldwide inserted extra second. Action was taken to align clocks and signals with atomic time scales adopted internationally in 1967 as official time measurement. Under atomic scale, 9 billion internal vibrations of cesium atom equaled atomic second. Because earth was rotating at relatively slow rate, occasional addition of one second to gmt was necessary. Adjustment was particularly important to seamen who navigated by earth time and position. (AP, W Post, 6/21/72, 2; W News, 6/28/72, 7)
Community Action Agency officials announced Office of Economic Opportunity approval of $80 000 grant to start program of welfare aid for jobless aerospace workers and families in Brevard County, Fla. Families included those of 1500 workers laid off at Kennedy Space Center. (M Her, 10/28/72)
Huntsville, Ala., police department was using “elapsed time speed computer,” developed by Chief Peter H. Broussard, Jr., of Marshall Space Flight Center Astrionics Laboratory’s Sensors Branch, to identify traffic speed violators. System consisted of low-cost electronic computer and two roadside markers. Timing switch was turned on when vehicle passed first marker and off when vehicle reached second marker. Elapsed time was measured by internal computer clock and compared with distance between markers. System would perform basic functions of radar units more economically. (NASA Release 72—223)
NASA Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard C. McCurdy testified on decrease in research and program management (r&pm) budget in House Committee on Science and Astronautics hearings on FY 1973 NASA authorization: Requested $700.8 million was decrease of $26.5 million from FY 1972. Ceiling of 26 850 was proposed for Civil Service component of nasa in-house work force, 1500 lower than original 1972 ceiling—bringing total reduction since 1968 peak to 8300 positions, or 25%. NASA had planned to achieve 1973 ceiling by normal attrition, but rate of attrition was running 22% lower than required and Center directors had been instructed to use reduction-in-force procedures as necessary to reach ceilings. Deputy Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Bernard Moritz testified that under FY 1973 authorization bill all NASA facility projects would be presented for approval and funding under full disclosure concept. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), Director of Facilities in Office of Administration, entered prepared statement detailing $77.3-million FY 1973 request for construction of facilities and explained $8 million request for facility planning and design within that total. First $3.5 million was for “regular recurrent” requirements and $4.5 million for “special” requirements. Of the $4.5, $3.75 million was for space shuttle facilities, including preliminary engineering reports for larger 1974 and 1975 programs. Second portion was for large aeronautical facility —$750 000 for design of full-scale subsonic wind tunnel that would ultimately cost $150 million to $200 million if approved, with total design cost of $7 million to $10 million. Requested FY 1973 funds would complete design on drive section of tunnel. Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology George W. Cherry described FY 1973 disbursements for aeronautics: Important part dealt with reduction of jet aircraft noise, with $28.5 million requested for research and technology to continue this work. Roughly one half was for research and technology attacking noise generation and noise propagation; $12.4 million'was for programs for near-term relief from jet aircraft noise. Of the $12.4 million, $9 million was requested for engine-modification development program and $3.4 million for development of operational procedures for noise abatement. Cherry presented audiovisual demonstration of effectiveness of engine modifications and operational procedures. (Transcript)
Marshall Space Flight Center engineers were conducting research on laser-doppler clear-air turbulence-detection system. System, ground-tested and installed in NASA’s Convair 990 at Ames Research Center for flight tests, could detect small-scale atmospheric motions. Laser system, which might lead to first commercially available instrument for air turbulence measurements, was designed and built by Raytheon Co. for NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology and U.S. Air Force’s Cambridge Research Laboratories. (NASA Release 72-182)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported H.R. 11487, bill that would authorize sale of land at Kennedy Space Center for Chapel of the Astronauts. (CR, 1/26/72, D28) January 27:	High-speed interferometer (hsi) developed for NASA at Jet Propulsion Laboratory would be used by JPL engineers to record levels of chemical components of Los Angeles smog, NASA announced. California Div. of Highways had requested JPL assistance in monitoring trace constituents of city’s atmosphere to help fight air pollution. Data gathered would also be given to Los Angeles Air Pollution Control District, hsi, designed for use on future NASA spacecraft, could detect five parts of carbon monoxide per billion parts of atmosphere. Instrument would monitor Santa Monica Freeway, particularly during traffic peaks, (nasa Release 72-15)
Lewis Research Center announced award of two-year, $2-million-plus extension to contract with Martin Marietta Corp. for integration of Centaur upper-stage rocket and Titan III booster. Contract included proof test-flight of new launch vehicle combination in early 1974 and launch of Helios spacecraft later that year. (LeRC Release 72—93)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced completion of design certification reviews on Saturn boosters to be used on Skylab missions, dcrs on Skylab payload—including Orbital Workshop, airlock module, multiple docking adapter, and Apollo Telescope Mount—would be completed within three months, (msfc Release 72—96)
NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences approval of recommendations of Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine was announced by NASA. Group—headed by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, and Soviet Academician Dr. 0. G. Gazenko—had met at Manned Spacecraft Center May 12-18 to continue exchange of experiences in manned space flight begun at first meeting in Moscow in October 1971. NASA had presented pre- and postflight medical requirements and flight crew health stabilization program for Apollo 16 (launched April 16), mission’s preliminary physiological results, and glossary of space medicine for mutual understanding of technical and scientific exchanges. U.S.S.R. had detailed medical findings from June 6-30, 1971, Soyuz 11—Salyut 1 mission, in which three cosmonauts died; pre- and postflight clinical-physiological examination procedures for cosmonauts; and theoretical aspects of predicting physiological responses of crew during flight. Soyuz-Salyut data had indicated no deterioration of crew’s physiological status or performance efficiency before accident. Inflight data were similar to data from previous Soyuz missions and to Apollo data and were consistent with findings by both countries that general adaptive process occurred during weightlessness. U.S.S.R. had confirmed cosmonauts’ deaths were due to hypoxia and gaseous embolism (dysbarism), caused by rapid decompression of landing capsule some half hour before return to earth. Review and evaluation of 24-day Soviet mission had indicated no need to modify medical aspects of Skylab plans. Joint Working Group had agreed to develop common medical examination procedures to compare U.S. and Soviet pre- and postflight data on crew body functions and increase information on physiological responses to space flight. Group would exchange correspondence on orthostatic tolerance (cardiovascular response), vestibular measurements, exercise-working capacity, and biochemical examination of body fluids and would discuss these areas in depth at Moscow meeting early in 1973, (nasa Release 72-157; Text)
Tenth anniversary of Oso 1 Orbiting Solar Observatory, first U.S. satellite devoted entirely to studying sun. Satellite had carried 13 experiments to collect data on solar radiation in ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma ray regions. After one year of operation it had provided more data on behavior and composition of sun than any single ground-based observatory and all previous rocket, balloon, and satellite flights combined and had measured 75 solar flares and subflares. Oso 1 had stopped operating Aug. 6, 1963, exceeding 6-mo design lifetime by almost 11 mos. (gsfc pao; A&A 1963)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics would sponsor U.S. aerospace industry trade exhibit in Moscow in early spring 1973, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Exhibit would center on air traffic control equipment but probably would include other aviation and avionics gear. U.S.S.R. was expected to purchase $10 million to $20 million worth of equipment but total orders might exceed $1 billion. (Av Wk, 12/18/72, 30) December 19:	Following successful splashdown—after Dec. 7 launch on longest lunar mission—Apollo 17 astronauts were greeted aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga by 12 Congressmen. President Nixon telephoned his personal congratulations on successful completion of mission. Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said Apollo program results would “give us such scientific values that we will be required to have another lunar program before the end of the century.” (AP, NYT, 12/20/72, 30; PD, 12/25/72, 1789)
Interview with Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris, NASA Director of Equal Employment Opportunity, was published by Washington Sunday Star. Mrs. Harris had adopted as her philosophy phrase, “We are all fellow astronauts on Spaceship Earth.” She had said, “My position is to make sure the space program is for everybody. We have to get the alienated minorities into every NASA level, especially space exploration.” (Trescott, W Star, 1/9/72, Cl) January 10:	European participation in space shuttle development was discussed by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers during press briefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. European space officials had released to European industry “fairly extensive study . . . leading to the definition of the tug that the Europeans might build for the shuttle to carry.” Tug was 3rd stage of shuttle transportation system. Myers said NASA had examined three possible areas for European participation: “One would he in elements, physical pieces of the shuttle that would be managed ... as the prime contractor manages a subcontractor. We will expect the prime contractors to Work directly with the European industries in that case.” Europeans would supply money for parts developed by Europe. Second area Was tug. “If the tug were developed, we would expect it to be paid for by the Europeans.” Third area was sortie can, “experimentcarrying device to be carried in the payload compartment,” which would give them “an opportunity to enter into the use of the shuttle very extensively.” European space officials would meet with NASA within two months to respond on interest in participating. Timetable called for selection of industrial contractors in summer 1972, with subsonic and suborbital test flights beginning in 1975, manned orbital tests in 1978, and first fully operational mission by 1980. Site evaluation board would make its next report to NASA within few weeks, and site for shuttle launch and recovery would be selected by spring. One site would be selected initially, with another or others selected later according to program needs. “We don’t see the shuttle as a highly limited operation. And, I think that eventually there will be more than one site.” Location depended on mission. “Today . . . there is a preponderance of due-east missions out of ksc [Kennedy Space Center!, and . . . different azimuths out of the West Coast. We can’t go due east out of the West Coast very well . . . because of the populated areas east . . . and we can’t get as efficient in polar orbits out of Kennedy ... so there is a tendency to ... go to the two coasts. Now whether that really ends up being that way in the shuttle system, we don’t know yet.” (Transcript)
Development of automated visual sensitivity tester was announced by Ames Research Center. Simple, accurate, and easy-to-use device to map individual vision patterns was originally developed for use during long-term confinement, such as during space flight. It mapped position and extent of normal blind spot of each eye and plotted abnormal blind spots. Device was expected to be valuable in diagnosis and treatment of many disorders, including brain damage caused by tumors or injuries, optic track degeneration, glaucoma, and detached retina. It could be used in testing visual acuity, color blindness, dynamic ocular tracking, form discrimination, Optokinetic Nystagmus Reflex, and color sensitivity, (nasa Release 72-21)
Intense solar storm in solar region 331 was observed by sensors on NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory. Warnings were issued July 28. [See Aug. 2, 7, 13; and During October.] (nasa Release 72—164)
Most intense solar storm in two years, first observed by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory July 26, produced three major explosions. Storm was being observed by Oso 7 and 5; Explorer 41, 43, and 45; Pioneer 6 and 10; and ground-based observations. [See Aug. 7.] (nasa Release 72-164)
Unidentified Administration officials told New York Times there was evidence that People’s Republic of China had deployed strategic missiles capable of reaching Moscow. Missiles were said to have 5600-km (3500-mi) range, carry 3-megaton warheads* and be installed in well protected launching sites. Times said officials had declined to reveal source of evidence but paper surmised source to be reconnaissance satellite. (Beecher, NYT, 11/8/72, 67) November 7-8:	Goddard Space Flight Center sponsored symposium “Significant Accomplishments in Technology” at Greenbelt, Md. Fifty-two papers covered spacecraft and vehicle technology, sensor technology, ground operations, and communications and navigation. Robert J. Goss of gsfc reported design changes had increased Thor-Delta launch vehicle performance while maintaining reliability and low cost. Payload that could be placed in synchronous transfer orbit would have increased from 45 kg (100 lbs) in 1960 to 680 kg (1500 lbs) when H-l booster was operational in 1974. Joseph Arlauskas of gsfc described multispectral scanner in orbit on Erts 1, launched July 23, that permitted simultaneous imaging in three visible bands and one nearinfrared, to provide data for management of environmental resources. gsfc also sponsored symposium “Significant Accomplishments in Science” on high-energy and solar astronomy; optical and ultraviolet astronomy; planetary, lunar, and cometary studies; earth observations; and earth physics. Dr. John A. Philpotts of gsfc reported that three years study of lunar samples from Apollo and U.S.S.R. Luna missions showed essentially three kinds of rocks: iron-rich basalts in mare basins, KREEP basalts in Mare Imbrium and Oceanus Procellarum, and anorthosites in highlands. He thought there was enough material in hand “to work out the origin of these . . . rocks, and from that, the evolution of the moon and its relation to other solar system materials.” (Proceedings, NASA SP-326, SP-331) November 8:	Operational control of Noaa 2 Improved Tiros operational weather satellite, launched by NASA Oct. 15, was officially transferred to National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Environmental Satellite Service, (nasa Release 72-221)
First three of 749 F—15 Eagle air superiority fighter aircraft in Air Force program had done well in initial flight tests, according to Air Force sources quoted by New York Times. Two were undergoing tests at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., and third at McDonnell Douglas facility in St. Louis. Aircraft was U.S. answer to Soviet MiG-23 Foxbat and Mikoyan Fearless, new Soviet air superiority fighter forecast for 1974 deployment. (Middleton, NYT, 11/25/72, 17) November 26:	Sign posted by Grumman Aerospace construction personnel on gantry work platform near Apollo 17 spacecraft said, “This may be our last but it will be our best,” United Press International reported. Grumman foreman had said sign was to inform Apollo crew that “they don’t have to worry about our letting down.” Jobs of 600 Grumman workers at Kennedy Space Center would terminate with completion of Apollo 17 mission. (W Post, 11/27/72, E6)
NASA announced issuance of invitation to scientists in U.S. and other countries to propose additional uses of data from Oao 2 Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (launched Dec. 7, 1968) and oao-c (Oao 3 when launched), scheduled for launch in late summer 1972. Data would be available from Oao 2 Univ. of Wisconsin experiment (array of four photometers and three spectrophotometers to study stars, galaxies, and nebulae in ultraviolet portion of spectrum) and oao-C Princeton experiment package (81-cm [32-in] reflecting telescope to study effects of interstellar space on uv light from stars). (NASA Release 72-138)
President Nixon had approved assignment of m/g Kenneth W. Schultz (usaf) as commander of Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) effective Aug. 1, Dept, of Defense announced. Gen. Schultz, Deputy Chief of Staff for Air Force Systems Command, was nominated for promotion to lieutenant general. (Reuters, NYT, 5/20/72, 8) Science Institute of Space Research, headed Soviet group. (NASA Release 72-106)
NASA announced award of six-month, $197 000 contract to Arthur D. Little, Inc.—acting for four-firm industry team—for feasibility study of using large satellites in synchronous orbit to beam down electrical energy for power needs on earth. Station would convert solar energy to electric power in space and then transmit power via microwave beam to earth. NASA was investigating concept for comparison with other methods of producing large amounts of power from sun for use on earth. Contract would be managed by Lewis Research Center. (NASA Release 72-135)
Intense solar storm observed by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory
NASA released findings of U.S. authorities who met at Langley Research Center Aug. 16-20,1971, to discuss detection of air and water pollution by remote sensing, especially from aircraft or satellites. Group had reported that remote sensing produced essential information unobtainable by other means. Measurements could be obtained by aircraft, high-flying balloons, and satellites and from ground, to provide picture of global or regional pollution problems. Group had recommended that new techniques and instrumentation be used as fully as possible with special emphasis on remote sensing potential of space technology. (nasa Release 72—58)
Dr. Robert C. Cameron—first director of NASA’s Johannesburg, South Africa, tracking station from 1958 to 1959—died in Washington, D.C., at age 47. He had resigned earlier in year as astronomer at Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Cameron had made first successful photos of U.S. satellite (Explorer 1, launched Jan. 31, 1958) and had received special award from gsfc in 1966 for writings on astronomy. Before joining NASA, he had worked for Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. In 1952 he had discovered asteroid Winifred, named after his wife. (W Post, 12/17/72, D12)
President Nixon sent message to Congress outlining plan for Federal Partnership in District of Columbia’s observance of American Revolution Bicentennial in 1976: “. . . there will be a handsome new building for one of the Mall’s oldest tenants, the Smithsonian Institution. This structure, which will house the National Air and Space Museum with exhibits ranging from Kitty Hawk to Hadley Rille and with a former astronaut [Michael Collins] in charge, can be ready in 1976 if the Congress will move now to approve FY 1973 construction funds for it; the plans are nearly complete.” {PD, 2/7/72, 184-93) February 6:	Fire leveled eight-trailer modular complex being used by nasa as temporary office space near Astrionics Laboratory at Marshall Space Flight Center. Redstone Arsenal Fire Dept, extinguished blaze within one hour but officials said portion of building containing high vacuum and thin film research section of hybrid microelectronics research laboratory had suffered minor damage. MSFC Director, Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, later appointed six-member board to investigate cause of fire that led to estimated $100 000 loss, but no injuries. (Huntsville Times, 2/8/72) February 7:	Experiment turn-on and checkout of Heos 2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite (launched by NASA for European Space Research Organization Jan. 31) was completed and spacecraft became fully operational. Heos 2 carried seven experiments to study interplanetary physics and high-latitude magnetosphere. (NASA Release 72-29)
NASA had asked private industry to help assess space shuttle boosterrecovery system, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Large parachutes would lower 90-metric-ton (lOO-U.S.-ton) spent booster stages to ocean. Six proposals for study of parachute deceleration system had been received, (msfc Release 72-70)
Langley Research Center team working with Environmental Protection Agency had developed telescope-mounted laser to detect air-polluting gases from industrial smokestacks, NASA announced. Laser was beamed at smoke emitted and detected reflected light from pollutants through optical filters, epa was interested in laser for remote sensing of industrial plants. Tests were being conducted at Asheville, N.C., plant of Carolina Power and Light Co., which had offered to cooperate with Government agencies in experiments, (nasa Release 72-222)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of Office of Naval Research Project Skyhook was celebrated with launch from Cape Girardeau, Mo., of 940 000-cu-m (33.1-million-cu-ft) thin-walled plastic balloon. Balloon carried 1360-kg (3000-lb) experiment designed by Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Jonathan F. Ormes to measure high-energy cosmic rays. It reached altitude of nearly 40 000 m (more than 130 000 ft) and on-station time of more than 25 hrs. Payload was recovered 25 mi east of Nashville, Tenn. Project Skyhook, gathering information for future space flights, launched its first balloon Sept. 25, 1947. Since then more than 3000 flights had been launched throughout the world, including launches from the high seas, (onr, Naval Research Reviews, 2/73, 1-10)
Air Force and Dept, of Defense viewed space not as a mission but “as a place that offers more effective ways of accomplishing certain defense missions,” Grant L. Hansen, Assistant Secretary of Defense for r&d, said in published interview. There was no “space program in the sense of nasa” within dod. During first phase of space exploration and use for national defense, Air Force has been assigned role as DOD’s executive agency for military space efforts, from operation of Joint dod and Atomic Energy Commission Vela space surveillance system to launches of payloads for other military services. New instructions from Dr. John S. Foster, dod Director of Defense Research and Engineering, in 1971 had encouraged all military services to “look for ways of using space systems to perform their jobs better and cheaper.” Air Force would continue launches but “will no longer operate space systems of other services, nor will there be the requirement to develop their systems for them. The cooperation among the services on space matters is excellent, and, I believe, this change, which recognizes that space as a military medium has reached maturity, benefits everybody.” (AF Mag, 6/72, 35-40)
Revision of NASA’s FY 1973 operating plan to adhere to $3.2-billion budget limitation would necessitate work reductions in manned space flight, NASA announced. Work reductions at Manned Spacecraft Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Kennedy Space Center would not affect Apollo 17 or Sfeylab launch schedules or safety and quality assurance requirements. Support contractor manpower at msfc would be reduced by 600 to 700 positions. Cost ceilings also would necessitate additional reductions in prime contractor personnel. (NASA Release 72-176; msfc Releases 72-111, 72-113)
Senate approved S.R. 261, making minority changes in committee assignments. Sen. James L. Buckley (R-N.Y.) was removed from Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and Sen. Karl E. Mundt (R-S.D.) was added. (CR, 2/23/72, S2379-80) February 23—24:	NASA officials continued testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson reported “excellent results” in first acoustic tests, completed in November 1971, of experimental quiet engine for conventional takeoff and landing (ctol) aircraft. “In an unsuppressed baseline configuration . . . the noise levels were the equivalent of at least 3 EPNdB [epndb, effective perceived noise in decibels] lower than the original targets. In a first cut simulation of an acoustically suppressed nacelle which was not an optimum design, the noise levels were from 7 to 9 EPNdB lower yet, with aerodynamic performance losses no greater than expected.” It appeared possible to design an advanced version of ctol engine “which will incorporate all the advances in technology and will have a more nearly optimum trade-off between noise reduction and installed weight penalty.” In FY 1973, $2.5 million was requested for program to reduce noise of short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to 95 epndb at 500 ft (150 m). Tests at Flight Research Center of quieted T-34 high-bypass-ratio engine operating with simulated wing-flap system would develop design data for both quiet, experimental stol (questol) aircraft program and quiet, clean, STOL experimental engine program. Vertical takeoff and landing aircraft (vtol) noise reduction program, with budget request of $2.5 million, focused on lift fans with additional work on helicopter rotor noise. Acoustic and aerodynamic data would continue to be developed in tests at Langley, Ames, and Lewis Research Centers. George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs in Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast), described NASA role in Joint nasa, Federal Aviation Administration, and Dept, of Defense microwave landing system (mls) development plan to provide landing system for civil and military use to replace current very-high-frequency (vhf) landing system. NASA would provide personnel in faa mls Project Office, chairmanship of the mls Interagency Advisory Group, flight-test validation of the mls for stol operations, and extension of our work in FY 1973 to include ctol and vtol aircraft. “We are convinced the national microwave landing system program will make significant contributions toward noise abatement, airport congestion relief, and, especially, safety enhancement in the airport area.” Gerald G. Kayten, Director of Transport Experimental Program Office in oast, said on Feb. 23 that NASA programs would “provide a foundation upon which industry can base the design and development of the new stol systems in the late 1970’s, and upon which the Government can establish criteria for certification and regulation of such systems.” Programs also would enable Government to make 1976 decision on vertical short takeoff and landing (v/stol) incorporation recommended in Dept, of Transportation Northeast Corridor Report. “NASA’s main focus is on propulsive-lift technology for effective and economical STOL capability, engine technology for development of quiet and clean STOL propulsion systems, and airborne STOL avionics and system technology.” Technology represented “totally new capability based on major advances in each of several technical disciplines.” Albert J. Evans, Director of Military Aircraft Programs Office in oast, on Feb. 24 described support of military aircraft development programs. NASA had assigned research engineers to F-15 and B-l aircraft and Air Force prototype systems program offices. “This has put NASA ‘on the scene’ as technical problems become recognized and defined, and brings NASA’s technical capabilities ... to bear on the problems at an early date.” F—15 would make first flight early in FY 1973 “with about 12,000 nasa wind tunnel hours behind it, and much technical consultation by NASA staff members with the Air Force and the industry that is developing the F—15.” F—15 operational engine would be installed at Lewis Research Center to analyze air flow through engine components, combustion efficiency, and performance characteristics. nasa would analyze F-15 engine and airframe performance and flight-test aircraft at LeRC, where similar tests would be run on Air Force AX aircraft in cooperation with usaf. In B-l program, four frc engineers would be assigned to usaf Systems Program Office and contractor to assist in establishing flight-test requirements and instrumentation to verify analytical design techniques and ground-test data obtained at small scale in wind tunnels and information from simulator studies. (Transcript)
Twenty-five years ago—Oct, 14, 1947—Capt. Charles E. Yeager (usaaf) flew the Bell X-l experimental jet aircraft (at top above), launched from a B-29 bomber from Muroc Flight Test Base, to the speed of 1078 kilometers (670 miles) per hoar to break the sound barrier in level flight. The X-l had been developed under an Army Air force contract with National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics cooperation. In 1972, research plans included hypersonic flight, with flights in 1973 of the X-24B lifting body in a nasa-usaf program to develop technology for future aircraft that could cruise at hypersonic speeds at the edge of space. The X-24B was delivered to the usaf and nasa by Martin Marietta Carp, in Littleton, Calif., ceremonies Oct. 11 and unloaded at Flight Research Center Oct. 22 flower photo). The B version of the X-24A, flown in 1971, had an extended nose, flattened underside, and blended wings. Primary objectives'were to place 34-5-kg (760-lb) spacecraft in sun-synchronous orbit with local equator-crossing time between 9:00 and 9:20 am and conduct in-orbit engineering evaluation, before turning operational control of spacecraft over to Noaa’s National Environment Satellite Service (ness). Orbit would permit regular, dependable daytime and nighttime temperature soundings of earth’s atmosphere and cloud-cover observations by both direct readout and onboard storage in support of National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (nomss). First flight to implement operational atmospheric sounding and very-high-resolution infrared cloud-cover viewing, Noaa 2 carried two new sensors: redundant very-high-resolution radiometer (vhrr) and vertical-temperature-profile radiometer (vtpr). Equipment also included scanning radiometers (srs) and single solar proton monitor (spm) as secondary sensor. Oscar 6 (Oscar C) Orbital Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio, carried pickaback on 2nd stage for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. (amsat), was successfully ejected and entered orbit with 1456-km (904.7-mi) apogee, 1451-km (901.6-mi) perigee, 114.9-min period, and 101.7° inclination. Oscar 6 was sixth in Oscar series; previous spacecraft was launched by NASA as secondary payload with Itos 1 (Tiros-M) mission Jan. 23, 1970. Satellite, to conduct experimental program of multiaccess communication techniques using low-powered earth terminals, had been developed by U.S., Australian, and German amateur groups working through amsat. The 18-kg (40-lb) satellite would receive at 145.9 mhz and transmit at 29.5 mhz. Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) program was joint effort of NASA and Dept, of Commerce under Jan. 30, 1964, agreement. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for design and development of spacecraft and ground systems, for launch, and for checkout and evaluation. ness was responsible for operating spacecraft and processing data. First series of spacecraft included nine satellites—Essa 1 through Essa 9— of which 8 and 9 were still in routine use and 2, 6, and 7 still functional and available for backup coverage. In second series—Improved tos (itos)—prototype had been Itos 1 and first NOAA-funded spacecraft, Noaa 1, had been launched Dec. 11, 1970, to observe globe twice daily. (NASA proj off; gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; noaa Release 72-135; A&A 1970)
Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum completed first year under new Director, former astronaut Michael Collins. Major emphasis was on preparation for new museum to be opened in U.S. Bicentennial year, 1976. Domed planetarium chamber 9 m (30 ft) high was being constructed as laboratory for experimentation and design of programs and equipment for Spacearium in new museum. Museum library was being reorganized to standards of other Smithsonian Institution libraries. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (sao) progress and plans were being assessed against standards recommended by Astronomy Survey Committee of National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council [see June 1], (Smithsonian Year 1972, 61, 62)
Astronaut John W. Young had not had “command pilot syndrome”— fastest peak heart rate of crew at launching—when Apollo 16 was launched, Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, said in interview. “The commander has the greatest responsibility and . . . usually has the fastest rate.” During Apollo 16 launch lunar module pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., had fastest peak rate, 130 beats per min. Command module pilot Thomas K. Mattingly II registered 115 heats per min, and Young—who was making fourth space flight and second trip to moon—registered 108 beats per min. Record had been set by Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., whose rate had reached 166 beats per min just before launch of Gemini 11 Sept. 12, 1966. (Altman, NYT, 4/17/72, 24)
Two NASA aircraft equipped with camera systems similar to those on board Earth Resources Technology Satellite A (erts-a; scheduled for June or July launch) were flying from Ames Research Center in preparation for erts flights, erts flights would be first U.S. attempt to monitor earth resources from space. Purpose of NASA aircraft flights at 20 000-m (65 000-ft) altitude was to acquire photographic data in color, infrared, and other spectral bands at same time of day as erts-a would photograph from 885-km (550-mi) altitude. Data from 50 test sites in continental U.S. would be processed and distributed by arc to 47 erts investigators who required seasonal terrain-change data in agriculture, hydrology, and forestry for analysis of early growing season. Seasonal change data from aircraft would be correlated with erts-a data after launch to monitor healthy crops and forests and disease infestation, (nasa Release 72-116)
Flight Research Center began test series to evaluate method of simulating space shuttle orbiter in flight at subsonic speeds. Tests would be conducted on FRc’s general-purpose airborne simulator (gpas)—converted subsonic jet transport equipped with electronic variable stability and control system. Flights would determine aircraft’s ability to match orbiter’s final approach path in steep descent from 9 km (5.6 mi) down to landing, (frc Release 21-72; frc pao)
Space shuttle was “investment in the future,” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, said in Aerospace article. Controversy over manned versus unmanned space flight had been “negated” by advancing technology that provided “entirely new approach to space operations.” Shuttle combined “advantages of man in the cycle with a degree of economy hitherto unobtainable.” Fundamental reason for shuttle program was “to make available a means of routine access to space, to remove the constraints imposed by an earlier level of technology, to progress from space adolescence to full maturity.” (Aerospace, 4/72, 3-9)
Delegation from Federation of American Scientists (fas), nongovernment organization, left for People’s Republic of China to explore means of improving contacts between Chinese and American scientists. (Science, 5/19/72, 783) May 14:	Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp said in Washington Post article that NASA followed “cart-before-the-horse” or “rocket-before-payload policy” in figuring shuttle costs. Question to be debated was not shuttle transportation “but the basic purpose and worth of payloads.” NASA was “sorely perplexed as a federal agency whose basic mission was accomplished when men landed on the moon.” Skylab mission in 1973, “when a temporary, makeshift station is placed in orbit,” would end NASA manned space flight “unless the shuttle project goes ahead. In a sense, it’s a shuttle to nowhere unless a permanent space station is also approved. This project, last costed at $10 billion, was once the basic rationale of the shuttle, but its price tag scared off congressmen. Now NASA downplays the space station, but the Jan. 31, 1972, Mathe-matica study includes 62 shuttle trips to space stations in one scenario.” (W Post, 5/14/72, B3)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Dudley Observatory experiment to 108.7-km (67.5-mi) altitude. Launch was second in series of three to collect and identify cosmic dust particles from Giacobini meteor shower [see Oct. 8]. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
Filter cassette—filter-paper holder developed by Lewis Research Center and Cleveland (Ohio) Air Pollution Control Div. and used in high-volume air samplers—was being used to simplify and improve collection of air samples over Cleveland area. Cassette had been developed to avoid contamination of filter papers used to collect trace materials. They were being used in 16 Cleveland air samplers as parallel network to city monitoring stations and in 7 LeRC samplers in Cleveland suburbs. (nasa Release 72-82)
Last in series of very-high-altitude flight tests of parachute decelerator system for NASA’s Viking Mars lander, scheduled for 1975 launch, was held over White Sands Missile Range by Martin Marietta Corp. under Air Force Research Laboratories direction. Decelerator was dropped from balloon at altitude of 27 000 m (88 000 ft) to check out parachute system at subsonic conditions. In previous tests rocket motors had boosted speed after balloon had carried system to desired altitude. [See July 11 and 26, Aug. 13, and Dec. 14.] (afsc Release 105.72; Martin Marietta Corp pio; NASA Release 72-118) Primary objective was to obtain high-resolution spectra of stars in ultraviolet range between 1000 and 3000 A to investigate composition, density, and physical state of matter in interstellar space and stellar sources. Secondary objective was to evaluate onboard computer, light baffle, inertial reference unit, electronically scanned star tracker, and heat pipes. Spacecraft carried two experiments—Princeton experiment package (pep), 80-cro (32-in) Cassegrainian telescope and photoelectric spectrometer; and Univ. College London (ucl) x-ray experiment containing three telescopes and collimated proportional counter. All spacecraft operations were carried out as planned, with spacecraft checkout completed Aug, 24, experiment checkout completed Aug. 26, and stabilization and control system checkout completed Aug. 28. By 2:00 pm edt Aug. 29 Oao 3 had completed 120 orbits with systems operating almost perfectly, pep was viewing bright star Zeta in constellation Ophiuchus and obtaining excellent data. UCL experiment was undergoing calibration and alignment and would begin observing x-ray sources in September. Fourth OAO launched by NASA, Oao 3 at 2200 kg (4900 lbs), 2 m wide and 3 m high (7 x 10 ft), was heaviest and most complex automated spacecraft developed by U.S. It had new gyro inertial reference unit with four star trackers, electrically scanned star tracker, precision digital solar-aspect sensor, and onboard computer that could handle 16000, 18-bit words and store 1024 ground commands. OAO-B had crashed Nov. 30, 1970, when shroud failed to separate after launch. Oao 2 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) was still returning valuable data. Oao 1 (launched April 8, 1966) had failed because of high-voltage arcing in star trackers and malfunction in power supply system. OAO program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under direction of NASA Office of Space Science. (NASA proj off; NASA Release 72-156)
Press conference on scientific results of NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe (launched May 30, 1971) was held at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. Robert H. Steinbacher, project scientist, said Mars “used to he likened to earth in science fiction, and was compared to the moon after the first pictures from Mariner 4 in 1965. Now we are seeing that Mars has a character all its own. It is not earth-like or moon-like, it is Mars-like.” Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey said Mars could be divided into four major geological provinces: Nix Olympica-Tharis volcanic province with volcanoes up to 8 km (5 mi) high and 500 km (300 mi) in diameter; Ophir-Eos equatorial plateau region with faults and rifts 5 km (3 mi) deep; cratered and smooth terrains with large circular basins like lunar impact basins; and south polar cratered terrain covered with glacial sediment layers up to 100 m (330 ft) thick. Convincing evidence that water had played active role in evolution of Mars was shown in Mariner 9 photos of deep, winding channels that might have once been beds of fast-flowing streams. Masursky suggested two explanations for apparent heavy rains and floods on Mars in past: volcanic heat might have melted water ice stored below surface as permafrost or increased dosages of sunlight on polar caps every 50 000 yrs, because of axis wobbling, might have melted polar caps completely. Dr. Geoffrey A. Biggs of Jpl described north polar hood of variable clouds that appeared to have general west-to-east flow pattern, with some systems resembling small cyclones. Photos also showed “white cloud phenomenon”—brilliant white spots, believed to be water ice clouds, associated with volcanoes. “The clouds appear mostly in the afternoon, when warmer air is moving up the slopes and cooling as it goes.” Pictures of north polar area showed wavelike clouds “formed by a simple, harmonic movement of air, of winds up to 115 miles per hour [185 kilometers per hour] . . . very much like the cold fronts shown in earth atmosphere pictures.” (Summary statement and abstracts; Wilford, NYT, 6/15/72, 1; Swaim, Pasadena Star-News, 6/15/72)
NASA launched Black Brant VB sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload to test rocket configuration that would be used in support of Skylab mission. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Cost reduction suggestion by Marshall Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Thomas A. Parnell had saved NASA $57 000 in development of gamma ray telescope for scheduled balloon probe to investigate gamma ray sources, MSFC announced. Dr. Parnell had suggested substitution of scrap crystal (sodium iodide) for large, expensive crystal used to shield gamma-ray detectors from radiation sources other than desired target during probes. Scrap crystal material in tank containing oil-based liquid served as effective shield. Balloon probe was to be launched in March or April from National Center for Atmospheric Research. (msfc Release 72-2)
NASA launched Aerobee 200 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload to test flight performance. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced appointment of Dr. George H. Ludwig as Director of System Integration. Dr. Ludwig, who had assumed position in early September, had been Associate Director for Data Operations at Goddard Space Flight Center since 1971. (noaa Release 72-120)
First successful experimental demonstration in U.S. of magnetic levitation system (maglev) was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. maglev—system for suspending vehicle above guideway with power supplied by supercooled magnets—would permit trains to travel at speeds up to 480 km per hr (300 mph) without physical contact with rails or guideway. Test was performed in Menlo Park, Calif., by Stanford Research Institute under contract to Dept, of Transportation, (dot Release 100-72) November 22:	Deputy Director James A. Lovell, Jr., of Manned Spacecraft Center’s Science and Applications Directorate announced intention to retire from space program to press at Msc. As astronaut he had spent more time in space than any other U.S. astronaut. Lovell had been Gemini 4 backup pilot, Gemini 7 pilot, Gemini 9 backup command pilot, Gemini 12 command pilot, Apollo 8 command module pilot, Apollo 11 backup command pilot, and Apollo 13 commander. Lovell told press he was examining offers from New York and Chicago business firms. “This is not something that I would choose to do under other circumstances but . . . there are not enough slots for us guys who want to remain in the operations end of space flight.” Lovell said he would remain with NASA until completion of Apollo 17 mission, (upi, W Post, 10/24/72, A5)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory had issued report calling for analysis of potential hazards of 64-m (210-ft) dish antenna at Goldstone Tracking Station near Barstow, Calif., Los Angeles Times reported. Beam could pose electromagnetic threat to electronics components in aircraft and to passengers on board who had cardiac pacemakers. Preliminary estimates indicated high potential hazard within tubular, 400 000-w invisible beam out to 16.9-km (10.5-mi) altitude, where its power diminished to safe levels. (Miles, LA Times, 3/21/72)
Soviet scientists at Krym Astrophysical Observatory had discovered unidentified astronomical objects, Tass announced. Using radiotelescope with 200-mm (8-in) mirror, scientists had located radio emitters emitting 3!/^-cm signals that “do not belong to the category of pulsating stars (pulsars), which emit short impulses only in a meter-long (three-feet-long) wavelength. For their properties the new astronomical objects are closer to the class of quasi-stellar radioemitters—quasars which are 1,500 million light-years from the earth.” (fbis-SoV, 4/3/72, L4)
NASA launched first in series of five Nike-Javelin III sounding rockets carrying Naval Research Laboratory cesium cloud experiments from Wallops Station at 5:15 am est. Payloads in series would be released at 97-km (60-mi) altitude, producing yellowish clouds visible for several hundred kilometers along East Coast. NRL scientists would make radio propagation, photographic, and geomagnetic observations to determine role of wind motions, magnetohydrodynamic effects, and chemical-thermal processes governing atmosphere. Second launch would be conducted March 27. (WS pao; WS Release 72-4)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Naval Research Laboratory astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Significance of nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences joint Apollo-Soyuz test project (astp) was discussed by Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, in letter to nasa staff. Eyes of world would be on nasa and Soviet manned space flight teams as never before. There “must be a near certainty that the mission will be successful, or it should not be attempted.” Not just nasa reputation but “future of manned space flight and international cooperation in space will be significantly influenced by the success or failure.” Mission also was “important first step to facilitate rescue missions in space and to enable manned spacecraft from two or more countries to participate in future cooperative activities. And because several years of friendly cooperation are required just to plan and fly this one test mission, it takes on an added symbolic significance and gives us the feeling that even now, long before the flight, we may be making a contribution to the cause of peace and better understanding between our two countries.” Decision to cooperate in project was “optimistic vote of confidence in the future of manned space flight by the two leading powers.” But project had practical limits. Neither side would transfer its technology as such. “So neither side has to give away anything, but each has much to gain.” Biggest concession to be made by each country was “recognition that close and visible cooperation between the two countries on an important aspect of manned space flight has become desirable.” (NASA Activities, 10/15/72, 200-2)
Details of Mariner 10 mission to Venus and Mercury, first dual-planet flight, to be launched from Eastern Test Range in October or November 1973, were released by NASA. Jet Propulsion Laboratory would manage Mariner Venus mission project for NASA Office of Space Science. Project would include first use of one planet’s gravitational field (that of Venus) to propel spacecraft to another and first Mercury exploration. Spacecraft’s 500-kg (1100-lb) weight would include 78 kg (170 lbs) of scientific equipment—two TV cameras to take at least 8000 photos of planets and six experiments to return planetary and interplanetary data, with emphasis on Mercury. Objectives of experiments would be to provide celestial mechanics information during flight and physical characteristics of planets and their atmosphere; study structure of solar wind and its interaction with Venus and Mercury; search for magnetic field at both planets and measure interplanetary magnetic fields between orbits of earth, Venus, and Mercury; search for Mercury atmosphere and obtain data on Venusian atmosphere; measure temperature emissions from both planets and their atmospheres and correlate data with visible features; and measure charged particles over wide energy range to study solar charged-particle bombardment of Mercury and its possible atmosphere. Spacecraft would fly by Venus in February 1974 and by Mercury in March 1974, with closest approach to Venus 5300 km (3300 mi) and to Mercury only 1020 km (635 mi). (NASA Special Release, 9/5/72)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced award of $4.8-million contract to Ball Brothers Research Corp. to design, build, and test high-spectral-resolution gamma ray spectrometer for nasa’s High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) in 1977. Spectrometer would make exploratory search of universe for gamma-ray-line structures of low and medium energy. Observation of lines could unlock many secrets of supernovae and pinpoint regions where chemical elements—basic building blocks of universe—were synthesized. Spectrometer also would monitor intensity, position, time variation, and spectrum of x-rays and gamma rays as emitted from cosmic sources such as pulsars and x-ray stars. (jpl Release 630) October 9:	President Nixon announced new policy making U.S. launch assistance available to interested countries and international organizations for satellites intended for peaceful purposes consistent with relevant international agreements. Launch assistance from U.S. sites would be on cooperative or reimbursable basis similar to that available to non-Government U.S. users. Assistance with launches from foreign sites would be available with purchase of U.S. launch vehicle. With foreign launches, U.S. would require assurance that launch vehicles would not be made available to third parties without its permission. Under policy terms U.S. would provide launch assistance for telecommunications satellites recommended by International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium. In absence of Intelsat recommendation, U.S. would assist systems it had supported within Intelsat. For communications satellite system not recommended by Intelsat and not previously supported by U.S., U.S. would decide on request for launch assistance after considering degree to which proposed system would be modified to meet Intelsat approval. Future operational satellite applications without broad international acceptance would be considered for U.S. launch assistance only after international acceptance had been obtained. (White House Release; PD, 10/16/72, 1508)
Largest NASA-owned aircraft—Lockheed C-141 StarLifter weighing 147 000 kg (325 000 lbs) with 49-m (160-ft) wing span and 43-m (140-ft) length—was delivered to Ames Research Center. Aircraft, modified to accept infrared telescope 91 cm (36 in) in diameter and two computers, would be used by NASA as international facility for infrared astronomy. Aircraft observatory would be unique when telescope was installed later in year, (arc Astrogram, 3/16/72, 1)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Sciences, reviewed space science program before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 authorization hearings: Major accomplishment in astronomy in 1971 had been mapping of universe at x-ray wavelengths with first x-ray astronomy satellite, Explorer 42 (Vhuru, launched Dec. 12, 1970). Two dozen scientific articles had been published on observations by satellite; 116 objects emitting x-rays had been studied and positions accurately determined. Analysis of rocket data on one object indicated diameter was less than 20 km (13 mi), yet it emitted much larger amount of x-radiation than did sun. “The discovery of such X-ray sources is of fundamental importance because matter in ordinary states . . . cannot account for such intense radiation.” In 1971 NASA had launched eight missions in physics and astronomy program. Most important was Orbiting Solar Observatory Oso 7 (launched Sept. 29, 1971), “which carried into orbit a set of solar telescopes more powerful than any launched before. One instrument— a coronagraph—revealed visible evidence of three luminous jets of intensely hot solar plasma being hurled out into space at a speed of more than two million miles per hour [some 3 million km per hr]. These luminous jets were 20 times the size of the earth, and represented the energy of 100 million atomic bombs. A peak temperature of 30 million degrees must have been attained in this event. Again . . . matter must have been produced on a scale man cannot produce on earth.” International cooperation continued major role in space science program; five of eight 1971 missions had had significant international participation. During year experiments and prime contractor, TRW Inc., had been selected for “newest and most significant program in astronomy”—High Energy Astronomy Observatory, designed to “unlock some of the most profound and puzzling secrets of modern physics.” Pulsars and quasars had given evidence of new concept of energy generation that produced power at levels unexplainable by modern nuclear physics. (Transcript)
Publication of A Current Index of Technical Briefs (Cl-1) by NASA and Small Business Administration was announced. Brochure contained abstracts from NASA’s technical briefs filed during 1971 and 1972. nasa had published nearly 5000 technical briefs since 1963. First edition of new publication had been mailed to more than 50 000 small manufacturing and research and development companies. Brochure eventually would be published monthly. (NASA Release 72-188; NASA pao)
National Academy of Sciences released findings of two-year study of science and its relation to society, made by Physics Survey Committee chaired by Yale Univ. physicist Dr. David A. Bromley. Report, tentatively titled “Physics in Perspective,” was in press at release time. It rated 69 program areas in physics in order of priority and emphasized cost to U.S. science and society and to physics if programs were not adopted. Most “striking” aspect of survey had been “renewed discovery of the over-all power and vitality of U.S. physics,” but “this strength is in danger.” Committee found danger most immediate and obvious in subfields like elementary particle and nuclear physics where major facilities approved in mid-1960s were just becoming operational. Report named 15 programs that had growth potentials warranting high priority for incremental support: macroscopic quantum phenomena including superfluidity and superconductivity, quantum optics, scattering in solids and liquids, heavy-ion interactions, higher-energy nuclear physics, national accelerator laboratory, Stanford linear accelerator, controlled fusion, turbulence, nonlinear optics, lasers and masers, atomic and molecular beams, biophysical acoustics, very large radio array, and x-ray and gamma ray astronomy. Committee concurred with recommendation of Astronomy Survey Committee [see June 1] that High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) should be prominent in national effort in astrophysics and astronomy. “Because of the opaqueness of the earth’s atmosphere to both X and gamma radiation, these windows on the universe have only recently been opened through rocket and satellite astronomy. Any reasonable extrapolation from the preliminary soundings that have been possible so far suggests a larger return in fundamental insight into the structure and history of the universe. In the total national physics program, the estimated cost of this facility—$400 million . . . is extremely high. To be considered in proper perspective it must be viewed in the context of the total expenditures of the U.S. space program. In anticipated scientific return—both short- and long-range— it merits high priority in that program.” (NASA—nrc-nae News Rpt, 8-9/72, 1-7)
President Nixon delivered State of the Union address before joint session of Congress and sent written message to Congress. He said in speech: “In reaching the moon, we demonstrated what miracles American technology is capable of achieving. Now the time has come to move more deliberately toward making full use of that technology here on earth, of harnessing the wonders of science to the service of man.” He would propose new “Federal partnership” in technological research and development “with Federal incentives to increase private research, federally supported research on projects ... to improve our everyday lives.” In written message President said dealings with U.S.S.R. had “advanced the prospects for limiting strategic armaments. We have moved toward greater cooperation in space research and toward improving our economic relationships.” President said he would request Dept, of Defense budget increase “to preserve the sufficiency of our strategic nuclear deterrent, including an allocation of over $900 million to improve our sea-based deterrent force.” He had instructed dod “to develop a program to build additional missile launching submarines, carrying a new and far more effective missile.” Space program had been reoriented to produce increased domestic benefits: “In recent years, America has focused a large share of the technological energy on projects for defense and for space. These projects have had great value. Defense technology has helped us preserve our freedom and protect the peace. Space technology has enabled us to share unparalleled adventures and to lift our sights beyond earth’s bounds. The daily life of the average man has also been improved by much of our defense and space research—for example, by work on radar, jet engines, nuclear reactors, communications and weather satellites, and computers. Defense and space projects have also enabled us to build and maintain our general technological capacity, which—as a result—can now be more readily applied to civilian purposes. “America must continue with strong and sensible programs of research and development for defense and for space. I have felt for some time, however, that we should also be doing more to apply our scientific and technological genius directly to domestic opportunities. Toward this end, I have already increased our civilian research and development budget by more than 40 percent since 1969 and have directed the National Science Foundation to give more attention to this area .... “I recently announced support for the development of a new earth orbital vehicle that promises to introduce a new era in space research.” Reusable space shuttle would lower cost and risk of space operations and open new opportunities in weather forecasting, communications, monitoring natural resources, and air traffic safety. “The space shuttle is a wise national investment.” Proposals included increase of $700 million in civilian R&D, 15% increase over previous year. And technically oriented agencies like NASA and Atomic Energy Commission would work more closely with agencies with primary social mission like Dept, of Transportation. {PD, 1/24/72, 74-92)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced formation of new flight project office for unmanned mission to Jupiter and Saturn in 1977. Mariner Jupiter/Saturn 1977 project would be managed by Harris M. Schurmeier, with Dr. Edward J. Smith as acting project scientist, Raymond L. Heacock as spacecraft system manager, and Dr. Ralph F. Mills as mission analysis and engineering manager, (jpl Release 621)
First anniversary of dedication of Visitor Center at Langley Research Center. Since June 8, 1971, opening, Center had attracted more than 175 000 visitors from all 50 states and more than 20 foreign countries. (Langley Researcher, 6/23/72, 1)
Senate passed and sent to House H.R. 11487, Chapel of the Astronauts bill, after amending it to restrict authority to sell land at Kennedy Space Center for chapel to two years after act’s enactment date. {CR, 2/3/72, S1097-8)
Apollo 17 astronauts were examined on hoard recovery ship U.S.S. Tieonderoga by Dr. Charles K. La Pinta, Apollo medical team leader. He pronounced them “as good as any crew of astronauts that I have ever seen. They appear to be one of the more well-rested crews to have returned from a space flight.” (Reuters, W Post, 12/21/72, A17)
Los Angeles Times editorial criticized Jet Propulsion Laboratory name change: “While the alteration may meet with some approval in parts of the 20th Congressional District, it has gone over with a thud at the laboratory and on the Pasadena campus of Caltech.” Scientists and teachers were asking “why the nonpolitical space lab has to be saddled with the name of a retiring congressman, especially one with no distinction in the technology of space .... Congress could reconsider; it should.” (LA Times, 11/8/72) Under contract between NASA and Telesat Canada, NASA mission objective was to place Anik 1 in orbit of sufficient accuracy to allow onboard propulsion systems to place spacecraft in stationary synchronous orbit while retaining sufficient station-keeping propulsion to meet mission lifetime requirements. Objectivie was met; mission was adjudged successful Nov. 15. Launch was first on Thor-Delta “straight eight” launch vehicle, so called because diameter was eight feet for all three stages including fairing. Previous Thor-Deltas had been tapered at joint of first and second stage. New design allowed Delta to launch new generation of larger volume spacecraft. Flight was also first with nine solid-fuel thrust-augmentation rockets from Cape Kennedy. Third stage was TE-364-4 solid-fueled motor. Anik 1—first of two—was built by Hughes Aircraft Co. under contract with Telesat and designed to provide transmission of TV, voice, and data throughout Canada for seven years. It would provide 10 color TV channels or up to 9600 telephone circuits. System could distribute analog or digital signals with overall performance comparable to that of terrestrial methods. Spacecraft, 1.8 m in diameter and 3.4 m high (6 by 11 ft), weighed 540 kg (1200 lhs) at launch and 270 kg (600 lhs) in orbit. Electronics system was powered by 23 000 solar cells, with onboard battery capacity to maintain service during sun eclipse. Telesat Canada would reimburse NASA for cost of launch vehicle and services. Goddard Space Flight Center managed project for NASA Office of Space Science, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-206; GSFC Operations Center Br) November 9:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base on Thor-Burner II into orbit with 879-km (546-mi) apogee, 824-km (512-mi) perigee, 101.5-min period, and 98.6° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 11/16/70, 70)
Award of $1.5-million contract to United Air Lines, Inc., for flight-test program to evaluate operational procedures and avionic system to reduce noise level near airport approach patterns was announced by Ames Research Center. Contract was part of arc program in cooperation with Federal Aviation Administration. Avionics system would be developed by Collins Radio Co. under separate $233 000 NASA contract. (arc Release 72-136)
Chronology of H.R. 10243, bill to establish Office of Technology Assessment for Congress (signed by President Nixon Oct. 13), was traced in Washington Post article. Bill was result of six-year effort begun by Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), who had since left Congress. House had passed earlier version Feb. 8; Senate had approved its version Sept. 14; and conference report worked out Sept. 21 had been approved by both houses. Bill had been supported in House by members of Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development and by Rep. Jack Brooks (D-Tex.) and in Senate by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), Sen. B. Everett Jordan (D-N.C.), and Sen. Gordon Allott (R-Colo.). Post quoted Senate aide as saying recent renewed interest in bill had been prompted by debates over supersonic transport (sst) program and antiballistic missile systems. In both, Congress had had “no really authoritative expertise of its own.” New Office of Technology Assessment would have authority and independence of General Accounting Office and was expected to depend mainly on contracts with outside study groups. (Cohn, W Post, 10/26/72, G3)
NASA announced it would continue Life Scientist Program for 1972 with award of up to five three-year institutional grants for research relevant to NASA needs. Principal investigators and their designated graduate students, selected from proposals due Nov. 20, would devote one third of their time to research at Manned Spacecraft Center, Ames Research Center, or Langley Research Center. Study areas would include physiological and psychological processes and medical aspects of manned space flight, changes in man’s health and safety, design of advanced life support systems, man-machine integration, human augmentation devices, bioinstrumentation, habitability considerations, and use of flight environment to understand living systems better. Other areas announced by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director for Life Sciences, were possible existence of life elsewhere in universe, scientific explanation of life’s origin, and detection and characterization from space of ecological phenomena on earth or other planets. Step-funded grants would not exceed $50 000 annually and would support maximum of 50% of scientist’s salary, (nasa Release 72-175)
During five-day visit to Poland Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, informed Polish government in Warsaw that U.S. would name oao-c Orbiting Astronomical Observatory for Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus. Launch of oao-c, scheduled for August, would inaugurate U.S. contribution to worldwide Copernican celebration feting 500th anniversary of Feb. 14, 1473, birth of Copernicus, oao-c would carry 81-cm (32-in) reflecting ultraviolet telescope developed by Princeton Univ. and battery of smaller x-ray telescope developed by Univ. College, Univ. of London, to study uv and x-ray emissions of celestial bodies, oao—c would weigh 2200 kg (4900 lbs) and would be launched into earth orbit with 740-km (460-mi) altitude by Atlas-Centaur booster, (nasa Release 72-141)
U. Alexis Johnson, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, and Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified on space agreements with U.S.S.R. signed in May, before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ special hearing. Johnson said agreement signed May 24 endorsed at highest level understandings reached over past 18 mos between NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences for cooperation in space science and applications such as meteorology, study of earth’s environment, further exploration of moon and planets, and space biology and medicine. It permitted development of compatible rendezvous and docking systems which “should enhance safety and value of space flight” and opened possibility of further areas of cooperation. It demonstrated “in full view of the world that the two great space powers have both the will and the capability to work together on important and difficult tasks. We have high hopes . . . that this agreement will be a milestone in our relationship with the Soviet Union. ... It serves our broad national purposes, as well as our specific foreign policy objectives.” Dr. Low outlined earlier agreements and gave details of joint rendezvous and docking mission agreed on for 1975. During April visit to Moscow, agreement had been reached that astronauts must understand Russian to extent normally used in both regular and contingency operations. Soviet cosmonauts also would need to understand other language and be able to respond. Dictionary would be.developed of commonly used phrases. Some astronauts, all interested in flying this mission, had begun studying Russian on their own. Astronauts selected would take formal language training. Others in NASA would also learn Russian. (Transcript)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of U.S. Air Force. First Secretary of the Air Force W. Stuart Symington had been sworn in Sept. 18, 1947, effective date of transfer of Army air activities to Dept, of the Air Force established by Armed Forces Unification Act of July 26, 1947. Publications during September commemorated Silver Anniversary. Airman editorial noted it has been more than 50 yrs since advent of military aviation “and it is virtually impossible to divide the technological achievements and amazing advances over that span of years into categories like ‘pre-autonomy’ or ‘post-autonomy.’ ” It was spirit that counted—“that indomitable, driving, probing, questioning, seeking perseverance, and sheer genius that has taken man from Kittyhawk to the moon in what is really an incredibly short period of time.” Air Force System Command’s Newsreview traced historical highlights of its bases and organizations. Arnold Engineering Development Center (aedc) near Tullahoma, Tenn., had been established in 1953 at recommendation of aeronautical scientist Dr. Theodore von Karman. Center currently consisted of 40 test units that provided “simulated flight-test capability ranging in speed to more than 20 times the speed of sound and to altitudes around 1,000 miles [1600 kilometers].” Center’s replacement value was $840 million. Patrick Air Force Base, Fla,, had grown with space program. Launch of V—2 from Eastern Test Range at Patrick in 1950 “was the first step to the moon. That goal, now accomplished five times, leaves the future of space exploration on the threshold of a dream.” Future of the Air Force was discussed by Gen. John D. Ryan (usaf) in Armed Forces Journal issue dedicated to Air Force Silver Anniversary. “It would be very easy ... to take off on rhetorical flights of overcoming the unlimited challenges of aerospace. The challenges do exist; and they could conceivably mean that the future of the Air Force will include the use of remotely piloted vehicles, hypersonic aircraft, and the laser. But if these, and anything else man can envision and produce, do exist in the future, they will only be the means for Air Force people to do their basic job of providing this country with the aerospace power required for defense and security. As in the past 25 years, success in the future depends heavily on the dedication and quality of Air Force people.” (Airman, 9/72, 25; AFSC Newsreview, 9/72, 6, 9; AFJ, 9/72; Dept of AF, A Chronology of American Air Space Events, 1/3/61)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Central Switzerland Cultural Foundation awarded annual cultural prize to Alfred Waldis, Director of Swiss Transport Museum in Lucerne. (Swiss Trans Museum Announcement, 11/72) September 11:	NASA released prints from infrared photos of New York area taken by Erts 1 (launched July 23). Black-and-white photo of New York City taken from 915-km (569-mi) altitude covering area 185 km (115 mi) square was covered by clouds, but was valuable as a general test of Erts 1 instrumentation. Images of infrared radiation from which prints had been made clearly showed distribution of vegetation in New Jersey. Dr. Paul D. Lowman of Goddard Space Flight Center said in interview that pictures of other areas had been of higher quality. “Our first discovery from erts is that all our maps, topographic as well as geologic, are out of date.” In California’s Monterey Bay area, scientists had discovered “a whole series of unsuspected faults” in earth’s crust. While major earthquake faults ran northwest and southeast, newly discovered faults ran at right angles to mountains, northeast and southeast. About 15 faults, each extending about 16 km (10 mi), had been discovered in Monterey region and about 12 faults had been discovered near Lake Tahoe, Calif. Satellite picture of Dallas-Fort Worth area showed many new roads, reservoirs, suburbs, and airports that were not on area’s most recent map, made three years before. (nasa Photos 72-HC-711, 72-4^241; Wilford, NYT, 9/12/72, 26)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body completed 22nd flight at Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Flight objectives were to check out pilot, Cecil Powell, and to obtain stability and control data at mach 0.70. Both objectives were achieved. Vehicle reached 14 300-m (47 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.70 on flight using two chambers of four-chamber rocket engine, (nasa proj off)
Nike-Javelin III sounding rocket, carrying Naval Research Laboratory cesium cloud experiment, was launched by NASA from Wallops Station at 5:07 am est. Huge yellowish clouds formed were visible along East Coast. Lauch was third in series of five to collect atmospheric data; previous launches had been conducted March 25 and 27. (WS PAO; WS Release 72-4.)
White House announced that Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, would lead scientific delegation to Moscow July 12 for formal discussions on implementation of Moscow summit agreement on cooperation in science and technology [see May 24]. Dr. David met at White House later with 21 scientific advisers who would accompany him to U.S.S.R. He told press following meeting that, instead of previous exchange of small numbers of scientists and engineers, there now would be “joint programs and common operations” in U.S. and U.S.S.R. Specific areas had not yet been selected, but Dr. David saw among possibilities joint research on electrical power, solar power, and exploitation of geothermal energy (heat inside earth) and magnetohydrodynamics (mhd). mhd generators burned fuel and directed resulting hot gas through magnetic field to produce electricity. Other areas of joint research might be crop genetics, atmospheric sciences, earthquake prediction, fisheries management and production, metallurgy, forestry, urban planning, computer sciences, and weather manipulation. (PD, 6/26/72, 1087; Cohn, W Post, 6/22/72, A2)
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed one of two flights scheduled from Flight Research Center. Pressure distributions were measured from mach 0.90 to 0.99 at altitudes from 12 800 to 13 960 m (42 000 to 45 800 ft) with flaps closed and at 5° and 10°. Second flight, an excess-energy maneuver, was canceled because DC generator light came on at end of first flight. Problem was later corrected and second flight was rescheduled, (nasa proj off)
President Nixon signed H.R. 11487, Chapel of the Astronauts bill, which authorized sale of land near Kennedy Space Center Visitor Bureau to private corporation for construction of chapel. Bill became P.L. 92-227. (PD, 2/21/72, 448)
nasa and European Space Research Organization (esro) were jointly soliciting proposals from scientists for planning experiments that could be carried on Explorer-class spacecraft in late 1970s. Scientists whose proposals were chosen would work in teams to aid in planning mission and help NASA and esro decide whether to conduct missions. Current plans called for one Explorer spacecraft to fly in circular, solar orbit with 2-million-km (1.2-million-mi) radius while dual mother-daughter spacecraft flew close together in elliptical earth orbit. Three spacecraft would be launched by Thor-Delta booster from Kennedy Space Center between 1976 and 1978. Mother-daughter spacecraft would make repeated passes through earth’s magnetic field to measure fine-scale space and time variations while interplanetary spacecraft recorded simultaneous variations of incoming solar wind. (NASA Release 72-100)
New York Times editorial commented on data returned by Soviet Venus 8 probe, which had landed capsule on Venus July 22: “Since the first Sputnik went into orbit a decade and a half ago, the world has seen so many major accomplishments in space by both the Soviet Union and the United States that the original sense of wonder has been largely lost. Yet even in today’s jaded atmosphere, it must be recognized that what the Soviet scientists accomplished with Venus 8 was one of the great technological accomplishments of the age. The scientists and technicians responsible for this great feat deserve the world’s congratulations. It is self-evident that this work needs to be continued with respect to other planets . . . and that it can be done by international cooperation.” (NYT, 9/13/72, 42) September 13—15:	First national conference on remotely manned systems was held at- Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. Stanley Deutsch of NASA Office of Life Sciences said in keynote address that usefulness of remotely controlled machines was “virtually limitless” both in space and on earth. “Using a remote system to scout Mars in advance of manned missions will enhance the safety of the man when we do send him to Mars.” Remotely controlled systems also could be used in future to rescue and return an incapacitated astronaut and provide a method for capturing unstable satellites. Remotely controlled systems technology developed for space was also being applied to nonspace applications such as Navy undersea manipulators, Air Force and Army remotely piloted aircraft, handling material in radiation laboratories, industrial safety, mining, medicine and hospitals, police work, and fire fighting. Dr. Ewald Heer of Jpl’s Advanced Technical Studies Div. said “intelligence” of automated systems would have to be increased greatly to ensure success of future earth orbital and planetary satellites. “Remotely manned systems are man-machine system® that augment and extend man’s sensory, manipulative and intellectual capabilities to remote places. However while machines may have superior strength and endurance and resistance to hostile environments, they still depend on human intelligence for decision-making in the performance of complicated tasks. Advanced engineering automation is essential in space station and shuttle operations and scientific data gathering must be microminiaturized for sustained interplanetary operations of two or more years.” (jpl Releases 625, 626; Swain, Pasadena Star-News, 9/14/72) September 14:	Senate approved U.S.-U.S.S.R. Interim Agreement on Limitation of Strategic Arms by vote of 88 to 2. Agreement was passed after adoption of amendment proposed by Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) that urged President Nixon to seek future treaty which would not limit U.S. to levels of intercontinental strategic forces inferior to limits provided to U.S.S.R. (CR, 9/14/72, S14859, S14868-14913)
Dr. Harlow Shapley, one of world’s leading astronomers, died in Boulder, Colo., at age 86 after long illness. He had been director of Harvard College Observatory from 1921 to 1952 and astronomer at Mount Wilson Observatory, Calif., from 1914 to 1921. At Mount Wilson Dr. Shapley had used variable stars and globular star clusters to fix position of solar system at some 30 000 light years from center of Milky Way galaxy. Previously earth and sun had been supposed near center of Milky Way galaxy. Finding had had immense scientific value and import for religious thought and philosophy. After World War II, Dr. Shapley shifted attention from scientific pursuits to public affairs. He had condemned cold war of 1940s and championed peaceful coexistence among nations of world. His advocacy of U.S.-U.S.S.R. friendship had led to his censure by House Un-American Activities Committee. Before retirement in 1952, Dr. Shapley had received 18 honorary degrees, many awards—including Pope Pius XI Prize in 1941—and had published more than 500 writings. (Weil, W Post, 10/21/72, B6; NYT, 10/21/72, 1)
Dr. Keith A. Kvenvolden, organic geochemist at Ames Research Center, displayed a HA-hillion-yearold sedimentary rock thought to contain evidence of the beginning of photosynthesis on earth—the historical point of the origin of life.
Cutbacks in NASA budget would necessitate dismissal of some 40 civil service employees at Kennedy Space Center during March, ksc Director, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, announced. Cutback was part of NASA-wide work force reduction. Similar reduction might be required in 1973. {Today, 3/2/72)
Possible discovery of historical point of origin of life from study of rocks believed to be 3.4 billion yrs old was announced by Ames Research Center scientist Dr. Keith A. Kvenvolden. Dr. Kvenvolden had conducted research with Dr. J. William Schopf and Dorothy Oehler of Univ. of California at Los Angeles on rocks Dr. Kvenvolden brought back in 1968 from Onverwacht Strata in Barberton Mountain Land near South Africa’s border with Swaziland. Rocks showed fossil evidence of beginnings of photosynthesis—life process of plants. Ancient carbon found in rocks which could predate photosynthesis was similar to organic carbon in meteorites believed to have come from asteroid belt. Immediately above was layer of identical pre-Cambrian rock with evidence of carbon produced by early photosynthetic organisms. Lack of photosynthesis in lowest layers of rock fitted theory of chemical evolution of origin of life, (upi, W News, 4/25/72, 10; Time, 6/19/72)
Apollo 15 Astronaut James B. Irwin received honorary Doctor of Science degree from Samford Univ. in Birmingham, Ala. (Birmingham News, 5/14/72) May 27—June 4: U.S. International Transportation Exposition transpo ’72 was sponsored by Dept, of Transportation at Dulles International Airport in Chantilly, Va. More than 400 exhibitions from 10 countries included military and civil aircraft and aerial demonstrations, experimental safety vehicles developed by automobile industry, Apollo 12 command module with Apollo 12 moon rocks, and four working models of independently powered 6- and 12-passenger “people movers” operated by pushbutton for urban mass transportation. NASA theme, “Aviation Serves the Community and the Nation,” was illustrated with exhibits on aviation passenger growth, airport planning, aircraft noise reduction, pollution control, aircraft safety, long-haul aircraft for 1980s, new vehicle technology, general aviation, nagivation and communications, and equation of ecology with technology. Exhibition was marred by three accidental deaths during aerobatic and precision flying demonstrations. (Langley Researcher, 5/12/72, 1; Grubisch, W Post, 5/4/72, HI; Transpo 72 News) May 28:	President Nixon discussed Moscow summit meetings and resultant agreements in radio and TV address to Soviet people from Kremlin in Moscow. He said: “We have agreed on joint ventures in space. We have agreed on ways of working together to protect the environment, to advance health, to cooperate in science and technology.” Most important agreement was “historic first step in the limitation of nuclear strategic arms.” By settling arms limitation, “people of both of our nations, and of all nations, can be winners. If we continue in the spirit of serious purpose that has marked our discussions this week, these agreements can start us on a new road of cooperation for the benefit of . . . all peoples.” (PD, 6/5/72, 939-41)
NASA announced award of $16 794 556 contract extension to North American Rockwell Corp. for testing, checkout, and launch operations in Skylab program. Cost-plus-fixed-fee supplement agreement with Kennedy Space Center covered third year of work under Nov. 29, 1970, contract, (nasa Release 72—243)
National Science Foundation released Federal Funds for Academic Science, Fiscal Year 1970 (nsf 72—301). In FY 1970 total Federal support to universities and colleges declined 7% from FY 1969 funding level. Major portion of decrease was in academic science activities, which experienced 8% drop in 1970, contrasting with 3% in support for nonscience activities. Research and development and manpower development support accounted for bulk of total academic science funding. Obligations for these activities totaled $1,396 billion and $429 million. (Text)
Protocol on- agreement between National Academy of Sciences and Soviet Academy of Sciences for further development of scientific cooperation was signed in New York by nas President, Dr. Philip Handler, and Soviet Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh. Protocol agreed on planning 50% increase in interacademy exchange program and increasing interacademy cooperative research program. Parties had agreed to expand joint research after noting “that their efForts had already encouraged the development of the US-Soviet cooperation toward compatible docking mechanisms for space vehicles and other cooperation in space activities, organization of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, as well as cooperation in very long base interferometry in radio, astronomy, oceanography, and other fields.” (Text)
President Nixon accepted resignation of John H. Chafee as Secretary of the Navy, effective at undetermined date. President also submitted to Congress nomination of r/a Allen L. Powell to succeed r/a Don A. Jones as Director of National Ocean Survey in National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Dept, of Commerce, r/a Jones was retiring effective April 30. Senate confirmed nomination of Powell May 3. {PD, 4/10/72, 722, 725, 737; CR, 5/3/72, D484) April 4-6:	Moscow meeting of NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences delegations confirmed desirability of joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking test mission and established understanding on management and operation of mission to be conducted in 1975, subject to government approval. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, led U.S. delegation. Soviet delegation was headed by Vladimir A. Kotelnikov, Acting President of Soviet Academy. Parties agreed to use of U.S. Apollo spacecraft and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft with systems developed by both sides, to specific documents for development of joint documentation, and to principles for preparatory and operational phases of mission. (Summary of results; NASA Release 5/24/72) April 5:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences continued hearings on NASA FY 1972 authorization. Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified that LeRC quiet engine program was proceeding on schedule: “Tests of full-scale fans for the engine have revealed much new information on the interrelationships among noise, aerodynamic performance, and structural integrity. The complete experimental engine will be operated in about 6 months. Results . . . indicate that we may expect to better the original noise abatement goals. Program results are given to industry on a continuing hasis. . . . We can expect some of our improvements to be adopted by industry in new engine designs before completion of our program.” NASA—aec Spade Nuclear Systems Office Manager Milton Klein testified: “Reactor power sources will be required to provide power in amounts greater than a few kilowatts for many of the missions of the future. For unmanned military satellites, radiation hardening—mandatory for certain military missions—and low recurring costs for multiple missions are important advantages of small reactor systems. For unmanned NASA earth orbit missions, reactors become cost effective above a few kilowatts, a power range needed for such applications missions as communications satellites. In manned missions . . . overriding advantage of reactor systems is their ability to accommodate unforeseen large increases in power demand.” Advanced reactor systems were needed for electric propulsion systems capable of high energy missions to far planets. Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M.	Truszynski reported that satellite network included 10 electronic ground stations operated by NASA, supplemented by optical tracking network operated by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Electronic stations provided worldwide system that tracked each satellite, determined status of onboard systems, commanded satellite functions, and acquired data. Optical stations, which included laser capabilities at selected sites, provided specialized services in precision orbital tracking. (Transcript)
National Science Foundation announced issuance of Solar Energy in Developing Countries: Perspectives and Prospects. Report of NAS Board on Science and Technology for International Development said solar energy had “capability to meet energy needs substantially beyond the applications now being made.” But best course was to study general energy needs of developing nations and methods of satisfying these needs without placing excessive hope in promising but unproved applications of sun’s energy. Report recommended establishment of regional centers in developing nations to evaluate supplies and uses of all kinds of energy and to begin research and development efforts on applications suitable to local conditions, (nas Release) April 13:	Soviet and NASA scientists exchanged lunar soil samples in ceremony at Soviet Academy of Sciences in Moscow. NASA representatives Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Manned Spacecraft Center Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., and Dr. Michael B. Duke, Lunar Sample Curator at msc, presented Soviet scientists with 1 g (0.04 oz) of soil brought to earth by Apollo 15 astronauts. Exchange brought total weight of Apollo 15 lunar material given to Soviet scientists to 3 g. Soviet scientists gave NASA representatives 2 g (0.07 oz) of soil brought to earth by Luna 20, several photos of Luna 20 landing site, and pictures of separate rock fragments, (nasa Release 72—77; fbis—Sov, 4/13/72, L4; nasa omsf)
Dr. John Teegan, Chief of Launch Site Medical Operations at Kennedy Space Center, announced his resignation to press at Cape Kennedy. Dr. Teegan, who would return to private practice, said he had resigned because his patients—astronauts-—were too healthy. Astronauts were unusually healthy because they were in excellent physical condition when they were chosen and made it a point to stay that way. “I was educated to care for people who were ill and I want to get my feet wet again in clinical medicine. This chapter in space history was a very valuable experience that few people have had the opportunity to experience.” (Reuters, B Sun, 2/13/72; ksc pao) February 14^-25: U.S.S.R. launched Luna 20 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur at 8:28 am local time (10:28 pm est Feb. 13). Tass said objective of mission was “further exploration of the moon and near lunar space.” On Feb. 18 Luna 20 entered near-circular lunar orbit with 100-km (62-mi) altitude, 1-hr 58-min period, and 65° inclination. Engine firing on Feb. 19 placed spacecraft in elliptical orbit with 100-km (62-mi) apolune and 21-km (13-mi) perilune. Main retroengine burn for 267 sec on Feb. 21 thrust spacecraft toward moon and Luna 20 free-fell to 760-m (2490-ft) altitude. Spacecraft was then guided by braking rocket to softlanding northeast of moon’s Sea of Fertility at 12:19 am Bay-konur time Feb. 22 (2:19 pm est Feb. 21). Landing coordinates were 3° 32' north latitude and 56° 33' east longitude. Spacecraft began transmitting radio signals and conducting experiments. After drilling lunar rock, collecting lunar samples, photographing lunar surface, and performing other undisclosed experiments, Luna 20 lifted off moon at 3:58 am Baykonur time Feb. 23 ( 5:58 pm est Feb. 22), after 27 hrs 39 min on lunar surface. Tass said samples had been obtained with earth-operated, percussion-rotary drill designed to handle hard and loose rock samples simultaneously. Luna 20 reentered atmosphere Feb. 25 and parachuted to landing at 12:12 am Feb. 25 Baykonur time (2:12 pm est Feb. 24) 40 km (24 mi) northwest of Djezkazgan, Kazakhstan, after 11-day 16-hr mission. Capsule containing lunar samples was recovered despite “extremely unfavorable weather conditions—strong wind, blizzard, and low clouds.” Luna 20 was second unmanned spacecraft to land on moon and return to earth with lunar samples. First had been U.S.S.R.’s Luna 16 (Sept. 12-24, 1970). Luna 17 had landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and had released Lunokhod 1 lunar rover. Luna 18 (launched Sept. 2, 1971) had crashlanded on moon Sept. 11, 1971, and Luna 19 (launched Sept. 28, 1971) was still in lunar orbit on photography and mapping mission. (Tass, FBis-Sov, 2/14/72, LI; 2/22-24/72, LI; 2/28/72, LI; SBD, 2/15/72, 226)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carried Spanish and Goddard Space Flight Center experiments to 85-km (52.8-mi) altitude to study ion composition of D- and E-regions of ionosphere. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily except for short tone-ranging data dropout which was not expected to affect scientific results. Good data were obtained. Launch was made under April 21, 1972, modification of July 30, 1970, Memorandum of Agreement between NASA and Comision Nacional de Investigacion del Espacio (conie) for cooperative sounding rocket project to study ionosphere, (nasa Rpt srl)
Major thrust of Dept, of Defense FY 1973 expenditures was to improve strategic weapon capability, Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial said. Budget [see Jan. 24] was “the best news the aerospace industry has had in several years ... a clear signal for action and forward thrust. It also imposes an awesome responsibility on the aerospace industry. Once again it is being called upon to produce new and demonstrably superior hardware on which it is possible to base a military power sufficient to deter major war and sufficient to win quickly any minor wars. It must produce swiftly and efficiently. Neither the aerospace industry nor the country can afford any more of the expensive development fiascos of the McNamara era.” (Av Wk, 1/31/72, 9) During January:	Space Science Board of National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council released Outer Planets Exploration, 1972—1985. Analysis of new cost and engineering data for unmanned spacecraft for missions to outer planets had been made for NASA by panel chaired by Dr. Francis S. Johnson of Univ. of Texas at Dallas. Extensive study of outer solar system was “one of the major objectives of space science in this decade.” Panel recommended thermoelectric outer planets spacecraft (tops) be developed and used in Grand Tour missions of late 1970s; Pioneer-level program be maintained for exploration of Jupiter and Saturn and their satellites every two years; Pioneer-F and -G evaluate radiation environment of Jupiter and Pioneer-H be readied for Jupiter magnetosphere mission to further evaluate planet’s radiation if necessary; NASA ground-based research on planetary exploration be continued; even-segment Titan booster or its equivalent be developed for outer planet exploration; support be provided for scientific advisory committees, development of instrumentation, and studies of alternative mission strategies for Jupiter and Saturn exploration; and NASA development of methods of solar and nuclear electric propulsion be continued. Report recommended programs for three funding levels: four tops Grand Tour missions in 1976-1980 period at $400-million annual budget level, compromise between Grand Tour missions and outer solar systems programs like modified Pioneer missions at $250-million-a-year level, and varied program of outer solar system exploration using modified Pioneer spacecraft at lowest funding level, approximately $400 million over one decade, (nas-nrc—nae News Rpt, 1/72, 8-9)
Skylab crew press conference, with prime and backup crewmen, was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said preparations were on schedule for April 1973 launch. Contractor checkouts and tests of hardware were expected to be completed for delivery to Kennedy Space Center in July. Skylab would carry some 20 000 pieces of stowage equipment on board to provide life support for nine men for 140 days. “So it all goes up at one time, and we’ve got a great deal of work to do, not only to learn how to operate this vehicle but also all the experiments in it. It became apparent that we could not be 100 percent cross-trained as we had been in Apollo, so we’ve . . . defined some areas for each guy to become expert in ... . That allowed us to balance out the training hours. Right now ... we have some 2000 training hours per man defined. We’ve been working on the basic training for the past year.” Training hardware would be available about February 1. Commander would have overall responsibility for mission and would be command and service module expert. Science pilot would be expert in all medical equipment and in Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) and its associated hardware. Pilot would be expert in Orbital Workshop systems and electrical systems. Remaining experiments would be divided among crewmembers according to availability and choice. Astronaut Alan L. Bean said photographic data returned from Skylab would be “far superior” to previous data because actual film would be returned to earth. To return film, crews would conduct two extravehicular activities (eyas) on first mission, three on second, and two on third. “We’re going to be moving . . . 240 pounds [109 kg] worth of film, in canisters, magazines, in and out of the cameras. We’ll have to remove the used exposed film and replace it with new film. It’s going to take about 3 hours.” Experiments were described by Astronaut Gerald P. Carr. They included EREP earth resources experiment containing five sensors to calibrate earth’s atmosphere, corollary experiments submitted by high school students, engineering experiments to study effects of zero g on metal alloys and flammability of certain items, habitability experiments to study noise levels and atmospheric composition, and scientific experiments. Scientific experiments would include studies of effect of zero g on single human cells, studies of circadian rhythm of pocket mice and vinegar gnats, ultraviolet stellar astronomy and x-ray astronomy. Technological experiments would include crew vehicle disturbances, manual navigation sightings, and “a study of the little contamination cloud that we carry around with us . . . kind of like Pigpen in Peanuts.” In response to question on illness during missions, Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin said NASA would provide equipment and training on board to take care of most illnesses and injuries that could be handled in a doctor’s office. Science pilot would be able to provide emergency care for illnesses “up to and including quite severe. We have quite a package of drugs on board, administrable by all routes; we have tracheotomy equipment and equipment for maintaining an airway for stopping bleeding. We are attempting to develop in time for the flight intravenous fluids. We feel that, almost regardless of the severity of the injury, we will at least be able to stabilize the patient.” (Transcript)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, and Ronald E. Evans passed final four-hour physical examination at Kennedy Space Center. Manned Spacecraft Center Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, Dr. W. Royce Hawkins, told press astronauts were “well rested, in good spirits, and physically in excellent shape.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/2/72, 58)
Appointment of Dr. Noel W. Hinners as Deputy Director and Chief Scientist, Apollo Lunar Exploration, in Office of Manned Space Flight was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Dr. Hinners had headed lunar exploration department of Bellcomm, Inc. (msc Release 72-82)
Apollo Telescope Mount was shipped from Marshall Space Flight Center to Manned Spacecraft Center, where it would undergo alignment tests. The 11800-kg (24 000-lb) spacecraft, housing telescopes and other instruments for studying sun, would be launched on Skylab Orbital Workshop in April 1973. (msfc Release 72-77)
Results of analyses of data collected by City of Cleveland’s Air Pollution Control Div. from 1968 through 1971 were reported by Lewis Research Center scientists. State of Ohio standards for total suspended particulate and nitrogen dioxide had not heen met in Cleveland; sulfur dioxide standards had been met only in limited residential areas. Air quality had improved in industrial valley but only sulfur dioxide pollution showed consistent deciease in remainder of city, and suspended particulate levels had increased to west of Cuyahoga River with decrease to east. Trends had been determined by LeRC Environmental Research Office from data obtained during two-year joint LeRC and City of Cleveland project. (LeRC Release 72-102) *	Officials of Corp. for Public Broadcasting (cpb), Public Broadcasting Service (pbs), and National Public Affairs Center for TV (npact) met to discuss NPACT feasibility study of possible special scientific coverage of Apollo 17 evas by PBS [see Nov, 9]. Following discussion CPB President Henry Loomis issued message to pbs stations. Decision bad been made that “live coverage would be impractical for public television and that alternate idea for space project programming would be considered.” Decision was based on study conclusions that time was too short to gather required staff, mission delays might disrupt TV schedules, and coverage by commercial networks would be more extensive than first expected. There was agreement that “scientific findings of the entire Apollo project, which concludes with Apollo, merited serious treatment on public television.” (Text)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced appointment of Lynwood C. Dunseith as Deputy Director of Flight Operations. Dunseith had joined nasa in 1959 as member of Space Task Group at Langley Research Center and had been Assistant Director for Computation and Flight Support at msc since 1970. (msc Release 72-137)
Retirement of Dr. Fred L. Whipple as Director of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory—effective July 1, 1973—was announced by Dr. S. Dillon Ripley II, Secretary of Smithsonian Institution. Dr. Whipple would be succeeded by Dr. George B. Field, professor of astronomy at Harvard College Observatory. Director of SAO since 1955, Dr. Whipple received President’s Distinguished Federal Civilian Service Medal in 1963 for leadership in developing Baker-Nunn satellite tracking camera and optical tracking network that had gathered data since launch of world’s first satellite in 1957. Known internationally for studies of moon, meteors, and comets, he would become a senior scientist at Smithsonian. (Smithsonian Release; NYT, 11/5/72, 12; 6/13/63, 21; Green, Lomask, Vanguard,—A History, SP-4202)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in letter to staff congratulated NASA, contractor teams, and participating scientists for successful performance of Oao 3 Orbiting Astronomical Observatory launched Aug. 21, 1972. To date, performance indicated “we have given the world a wonderful new window on the universe and a magnificent new tool of science worthy of the illustrious name it now bears [Copernicus].” Copernicus, father of modern astronomy, had changed world’s thinking about nature of solar system and earth’s place in it. “I believe we are going to see advances of comparable magnitude in our understanding of the universe, thanks to the new technology brought into being in our oao program.” (NASA Activities, 9/15/72, 180-1)
Article in Soviet space magazine Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika (Aviation and Cosmonautics) had indicated U.S. was not only nation investigating space shuttle development, New York Times reported. Two Soviet space scientists using pseudonyms V. Vasilyev and L. Leonidov had called shuttle “logical continuation of the space exploration effort.” Times said it was “first technical discussion” of the space shuttle concept to appear in Soviet press since President Nixon approved U.S. shuttle development in January. (Shabad, NYT, 7/10/72)	_	_
President Nixon signed S. 3943, Senate version of H.R. 16645. Bill, for construction of civic center as memorial to President Dwight D. Eisenhower, carried rider that changed name of Jet Propulsion Laboratory to H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory, effective Jan. 4, 1973. Bill became Public Law 92-520. {PD, 10/30/72, 1548-9; PL 92-520)
Relation of U.S. space program to national interest was discussed in Foreign Affairs article by Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, and Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator: “To some, space is, or should be, pure science; to others, it is prestige and the American image; to still others, space means national security.” Some space program students had said “its impact will be felt in other respects than the costaccounting of economic productivity versus technological investment. There has been much discussion of the influence of space exploration on the mind and spirit of man, as an extension of the revolution in thought that was initiated by Copernicus and continued by Newton and Darwin. A study of the history and pre-history of man suggests that the human drive is expressed through just such tentative movements out of the world of tried experience into a new world of untested promise. “Sputnik and the moon landing signaled the opening of a new frontier across which man can now travel into the endless reaches of outer space. The new frontier of space will not be closed quickly, for astronomical knowledge shows that billions of stars, some undoubtedly accompanied by earthlike planets, surround us in the galaxy. Space exploration has brought home to more people than ever before the reality of this vast complex of stars and planets. ‘Out there’ is really there, a place that one can get to. Never again can we make the mistake of identifying our speck of planetary matter as the universe.” (Foreign Affairs, 4/72, 532-44)
White House announced plans for new series of awards, Presidential Prizes for Innovation. Prizes, to be distributed Sept. 15, would consist of medal and $50 000. Money would come from National Science Foundation budget for Research Applied to National Needs (rann). Recipients would be chosen by Prizes Staff of White House Office of Science and Technology, headed by National Bureau of Standards physicist Carl M. Muelhause. Prizes would honor technological advances dealing with “significant problem” in domestic area. (Sci & Gov Rpt, 6/15/72, 2) May 22:	President Nixon and party flew from Salzburg, Austria, to Moscow for first official visit of U.S. President to U.S.S.R. He met for two hours with Communist Party leader Leonid I. Brezhnev and later attended Kremlin dinner given by Presidium of U.S.S.R. During toast, Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny said: “. . . great importance is attached in the Soviet Union to Soviet-American talks which should cover a wide range of questions. We approach these talks from realistic positions and will make every effort in accordance with the principles of our policy to achieve positive results and try to justify the hopes placed in our countries and beyond them.” President Nixon responded: “Because we are both prepared to proceed on the basis of equality and mutual respect, we meet at a moment when we can make peaceful cooperation a reality.” Summarizing objectives of summit talks, President Nixon said: “First, we want to complete work on matters that years of patient negotiations have brought to the decision point: Bilateral matters will serve as our point of departure: Our two nations can work together in the exploration of space, the conquest of disease, the improvement of our environment.” {PD, 6/5/72, 915-7)
Chicago Tribune editorial said there was still “a lot of studying to be done” on U.S. conversion to metric system [see Aug. 18]. Question of financing was “sticky” one. “Many of the countries which have gone or are going metric have provided some sort of government help to finance the changeover.” U.S. estimated conversion cost at between $10 billion and $40 billion. “Both labor and industry—especially small business—have been leery of undertaking this expense without government help. But the government is in no position at the moment to give much help; and if it were to convert its purchases to the metric system quickly, the result would be favorable to foreign manufacturers already on the metric system and detrimental to our own.” (C Trib, 8/21/72) August 22:	NASA announced preliminary timeline for Apollo 17 manned lunar landing mission. Spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt—would be launched from Kennedy Space Center at 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. Lunar module would land on moon’s Taurus-Littrow region at 2:55 pm est Dec. 11 and two crewmen would explore lunar surface for three extravehicular activity periods before lm lifted off moon at 5:56 pm est Dec. 14. Spacecraft would splash down in Pacific at 2:24 pm est Dec. 19, after 304-hr 31-min mission, (nasa Release 72-169)
Space Science Awareness Month was celebrated by City of St. Louis, Mo., at instigation of Mayor Alphonso Cervantes. More than 100 space science lectures and demonstrations were presented in area to provide opportunity for teachers, students, and general public to understand space technology and its benefits to society. Eugene Hanses, education director of McDonnell Planetarium, was chairman of activities which included talks by Marshall Space Flight Center officials and display of moon rocks, (msfc Release 72—145; NASA Activities, 12/15/72, 253)
NASA’s M2—F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, reached 14 300-m (47 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.8 during 17th flight from Flight Research Center. Objectives—to expand flight envelope and obtain stability and control data at mach 0.95—were not achieved because two of four chambers failed to ignite, (nasa proj off)
Goddard Space Flight Center was awarding $100 000 contract to rand Corp. to plan and coordinate study for Broadcasting Satellite System. RAND would provide improved analytical tools for technical guidance and support of broadcasting satellite services development, (gsfc PAO; SBD, 4/20/72, 273)
President Nixon and party left Andrews Air Force Base, Md., for Salzburg, Austria, first stop on scheduled 13-day visit to Austria, U.S.S.R., Iran, and Poland. Visit would include summit meetings with Soviet officials in Moscow to discuss possible cooperation in joint manned space flight mission, strategic arms limitation, environmental and health problems, reducing risk of incidents at sea, international trade, and other ventures in “peaceful coexistence.” {PD, 6/5/72, 912; Marder, W Post, 5/21/72, Al)
President Nixon and Japanese Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka issued joint statement following their meetings in Hawaii. Statement described subjects covered in talks. They had “discussed cooperation in space exploration including Japan’s goal of launching geo-stationary communications and other applications satellites. The President welcomed Japan’s active interest in and study of the launching of a meteorological satellite in support of the global atmospheric research program.” (PD, 9/11/72, 1333-4)
Apollo 17 astronauts began final week of training at Kennedy Space Center for Dec. 6 mission. NASA spokesman said countdown test begun Nov. 15 had proceeded so smoothly that launch pad technicians had “only to monitor the systems.” Other technicians installed batteries and water in lunar landing vehicle and checked backup flight systems. (Wil-ford, NYT, 11/28/72)
Progress in NASA development of technology to alleviate aircraft noise pollution and ensure quieter aircraft operation was described by Walter A. Pennino, Public Affairs Officer in Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast), at NASA Hq. press briefing. Research had shown aircraft noise could be reduced if pilot flew aircraft “so that it climbs quickly” to be “as far from a ground observer as possible.” When wing flaps were retracted as aircraft accelerated, aircraft required “less thrust to climb. When a safe altitude is reached, the pilot can reduce the engine thrust from that required for takeoff to the lower thrust required for climb.” NASA and Federal Aviation Administration were encouraging airlines to adopt two-segment approach to reduce landing noise. Pilot would adjust controls to descent first at 6° glide slope. About one mile from the runway he would change path to slope. In final stages there would be no difference in the landing procedure. Aircraft would approach with engine power somewhat reduced and would be at higher altitude. Noise reduction would be three to five effective perceived noise in decibels (epndb) one nautical mile from the end of the runway and even greater reduction farther out from the runway. Ames and Langley Research Centers were studying requirements to make two-segment approach safe standard procedure. In Lewis Research Center Quiet Engine Program, experimental engines suitable for conventional takeoff and landing aircraft were being built. Test had shown reduction of noise by using quiet engine with and without acoustically treated nacelle. Goal chosen for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft was 95 epndb at 152 m (500 ft). “We don’t have an engine that can do that job right now, but NASA is working on it.” Follow-on programs for new family of aircraft were described by James 0. Kramer, Chief of Noise and Pollution Reduction Branch in oast Aeronautical Propulsion Div. “Preliminary design study contracts will be let in the next month or two to study a low-noise, low-pollution engine . . . suitable for stol. In addition, we havie been carrying on design study for an advanced technology transport . . . appropriate for the 1980-timeframe as a replacement for 707 or for the DC-8. We are . . . planning to initiate in FY 73 preliminary design studies of a Quiet Engine . . . appropriate for such an advanced technology airplane.” (Transcript)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $1 323 565 contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to provide liquid hydrogen to East Coast space program users from June 1, 1972, through March 31, 1973. Liquid hydrogen would be distributed to Government agencies and contractors in Saturn V booster and space shuttle activities. Under interagency agreement, NASA contracted for all liquid hydrogen used by NASA and Dept, of Defense in eastern U.S. (msfc Release 72-69)
President Nixon announced decision U.S. should develop space shuttle system. In statement re'eased from San Clemente. Calif., following 45-min meeting with Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, President said: “I have decided today that the United States should proceed at once with the development of an entirely new type of space transportation system designed to help transform the space frontier of the 1970’s into familiar territory, easily accessible for human endeavor in the 1980’s and 1990’s. “This system will center on a space vehicle that can shuttle repeatedly from earth to orbit and hack. It will revolutionize transportation into near space, by routinizing it. It will take the astronomical costs out of astronautics. In short, it will go a long way toward delivering the rich benefits of practical space utilization and the valuable spinoffs from space efForts into the daily lives of Americans and all people. “The new year 1972 is a year of conclusion for America’s current series of manned flights to the moon. Much is expected from the two remaining Apollo missions—in fact, their scientific results should exceed the return from all the earlier flights together. Urns they will place a fitting capstone on this vastly successful undertaking. But they also hring us to an important decision point—-a point of assessing what our space horizons are as Apollo ends, and of determining where we go from here. “In the scientific arena, the past decade of experience has taught us that spacecraft are an irreplaceable tool for learning about our near earth space environment, the moon, and the planets, besides being an important aid to our studies of the sun and stars. In utilizing space to meet needs on earth, we have seen the tremendous potential of satellites for intercontinental communications and worldwide weather forecasting. We are gaining the capability to use satellites as tools in global monitoring and management of natural /resources, in agricultural January 5; President Nixon and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher examined a model of the reusable space shuttle at San Clemente, Calif,, following the President’s announcement that the United States would proceed with shuttle development. applications, and in pollution control. We can foresee their use in guiding airliners across the oceans and in bringing televised education to wide areas of the world. “However, all these possibilities, and countless others with direct and dramatic bearing on human betterment, can never be more than fractionally realized so long as every single trip from earth to orbit remains a matter of special effort and staggering expense. This is why commitment to the space shuttle program is the right next step for America to take, in moving out from our present beachhead in the sky to achieve a real working presence in space—because the space shuttle will give us routine access to space by sharply reducing costs in dollars and preparation time.” It was significant, President said, “that this major new national enterprise will engage the best efforts of thousands of highly skilled workers and hundreds of contractor firms over the next several years. The amazing ‘technology explosion’ that has swept this country in the years since we ventured into space should remind us that robust activity in the aerospace industry is healthy for every one—not just in jobs and income, but in the extension of our capabilities in every direction. The continued pre-eminence of America and American industry in the aerospace field will be an important part of the shuttle’s ‘payload.’ ” Shuttle program would “give more people access to the liberating perspectives of space, even as it extends our ability to cope with physical challenges of earth and broadens our opportunities for international cooperation in low-cost, multi-purpose space missions.” President quoted Oliver Wendell Holmes: “We must sail sometimes with the wind and sometimes against it, but we must sail, and not drift, nor lie at anchor.” President concluded, “So with man’s epic voyage into space—a voyage the United States of America has led and still shall lead.” (PD, 1/10/72, 27-8; Transcript of Fletcher, Low press conference, 1/5/72)
New York Times editorial commented on space cooperation: “These past few years astronomy has probably advanced further than in any previous century since the invention of the telescope. Fantastic progress has been made through American and Soviet exploration of the moon, Mars and Venus.” Need was “to build on this new base of knowledge with a program of further manned and unmanned space exploration conducted under a system of international cooperation which combines the resources, manpower and knowledge of many nations. No generation has ever faced a nobler challenge than space now poses before all humanity.” (NYT, 4/16/72, 5:12)
Flight Research Center announced selection of rca Service Co. for final negotiation of contract to support nasa Aerodynamic Test Range— radar/communication sites 550 km (340 mi) apart that provided high-speed flight corridor 1850 km (1150 mi) long from mid-Washington state to Edwards, Calif. Negotiations were for four-year, $359 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract with four one-year options, (frc Release 13-72)
National Research Council announced formation, at Dept, of Transportation request, of nrc Committee on the Department of Transportation Climatic Assessment Program. Committee, chaired by Dr. Henry G. Booker of Univ. of California at San Diego, would examine need for studies of effects of aircraft nitrogen-oxide emissions on earth’s ozone layer; atmospheric dynamics, physics, and chemistry; nature of prospective emissions into stratosphere; and biological effects on earth of stratospheric activities, (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 10/72, 2)
National Academy of Sciences was seeking Congressional approval of project to provide funds to Poland for construction of fl-million astronomical research center as gift to mark 500th anniversary of birth of Copernicus in 1973, New York Times reported. Additional funds for equipment would be sought in U.S. from Polish-American community. Facility would be in Warsaw. (Feron, NYT, 5/15/72, 81) May 16:	Press briefing on Apollo 16 preliminary science results was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Dr. David W. Strangway, Chief of msc Geophysics Branch, said magnetic sample returned to moon on Apollo 16 “did pick up fairly strong component of soft magnetization as the result of exposure to the spacecraft systems. On return to the earth, however, we were able to clean that out and to recover the original hard component of magnetization which is what ... we were hoping to do.” Experiment had worked out “quite successfully and suggests that the soft components that we’re seeing in the rocks is indeed of spacecraft origin and is not an artifact of some kind that came from the lunar surface. ... if it did come from the lunar surface we’ve contaminated it so much that we can’t sort it out afterwards. But the hard component then, we believe, is real and it came back through the whole journey and ... is essentially unchanged and unmodified.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said qualitative conclusion from chemical analysis of few samples examined to date was “that the soil is certainly quite homogeneous from point to point.” Homogeneity suggested that rock at Cayley Plains might not be different from rock in Descartes and that neither formation might have been formed from volcanic lava. Samples had very high concentrations of aluminum and calcium—26%% aluminum oxide and 15% calcium—“very different from what we see everywhere on the surface of the earth.” X-rays of core tubes showed dispersion throughout soil of metal particles—probably metallic iron—up to 0.5 cm (0.2 in) in diameter. Tentative conclusion was “that metallic iron, both in the soil and the rocks, is very much more abundant at this site than it’s been at any other site on the moon and this may be a qualitative characteristic of the Apollo 16 site and perhaps a qualitative characteristic of the highlands is that rocks there contain bits of metallic iron. It is tempting to speculate that this has something to do with the high magnetic field at this region.” Although scientists couldn’t tell just from looking at rocks whether any were volcanic, “the opinion is evolving that they are not.” Rocks appeared, to naked eye, to be impact breccias. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 5/17/72)
Pupils from seven suburban schools in Cleveland, Ohio, area visited Lewis Research Center to discuss participation in joint LeRC and Cleveland Div. of Air Pollution Control project to measure trace elements in air. NASA would supply equipment to schools for sampling outside air. Samples would be analyzed at LeRC and compared with Cleveland air. (Cleveland PD, 2/10/72) February 10:	Apparent failure of electronic component had caused loss of major portions of data from two of three scientific experiments on board particles and fields Subsatellite placed in lunar orbit by Apollo 15 Aug. 4, 1971, NASA announced. Affected experiments—magnetometer and particles experiment—appeared to be functioning normally, but not all data could be received from them. Data controlled by 2 of 12 gates which released data in proper sequence were lost Feb. 3 and engineers had been unable to restore the data paths that handled orientation for analyzing magnetometer results, synchronizing pulses that allowed ground-based computers to decipher telemetry data, and portions of data collected by experiments. Manned Spacecraft Center personnel had been manually analyzing thousands of bits of data to determine extent of problem and to work out alternate procedures for obtaining the missing data. Analysis showed that failure was probably due to breakdown of some electronic part, (msc Release 72-37)
More than 70 students from six continents would witness Apollo 17 launch and visit major U.S. science centers during Dec. 4-17 tour sponsored by NASA in cooperation with Dept, of State, NASA announced. Students 15 to 17 yrs old with top academic ratings had been selected by their governments on NASA invitation. U.S. tour would give students broad view of work in science and space. Tour would include Washington, D.C.; Tennessee Valley Authority; Oak Ridge National Laboratory; Marshall Space Flight Center; Manned Spacecraft Center; Ames Research Center; Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and facilities of National Bureau of Standards, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and United Nations. Project also was supported by U.S. Information Agency and National Science Teachers Assn, (nasa Release 72-219)
Langley Research Center awarded 32%-mo, $1 717 200 costplusfixedfee contract to United Aircraft Corp. United Technology Center (utc) Div. to demonstrate technology of high-performance hybrid rocket system, utc would build and test-fire seven rockets about 90 cm (36 in) in diameter and 2.6 m (101.5 in) long with 48 930-newton (11 000-lb) thrust, (nasa Release 72-127)
President Nixon sent United States Foreign Policy for the 1970’s: The Emerging Structure for Peace to Congress. Third annual report on U.S. foreign policy analyzed world situation. Of space, President said; “As our astronauts have seen, the unity of the Earth is experienced most vividly from outer space. And conversely, seen from our planet, space itself is a frontier to mankind as a whole, not merely to individual nations. Space is, therefore, an unparalleled field for cooperation among nations. “As we move into the second decade of space exploration, the U.S. is committed to work with others in space for the benefit of all mankind. We are taking whatever steps can reasonably and properly be taken to work with other countries in the development of their space skills. “Specifically, we have assured the European Space Conference that its member countries may obtain our assistance in launching satellites which are for peaceful purposes and which are consistent with international obligations embodied in such agreements as the Outer Space Treaty and the arrangements for the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat). We are prepared to consider such assistance to other interested countries. In addition, we are working closely with the Europeans on the concepts and design of a reusable space transportation system. “Over the past year, NASA has agreed with the Soviet Academy of Sciences to significant cooperation in specific space tasks, and in the exchange of information and plans concerning our respective space programs. We have exchanged samples of lunar soil. We are examining together the means to enable Soviet manned spacecraft and our own to rendezvous and dock in space. Joint expert groups have been meeting to arrange details of further collaboration in space meteorology, biology, and medicine, in the study of the natural environment, and in exploration of the moon and planets. “In 1971, after years of negotiation in which the United States has played a leading role, the United Nations General Assembly approved an Outer .Space Liability Convention. . . . “Last year also brought a new definitive charter for the operation of INTELSAT. . . .” President said NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences space cooperation had been among series of U.S.—Soviet agrements, “striking both in their diversity and in their promise of mutual advantage.” But in “changed world” conditioning U.S. foreign policy, President noted “the end of an indisputable U.S. superiority in strategic strength,” and its replacement by a strategic balance in which the U.S. and Soviet nuclear forces were comparable. U.S.S.R. had continued to improve its capability in “virtually every category of strategic offensive and defensive weapons. . . . Soviet strategic forces, even at current levels, have the potential of threatening our land-based ICBMs if the Soviets choose to make certain qualitative improvements. They have the necessary technological base.” People’s Republic of China Was “continuing to, develop a strategic offensive capability. The possibility of accidental attacks remains.” President said it was wise for U.S. to begin Safeguard abm deployment, but “we may soon complete a salt agreement with the USSR which will limit abm deployment.” President commended 1970 Hague and Montreal International Civil Aviation Organization conventions to deter aircraft hijacking and sabotage: “These two conventions will increase the likelihood that hijackers, saboteurs, and persons committing other attacks against civil aircraft will be punished. . . . Universal ratification would ensure that air pirates could find no place to hide. “We intend to press for wide adherence to these agreements and for continued international cooperation, including exchanges of information on security measures. We will also continue to urge international agreement to suspend air service to countries which refuse to cooperate in the release of hijacked aircraft and in the punishment of hijackers.” (PD, 2/14/72, 235-411)
NASA published Physics of the Space Environment (NASA SP-305). Series of lectures, presented originally in colloquia at Univ. of Alabama 1970-1971, had been sponsored by Marshall Space Flight Center’s Aero-Astrodynamics Laboratory. Major topics covered were dynamics and transient state of upper atmosphere, chemical composition of upper atmosphere, and solar flare forecasting. Flare forecasting “fiasco” was described by Frederick W. Ward, Jr., Air Force Cambridge Laboratories physicist: Forecasters dreamed of discovering cause, energy source, and antecedent conditions for solar flares. “This ‘tunnel vision’ has had a profound and deleterious effect on the state-of-the-art. It has diverted attention from many promising approaches and relegated them to limbo. More importantly, it has actually inhibited the scientific search for the underlying physical mechanisms.” Examples of neglected aspects ranged from observing techniques and equipment to availability and accuracy of archived data. Inspection of available data “leads to an obvious conclusion: there are at least two suns up there.” (Text)
Tenth year of interplanetary exploration was celebrated by Jet Propulsion Laboratory on 10th anniversary of arrival at Venus of Mariner 2, launched by NASA Aug. 27, 1962. Five more Mariners—designed and built by JPL engineers—had been launched during decade. In 1965 Mariner 4 (launched Nov. 28, 1964) flew by Mars, obtaining first close-up pictures. Mariner 5 (launched June 14, 1967) helped determine atmosphere of Venus was 75 to 100 times more dense than earth’s. Mariner 6 (launched Feb. 24, 1969) and Mariner 7 (launched Mar. 27, 1969) took photographs of Mars surface from as close as 3500 km (2200 mi). Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) gathered data during 698 revolutions of Mars, provided map of entire planet, and showed evidence of volcanic activity and free-flowing water in planet’s geologic history, (jpl Release 640; A&A 1962; nasa Release 72-241)
William P. Lear, Sr., pioneering designer of autopilots and executive jet aircraft, told press conference at transpo ’72 at Dulles Airport, Va., that he hoped to sell aircraft with supercritical wing that would increase speed capability from mach 0.80 to 0.92 without increasing fuel consumption. NASA engineers at Langley Research Center had developed original supercritical wing. (AP, LA Times, 6/27/72)
Reassignment of Apollo 15 Astronaut Alfred M. Worden from Astronaut Office at Manned Spacecraft Center to Airborne Science Office, Space Science Div., at Ames Research Center became effective, (msc Release 72-197)
International aspects of future space programs were discussed by Crosby S. Noyes in Washington Evening Star and Daily News column. Scientific and engineering aspects of 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission were “minimal compared to the psychological switch which the effort represents.” Project had “most profound political implications for the future.” U.S.S.R. participation in space shuttle development might raise “touchy questions” because of “obvious military aspects of the program.” In distant future efforts, including possible manned flights to other planets, “it is . . . evident that international cooperation on a much wider scale will be essential. What the Apollo program has demonstrated is that manned space flight is an impractical proposition for any single nation to undertake. Which may turn out to be the most valuable discovery of all.” (W Star & News, 12/5/72) December 6:	NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by Cecil Powell, completed 25th flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Objectives of flight were to evaluate command augmentation system; to ohtain stability and control data at mach 1.1, mach 0.8, and mach 0.7; and to check out pitch-reaction augmentation system. All objectives were achieved. M2-F3 reached 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.3. (nasa proj off)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight met for briefing by NASA on joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission in 1975. Officials—Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Arnold Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs; and Glynn S:'Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager—presented chronology of major events leading to mission, preliminary mission description, description of hardware elements, and data on management of engineering phase and of real-time operation. (Transcript)
Tenth anniversary of start of Saturn V project at Marshall Space Flight Center. Since inauguration of Advanced Saturn development Jan. 25, 1962, Saturn V launch vehicles had been used successfully to launch eight manned space flights. Apollo 16 Saturn V booster would be 26th Saturn launch vehicle flown from Kennedy Space Center since firing of first Saturn I Oct. 27, 1961. (msfc Release 72-3)
U.S.S.R. successfully flight-tested new intercontinental missile over 6300km (3900-mi) distance between Tyuratam in central U.S.S.R. to Kamchatka Peninsula. U.S. intelligence experts later said flight was first successful test of improved missile about as large as Soviet SS-9. (Hoffman, AP, W Star & News, 1/7/73, A5) December 31:	Use of solar energy to combat encroaching energy crisis was being examined seriously, Oliver Bell reported in Washington Post article. Solar energy panel had been established in Office of Science and Technology’s Energy Research and Development Goals Study and NASA was “actively researching whether it can become involved in the solar energy picture.” Solar satellite power station concept developed by Peter E. Glaser of Arthur D. Little, Inc., was being considered. Satellite would circle earth in synchronous orbit at 35 900-■ km (22 300-mi) altitude exposed to sun 24 hrs a day. Solar collector— lightweight panel of solar cells—would convert sun’s light into electricity, which would then he changed to microwave energy, beamed to earth, collected on antenna, and reconverted into electricity. Other proposals included earth-based system to reflect sun’s radiation onto solar furnace and boiler atop 460-m (1500-ft) tower, and system to use steel collecting surfaces with “greenhouse” effect to produce temperatures to 813 K (1004°F). Congress would decide whether Government would fund research into unconventional sources of power. (W Post, 12/31/72) During December: House Committee on Science and Astronautics released Solar Energy Research: A Multidisciplinary Approach, responses of Federal agencies to requests for information on solar energy research. NASA and National Science Foundation—agencies primarily responsible for Government’s solar energy efforts—had recommended Federal program of research and development to apply solar energy to U.S. heat and power needs. NASA had recommended development of economical systems for heating and cooling buildings; economical methods for producing and converting organic materials to liquid, solid, and gaseous fuels; and economical methods for generating electricity. If programs were successful, NASA had said, building heating could reach public use in 5 yrs and building cooling in 6 to 10 yrs, synthetic fuels could be produced from organic materials in 5 to 8 yrs, and electricity could be generated from solar energy in 10 to 15 yrs. There were no significant environmental disadvantages to wide use of solar energy. (Text)
Huntsville (Ala.) Times editorial criticized attitude of Democratic presidential candidate Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S. Dak.) toward U.S. space program: “The McGovern space-budget figure of $2 billion may not seem a paltry sum to many taxpayers and voters. But it becomes a piddling figure . . . when compared Avith massive governmental outlays for farm price-supports and other questionable multibillion-dollar expenditures. And even in endorsing this minimal space effort, Senator McGovern stresses the negative aspect of not wanting to see additional thousands of aerospace employees thrown out of work, rather than emphasizing the positive contributions of space to the expansion of man’s scientific knowledge, to the strengthening of the technological know-how of American industry, and to the enhancement of the nation’s image throughout the world.” (Huntsville Times, 9/11/72) September 11—13:	American Society of Mechanical Engineers held annual Aerospace Div. Conference at Anaheim, Calif. Application of aerospace technology to societal problems and future of space exploration were discussed by officials of NASA; National Science Foundation; Depts. of Commerce, Transportation, and Interior; state and local governments; industry; and education. Aviation’s role in earth resources surveys was described in paper by Deputy Director Clarence A. Syvertson and Airborne Science Office Chief Donald R. Mulholland of Ames Research Center: “At the present time, 275 companies are engaged in aerial surveys, but less than 50 of these are equipped for nonphotographic remote sensing. New sensor technology growing from and stimulated by the space program has made it possible to obtain vastly improved data.” Federal Aviation Administration data showed that in 1971 “some 230 aircraft were used for aerial surveys and another 31 for patrolling.” ARC used general-aviation, high-altitude research, and four-engine jet transportation craft. Remote sensing from aircraft provided data to improve environment, conserve natural resources, and contribute to economic growth. “The sensors required . . . are evolving rapidly, in part from well-established aerial reconnaissance technology, and in part from technology developed for the space program.” asme Spirit of St. Louis Award was presented to Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man on moon, for “meritorious service in the advancement of aeronautics and astronautics.” (asme Release 7/18/72; NASA Activities, 10/15/72, 207-10) September 11-October 1:	Series of six stratospheric balloons were launched to altitudes from 58 000 to 41000 m (125 000 to 135 000 ft) from Cape Girardeau Municipal Airport, Mo., in project directed by Navy’s Office of Naval Research and Raven Industries, Inc., in cooperation with four universities and NASA. Balloons, with volumes from 310 000 to 937 000 cu m (11 000 000 to 33 100 000 cu ft), achieved all flight objectives. Sept. 11 flight carried instruments from Univ. of New Hampshire to study charge and isotopical composition of cosmic radiation particles and two ionization chambers from Atomic Energy Commission and Rice Univ. Sept. 14 flight carried Washington Univ., St. Louis, experiments, including one to measure isotopic abundances of silicon, sulfur, calcium, and iron nuclei. On Sept. 14 and 24, Enrico Fermi Institute, Chicago Univ., counter experiments were launched to measure nuclear composition of very-high-energy cosmic rays. Univ. of California, at Riverside experiment was launched Sept. 19 to measure albedo neutrons from earth and solar neutrons from solar flares and quiet sun. Sixth flight, Oct. 1, carried Goddard Space Flight Center experiment to measure flux of very-high-energy cosmic rays. (Navy, onr Field Representative [Navy Balloon Proj])
President Nixon accepted resignation of James H. Wakelin, Jr., as Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology, effective Aug. 1.	(PD, 8/7/72,1204)
Col. Robert R. Wessels (usa) had been assigned to Marshall Space Flight Center as Director of Shuttle Construction Office, Marshall Star reported. Col. Wessels previously had been Deputy District Engineer for NASA Support, responsible for monitoring and coordinating district’s design, engineering, and construction program at MSC and Mississippi Test Facility. (Marshall Star, 8/30/72, 1)
Kennedy Space Center announced two contract awards. McDonnell Douglas Corp. was awarded $15 945 000, one-year contract modification for prelaunch, launch, and postlaunch operations of Skylab airlock module, Orbital Workshop, associated ground support equipment, special test devices, and facilities. Modification brought total value of contract to $60 599 698. Boeing Co. Field Operations and Support Div. was awarded $22 904 790, one-year contract extension for base support services at KSC and Cape Kennedy Air Force Station. Extension brought total value of contract to $42 122 790. (ksc Releases 24r-72, 25—72)
Two press briefings were held at nasa Hq., Apollo 16 Mission Director’s press briefing and press conference on medical aspects of Apollo 15 and 16. In first, press was told hypergolic loading of propellants had begun and countdown demonstration test with fueled spacecraft would begin March 29. msc was continuing simulations, and prime recovery ship would leave San Diego March 23 and Pearl Harbor April 8 to take position. Launch preparations were proceeding on schedule toward liftoff at 12:45 pm est April 16. Apollo Mission Director Chester M. Lee said one purpose of microbial ecology evaluation device (meed; experiment to carry fungi and bacteria) on Apollo 16 was to prepare for future Skylab missions. In Skylab “we are going to have some evas and some of these bacteria, fungi, are on the suit before they go out. So the idea is to find out is there anything when we bring those suits back in and stow them for long periods of time like we are going to have on Skylab, do we have anything that we should be considering or concerned about as far as mutants and so forth.” Lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover had been improved with new seatbelts that could be hung up out of way when not in use and with extra circuit breaker to permit deployment of TV after third extravehicular activity period, lrv would not cover as much distance on Apollo 16 as on Apollo 15. “We are planning 25.2 kilometers [15.7 miles] . . . because that gets us to our primary objectives,” not including 10% wander factor for missing craters. (Transcript) In second briefing, Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, explained medical problems and procedures on Apollo 15 and changes for Apollo 16. Major concerns on Apollo 15 were cardiac arrhythmia—irregular heart rhythm—and fluid-electrolyte imbalance, with severe loss of potassium. Cardiac arrhythmia occurred occasionally in normal persons and frequently in college students, apparently as a result of fatigue from all-night studying, adrenalin increase from apprehension about grades, drug effect from drinking coffee to stay awake, and heavy workload. Fatigue, adrenalin increase, drug effect, and heavy workload also acted on astronauts. Fluid-electrolyte imbalance was dependent upon intake in food and drink and output in breath, sweat, and body wastes. In space, balance was affected by weightlessness, acceleration, 100%-oxygen atmosphere, abnormal work-rest cycle, and sustained work loads. Countermeasures that could be taken were better control of intake, supplementing electrolytes with intravenous fluids, coordinating exercise, providing lower body negative pressure, and optimizing work-rest cycles. Medical objectives for Apollo 16 were essentially same as for Apollo 15: to ensure crew safety medically, to improve probability of mission success by providing necessary medical information, and to detect and understand changes incident to space flight and learn more about effects of space flight on man. To improve medical wellbeing of Apollo 16 astronauts, 72-hr preflight controlled-diet period would determine amount of potassium needed by each crew member. Since potassium could not be preloaded, small amounts of extra potassium would be given in daily diet in flight to ensure adequacy. In addition to regular preflight cardiovascular examination, x-rays of astronauts’ hearts would be taken before and after mission to determine whether heart size decreased during flight. Skylab equipment would be used in flight for electroencephalogram, electrocardiogram, and electro-oculogram. Other inflight medical changes were daily sample of improved electrocardiogram data, option to alter bioharness wearing schedule, expansion of crew status report, high-potassium diets with potassium-enriched beverages and snack supplements, measurement of food and fluid intake and urine and fecal output, return to earth of urine and fecal samples for analysis, and provision of anti-arrhythmic drugs lidocaine, procainamide, and atropine. Dr. Berry also announced that Astronaut Donald K. Slayton, who had been removed from Aurora 7 mission (May 24, 1962) and NASA flight status 10 yrs ago because of possible heart malfunction, had been returned to NASA and Federal Aviation Administration flight status. Evidence of atrial fibrillation found in 1959 and treated until 1969 had disappeared and tests completed recently had shown “perfectly normal cardiac function and cardiac anatomy.” First space flight for which Slayton could be eligible would be proposed joint mission with U.S.S.R. (Transcript)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced appointment of Dr. Charles R. O’Dell as project scientist for Large Space Telescope (lst). Dr. O’Dell was Chairman of Univ. of Chicago Dept, of Astronomy and Astrophysics and Director of university’s Yerkes Observatory, (msfc Release 72-118)
Report by Italian Research Organization sobis was quoted as saying U.S. and U.S.S.R. were rocketing out of Europe’s reach in technical and managerial sense as result of the success of their space technologies. Report, prepared for Commission of the European Community, recommended that high priority be given to strengthening and unifying European aerospace industry, (csm, 6/5/72) World Bank President Robert S. McNamara said during June 9 session: “Ecological considerations have made us all more aware of the interdependencies of our world. We have come to see our planet as a ‘spaceship earth.’ But what we must not forget is that one-quarter of the passengers . . . have luxurious first-class accommodations and the remaining three-quarters are traveling in steerage. That does not make for a happy ship—in space or anywhere else.” Major conflict of Conference was over resolution to halt nuclear weapon testing. Resolution was approved by majority but opposed by Communist China and France, with 14 nations—including U.S. and United Kingdom—abstaining. Conference recommendations, subject to ratification by U.N. General Assembly in September, were not legally binding. (NYT, 6/5—17/72; Hawkes, Science, 6/23/72,1308-10) June 6:	Dr.’ James C. Fletcher reviewed space program accomplishments during his first year as NASA Administrator in speech before Salt Lake City, Utah, Rotary Club. He had been asked at bis first NASA Hq. press conference if he “did not feel like the captain of the ill-fated ship Titanic.” Ten “good reasons” why reporters no longer asked that question were: (1) NASA had defined space program for 1970s that was “as challenging, as exciting, and as rewarding as our space achievements of the last decade, but less costly.” (2) New program had been approved by President and Congress “with a strong bi-partisan majority.” (3) Program could be carried out over next six or eight years at present $3.4-billion NASA budget level “which calls for steady space progress at a cost the country can afford.” (4) Balanced program meant increased capability for “useful work in all the major areas of space activity.” (5) “We have chosen the re-usable Space Shuttle as our major investment in new space technology . . . and . . . have succeeded in redesigning the Shuttle to cut estimated development costs in half without significant losses in performance.” (6) “We have settled the argument over whether to stress manned or unmanned space missions in the Seventies. The shuttle will be used for both.” (7) Space shuttle in military service “will make an important contribution to our national security.” (8) Program was “relevant to the needs of modern America.” Information culled from Earth Resources Technology Satellites would “help protect the environment of spaceship Earth.” (9) Space shuttle program to develop future uses of space provided “necessary base for increased international cooperation,” adding significance to U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement. (10) NASA again had “national commitment to make space progress a clear expression of our national character and a symbol to the world of what America stands for and works for.” (Text)
Appointment of William H. Rock, Assistant Program Manager for Apollo-Skylab Programs, as Manager of new Sciences and Applications Office at Kennedy Space Center was announced by Ksc Director, Dr. Kurt H. Debus. New office would become KSC’s interface with NASA’s Office of Applications, (ksc Release 279-72)
Apollo 17 astronauts flew proficiency runs in NASA T-38 jet aircraft from Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., while at Kennedy Space Center five mice were selected to fly on mission experiment. Mice had been selected from 40 small rodents brought from California desert as candidates for mouse-to-the-moon mission. They would remain in orbit around moon when lunar module descended to surface. (AP, B Sun, 12/3/72) December 2—3:	Chicago Daily News editorial commented on impact of Apollo program: “The costly moon race may have helped distort American thinking in a damaging way. If we can go to the moon, so the slogan ran, we can do anything—wipe out poverty, eradicate racism, guide the economy, cure every evil of society. The euphoria created by the burgeoning space program and the crowning successes of the landing may have contributed to the rise of expectations in other fields beyond any solid hope of their realization. Science and technology can do wonders, but social problems do not yield so readily to electronics or telemetry.” (C Daily News, 12/2-3/72) December 3:	Kennedy Space Center technical writers, members of International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees, agreed to accept 44% pay increase, ending threat of strike that might have delayed Apollo 17 launch [see Nov. 5]. (Auerbach, W Post, 12/4/72, A20)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., passed final physical examination at Kennedy Space Center. Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, said results showed astronauts “in good shape and ready to fly.” (AP, W Star, 4/11/72, A3)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Dudley Observatory experiment to 108.0-km (67.1-mi) altitude. Launch was third and last in series to collect and identify cosmic dust particles from Giacobini meteor shower [see Oct. 9]. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained. (nasa Rpt srl)
New satellite Hot Line between White House and Kremlin was targeted to begin operation in 1973, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. President Nixon’s approval had been announced Sept. 24, 1971, of U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreement on direct communication link using two satellite circuits, one established by each country. Agreement had been signed Sept. 30, 1971. (Av Wk, 1/17/72, 9; A&A 1971) January 17-19:	American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) held 10th Aerospace Sciences Meeting in San Diego, Calif. Apollo 15 Astronaut James B. Irwin and Nobel Prize-winning physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey reviewed space activities for local high school students. Dr. John C. Houbolt, Executive Vice President of Aeronautical Research Associates, delivered Dryden Research Lecture “Atmospheric Turbulence.” Lecture had been named in honor of late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first NASA Deputy Administrator, in 1967. It succeeded Research Award established by aiaa in 1960. Dryden Lecture award, sponsored by General Electric Co., carried $1000 honorarium and $1500 travel allowance for repetition of lecture before selected aiaa sections. Dr. Houbolt reviewed latest data on atmospheric turbulence and its influence on aircraft design and flight. Dr. Allen E. Puckett, Executive Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., was installed as 1972 aiaa President at Jan. 19 Honors Banquet. aiaa presented Goddard Award to Gary A. Plourde, project engineer at United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., and Squadron Leader Brian Brimelow (raf) and Howard E. Schumacher, both of Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory. Trio was honored as team for original research leading to first understanding of gas-turbine compressor stalls induced by turbulent inlet flow conditions. Sylvanus Albert Reed Award was presented to Dr. Max M. Munk, retired engineer, for “enduring contributions to the science of aerodynamics.” Robert M. Losey Award was given to Dr. David Q. Wark, Senior Scientist with National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “in recognition of outstanding contributions to the science of meteorology as applied to aeronautics.” Edward W. Price, Head of Naval Weapons Center Aerothermochem-istry Div., received G. Edward Pendray Award for “continued outstanding contributions to the literature of solid rocket internal ballistics and combustion, particularly for his contributions on combustion instability and ignition.” Space Science Award was presented to Dr. Norman F. Ness, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center Laboratory for Extraterrestrial Physics, for “significant contributions to the description and understanding of the interplanetary medium and the interactions of this medium with the earth and other large bodies.” (aiaa Releases 1/10/72, 1/13/72; A1AA Bull, 1/72, 2/72, 67) January 17-21:	Fourth Annual Earth Resources Program Review was held by NASA at Manned Spacecraft Center. Scientists from foreign nations and organizations, Government, universities, and private institutions attended. Reports were presented on 1971 research and analysis of aircraft and spacecraft remote sensing data. In Jan. 18 press briefing NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews said pollution monitoring was natural activity for global surveillance capability because atmospheric pollution was potentially global problem. Not well understood were manner in which pollutants were dispersed throughout globe or manner in which earth corrected itself. “There’s a lot of work to be done in this area.” In Jan. 21 briefing Dr. John M. DeNoyer, NASA Director of Earth Observations, said program was moving from exploratory to flight phase, from learning to applying techniques. Among applications was spring Arctic ice survey, in which some 80 scientists would be on ice measuring strain rates, meteorological conditions, and ice types, supported by Convair 990 aircraft from Ames Research Center. Also microwave techniques in remote sensing could identify ice-free lanes in Great Lakes region, making possible efficient shipping much earlier in spring than at present. Soo Canal into Lake Superior, which carried more tons of freight than any other canal in world, was now open only one half of year. Weather and cloud cover made aircraft surveillance inefficient; microwave techniques from satellite altitude was more practical in this instance. Another important program would be thermal mapping by remote sensing to permit better industrial planning from knowledge of how development would actually affect environment. Land-use planning also would be greatly aided by remote sensing data processed by computerized inventory system being developed at msc. (msc Release 72—11; MSC PAO; Transcript) January 18—20:	Opening hearings on aeronautical research and development, Chairman Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology announced Subcommittee name had been changed to Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Change followed receipt of Jan. 14 letter from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announcing change in NASA office name from OABT to OAST. On first day of hearings Dr. Fletcher testified on “steady increase” in NASA funding for aeronautics: Funding had grown from $42 million in FY 1966 to $110 million in FY 1972, “a doubling in terms of constant dollars. When you add the funding for salaries and other in-house costs related to supporting the aeronautics programs, the total . . . has grown from 1.6% of the total NASA budget in fiscal year 1966 to 7.1% in fiscal year 1972.” Number of NASA personnel members working in aeronautics research and technology had grown from 2600 in 1966 to 5300. Increase had occurred while NASA staff had been reduced from 34 000 to 27 500. Dr. Fletcher said joint Dept, of Transportation and NASA Study on Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) had “forced the establishment of new and more effective coordination mechanisms between NASA and DOT.” Mechanisms were being used “to develop a formal card Policy Implementation Plan to specify clear goals, responsibilities, planned achievement milestones, and projected resource requirements for dot and NASA jointly.” card policy study had caused “better focus on the priority problem areas of aircraft noise . . . and terminal congestion” and directed more specific attention to role R&D might play in developing better total operating system for low-density aviation market so that civil aviation might be used more economically as tool for regional development. Focus did not compromise “ability to continue a comprehensive research and technology program in all the aeronautical disciplines to provide a technology base for the future.” Deputy Director Clarence A. Syvertson of Ames Research Center outlined general recommendations of CARD study: scope of civil-aviation R&D programs should be expanded to emphasize nontechnological factors; economists and social scientists should be assigned to NASA and dot staffs, r&d staffs of Dept, of Defense, NASA, dot, and Civil Aeronautics Board should be interchanged to provide broad systems background for more effective Government action in civil aviation programs. cab should explore policy of allowing intermodal mergers of airlines for expanded use of air cargo to encourage innovative industry R&D in this area. Dept, of Commerce should refine and monitor measurable indicators of U.S. progress in civil aviation industry. National Aeronautics and Space Council should review and recommend national policies guiding civil aviation that embraced several agencies. George W. Cherry, Deputy Administrator for Programs in oast, reported “considerable ongoing activity abroad in designing, building and selling new, small economical aircraft for the world’s low-density short-haul market. This raises the questions: Where will replacement aircraft come from? Can the U.S. industry compete with the foreign manufacturers to fill the market?” Answers required “fundamental policy decisions by the United States with regard to the desirability of providing continuing or expanded public-need air service, and also . . . to whether Government support can or should be given to the manufacturer.” U.S. needed to know more about market and economics of operating in low-density area to write specifications for aircraft and operating system. “If industry designs fall short of meeting the economic specifications, there should be enough information available to determine if Government assistance . . . could result in the operator providing viable service. If subsidy is necessary, subsidizing the nonrecurring costs of manufacture, rather than the recurring costs of operation, might make good sense.” NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson described questol project plans for two quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (stol) transport research aircraft: “The experimental airplanes will function as a versatile facility for NASA flight research programs developed in cooperation with other Government agencies and interested industry groups, including the airlines. The information provided will reduce the technical risk associated with development, by industry, of both civil and military STOL transports” and “provide a comprehensive technical foundation on which Government regulatory agencies can establish realistic criteria for certification of commercial subsonic stol transport aircraft and for en route and terminal area operations.” (Transcript) January 19:	NASA announced selection of flight crews for Skylab missions. Prime crewmen for first, 28-day flight were Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot), and Paul J. Weitz (pilot). Backup crewmen were Russel L. Schweickart, Dr. Story Mus-grave, and Bruce McCandless II. Crewmen for second, 56-day mission were Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Third mission, for 56 days, would be flown by Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue. Backup crew for second and third missions was Vance D. Brand, Dr. William B. Lenoir, and Dr. Don L. Lind, (nasa Release 72-12)
Future of France’s Kourou, French Guiana, Space Center was uncertain because of uncertainty over European space programs, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Center plans had not materialized because of delays in European launcher program and 18- to 20-month hiatus in French Diamant B launcher program. Only 1972 launches from Kourou had been 8 to 10 sounding rockets. French officials had discussed possibility of shutting down major portions of center between launches. Maintenance cost about $20 million annually. (Av Wk, 12/11/72, 18),
nasa announced organizational changes within Office of Manned Space Flight to fit post-Apollo/Skylab activities. New Mission and Payload Integration Office had been established, Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force, Advanced Missions Office was redesignated Advanced Programs Office, and Apollo Program Office became Apollo/astp Program Office. Functions of Engineering and Operations Directorate in omsf had been reassigned to Advanced Programs Office. Mission and Payload Integration Office would plan and coordinate requirements between payload sponsors and shuttle and sortie lab organizations. Sorties Lab Task Force would manage NASA planning and definition activities to produce manned module for research and applications activities with space shuttle. Current project emphasis was on technical definition and planning for hardware development phase. Parallel definition studies were being made by NASA and European Space Research Organization. If Europe undertook development of sortie lab, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had said, NASA Task Force would coordinate NASA and esro activities. Philip E. Culbertson was Director of Mission and Payload Integration Office and Acting Director of Advanced Programs Office. Douglas R. Lord was Director of Sortie Lab Task Force, and Dr. Rocco A. Petrone was Director of Apollo/ASTP Project for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission in 1975. (nasa Release 72-232)
Leading figures in Federal Government monopoly suit against International Business Machines Corp. would visit Kennedy Space Center during Apollo 17 mission to examine computer operations, Washington Post reported. U.S. District Judge David N. Edelstein, with lawyers from IBM and Dept, of Justice, would fly from New York. Similar trip had been proposed for April 16-27 Apollo 16 mission but NASA had opposed visit on grounds that it could lead to breach or relaxation of security and safety regulations. Visit was to educate court on nature of IBM equipment used during launch. (Mintz, W Post, 11/23/72, A29)
National Science Foundation published Company Funds Push Total Industrial R&D Spending to $18 Billion in 1971 (nsf 72-318). In 1971 total industrial research and development performance had amounted to $18.4 billion—equal to 1969 level. When measured in constant dollars, 1971 level was 3% below 1970 and 9% below 1969, Federal r&d funds in industry decreased by 1% between 1970 and 1971, to $7.7-billion level. Federal r&d funds to industry had decreased each year since 1968, when they had reached peak $8.6 billion. Company R&D funds totaled $10.7 billion in 1971, 3% above 1970 level of $10.4 billion, smallest year-to-year dollar gain in company R&D spending since NSF series began in 1953. But 1971 company R&D
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, appraised scientific contributions of Apollo program in testimony during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight hearings on nasa FY 1973 authorization bill. “. . . Apollo 11 crew crossed over four hundred thousand kilometers (250,000 miles) of space to touch another planetary body. Four teams of astronauts, from Apollos 11, 12, 14 and 15 . . . have now made the epic journey and walked the lunar surface. They have returned some 176 kg (388 lbs.) of lunar rocks and soils for analysis in earth-based laboratories and have established scientific stations on the moon that are continuously transmitting scientific and engineering data back to earth.” Apollo data, with information expected from continued sample analysis and lunar data analysis in the post-Apollo period, “surely will be of practical value to man, even helping him to cope with current environmental problems on earth.” NASA sample analysis program had “required unprecedented advancement in instrumentation and techniques to perform multiple element and isotope analyses with extreme precision on minute amounts of sample.” Improved high-resolution instruments made “detailed investigations of surface features and internal structure of materials.” Other related important breakthroughs had been computer hardware and software for processing and reducing large amounts of analytical data in a very short time. “These advances, in large part stimulated by NASA-funded meteorite studies, were absolutely essential, because of the scientifically unique, but limited, lunar materials. . . . these high precision research methods can now or will soon be routinely utilized in industrial processes and laboratories.” They could also “be immediately applied to a variety of environmental and biomedical problems by providing the capability to check and monitor levels of pollutants and toxic elements in our atmosphere, water, and foods.” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider outlined program’s progress: “During the coming fiscal year testing and checkout will be completed and operation of Skylab will have started. Within 2 years, the first Skylab . . . will have become part of history, having contributed new knowledge in many fields.” Skylab offered “an earth observation capability never before available” to U.S. manned spacecraft. During eight-month mission, Skylab would fly over entire U.S. except Alaska, over much of Europe, all of Africa, Australia, China, and almost all of South America—covering 75% of earth’s surface and passing over each point every five days. By end of 1971, 288 investigations requiring Skylab data had been submitted, 249 U.S. and 39 foreign. Of these, 164 had been identified for further study. Skylab was “first manned space flight program designed specifically to carry activities and equipment explicitly aimed at improving man’s life on earth. It will contribute significantly to the increase of knowledge of pure science and is also an experimental space station; a forerunner of permanent space stations of the future.” Earth-oriented sensors would test technology for synoptic surveys of many environmental and ecological systems. Solar and astronomical observations and other science experiments would expand knowledge of solar system, universe, and near-earth space. Biomedical experiments would inform how man’s well-being and ability to function were affected by living in space. Harry H. Gorman, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management in Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on $305-million FY 1973 budget request for development, test, and mission operations in manned space flight research and development program: “This is the first year in which this activity is presented as a separate item. . . With near-completion of Apollo program, “we believe it iinportant to separately identify and control this basic capability which has been built up. . . . This work is essential to the support of the Nation’s space programs for the 1970’s and beyond.” Requested funding would provide for contractor support of in-house capabilities for Apollo and Skylab programs; for definition, design, development, and subsystem testing activities in shuttle program; and for pre-definition and definition of future programs, including High Energy Astronomy Observatory, Stratoscope 1 and 2, and Earth Observation Satellites. (Transcript)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics released For the Benefit of All Mankind: The Practical Returns from Space Investment. Updated report of spinoff dividends from space exploration covered application of space technology to communications, weather forecasting, business and industry, management, agriculture, environment, aeronautics, education, medicine, home and marketplace, and municipal and urban affairs and in foreign countries. Committee concluded that dividends were “fallout of ingenious application of space flight experience.” Dividends already paid, “coupled with those in sight for the near-term future, affect practically every facet of human convenience and concern. They promise continuing and increasing return on our space investment for the benefit of mankind.” (H Rpt 92-1452)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Ball Brothers Research Corp. for negotiation of contract to develop heavy nuclei experiment for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao—a), scheduled for launch in 1975. Experiment would measure charge-to-mass ratio, abundance, and energy of cosmic ray particles, (msfc Release 72-53)
NASA Convair 990 aircraft was being used for scientific probe of high-altitude cloud formations up to 14 000 m (45 000 ft) in attempt to identify and measure ice and water particles with remote sensing devices, Ames Research Center announced. Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Warren A. Hovis and team of scientists from NASA, Univ. of Arizona, and Arthur D. Little Co. were conducting experiment to improve short-term weather forecasting and to transfer technology to weather satellites. (NASA Release 72-14)
NASA announced award of $83 645 871 cost-plus-award-fee contract to trw Systems Inc. for development of two automated High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) satellites to study high-energy radiation from space. First heao would be launched in late 1975; second would be launched 18 mos later, (nasa Release 72—133)
Group of 49 industrialists and educators from England, Sweden, Denmark, Germany, France, Italy, Holland, and Belgium visited Kennedy Space Center during week-long orientation arranged by London Financial Times. Group also visited NASA Hq., Goddard Space Flight Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Manned Spacecraft Center. (ksc Release 40-72)
Scientists were developing estimate of interactions between unvisited deep-space planets and solar wind in National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration project to program future deep-space missions. Series of space environment models had been developed by Ames Research Center scientists Dr. Arthur W. Rizzi, NOAA physicist Dr. Murray Dryer, and Dr. Wen-we Shen of Texas Instruments, Inc. Scaled magnetopause or ionospheric shell had been made for each planet by using available data on earth, Mars, and Venus, and extending models that had worked well for these planets to cases of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto, (noaa Release 72-161)
Crowd estimated at more than half million would witness nighttime launch of Apollo 17, which experts believed would be visible within 800-km (500-mi) radius, Associated Press reported. Lester T. Keene of Kennedy Space Center Data Systems Div. had said exhaust from Saturn V rocket would be equivalent to brilliance of sunlight. Peak visibility would be reached about 2 min 30 sec after launch, when Saturn V was at 68-km (42-mi) altitude and 90 km (56 mi) northeast of Cape Kennedy, and before shutdown of lst-stage engines that burned fuel producing orange flame. Pale blue flame of 2nd stage would not be seen for as great distance. (B Sun, 11/21/72, A8)
Reassignment of Apollo 15 Astronaut Alfred M. Worden from Astronaut Office at Manned Spacecraft Center to Airborne Science Office Space Science Div. at Ames Research Center was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Worden would use astronaut experience in developing and evaluating systems and procedures for arc airborne science and space-shuttle-vehicle simulation studies and in earth resources surveys and high-altitude astronomy using NASA aircraft, (msc Release 72-197)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), campaigning for Presidential nomination, told street crowd in Titusville, Fla., that U.S. should be first in space and science. “We can’t afford to have the Soviet Union first in space.” Later, rival Democratic candidate Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) told Orlando, Fla., crowd that Humphrey had never been recorded on space shuttle issue “until he entered the Florida primary.” (C Trib, 3/14/72) March, 13—14: American Astronautical Society (aas) sponsored 1972 Goddard Symposium, “Transfer of Space Technology to Community and Industrial Activities,” in Washington, D.C. Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in keynote address stressed importance of high technology development to U.S. standard of living. He compared favorable balance of trade in high-technology aerospace products with unfavorable balance in low-technology products. Annual U.S. exports in aerospace products were valued at $3.6 billion over imports; computers, $1.1 billion; and machinery, $1 billion. Motor vehicle imports were $3.3 billion over exports, clothing and textiles, $1.9 billion, and iron and steel, $1.9 billion. (NASA Release 72-56) National Space Club awards were presented at Goddard Memorial Dinner at Space Club on evening of March 14. Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, NSC’s highest award, was presented to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, by former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Citation read: “His deep knowledge of the space program and his effective leadership in the Senate and the Nation have been invaluable in fostering Congressional understanding of and support for this program. The benefits to mankind from the U.S. space program flow in large measure from the dedicated efforts of this great American.” Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineer Dan Schneiderman. Citation read: “For his management of the Mariner Venus ’67 and Mariner Mars ’71 missions. His perception, decisiveness, and inspiration have made it possible for man to place a measuring device in orbit around another planet for the first time in the history of the world.” Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship was presented to C. Thomas Snyder of Ames Research Center “so that he may continue to seek and maintain pre-eminence in outer space for the United States.” Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award for 1971 competition was given Albert B. Christman of Naval Weapons Center for “Robert H. Goddard and the Military.” National Space Club Press Award was presented to Howard Benedict of Associated Press for “giving the public authoritative yet highly readable chronicles of the unfolding Space Age.”	. Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to Boeing Co. by Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott. Citation read: “In recognition of great mobility provided by the ingenious Lunar Roving Vehicle. . . . Exploration of the moon by the Apollo 15 crew, its cameras, and its equipment, covering 28 kilometers [17.3 miles] over the rough terrain, was made possible by this masterful 500-pound [227-kilogram] stowable vehicle.” (Program) March 14:	President Nixon transmitted to Congress Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1971 Activities. In transmission message President said: “Aided by the improvements we have made in mobility, our explorers on the moon last summer produced new, exciting and useful evidence on the structure and origin of the moon. Several phenomena which they uncovered are now under study. Our unmanned nearby observation of Mars is similarly valuable and significant for the advancement of science. During 1971, we gave added emphasis to aeronautics activities which contribute substantially to improved travel conditions, safety and security, and we gained increasing recognition that space and aeronautical research serves in many ways to keep us in the forefront of man’s technological achievements. There can be little doubt that the investments we are now making in exploration of the unknown are but a prelude to the accomplishments of mankind in future generations.” Report said U.S. was “proceeding into this decade with clearly defined goals and objectives for its civilian space program.” U.S. continued to invest “substantial resources” in space activities because of “national thrust to explore the unknown, the desire to acquire new knowledge, and the realization that space activity has practical and widely beneficial applications. Space is increasingly coming to be seen as an arena of human activity, rather than national activity, and therefore a particularly congenial focus for cooperative undertakings that bring the people of the world together.” {CR, 3/14/72, S3885; Text)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying American Science and Engineering, Inc., x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list) April 2:	Interview of Roris N. Petrov, Chairman of Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Council for International Cooperation in Investigation and Utilization of Outer Space, on U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint space mission was published in New York Times. Interview, described as “first full public discussion of the negotiations from the Soviet point of view,” had been obtained in Moscow by Times science writer John N. Wilford. Petrov had emphasized that “tangible progress” had been achieved and he was “optimistic” about prospects of joint space flight, technically feasible in “the middle of the nineteen-seventies.” Government approval would “depend much” on April meetings in Moscow between NASA and Soviet Academy officials and May meeting in Moscow of Working Groups on rendezvous and docking. Petrov said compatible docking system would allow “docking of spaceships of our countries with the humane aim of rendering help to crews of spaceships and space stations in distress. These systems would also allow joint experiments during the flights in space.” Petrov said negotiations had occurred in “atmosphere of mutual understanding and businesslike discussion” that “gives us the hope that all the difficulties connected with . . . such a sophisticated scientific and technological undertaking could be overcome.” (NYT, 4/2/72)
Apollo 7 Astronaut Donn F. Eisele was sworn in as a Peace Corps director. He would supervise 315 volunteers and 14 paid staff members in Bangkok, Thailand, beginning assignment in mid-June while on terminal leave from Air Force. His retirement from Air Force, after 20 yrs service, would be effective July 1. (W News, 5/23/72; NYT, 5/23/72, 27) had said that “decade ended with an adventure so fantastic as almost to overshadow and redeem all the turmoil that had scarred it.” Redeeming adventure had been Apollo 11 moon landing, which Dr. Fletcher called “the one great event of the decade that gave the American people renewed faith in their destiny.” William M. Magruder, special consultant on technology to President Nixon, said U.S. had lost any chance of competing for first airline supersonic transport orders. He predicted U.S. would produce “second generation” SST that would begin carrying passengers in a decade. l/g Otto J. Glasser (usaf), Deputy Chief of Staff, Research and Development, said in speech that U.S. aerospace industry had become “overbuilt, overmanned, and overmanaged. Not only are there too many companies, but collectively they have more production capacity than we have any conceivable future need for. The passing of relatively ineffective . . . DC-3s and P—51s has gradually rendered obsolete and archaic our production oriented industry.” Gen. Glasser recommended that U.S. firms follow European approach of “very small, tightly integrated design teams manned by top-of-their-graduating-class engineers.” (Texts; NYT, 5/23/72) May 23:	Scientists	at Manned Spacecraft Center detonated by radio command three of four explosive mortar charges left on moon by Apollo 16 astronauts. Fourth grenade was not detonated because data indicated attitude sensor might have been knocked out of position by previous firings. Analysis of data on pitch sensor was under way to determine if sensor had failed or if mortar package had shifted its position. First grenade contained 270 g (0.6 lb) of explosive with predicted range of 910 m (3000 ft). Second had 45 g (0.1 lb) and 150-m (500-ft) predicted range. Third had 140-g (0.3-lb) charge and 300-m (1000-ft) predicted range. Signals from three explosions, recorded by geophones left on lunar surface, indicated that moon’s surface layer was at least 50 m (164 ft) thick, (msc Release 72—112; O’Toole, W Post, 5/24/72, A3; upi, C Trib, 5/24/72)
Consolidation of all engineering and development functions of Federal Aviation Administration into new service, Systems Research and Development Service (srds), was announced by faa. Spencer S. Hunn, head of faa’s National Airspace System Program Office, would head new service, which would incorporate naspo. (faa Release 72—170)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Chairman of Atomic Energy Commission, to be U.S. representative at 16th session of General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency. Among alternates nominated was Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator. (PD, 8/14/72, 1225) August 8-9:	Skylab program managers reviewed design of mission’s experimental hardware with 11 high school student winners of NASA and National Science Teachers Assn, competition to propose experiments for 1973 Skylab mission [see July 20]. Students attending critical design reviews at Marshall Space Flight Center were those whose experiments required new scientific equipment, (nasa Release 72-161) August 9:	Army announced cancellation of controversial Lockheed AH-56A Cheyenne helicopter program and plans, subject to congressional approval, to develop new attack helicopter. Production contract for Cheyenne had been canceled in May 1969, after Lockheed failed to solve rotor problem. Since then firm had claimed progress in combating problem, Wall Street Journal later reported. (WSJ, 8/10/72, 3; Army pio)
Adelbert 0. Tischler, Director of Shuttle Technologies Office in NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast), testified on progress of shuttle transportation system before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during NASA FY 1973 authorization hearings: “Methods for rapidly assessing the aero-heating and flight handling characteristics of the shuttle are being developed. A base for applying new design methods and for use of new materials in the sensitive problem of structural mass has been laid. Thermal protection systems, some comprising materials which were virtually unknown at the start of the program, will be brought to . . . technological readiness. The questions of long-lived propulsive and power equipment, suitable for repeated re-use, will be answered.” Computerized index and search procedure for access to all published shuttle technology was nearing completion. “While technology issues remain, the continuing progress of the technology program conducted by . . . NASA centers and industrial contractors is building a technological base that is far deeper and stronger than that which has heretofore underlain new development programs. This base . . . will assure successful Shuttle development.” David S. Gabriel, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office, described NASA-funded electrophysics research program conducted by Ames, Langley, and Lewis Research Centers and Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Program was concerned “with understanding and, ultimately, using electrons, nuclei, atoms and molecules. Such work is of central importance to future sciences, for example, to laser beam generation, transmission and conversion; superconductivity; or plasma power devices.” In FY 1972, research had been completed on continuous-flow plasma accelerator to simulate spacecraft reentry conditions accurately, new contributions to understanding plasma turbulence had been made, knowledge of uranium plasma properties had been improved, and carbon monoxide lasers had been demonstrated to be highly efficient. New superconductor made up of thin films of vanadium and silicon had been discovered. For FY 1973 $3.4 million had been requested for programs in plasma dynamics, lasers, superconductivity, and nuclear physics. Roy P. Jackson, Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, testified that “clearly the space shuttle orbiter, a rather sophisticated piece of machinery, is not only a launch vehicle and a spacecraft but also a high speed airplane, with all the attendant considerations of aircraft-type control and landing. It offers NASA an opportunity to apply aerodynamic, structural, and materials technology that has been developing over the past 10 or 15 years for high performance aircraft. Reciprocally the shuttle work offers much to benefit aircraft in the next 10 to 15 years.” NASA had also capitalized on early Air Force technology oriented toward manned high-speed flight in the atmosphere as well as reentry into the atmosphere, such as Dyna-Soar and X-15 projects. Francis J. Sullivan—Director of Guidance, Control, and Information Systems in oast—testified on nuclear electric power system research for spacecraft: Nuclear electric power systems offered “attractive alternatives” to batteries for long-life orbiting systems, “in terms of minimizing structural constraints and the economic considerations of supplying several kilowatts of power. Current research is directed primarily toward two types of nuclear systems, isotope systems for low power levels of about 1 kilowatt, and the intermediate reactor power systems for levels in the range of several kilowatts up to 10-20 kilowatts.” Isotope systems were radioisotope thermoelectric generators (rtgs). Intermediate reactor power system consisted of zirconium hydride reactor to generate heat and thermoelectric power-conversion components to convert this heat into electricity. Program was directed toward reactor test in 1976-1977 period to demonstrate long-life capability. Stable performance had been achieved on thermoelectric converter test modules. Effort in FY 1973 would concentrate on verifying this performance. Conversion system would be developed for testing with the reactor to verify the integrated system performance. (Transcript)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of grants to Florida Technical Univ (ftu) in Orlando and Florida Institute of Technology (fit) in Melbourne for ecological studies of spaceport area, much of which was a wildlife refuge. Grants, each totaling $90 000, were for one year. FIT would study living processes in ecosystem which could be used as indicators of significant changes in environment. FTU would divide land areas and associated waters at KSC into geographical zones that would be intensively sampled for life forms for comparative academic studies, (ksc Release 80-72)
Japan launched Denpa (Radio Wave) Radio Explorer Satellite (rexs) from Kagoshima Space Center by Mu-4S booster at 11:40 am local time (10:40 pm edt Aug. 18). Recause of unusually strong winds, satellite entered highly elliptic orbit with 6302-km (3915.9-mi) apogee, 239-km (148.5-mi) perigee, 157.2-min period, and 31° inclination. Denpa carried ionospheric plasma probes, electromagnetic and plasma-wave receivers, cyclotron instability experiment, electron flux analyzer, and fluxgate magnetometer. Instruments functioned satisfactorily immediately after launch, but satellite later experienced power failure that prevented transmission of data. The 75-kg (165-lb) satellite, 68 cm (22.3 ft) long, was fourth satellite to be launched by Japan and second to carry scientific payload. Shinsei (launched Sept. 28, 1971) had carried instruments to study cosmic and electric waves. Tansei (launched Feb. 16, 1971) and Ohsumi (launched Feb. 11, 1970) test satellites had returned performance data, (gsfc SSR, 8/31/72; FBis-Japan, 7/20/72, C7; Spacewarn, 8/8/72, 8; NASA Int Aff; Japanese Embassy pio)
NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry and equipped with supercritical wing, completed 33rd and 34th flights from Flight Research Center. Unaugmented stability and control data were obtained from mach 0.8 to 0.99 at dynamic pressure of 19 152 newtons per sq m (400 lbs per sq ft). Wing loads were measured from mach 0.5 to 0.99 at 9576 newtons per sq m (200 lbs per sq ft). Targets placed along 35% chord line and at wing tip were photographed to determine wing deflections. (NASA proj off)
Selection of Lockheed-Georgia Co. Div. of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for negotiations leading to contract for design and option for fabrication of quiet, fan-jet, propulsive-lift research aircraft (questol) was announced by NASA. Agency also authorized $600 000, four-month, cost-reimbursable design-refinement phase. If construction was authorized, Lockheed was to deliver research vehicle in two years. Project was managed by Ames Research Center with technical support from Langley, Lewis, and Flight Research Centers, (nasa Release 72-224)
Cosmos 542 was launched from Plesetsk by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 640-km (397.7-mi) apogee, 527-km (327.5-mi) perigee, 81.2° inclination, 96.3-min period, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/72; SBD, 1/3/73, 2)	_ December 29:	Lunar scientists at Manned Spacecraft Center told press they had not yet been able to determine from study of Apollo 17 lunar samples whether orange soil found on lunar surface proved existence of lunar volcanic activity. Dr. Wallace C. Phinney, Chief of msc Geologic Branch, said soil had no “distinct evidence of alteration” as from steam or sulfur gas in volcanic action. “As to what caused the orange coloration, we must wait until we have more chemistry. The most interesting thing is it has very fine grain soil samples, greater than 90 percent in glass.” Dr. Paul Gast, Chief of Planetary and Earth Sciences, said glass could indicate volcanic or other crust-related activities. Soil was not particularly rich in water or sulfur, properties associated with volcanic action, (upi, W Star & News, 12/30/72, A3)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Harvard College Observatory solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
St. Louis Post-Dispatch editorial commented on Soviet announcement of plans for Soviet-American space mission: “If successful, the way would be opened for further joint exploratory missions, and for emergency rescues. Hopefully, the experiment would provide a stimulus for further combining . . . space efforts. This would provide a valuable interchange of scientific data and a saving in money. The goal should be co-operation in spacefaring by all the nations of the earth.” (St Louis P-D, 4/17/72) F—14 jet fighter aircraft to complete Navy’s order for 134 unless Government restructured contract. Grumman would require at least $2.2 million more per aircraft to compensate for expected losses, plus additional amount to provide profit. Navy was seeking $734 million in FY 1973 for 48 F-14s at current unit cost of $16.8 million. Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt, Chief of Naval Operations, testified April 19 that Government should “stick to the contract.” F-14 was “real winner, one the country really needs,1’ but aircraft could be produced profitably under current contract terms. (CR, 4/17/72, 4/19/72; Madden, NYT, 4/18/72, 1; Vasquez, NYT, 4/20/72, 5) April 18:	Science briefing on magnetic enigmas of moon was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Finding that rock samples of different kinds collected at all four Apollo landing sites were imprinted with magnetic field from 3 billion to 4 billion yrs ago was reported by Dr. David W. Strangway, Chief of msc Geophysics Div. Laboratory tests had shown 400 to 500 gammas of local magnetic field would have been needed to leave magnetism observed in lunar rocks—% o t0 Vioo as strong as magnetism on earth’s surface. Earth’s magnetism was believed to be caused by earth’s rapid spin and molten core but moon spun only once a month and had been assumed to be solid throughout. Analysis had determined that lunar rocks cooled from molten state between 3.6 billion and 4 billion yrs ago and it was “almost certain” that rocks had acquired their magnetism at that time. Dr. Paul J. Coleman of Univ. of California at Los Angeles reported that findings obtained with Subsatellite launched from Apollo 15 Aug. 4, 1971, had shown marked variations in lunar magnetism on moon’s far side, with sharp, even peak near crater Van de Graaf close to center of moon’s far side. Dr. Palmer Dyal, Ames Research Center physicist, said Apollo 16 efforts to find explanation for observed lunar magnetism would include survey of Palmetto Crater north of landing site to assess possibility that impacts of large meteorites could leave residue of local magnetism. Equipment included magnetometers left on moon by previous missions and lunar subsatellite to be ejected from Apollo 16 command module. (Transcript)
Conclusive identification of absorptions caused by water frost in infrared reflectivities of Jupiter’s Galilean satellites J II and J III was reported in Science by astronomers from Massachusetts Institute of Technology and State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook. Measurements had been made by rapid-scanning Fourier spectrometer on 150-cm (60-in) McMath solar telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory. Percentage of frost-covered surface area had been determined at 50% to 100% for J II, 20% to 65% for J III, and possibly 5% to 25% for J IV. Leading side of J III had 20% more frost cover than trailing side, which explained visible geometric albedo differences between the two sides. Reflectivity of material underlying frost on J II, J III, and J IV resembled that of silicates. Surface of J I might be covered by frost particles much smaller than those of J II and J III. (Pilcher et al., Science, 12/8/72, 1087-9)
Importance of high technology to U.S. future was discussed by Dr. Karl G.	Harr, Jr., President of Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., in speech before Aero Club of Washington, D.C.: “If we as a nation are to continue to base our national security on modern forces-in-being, relying on qualitatively superior weaponry, then we must adequately fund both research & development and procurement.” In space exploration “our national willingness or unwillingness to proceed with this effort so rich in demonstrated benefits of all kinds, will foretell our spiritual strength to face the future.” (Text)
NASA launched four Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Point Barrow, Alaska. First rocket carried Goddard Space Flight Center grenade payload to 110.2-km (68.5-mi) altitude to provide temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in support of closely coordinated ozone and atomic oxygen flights. All 31 grenades were ejected and detonated as planned and sound arrivals were recorded on ground. Second rocket carried gsfc payload to 84.6-km (52.6-mi) altitude to measure ozone distribution in mesosphere and stratosphere in Arctic after spring wind reversal and in conjunction with overpass of Nimbus 4 satellite. Payload deployed properly and on time and descended by parachute. Excellent ozone data were acquired. Third rocket carried experiment developed by Univ. of Michigan and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to 127-km (78.9-mi) altitude. Objective was to measure atomic oxygen distribution in mesosphere in proximity to ozone and grenade flights. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good atomic oxygen data were acquired. Fourth rocket carried 31-grenade gsfc payload to collect atmospheric data in support of ozone and atomic oxygen flights. All grenades were ejected and detonated as planned and sound returns were recorded on ground. (NASA proj off)
Reorganization of Marshall Space Flight Center, announced June 30, was implemented, (msfc Release 72-98)
Federal District in Washington, D.C., issued temporary order restraining NASA from reducing staff at Marshall Space Flight Center on petition of American Federation of Government Employees, msfc reduction in force had been scheduled for June 29. Judge Joseph C. Waddy scheduled hearing for July 10 to determine if restraining order would become permanent injunction, (msfc Release 72-80)
Delivery to Dulles International Airport of arts iii—computerized automated radar terminal system to improve air traffic handling in busy terminal areas—was announced by Federal Aviation Administration. System processed radar beacon signals emitted by airborne transponders giving aircraft identity and altitude and presented information on radar displays for air traffic controllers, (faa Release 72-19) January 30:	First of four lunar eclipses to occur during 1972 was partially visible in portions of North and South America. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory spokesman said later that 37-min eclipse was not seen over Northeastern U.S. because of cloud cover. (NYT, 1/29/72, 19; 1/31/72, 3) January 31—February 23: European Space Research Organization’s 117-kg (257-lb) Heos 2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite was launched by NASA from Western Test Range by three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta (DSV-3L) booster at 9:20 am pst. Orbital parameters: 244 011-km (151621.4-mi) apogee, 416-km (258.5-mi) perigee, and 90.2° inclination. All vehicle systems monitored during launch functioned normally. Second burn of 2nd stage and ignition and burnout of 3rd stage occurred over Indian Ocean south of African continent. By Feb. 6 all flight experiments had been turned on and were working properly and all spacecraft systems were still functioning normally Feb. 23. On Feb. 18 NASA officially judged mission successful. Primary NASA objective was to place spacecraft into orbit that would permit successful achievement of esro scientific objectives and provide tracking and telemetry support. Satellite—16-sided cylinder with 70% of its outer surface covered with solar cells—carried seven experiments to investigate strength and direction of magnetic fields, energy distribution of protons and electrons, and nature of solar winds; make very-low-frequency solar observations; and detect micrometeorites. Heos 2 was second heos mission. Heos 1 had been launched Dec. 5, 1968, and was still in orbit. After orbital insertion, spacecraft was controlled from European Space Operations Center (esoc) and tracked by European Space Tracking Stations (estrack). European Space Technology Center (estec) was responsible for project management and would reimburse NASA $6.6 million for booster and prelaunch and launch support services, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-17; GSFC SSR, 1/31/72) January 31:	Mathematica, Inc., published Economic Analysis of the Space Shuttle System. Report of study directed by Klaus P. Heiss and Oskar Morgenstern under nasa contract concluded development of space shuttle system was economically feasible assuming level of space activity equal to average of U.S. unmanned space program of past eight years; thrust-assisted orbiter shuttle (taos) with external hydrogen and oxygen tanks was economically preferred choice among current shuttle configurations; and choice of thrust assist for orbiter shuttle was still open, with pressure-fed boosters and solid-fuel rocket motors, either using parallel burn, as main economic alternatives. Third economic choice was use of series-burn boosters. (Text)
Langley Research Center awarded 31-mo, $4 128 860 contract to Univ. of Iowa for design, construction, integration, test, and launch support for Injun-F spacecraft and onboard experiments. Injun-F would be launched from Western Test Range by Scout booster in 1974 to study interaction of solar winds with geomagnetosphere at large radial distances over earth’s north polar cap. Orbit would be highly elliptical and would traverse an area of space not previously surveyed. Spacecraft would weigh 27 kg (60 lbs) and would carry three principal experiments: magnetometer to map geomagnetic field over polar caps, low-energy proton electron differential energy analyzer to provide data on population density of charged particles, and extremely-low-frequency and very-low-frequency (elf-VLF) experiment to determine nature of electrostatic and electromagnetic fields. Experiments might lead to understanding of way in which natural radiation belts surrounding earth maintained their supply of charged particles. Principal investigator would be Dr. James A. Van Allen, discoverer of Van Allen belts, (nasa Release 72-65)
Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded $11165 375 contract extension to Boeing Co. for design changes on final five Saturn V 1st stages (S-IC-11 through S—IC-15), Marshall Star reported. Work would be completed by Boeing Aerospace Group at Michoud Assembly Facility by Feb. 28, 1973. (Marshall Star, 6/14/72, 4)
U.S.S.R. celebrated Cosmonauts Day with annual memorial meeting on 11th anniversary of Vostok 1, first manned space flight, piloted by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. Soviet Academy of Sciences president Mstislav V. Keldysh summarized Soviet space achievements and described Soviet space programs. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 4/18/72, LI)
Artificial (gas-flame) fireplace logs were being produced by Martin Stamping and Stove Co. from materials developed for NASA, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Materials—manufactured by Universal Atlas Div. of U.S. Steel Corp., Foote Mineral Co., and Vulcan Materials Co.—were fibrous insulation for Skylab and lightweight, refractory concrete used in Saturn rocket test stands to deflect hot exhaust. (msfc Release 72-119)
Army Aviation Systems Command awarded research and development, cost-plus-incentive-fee contracts to Boeing Co. Vertol Div. and United Aircraft Corp. Sikorsky Aircraft Div. for engineering development phase of prototype helicopters for Utility Tactical Transport Aircraft System (dttas). Boeing Vertol would receive $91 million and Sikorsky Aircraft $61 million, (dot note to correspondents)
NASA announced Marshall Space Flight Center award of contracts and fund transfers totaling more than $49 million for scientific experiments for first High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao), scheduled for launch in 1975. Receiving awards were Columbia Univ., $8 929 059; Massachusetts Institute of Technology, two awards of $7 821 720 and $5 357 245; Univ. of California at San Diego, $5150 000; California Institute of Technology, Washington Univ. of St. Louis, and Univ. of Minnesota, $6 198 683 for joint experiment; Naval Research Laboratory, $7 919 000; and Goddard Space Flight Center, $8 250 000. (nasa Release 72-145)
NASA announced selection of Xerox Data Systems for contract negotiations to provide central data-handling facility and remote terminals for Atmosphere Explorer (ae) C, D, and E program. Atmosphere Explorers, 450-kg (100-lb) spacecraft, were to be launched by Thor-Delta rockets into elliptical earth orbit between autumn 1973 and summer 1976 to study chemical processes and energy transfer mechanisms that controlled structure and behavior of earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere. Project was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under direction of Office of Space Science, (nasa Release 72-212)
Future need for public administrators who understood science and technology was forecast by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in speech before American Society of Public Administrators in New York. Sociological and technological components of world problems raised problems to “new level of complexity.” Management and public administration teams were examining “successful conduct of the Apollo program—the most complicated and difficult technical task ever undertaken by man.” However, “in Apollo we were carrying out a highly complex, but basically technical program. Essentially we were dealing with machines, not people.” Asked if U.S. should use Apollo program approach to solve environmental problems, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman had told interviewer: “I don’t think that I would care to live in a country that solved its social problems in the same way we solved the Apollo problems.” Dr. Fletcher agreed “our Science-Administrator needs for the future should not he equated with needs for better technical program managers, although this too will become increasingly important. In developing and formulating wise and sound policies and programs to tackle our emerging problems, it will be essential to have individuals within all governmental levels who are capable of understanding the potentials of science and technology . . . and who are alert to their ultimate purposes and consequences. ... It is in this role that I conceive of the new Science-Administrator. (Text)
NASA announced issuance to scientists around the world of requests for proposals for new investigations based on data already acquired by Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (ogo), Orbiting Solar Observatory (oso), and Explorer satellites. NASA would provide limited support to new investigations, possible because of satellites’ extended lifetimes and increased volume of available data. Proposals were due by Oct. 31. Funding for selected U.S. proposals would be available April 1, 1973. Foreign investigators would make own arrangements without cost to NASA. (NASA Release 72-152)
Fairchild Industries, Inc., and Western Telegraph Co. announced formation of new company, as yet unnamed, to enter domestic satellite field. Spokesman for Fairchild and Western (which had no connection with Western Union Telegraph Co.) said new company would use Fairchild’s satellite systems and development and manufacturing capabilities. (Smith, NYT, 8/9/72) August 4:	Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carried Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 159-km (98.8-mi) altitude. Objectives were to measure intensity and energy spectra of low-energy protons, helium nuclei, and heavier nuclei during polar cap absorption event; examine relative abundances of charge species; and study changes in intensity with time during event. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily but telemetry signal was sporadic after 150 sec. Payload landed on ground and was recovered. Launch was first of two; second would be Aug. 5. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Saturn V 1st stage (S-IC-513), scheduled to boost Skylab into earth orbit in 1973, left Michoud Assembly Facility on board NASA barge Orion. It would arrive at Kennedy Space Center July 26. Stage had been turned over to NASA by Boeing Co. at Michoud ceremony. (msfc Release 72-91)
Development Test Satellite (dts), full-scale ground-test vehicle characteristic of high-capacity next-generation communications satellites, had been built by 15-member international consortium led by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Privately funded vehicle embodied concepts and technologies that Lockheed considered essential for profitable or cost-effective operations 1976-1985. Features included three-axis spacecraft stabilization; electric and hydrazine propulsion; sun-tracking, flexible, solar substrate solar arrays; multiple narrow antenna beams; onboard trans-ponder/antenna switching; and advanced thermal control. (Av Wk, 5/29/72, 41-7) May 30:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told meeting of White House Council that U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement on joint space mission would lead to some 4400 new jobs in California’s aerospace industry by 1974 and retention of some 1500 jobs at NASA Centers in Florida and Alabama. (Gwertzman, NYT, '5/31/72, 9)
nasa TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed 31st flight from Flight Research Center. Primary objective was to evaluate aircraft’s longitudinal stability with augmentation off at altitudes from 11300 to 13 700 m (37 000 to 45 000 ft) and mach 0.8 to 1.0. Survey equipment was removed. Angles of attack up to 17° and normal accelerations as high as 3.7 g were covered, (nasa proj off)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload, was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range. Objectives were to measure intensity and energy spectra of low-energy protons, helium nuclei, and heavier nuclei during polar cap absorption event; examine relative abundances of charge species; and study changes in intensity with time during event. Rocket and instrumentation performance was not satisfactory. Radar beam malfunctioned at liftoff, telemetry signal was lost after 128 sec, 2nd stage apparently failed to ignite, and payload was not recovered. Launch was second of two; first had been Aug. 4. (nasa Rpt srl) August 6:	Erts 1 return-beam-vidicon (rbv) camera system was shut down after unexpected power surge, rbv system was second experiment to be shut down because of power surge; first had been No. 2 tape recorder Aug. 3. Although both systems could be operated, shutdowns were necessary to determine whether operation would damage experiments and to identify exact cause of problem. Erts 1 (launched July 23) was providing excellent images from multispectral scanner (mss) system and No. 1 tape recorder was being used as required, (gsfc Release 16-72)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Apollo 16 astronauts presented 50 awards at Marshall Space Flight Center to Government and industry personnel who assisted successful Apollo 16 mission (April 16-27). (msfc Release 72—75)
Airborne laser system developed by NASA’s Wallops Station and Langley Research Center was being used to measure presence of drifting plankton in offshore areas of Chesapeake Bay, Md., and Chincoteague Bay, Va. System, mounted on helicopter, used orange light flash from laser to induce fluorescence in plankton. Fluorescence then was measured and recorded through telescope on helicopter. Test results had confirmed feasibility of using laser system on low-flying aircraft or surface vessel for observation of chlorophyll-bearing marine microorganisms. (Wallops Release 72-6)
NASA launched Black Brant VC sounding rocket from Wallops Station carrying Goddard Space Flight Center performance test payload. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA test pilot Gary E. Krier flew modified F-8 jet fighter equipped with digital-fly-by-wire control system from Flight Research Center in first flight test of aircraft that was completely dependent on electronic control system. Aircraft had no mechanical backup control system. Purpose of flight, limited to maximum speed of 680 km per hr (425 mph) and maximum altitude of 6000 m (20 000 ft), was to check out aircraft’s primary and secondary flight control system. Fly-by-wire system with digital computer and inertial measuring unit had been developed originally for Apollo lunar module and was designated for future use in space shuttle to ensure smoother flight. (nasa Release 72—112)
Senate Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 15093, FY 1973 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-space-science-veterans appropriations bill that included $3.432-billion NASA appropriation. Senate appropriation was $24 million above budget request of $3,408 billion and increase of $82.4 million over House appropriation of $3,349 billion voted May 23. Senate version raised appropriation for research and development (r&d) $74.9 million above House version, to $2,624 billion. Construction of facilities funds were increased by $7.5 million, to $77.3 million. Research and program management funds remained unchanged. Of r&d appropriation increase, $24 million was for aeronautical research in noise abatement and aviation safety and $50.9 million to restore funds deleted in House bill from other NASA research programs. Construction of facilities increase restored funds deleted in House bill—$5.5 million requested by NASA for modification of space shuttle manufacturing and final assembly facilities and $2 million for planning and design. Shuttle funds would support orbiter assembly and external hydrogen and oxygen tank manufacture, baselined “for estimating purposes” at Michoud Assembly Facility, one of possible sites for either or both of these functions. (S Rpt92-820)
Ultrasonic wrench developed by NASA to connect tubing in Saturn boosters was available to private industry for possible commercial use, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Wrench induced flexuous vibrations in nut being tightened and guaranteed calibrated tension. It could be used by industry on conventional nuts and bolts, which could replace expensive lock nuts and bolts that changed color as tension increased. Ultrasonic tightening also could remove normal friction forces and ensure proper tension by preselected torque dial, (msfc Release 72-10)
Decision to plan large multipurpose optical telescope to be launched and serviced by space shuttle in 1980s was announced by NASA. Large Space Telescope (lst) to study energy processes in galactic nuclei, early stages of stellar and solar system formation, supernova remnants and white dwarfs, and other phenomena relevant to origin of universe would also provide long-term monitoring of atmospheric phenomena on Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. Telescope, able to observe galaxies 100 times fainter than those seen by most powerful ground-based optic telescope, would weigh between 9000 and 11000 kg (20 000 and 25 000 lbs) and have length of 12 to 16 m (40 to 52 ft) and diameter of 3.6 to 4 m (12 to 13 ft). It would include diffraction-limited mirror with 3-m (10-ft) diameter. LST project management had been assigned to Marshall Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 72—98)
Group of 60 Civil Air Patrol cadets from 32 states and Puerto Rico arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center for week-long space flight orientation course. Cadets would attend lectures on NASA programs, tour msfc laboratories, and visit Alabama Space and Rocket Center. (msfc Release 72-92)
Fourteenth Israel Annual Conference on Aviation and Astronautics was held in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Fifth Theodore von Karman Memorial Lecture, “Perspectives in Aeroelasticity,” was delivered by Langley Research Center scientist I. Edward Garrick. (Off Naval Research London, European Scientific Notes, ESN-26-4, 4/28/72, 91) March 1—3:	NASA-wide conference on equal employment opportunity was held at Kennedy Space Center at request of Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. During conference chaired by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, Dr. Fletcher said: “Our successes in space exploration have been outstanding .... However, in spite of the efforts of many and a number of significant accomplishments, our achievements in equal employment in NASA, here on earth, do not match what we have done beyond our planet.” Dr. Fletcher said he would insist “that as fast as humanly possible, by transfer, training, promotion, and whatever other means are available, and appropriate, our offices move toward the goal of the balanced staffing that will achieve true equal employment opportunities.” NASA was planning to get members of minority groups into space. Space shuttle would be important factor in accomplishing this goal. NASA also would consider establishing annual awards for outstanding performance in Office of Equal Opportunity and would insist that “spirit as well as the letter” of contractors’ equal employment obligations be fulfilled. (Text) The 258-kg (569-lb), spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 11 scientific experiments to provide new knowledge about Jupiter, solar system, and Milky Way galaxy. It would return first closeup images of Jupiter and make first measurements of Jupiter’s twilight side, never seen from earth. Two additional experiments—celestial mechanics and S-band occultation—would use communication signal and earth-based equipment. Pioneer 10 would be first spacecraft to observe Asteroid Belt between orbits of Mars and Jupiter, first man-made object to escape solar system, first spacecraft to use orbital velocity and gravity of Jupiter for escape, and first NASA spacecraft powered entirely by nuclear energy— four radioisotope thermoelectric generators developed by Atomic Energy Commission. Pioneer 10 would make 20 kinds of measurements of Jupiter’s atmosphere, radiation belts, heat balance, magnetic field, moons, and other phenomena. It would also characterize solar atmosphere, interstellar gas, cosmic rays, asteroids, and meteoroids. Spacecraft also carried pictorial plaque designed to show scientifically educated inhabitants of another star system—who might intercept it millions of years later—-the time spacecraft was launched, from where, and by whom. Plaque design was etched into gold-anodized aluminum plate 15 by 23 cm (6 by 9 in) and 1.27 mm (0.05 in) thick attached to spacecraft’s antenna support struts. Radiating lines on left of plaque represented positions of 14 pulsars, with mathematical binary code “1-” symbols representing pulsars’ frequencies relative to hydrogen atom, which was used as “universal clock.” Hydrogen atom was also used as “universal yardstick” for sizing human figures and outline of spacecraft on right of plaque. Man’s hand was raised in good-will gesture. Across bottom of plaque were planets ranging outward from sun, with spacecraft’s trajectory arching away from earth, passing Mars, and swinging past Jupiter.	Initial orientation of Pioneer 10 was achieved six hours after launch so that communications high-gain antenna was directed toward earth. By March 3, four scientific instruments—magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid detector—had been turned on. First midcourse maneuver, March 7, increased velocity by 11 m per sec (45.9 fps), adjusted trajectory, and shortened flight time to Jupiter by nine hours. At 3:00 pm EST March 8, Pioneer 10 was 4 570 000 km (2 840 000 mi) from earth traveling at 32 800 km per hr (20 400 mph). Round-trip radio communication time was 31 sec. By March 10 trapped radiation detector and ultraviolet photometer had been turned on and meteoroid detector had recorded several hits. Second midcourse maneuver, with two brief thruster firings March 23 and 24, delayed arrival time by 2% hrs and moved arrival point at Jupiter about 6400 km (4000 mi) closer to planet. Maneuver was also attempt to fly Pioneer 10 behind Jupiter’s moon Io. Whether flight path behind Io had been achieved would not be known until spacecraft neared Jupiter. To go behind Io, spacecraft had to arrive within period of less then eight minutes. By March 24 remaining instruments—plasma analyzer, cosmic ray telescope, imaging photopolarimeter, infrared radiometer, and asteroid/meteoroid detector—had been turned on and all experiments were recording good data. Meteoroid detector had recorded 10 impacts, and asteroid/meteoroid telescope had seen one meteoroid. Spacecraft was expected to enter Asteroid Belt in early July and to reach Jupiter Dec. 3, 1973. Pioneer 10 was first spacecraft to attempt Jupiter probe. Pioneer 5 was launched March 11, 1960, to study heliocentric space environment inward toward sun. Pioneer 6 (launched Dec. 16, 1965) and Pioneer 7 (launched Aug. 17, 1966) were studying heliocentric space environment. Pioneer 8 (launched Dec. 13, 1967) and Pioneer 9 (launched Nov. 8, 1968) were studying interplanetary phenomena. Last four were still operating satisfactorily. (NASA proj off; NASA Releases 72-25, 72-32, 72-50, 72-68) March 2:	Isis 2 International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (launched by NASA March 31, 1971, in joint U.S. and Canadian program) was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had exceeded mission objectives. All 12 scientific instruments were operational and were still acquiring detailed information on latitudinal and diurnal variations of ionosphere. Spacecraft was obtaining radio-sounder and correlative direct measurements to allow continuation and extension of ionospheric studies during period of declining solar activity, and long lifetime was anticipated. Isis 2 was fourth and final mission in U.S.-Canadian program to study ionosphere that began with launch of Alouette 1 Sept. 28, 1962. All four spacecraft were operational and were providing useful data. ISIS program had acquired wealth of knowledge on worldwide morphology of topside ionosphere, virtually unknown region before Alouette-isis program, and in discoveries in plasma physics and radio-wave propagation. (nasa proj off)
X-24B experimental lifting body was delivered to Air Force and NASA by builder, Martin Marietta Corp., during ceremonies at Littleton, Colo. Lifting body could be used in joint NASA—Air Force research program at Flight Research Center and at Air Force System Command’s Air Force Flight Test Center to test its handling qualities for conventional runway approach and landing and for extended nearearth flight. About 30 flights were planned in program starting April 1973. X-24B would be flown to maximum speed of mach 1.5 to obtain performance data from 1450 km per hr (900 mph) down to landing speed. Lifting body arrived at FRC Oct. 22. (frc pao; UPl, W Post, 10/13/72; asfc Newsreview, 11/72, 3)
Apollo 17 launch date postmarks would be available from Kennedy Space Center and Manned Spacecraft Center, Washington Sunday Star & Daily News reported. Deadline for obtaining splashdown postmarks from recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga had passed. Titusville, Fla., Post Office would accept covers to be postmarked at KSC for 18-hr period beginning 8 am Dec. 6. (Fairies, W Star & News, 12/3/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced three contract awards. Grumman Aerospace Corp. had been awarded 15-mo, $200 000 fixed-price, research and development contract to continue to design, build, and test space shuttle orbiter heating systems. Singer Co. had been awarded $135 530 firm-fixed-price contract to study and define simulator requirements for space shuttle mission simulator. McDonnell Douglas Corp. Astronautics Co. had received $181 000 contract for design study of orbital maneuvering system (oms) to maneuver space shuttle orbiter in space, (msc Releases 72-157, 72-158, 72-159)
