NASA announced that General Counsel R. Tenney Johnson would leave NASA to become general counsel of the Energy Research and Development Administration, effective 16 Feb. Johnson had been With NASA since May 1973. NASA Deputy General Counsel S. Neil Hosenball had been named acting General Counsel. (NASA Release 75—32)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of two contracts to Martin Marietta Corp. for further studies on the Earth Orbiting Teleoperator System (EOTS). Under a $246 570 contract Martin would design EOTS, an unmanned remotely controlled spacecraft, to operate in earth orbit near the Space Shuttle Orbiter. The spacecraft would carry a TV camera for close-up inspection, have docking capability, and be propelled by cold-gas expulsion. Under a $64 000 contract Martin would develop a complete set of requirements for the control and display station, a unit in the Orbiter that would contain control equipment common to all experiments requiring a teleoperator system. (MSFC Release 75—29)
Appointment of Lt. Gen. William J. Evans as commander of the Air Force Systems Command became effective. Gen. Evans, who had been deputy chief of staff for research and development at Air Force Hq, was replacing retiring Gen. Samuel C. Phillips. AFSC had been responsible for developing Air Force aerospace technology. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug. 75)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported out H.R. 4700 authorizing FY 1976 appropriations for NASA. Changes recommended by the Committee would increase the total NASA authorization by $46.9 million, to $3,586 billion. [See also 3 Feb.] Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the House Committee Difference Recommended Purpose for Program from Submission Authorization Recommended (millions) (millions) Change Research and Development Space Shuttle 0 Space Flight Operations -4.0 Advanced Missions + 1.5 Physics and Astronomy + 1.0 Lunar and Planetary -1.0 Launch Vehicle Procure- 0 Space Applications + 6.5 Aeronautical Research and 0 Space and Nuclear Research +2.0 and Technology Energy Technology Applications 0 Tracking and Data Acquisition —2.2 Technology Utilization +2.0 R&D Totals +5.8 Research and Program Management Basic submission* 0 R&PM Totals* 0 Construction of Facilities Modification of 11- by 11-ft 0 transonic wind tunnel at ARC Modification of 40- by 80-ft +12.5 subsonic wind tunnel at ARC Addition to lunar sample —2.5 curatorial facility at JSC Addition for composite model 0 and metal finishing shops at LaRC Construction of transonic re- +27.5 search tunnel at LaRC 1 206.0 Accepted as presented. 203.1 To decrease development, test, and mission-operation activities. 3.0 To increase studies of large space structures, manned orbital systems concepts, and in-orbit maintenance. 156.8 To increase stratospheric research. 258.9 To decrease funding for the Lunar Research Program. 166.9 Accepted as presented. 181.5 To increase emphasis on weather and climate research, earth resources surveys, advanced communications research, data-management techniques, and Space Shuttle payload definition and early flight tests. 175.4 Accepted as presented. 76.9 To accelerate high pressure hydrogen propulsion systems tests and high temperature composites research. 5.9 Accepted as presented. 240.8 To decrease operations and advanced missions activity. 9.0 To accelerate effort of NASA TU teams to work with the public and . increase space benefits analysis 2 684.2 776.0 Accepted as presented. 2.7 Accepted as presented. 12.5 To repower tunnel. Not in original 0 Deleted from funds. 1.9 Accepted as presented. 27.5 Construction of high Reynolds number transonic wind tunnel. Not in original request. Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the House Committee (continued) Difference Recommended Purpose for Program from Submission Authorization Recommended (millions) (millions) Change Construction of Facilities: (cont.t Space Shuttle facilities -0.9 46.3 Deferment of modifications of two hypergolic checkout and refurbishment facilities and construction of facilities to house microwave scanning beam landing system. Rehabilitation of facilities 0 16.0 Accepted as presented. Minor construction of new facilities or additions to old 0 5.0 Accepted as presented. Facility planning and design + 4.5 13.8 For planning and design work assoeiated with construction and modification of two wind tunnels mentioned above. C of F Totals + 41.1 125.7 Grand Totals9 + 43.7 3 585.9
Intelsat IV F-6 communications satellite was destroyed by a NASA range safety officer 415 sec after launch from Eastern Test Range when the Atlas-Centaur test vehicle tumbled out of control. Lifting off at 6:35 pm EST, the mission had been normal to Atlas booster-engine cutoff at 138 sec. Then telemetry data indicated several malfunctions, including electrical problems and loss of altitude. After destruction, the vehicle impacted in the Atlantic Ocean 800 km downrange from the launch site. An investigation of the failure was begun under the direction of Lewis Research Center and the mission was officially judged unsuccessful 6 March. The failure was the first for an Atlas-Centaur since May 1971, when a circuit problem in the Centaur ended the launch of the Mariner 8 Mars probe. The 1400-kg Intelsat IV F-6, launched by NASA on a cost-reimbursable basis for the Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the 89-member-nation International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, was intended to be the primary spacecraft over the Indian Ocean region, with Intelsat IV F-5, launched 13 June 1972, becoming the backup. The failure of Intelsat IV F—6 would have no immediate effect on Intelsat global communications; Intelsat IV F-5 could provide the primary function and Intelsat III F-3, launched 6 Feb. 1969, was still capable of providing limited backup. The Intelsat IV F-6 mission had been scheduled originally for launch in February 1973 but experienced a series of delays from problems in both the satellite and the launch vehicle. (NASA MORs, 26 Feb 75, 13 March 74; PAO, interview, 21 Feb 75; NASA Releases 73—83, 75—7, 75—47; NASA “Note to Editors,” 3 May 73, 27 June 75; SBD, 24 Jan 75, 127)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the Energy Research and Development Administration announced selection of 16 organizations to negotiate contracts for the development of low-cost solar cells for residential and commercial use. Twenty-two contracts, totaling approximately $12 million, would be awarded as part of the Low Cost Silicon Array Project managed by JPL for ERDA. Objective of the project was to create by 1985 an industrial capability of producing silicon solar cells or arrays at a market price of less than $500/kw. Cost to date had been $20 000/kw. The demand for solar cells was expected to increase from 100 kw annually in 1975 to 500 000 kw annually by 1985. JPL negotiations included production of low-cost solar-grade silicon, economical production of silicon in large-area sheets suitable for use in solar cells, development of economical encapsulation materials and techniques for an array lifetime of 20 yr, and development of automated processes and facilities for low-cost production of arrays. Future contracts would be negotiated to procure array modules for a series of ERDA-funded tests of photovoltaic systems, in cooperation with the Department of Defense to determine the technical feasibility of using photovoltaics for military applications, and in cooperation with Lewis Research Center for a similar civilian effort. (NASA Release 75—280) The descent module of Venera 9 separated from the main spacecraft 20 Oct., 2 days before it reached the Venus atmosphere, which it entered at 11:58 pm EDT 21 Oct., landing on the surface at 1:13 am EDT Oct. 22. When the atmosphere had slowed the descent sufficiently, a parachute system had been deployed at about 50 km above the surface, and the lander studied the cloud layers and atmosphere during the rest of the descent. The lander modules had been built to withstand the hostile environment at the Venus surface, with temperatures that reach 500°C and pressures up to 100 times that of earth’s atmosphere. Before landing, the modules had been cooled to — KTC to provide a reserve of cold temperature that would permit operation for about an hour before overheating. Venera 10, launched 14 June and following the same procedure, had separated from its orbiter 23 Oct. and had landed on Venus at 1:17 am EDT 25 Oct. Venera9, launched 8 June from the Baykonur cosmodrome, was the third Soviet spacecraft to make a soft landing on Venus: Venera 7 and 8, which landed on Venus in Dec. 1970 and July 1972, respectively, had transmitted technical data for 23 and 50 min, respectively, but did not carry cameras. Pictures sent by the Venera 9 lander showed a rugged surface with sharp-angled and flat-surfaced rocks 30 to 35 cm across and some boulders. Pictures sent by the Venera 10 lander, which touched down 2200 km from the site of Venera 9, showed what seemed to be an older mountain formation with smooth rounded rocks. Soviet scientists had expressed amazement that both sites were bathed in light. The dense cloudcover that hides Venus from earth had been thought to keep the planet in perpetual shade. Dr. Arnold Selivanov, one of the TV system designers, said that they had “expected poor lighting conditions and built our instruments accordingly”; this is why they had received “good pictures. . .that can be used by newspapers without any preliminary processing.” The horizon of Venus discernible in a comer of the Venera photos did not appear concave (ends bent upward), as had been expected as a result of the theorized distortion resulting from the planet’s dense atmosphere. The apparent geological youth of the rocks on Venus “testifies to recent catastrophic processes like volcanic eruptions or earthquakes—we should say Venusquakes—which took place recently,” said Soviet mineralogist Dr. Aleksandr Basilevsky. “Venus apparently is internally active.” This conclusion had affirmed American theory that Venus resembled earth in having a liquid core, a mantle, and a rocky crust. Four Soviet scientists reviewing the Venera 9 and 10 program in an article in Pravda had summarized the descent-module findings: Temperature and pressure at the landing sites, 460°C and 90 atm, respectively; surface illumination, about 10 000 lux; local wind velocity at landing site, 0.4 to 0.7 meter per sec (Venera9) and 0.8 to 1.3 meter per sec (Venera 10); natural radioactive elements in Venus rock, 0.3% potassium, 0.0002% thorium, and 0.001% uranium. Orbiting module findings were: Temperature of Venus clouds at upper boundary, about — 35°C; cloud temperatures on nocturnal side, about 1(FC higher; atmospheric temperature decreased with altitude, but local temperature elevations were observable at the 66 to 55 km level; Venus ionosphere was thinner than the terrestrial and closer to the surface; and the electron concentration on the daytime side was significantly higher than on the nocturnal side but about 10 times smaller than in the terrestrial ionosphere. Much of the information relayed from Venus had still to be processed. Cameras in the orbiting spacecraft of Venera 9 and 10 had proceeded with photographing the dense cloudcover of Venus, their first pictures received 26 Oct. showing a panorama of more than 1500 km of the clouds circulating around the planet’s equator. Scientists at the Deep Space Communications Center in Moscow said the pictures “confirm the presence of powerful streams of circulating flows in the planet’s atmosphere, first detected on board the American probe Mariner 10 in February 1974.” There was no indication, the Baltimore Sun commented, how long the two Venus mother ships would continue in orbit. (NYT, 23 Oct 75,1; 26 Oct 75,1, sec. 4p 7; FBIS 208,210, 25 Oct 75; WStar, 23Oct 75, A3; BSun, 26 Oct 75, All; 27Oct 75, A4; Defense/Sp Bus Daily, 23 Oct 75, 272; 28 Oct 75, 289; 29 Oct 75, 301; Pravda, 21 Feb 76, 3—4) 23 October-. Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Integrated Systems Support, Inc. to negotiate a $2.8-million cost-plus-award-fee contract for computer support and facility operations at MSFC’s Slidell Computer Complex. The 1-yr contract had provisions for four additional 1-yr extensions. (MSFC Release 75—224)
Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov* one of the Soviet Union’s leading space scientists, died in Moscow at the age of 80. Blagonravov, chairman of the Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Commission for Space Research and head of the State Research Institute of Engineering Studies, was one of the key scientists responsible for launching the world’s first satellite, Sputnik 1, 4 Oct. 1957. Blagonravov had begun his career in the military and much of his early work was on the development of automatic infantry weapons. He later turned to the development of spacecraft, making major design contributions to the Soviet Union’s Lunik I, launched 2 June 1959, as the first man-made object to fly by the moon. Blagonravov also represented the U.S.S.R. in many international organizations: He had been vicepresident of the International Space Research Committee, permanent U.S.S.R. representative on the United Nations Scientific and Technical Subcommittee for the Peaceful Use of Space, and permanent deputy Soviet representative on the U.N. Space Committee. In 1962 Blagonravov held discussions with Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, during which details for exchange of satellite data were worked out. (Moscow Domestic News Service, FBIS—Sov, 7 Feb 75, Ul; WPost, 7 Feb 75, C8; McElheny, NYT, 6 Feb 75, 34)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $4 409 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to Bendix Corp. for design, development, test and evaluation, and fabrication of integrated electronic assemblies (1EA) for Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters on the first six Shuttle developmental flights. Each booster would require two IEAs: The forward IEA would initiate release of the nose cap and frustum, jettison the solid-rocket-motor nozzle, detach the parachute, and turn on recovery aids. The aft IEA would interface with the Orbiter, the forward IEA, and other avionic systems. Delivery of the IEAs would begin in 1976 and continue through 1 Apr. 1979. (MSFC Release 75 — 190)
NASA announced award of a $150 000 10-mo study contract to The Boeing Co. to determine the basic design, costs, and environmental impact of potential power-generating satellite systems in space. Boeing’s Aerospace Co. would investigate solar and nuclear families of space-based power generators, studying two different energy converters for each; define the satellites; study their cost; and determine potential environmental effects. One converter was to be a thermal engine converter like a steam turbine that transformed heat into a usable form of energy. The other, a thermionic converter, would produce electrically charged particles to power a passive electrical-generation system. Power generated by either method would be transformed into microwaves and beamed to earth for reconversion into electricity. (MSFC Release 75—156) Soyuz Launch: Soyuz 19, carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20 am EDT) 15 July. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 221.9-km apogee, 186.3-km perigee, 88.5min period, and 51.8? inclination. Foreign correspondents, barred from the launch site, watched the launch on color TV sets in a Moscow press center. The first Soviet launch to be televised live, it was transmitted to viewers throughout the Soviet Union, the U.S., and eastern and western Europe. President Ford watched from a U.S. State Dept, auditorium with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly P. Dobrynin and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher, before Dr. Fletcher and Ambassador Dobrynin flew to Kennedy Space Center to watch the Apollo launch. On the third orbit the Soyuz 19 crew established contact with U.S. mission control in Houston, putting into operation the global Moscow—Houston —Soyuz-Apollo communications system. On the fifth orbit the cosmonauts made the first of two maneuvers to place Soyuz 19 into a circular docking orbit. New orbital parameters were 231.7-km apogee and 192.4-km perigee. The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 3° per sec with all systems operating normally. Apollo Launch: At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July—7 hr 30 min after the Soyuz launch—a Saturn IB flawlessly lifted the Apollo spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center’s launch complex 39, carrying Apollo commander Thomas P. Stafford, command-module pilot Vance D. Brand, and docking-module pilot Donald K. Slayton. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 173.3-km apogee, 154.7-km perigee, 87.6-min period, and 51.8? inclination. The spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adapter was jettisoned at 9 hr 4 min ground elapsed time (9:04 GET, counted from the Soyuz 19 launch) and the crew maneuvered the Apollo 180° to dock with the adapter and extract the docking module. These events were videotaped and transmitted to earth later via Ats 6 (NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974). A maneuver 2 hr later at 7:35 pm circularized the orbit at 172 km. The Saturn S—IVB stage was deorbited into the Pacific Ocean 1 hr 30 min later. A second Soyuz 19 circularization burn of 18.5 sec at 8:43 am EDT 16 July placed that spacecraft in a circular orbit of 229 km, with all systems functioning normally. Rendezvous and Docking: A series of Apollo maneuvers, with the final braking maneuver at 8:51 am EDT 17 July, put the Apollo spacecraft in a 229.4-km circular orbit matching the orbit of Soyuz 19. Afew minutes later Brand reported, “We’ve got Soyuz in the sextant.” Voice contact was made soon after. “Hello. Soyuz, Apollo,” Stafford said in Russian. Kubasov replied in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to you, Tom and Deke. Hello there, Vance.” All communications among the five crew members during the mission were made in the language of the listener, with the Americans speaking Russian to the Soviet crew and the Soviet crew speaking English to the Americans. Contact of the two spacecraft 51 hr 49 min into the mission (12:09 pm 17 July) was transmitted live on TV to the earth, and Stafford commented, “We have succeeded. Everything is excellent.” “Soyuz and Apollo are shaking hands now,” the cosmonauts answered. Hard docking was completed over the Atlantic Ocean at 12:12 pm—6 min earlier than the prelaunch flight plan—watched by millions of TV viewers worldwide. “Perfect. Beautiful. Well done, Tom. It was a good show. We’re looking forward to shaking hands with you in board [sic] Soyuz,” Leonov said. Ta9s later reported that Kubasov told Moscow ground controllers that “we felt a slight jolt at the moment of docking” but that all went according to plan. Joint Activities: At 3:17 pm hatch 3 opened; Apollo commander Stafford and Soyuz commander Leonov shook hands 2 min later. “Glad to see you,” Stafford told Leonov in Russian. “Glad to see you. Very very happy to see you,” Leonov responded in English. “This is Soyuz and the United States,” Slayton told TV viewers around the world. Both Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Ford congratulated the crews and expressed their confidence in the success of the mission. Stafford then presented Leonov with “five flags for your government and the people of the Soviet Union” with the wish that “our joint work in space serves for the benefit of all countries and peoples on the earth.” Leonov presented the U.S. crew with Soviet flags and plaques. The men signed international certificates and exchanged other commemorative items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a meal aboard the Soyuz, the Americans returned to the Apollo and the hatch was closed at 6:51 pm. An integrity check of the hatches indicated an atmospheric leak on the Soviet side. Ground controllers later attributed the indication to temperature changes in the sealed docking module that were detected by the sensitive Soviet instrumentation. Future integrity checks of the hatches would be more rigorous, however. Following a sleep period, the crews prepared for another day of joint activity. Kubasov described the mission to Soviet TV viewers while the rest of the crews performed experiments in their respective spacecraft. At 5:05 am 18 July Brand entered the Soviet spacecraft; Leonov joined Stafford and Slayton in Apollo, greeting them with “Howdy partner.” Kubasov gave American TV viewers a tour of his Soyuz, and Stafford followed with a tour of the Apollo. Then both Kubasov and Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission to earth later. Kubasov and Brand ate lunch in the Soyuz while Leonov ate with Stafford and Slayton in Apollo. During a third transfer, Stafford and Leonov went into the Soyuz and Kubasov and Brand joined Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet viewers a Russian-language tour of the eastern U.S. as seen from space. Further speeches and exchanges of commemorative items were made for both U.S. and Soviet viewers before the final handshakes at 4:49 pm EDT 18 July, when the crews returned to their respective spacecraft. The hatches were closed after Brand told Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the best of success. I’m sure that we’ve opened up a new era in history. Our next meeting will be on the ground.” Total time for all transfers and joint activities was 19 hr 55 min. Stafford had spent 7 hr 10 min aboard Soyuz; Brand, 6 hr 30 min; Slayton, 1 hr 35 min. Leonov spent 5 hr 43 min in the Apollo, Kubasov 4 hr 57 min. During nearly 2 days of joint activities, the five men carried out five joint experiments. Undocking and Separation: The Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft undocked at 95:42 GET (8:02 am EDT 19 July). While the spacecraft were in station-keeping mode, the crews photographed them and the docking apparatus, transmitting the pictures live on TV to earth. The Apollo spacecraft then served as an occulting disk, blocking the sun from the Soyuz and simulating a solar eclipse—the first man-made eclipse. Leonov and Kubasov photographed the solar corona as the Apollo backed away from the Soyuz and toward the sun. The two spacecraft then redocked at 8:34 am EDT with the Apollo maneuvering and the Soyuz docking system active while good quality TV was transmitted to earth. The second docking was not as smooth as the first because a slight misalignment of the two spacecraft caused both to pitch excessively at contact. Final undocking—also with the Soyuz active—went smoothly and was completed at 11:26 am. As the spacecraft separated, the two crews performed the ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, making unsuccessful data measurements at 150 m and then moving to a distance of 500 and 1000 m, where data were successfully collected. The Apollo maneuvered to within 50 m of Soyuz and took intensive still photography of the Soyuz. Separation maneuvers to put the two spacecraft on separate trajectories began at 2:42 pm with a reaction-control system burn. With the maneuvers completed, Leonov told the Apollo crew, “Thank you very much for your very big job. ... It was a very good show.” Brand answered, “Thank you, also. This was a very good job.” Soyuz Orbit and Landing-. Soyuz 19 remained in orbit nearly 30 hrs after the undocking. The cosmonauts conducted biological experiments with microorganisms and zone-forming fungi. At 2:39 am EDT 21 July the Soyuz crew closed hatch 5 between their orbital vehicle and descent module and began depressurizing the orbital module. Braking burns of the descent engines began at 6:06 am when the spacecraft was 772 km from the Apollo. The 194.9-sec bum slowed the spacecraft to 120 km per sec. After another burn to stabilize the spacecraft, the orbital and descent modules separated over Central Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the first landing of a Soviet spacecraft televised in real time, the main parachute deployed at 7 km and jettisoned before the soft-landing engines fired. Soyuz 19 landed about 11 km from the target point northeast of Baykonur Cosmodrome at 6:51 am EDT 21 July, after a 142-hr 31-min mission. The rescue helicopter approached the capsule immediately and specialists opened hatch 5. Kubasov stepped out waving to rescue-team members, followed by Leonov, both cosmonauts in apparent good health and spirits. The cosmonauts returned to Baykonur for medical checks and debriefings. Apollo Postdocking Orbital Activities: Apollo remained in orbit while its crew continued U.S. science experiments begun during predocking. Searching for extreme ultraviolet radiation, the ASTP crew marked the birth of a new branch of astronomy when they found, for the first time, extreme ultraviolet sources outside the solar system; some scientists had believed that such sources could never be found. One of the newly discovered sources turned out to be the hottest known white dwarf star. The Apollo detector also revealed the existence of the first pulsar discovered outside the Milky Way. About 200 000 light years from earth’s galaxy, in the Small Magellanic Cloud, it was the most luminous pulsar known to astronomers, 10 times brighter than any discovered so far. After repairing some malfunctioning equipment, the astronauts also mapped x-ray sources throughout the Milky Way. The crew completed nearly all the 110 earth-observation tasks assigned. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by six groups of scientists on the ground, on ships at sea, and in aircraft. The astronauts looked at ocean currents, ocean pollution, desert geography, shoreline erosion, volcanoes, iceberg movements, and vegetation patterns. On 23 July the command-module tunnel was vented and the crew put on spacesuits to jettison the docking module. The command and service module undocked from the DM at 3:45 pm EDT, and a 1-sec engine firing put the CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km apogee, 219.0km perigee) so that the DM could move ahead. A second maneuver put the CSM in a 223.2-km by 219.0-km orbit. Deorbit began at 4:38 p.m. The command module and service module separated, the drogue and main parachutes deployed normally, and the Apollo splashed down at 224:58 GET (5:18 p.m. EDT 24 July) in the Pacific Ocean 163°W and 22°N, 500 km west of Hawaii. This was the last ocean landing planned for U.S. manned space flights; future flights on the Space Shuttle would be wheeled touchdowns at land bases. The CM landed in “stable 2” position (upside down) 7.4 km from the prime recovery ship, U.S.S. New Orleans. After swimmers from the rescue helicopter righted the spacecraft and attached a flotation collar, the Apollo was lifted by crane on to the deck of the recovery ship and Stafford, Brand, and Slayton stepped out to the cheers of the ship’s crew. President Ford telephoned congratulations. During the welcome, the crew was evidently experiencing eye and lung discomfort; subsequent conversations and spacecraft data revealed that, during reentry, the earth landing system had failed to jettison the apex cover and drogues as scheduled and had had to be fired manually, without first disabling the reaction-control system thrusters. With the CM oscillating, the thrusters began firing rapidly to compensate, and combustion products — including a small amount of nitrogen tetroxide— entered through the cabin-pressure relief valves. As soon as the RCS system had been disabled, fresh air was once again drawn into the cabin. The crew members told flight officials that they had put on oxygen masks once the spacecraft had landed, and then activated the postlanding vent system. Because of the crew’s discomfort, further shipboard ceremonies had been canceled and the crew had been sent to sick bay and then to Tripler Hospital in Hawaii for observation until 8 Aug. Primary ASTP mission objectives were to evaluate the docking and undocking of an Apollo spacecraft with a Soyuz, and determine the adequacy of the onboard orientation lights and docking target; evaluate the ability of astronauts and cosmonauts to make intervehicular crew transfers and the ability of spacecraft systems to support the transfers; evaluate the Apollo’s capability of maintaining attitude-hold control of the docked vehicles and performing attitude maneuvers; measure quantitatively the effect of weightlessness on the crews’ height and lower limb volume, according to length of exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and direct synchronous-satellite navigation tracking data to determine their accuracy for application to Space Shuttle navigation-system design. The objectives were successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on July 75; Apollo-Apollo-ry of the 15 Aug. (NASA MORs M—966— 75^-01, 7 July 75, 15 Aug 75;; mission transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; change of shift press briefing transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; W Post, 14 to 25 July 75; NYT, 14 to 24 FBIS—Sov, 14 to 25 July 75; NASA Release 75—118; NASA Soyuz Test Project: Information for Press, 1975; Froelich, Soyuz, NASA EP—109; Ezell, et al., The Partnership: A Histor Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; NASA SP—4209, 317— 49)
NASA announced completion of a program conducted by Jet Propulsion Laboratory to measure the constituent gases of the stratosphere to help determine the effects on the earth’s ozone layer of gases released from aerosol spray cans. Using a Fourier interferometer onboard a U—2 aircraft, JPL scientists had measured the distribution of hydrogen chloride molecules at altitudes between 10 and 21 km during 6 separate flights in May. Hydrogen chloride—produced by the breakdown of aerosol gas molecules in the upper atmosphere and released naturally, in small amounts, from the ocean surface and volcanic eruptions—was one of several trace gases thought to play a major role in controlling the equilibrium of the protective ozone layer. JPL had found traces of the chloride beginning at 15 km, and reaching a maximum of almost 1 part per billion at 20 km. Although the results did not represent a direct effect of aerosol gas, or Freons, on stratospheric ozone, JPL scientists recommended continuing measurements to detect any future buildup. The ozone measurements, part of NASA’s Stratospheric Research Program, had begun when a JPL-designed instrument was flown on the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport in 1973. Data collected on these flights included the first detection of nitric oxide, along with new information on the geographic and vertical distribution of water, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and methane, and furnished a base for the 1975 study. (NASA Release 75—223; Miles, LA Times, 21 Aug 75)
Scientist Herbert F. Wischnia was using Oao 3 (Copernicus, Orbiting Astronomical Observatory launched 21 Aug. 1972) satellite and its onboard optical telescope to look for possible flashes of an ultraviolet laser from another world, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Although radio signals would be a better way to communicate once contact was established, Wischnia believed that an optical telescope could pick up a whole spectrum of frequencies at a glance. A radio telescope required years to cover a significant band of frequencies because of the complex data processing necessary; an optical signal, once detected, would probably indicate which radio frequency would provide further information. The biggest difficulty was making the initial contact. CSM reported that Wischnia was looking at three stars likely to have planets, all older than the sun and about 11 light yr distant. (Cowen, CSM, 18 June 75, 25)
Astronomers in the People’s Republic of China said they had discovered two minor planets between Mars and Pluto, reported a British press delegation visiting Nanking Observatory. The press quoted the Chinese as saying that the planets, observed in January, were rarely visible because of their position in the solar system. The Chinese had named the planets Purple Mountain One and Purple Mountain Two, for the name of the mountain on which the Nanking Observatory was located. (Reuter, W Post, 7 May 75)
A long-duration free-flying manned space station in earth orbit appeared to be the most economical way of providing a continuing manned presence in space, according to “Manned Orbital Systems Concepts,” a study conducted for Marshall Space Flight Center by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. A station that could significantly extend the time in space planned for the Space Shuttle would offer advantages for doing a given amount of work with fewer flights and reducing the number of turnarounds, checkouts, and similar operations. A permanent facility could offer maintenance and repair and even reconfiguration of payloads. The study envisioned development of four-man facilities that would serve as building blocks for growth into larger stations for 12 or 24 workers as needed; the four-man configuration would consist of a subsystems and habitability module carried into orbit by one Shuttle and joined with a logistics and payload module carried on a second mission. Several payload modules could be docked in tandem with the core vehicle, or in radial locations through use of a multiple-port docking adapter. The core vehicle would be left on station for a nominal lifetime of 5 yr, logistic and payload modules being replaced at 90-day intervals. Crew exchange and resupply would occur every 90 days. The study concluded that problems anticipated by the world in the 1990s should be solved in the 1980s, and that an extended-duration manned orbital facility could contribute significantly to those solutions. (MSFC Release 75— 26)
A theory that the moon was actually a piece of the earth broken away early in the planet’s formation 4.5 billion yrs ago was presented in a paper by Dr. John A. O’Keefe, a Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, and Professor Harold C. Urey, Nobel Prize winner from the Univ. of California. The paper, presented by Dr. O’Keefe at a meeting of the Royal Society in London, stated that although the moon had little, if any, metallic core, data from Apollo lunar-landing missions and earlier unmanned lunar flights had provided chemical evidence that lunar rocks were once a part of a mass that had included a considerable portion of molten iron. The higher proportion of molten metal in the earth supported the theory that, before the split, the iron in the earth had sunk to the center, drawing with it the gold, platinum, and other rare metals found in molten rock originally mixed with the iron. According to the theory, the moon was pushed to its present distance from the earth by interaction with the tides of the body of the earth. Other theories about the formation of the moon included the possibility that the moon had been captured by the earth’s gravitational field when it passed near the earth, or that it had been formed simultaneously with the earth. Neither of those theories explained the moon’s lack of a substantial metallic core. (NASA Release 75—171)
NASA’s new Low Cost Modular Spacecraft (LCMS), a recoverable compartmented spacecraft being considered for use aboard the Space Shuttle, was. demonstrated at a news conference at Rockwell International Corp.’s Space Division. The LCMS consisted of an instrument and spacecraft assembly joined by a transition ring. Scientific instruments or earth-resources sensors could be attached to the LCMS for specific missions. Designed by Goddard Space Flight Center engineers, the LCMS would fit into the 5- by 18-m payload bay of the Orbiter and also could serve as a platform for as many as 14 satellites. The system could be placed in orbit by the Shuttle and later serviced or recovered and returned to earth for needed repairs. Dr. Robert G. Wilson, Director of Advanced Payload Analysis at NASA Headquarters', said that a recoverable modular satellite system such as LCMS could save as much as $100 million annually over the cost of nonrecoverable satellites. (JSCRoundup, 14Feb 75, 3;GoddardNews, Feb 75, 8)
The Energy Research and Development Administration had awarded a 45-mo $i7 736 000 contract to General Electric Co. Space Div. to provide nuclear generators for NASA’s two Mariner—Jupiter—Saturn missions scheduled for launch in late 1977. GE would build seven radioisotopic thermoelectric generators for use during the mission; three of the nuclear generators—each providing 150 watts—would be used for each spacecraft, and the seventh would serve as a spare. (ERDA Release 75— 79)
NASA Pilot William H. Dana made the last rocket-powered flight of the X—24B lifting body, from Flight Research Center. Although a four-chamber firing had been planned, only three chambers ignited, and a three-chamber flight plan was executed. The X—24B reached an altitude of 17 678 m and a speed of mach 1.2. Six more glide flights were planned. Objectives of the flight were to observe stability and control with rudder bias at 10°, to test handling qualities with all damper gains at zero, to survey body pressure, to perform a qualification test of a high-density reusable surface insulator, and to make a lefthand fin tuft study. The X—24B was part of a joint NASA-Air Force program to test concepts for a manned vehicle that could reenter the atmosphere from space, and to provide advanced technology for a future hypersonic cruise aircraft. (FRC X-Press, 26 Sept 75, 2; NASA Hq X—24B Fit Rpt)
States involved in NASA’s land-use satellite applications had included Ala., Miss., and Tenn., which had organized statewide survey programs, and Mo., which had just begun such a program. The Southern Growth Policies Board, a 15-state group monitoring the South’s development, had investigated application of Landsat capabilities to identify prime farm land, potential commercial sites, and land values. Georgia, working through Ga. Tech., Marshall Space Flight Center, and the U.S. Dept of Agriculture, had begun aerial surveys of Georgia’s peach orchards to study the problem of premature loss of the fruit trees. MSFC aircraft provided multispectral photos and thermal data to be processed through Ga. Tech, computers, detecting stages of decline not visible from the ground. (MSFC Release 75—247, 75—251)
Lewis Research Center was testing a version of an ipn-thruster engine with reduced propellant requirements that would permit payload increases of up to 20% on future spacecraft, NASA announced. The ion-thruster propulsion system used solar cells to convert solar energy into electrical power, tailored to the current and voltage necessary for the ion thruster. The propellant—mercury, cesium, or relatively stable gas—was ionized in the engine and electrically exhausted to produce thrust. During the tests the NASA version of the engine had become the first electric propulsion system to exceed 10 000 hr of operation. LeRC was continuing the testing toward an endurance goal of 15 000 hr. The engine was the second of its kind to be tested by NASA. The first had experienced internal sputtering and erosion which had degraded performance. Testing had been stopped at 9715 hr for modifications. (NASA Release 75—150)
Soviet officials gave western newsmen their first glimpse of a Soviet space center during a tour of the main Soviet flight-control center 24 km from Moscow. The Washington Post reported that the group led by the center’s technical director, Dr. Alberty V. Militsin, toured a 5-yr-old six-story brick and sandstone building acknowledged by Dr. Militsin to be one of several space facilities near Moscow. The operations room, which was similar to the control room at Johnson Space Center, contained five rows of consoles, each with telephones and closed-circuit TV screens. Mission Control Director Aleksey S. Yeliseyev told the newsmen that the consoles were staffed during missions by from 15 to 24 officials and technicians. An illuminated world map on the wall showed tracking stations and the orbited paths of spacecraft. Electronic screens flashed flight information. Other support consoles, communications systems, and computers were located elsewhere in the building. Dr. Militsin said that the center had contact with Soyuz spacecraft in .each orbit for 5 to 25 min, depending on the orbit. The newsmen also visited the three-room suite near the main operations room assigned to nine U.S. technicians for the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (Osnos, W Post, 13 May 75, A10)
Goddard Space Flight Center’s Goddard News reported that the John C. Lindsay Memorial Award, given annually to a GSFC employee in recognition of an outstanding contribution to science and technology, had been presented to Dr. Norman F. Ness. Dr. Ness had received the award for his pioneering work in the investigation of magnetic fields of planetary bodies and the interaction of the solar wind with these magnetic fields. Dr. Ness, who had been a participating scientist on the Explorer Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (IMP) satellites and Mariner 10, and Pioneer satellites, spearheaded the first measurements of the earth’s distant magnetic fields and magnetic tail. He was also the first to explore the moon’s magnetic field. On the Mariner 10 flybys of Jupiter, Dr. Ness made the surprising discovery of a small, but measurable, intrinsic magnetic field. (Goddard News, June 75,1)
Pioneer 11, about a third of the way on its course toward Saturn, had successfully completed its riskiest course-change maneuver in response to signals from earth, 458 million km distant. Controllers at Ames Research Center ceased communications with the Pioneer for several hours, giving the spacecraft time to command itself into a change of position, fire its thrusters, and reposition itself with antenna pointing back to earth. The maneuver increased spacecraft velocity by 108 km per hr, to ensure that Pioneer would have a choice of approach as it neared Saturn: between the rings and the planet, or under the rings and upward outside them. Recent tests had shown the onboard camera working well; Pioneer 11 had been scheduled to take the first closeup pictures of Saturn and its rings upon arrival at the planet in 1979. If its course had been set inside the rings, Pioneer 11 should be able to look closely at Saturn’s sixth moon, Titan, which is larger than the planet Mercury. (NASA Release 75—319; ARC Release 75—69)
NASA and the U.S. Coast Guard were jointly designing and developing a lightweight portable firefighting module to combat shipboard and dock fires, NASA announced. The module, a completely self-contained pumping system including pumps, hose, and firefighting suits, would pump sea water at a rate of up to 7300 liters per min (2000 gallons per min) for periods up to 3 hr. Marshall Space Flight Center was designing a prototype scheduled for construction early in 1976 and for testing 18 mos later. The Coast Guard had asked NASA to participate in the project because of its long experience with high-capacity lightweight fuel pumps developed for rocket engines. The project was being managed for NASA by MSFC’s Technology Utilization Office. (NASA Release 75—267)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory had proposed some economically sound and technically feasible alternatives to the automobile industry’s inefficient and polluting internal combustion engine [see 3 Sept.], a Los Angeles Times editorial said. Development of a new economical and pollution-free engine on a mass-production basis would take time and money but “the auto industry can well afford the $150 million a year that would be needed.” The JPL report voiced skepticism that industry could do the job alone. “Additional funding from the federal government is required, as well as a commitment that introduction of an alternative engine by 1985 is a national goal. JPL makes a persuasive case that all this is feasible and in the national interest. Given the potential in fuel savings and reduced air pollution, the money. . .would be a solid investment.” (LA Times, 5 Sept 75)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of an $18 749 million contract to Blount Brothers Construction Co. for modification of Launch Complex 39 Pad A, to accommodate all early Space Shuttle missions. The complex had been the site of all but one of the historic Saturn V launches; Pad B, from which the Skylab Orbital Workshop was launched, would be modified later. The contract included conversion of the mobile launcher for Shuttle operations. (KSC Release 164—75)
Lt. Col. Michael Love successfully completed the 28th flight of the X—24B lifting body, making its second and final runway landing [see 5 Aug.] at Flight Research Center. The purpose of the flight was to land on a concrete runway, survey body pressure, study a lefthand fin tuft, check out the thermal protection system, and perform stability and control maneuvers with the rudder bias at 5° toe-out. Launched from a B—52 aircraft at 13 700 m, Col. Love ignited the vehicle’s rocket engine and the X—24B reached a speed of mach 1.53 and an altitude of 21 900 m before engine shutdown and unpowered glide and landing. Flights of the 11-m delta-shaped vehicle were part of a joint NASA-Air Force program to study transonic flight characteristics of an aerodynamic shape that could be the forerunner of future hypersonic cruise vehicles. (X—24B fit rpt, NASA Prog Off; FRC Release 25—75)
Langley Research Center awarded a $1.5-million 30-mo contract to Rockwell International’s Autonetics Group for a highly reliable solid-state satellite data recorder using bubble-domain technology. The new recorder, with a memory capacity of 100 million bits, would achieve a tenfold improvement in reliability over mechanically driven recorders now in use. The bubble-domain technology would make the recorder about a third the size and half the weight of present recorders and would require only half the power for operation. Dr. R. L. Stermer of LaRC said a NASA decision to define hardware using the bubble-domain technology for use in the late 1970s would be greatly influenced by success of the new recorder. (Rockwell Release AG-9)
President Ford’s announcement that he intended to restore the White House Office of Science and Technology was discussed in a Washington Post editorial: most scientists were heartened by President Ford’s announcement. They had unanimously deplored President Nixon’s decision to abolish the office, believing that it was vital to the nation’s well-being for the President to get the most objective possible scientific assessment of new weaponry, as well as of medical, economic, and environmental policies. However, scientists also felt that the establishment of the office and the possible appointment of National Science Foundation Director Dr. H. Guyford Stever as its head would not solve the problem. A report drafted by a committee of 13 leading scientists had spelled out what was needed: establishment of a Council for Science and Technology that would carry the same weight as the Domestic and Economic Councils and could hold its own with the Office of Management and Budget and DOD. Any serious candidate for the top science job would want to consider whether the President “really intends to make constructive use of a science adviser. Past experience tells us that the best mechanism for advice from the scientific community is of no avail if the President isn’t listening.” (IF Post, 31 May 75, A12) During May: Preparations continued for late summer launches of the two Viking spacecraft to Mars. A Lander 1 plugs-out test was completed 8 May, 2 days later than planned, because of a grounding problem. By 26 May all flight equipment, except for the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer, had been installed on Lander 1. Lander 2 was mated with its protective aeroshell on 28 May. Orbiter 1 was undergoing final mechanical assembly as the flight subsystems became available after individual reworking. By 31 May all temperature-control louvers, protective covers, and thermal blankets had been installed. Initial Orbiter 2 system testing was completed 5 May, and Orbiter block validation tests were begun. All solar panels for both Orbiters had been assembled and swing-tested, and were awaiting buildup of the low-pressure gas system. On 13 May a major hardware review of both landers was held at Kennedy Space Center with 100 NASA and industry participants. The review was the final chance to discuss modifications in the spacecraft before closure of the bottom plates and sterilization. Following the review, Langley Research Center’s Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., said, “Everything is going just great and right on schedule.” (Viking launch and mission operations status bulletins 4, 5, 6; NASA Activities, June 75)
of Jupiter for the first time. Instrumentation at McDonald Observatory, the Univ. of Texas’s 27-m telescope facility in Austin, made the discovery by using high-resolution spectra. Dr. Reinhard Beer, JPL leader of the team, reported that the near-infrared spectra had been produced by a Connestype Fourier spectrometer in 1974; spectral lines—the “signatures” of various molecules—had disclosed that carbon monoxide molecules were present to a depth of at least 50 km into the lower atmosphere. Carbon monoxide had been previously found in minor amounts in the atmospheres of earth, Venus, and Mars. Although the spectra had shown no indication of carbon dioxide in the Jovian atmosphere, Dr. Beer reported, future telescope searches from higher altitudes might reveal its presence there. (NASA Release 75—269)
Kennedy Space Center announced the selection of Modular Computer Systems, Inc., for final negotiations on a $6.7-million fixed-price contract for equipment associated with the Space Shuttle launchprocessing system. The company would provide minicomputers and their associated equipment, software, maintenance, spares, and engineering support. The launch-processing system now under development at KSC would provide automatic test, checkout, launch control, and operational management for NASA’s Space Shuttle program. (KSC Release 69—75)
A digital Stoland navigation, guidance, control, and display system in an augmentor wing aircraft (a modified C —8A Buffalo) guided the aircraft to an automatic landing at the short-takeoff-and-landing (STOL) test facility at Crows Landing, near Patterson, Calif. The automatic landing, first for a STOL aircraft, was a milestone in the flight acceptance of the Stoland system being developed by Sperry Flight Systems under contract to Ames Research Center. The system would be tested on other STOL aircraft. (ARC Astrogram, 17 July 75, 2)
Luna 22, launched 29 May 1974 by the U.S.S.R., had been in lunar orbit more than a year. Tass reported that, after 3296 orbits of the moon. the planned program for a comprehensive exploration of the moon and near-moon Space had been fully carried out and additional exploration was continuing. All systems aboard the spacecraft were functioning normally. (Tass, FBIS-Sov, 18 June 75, Ul) 2— 7 June: Three NASA scientists and two Europeans conducted a Spacelab simulation mission aboard NASA’s Galileo II airborne laboratory. The series of five night flights was designed by NASA and European Space Agency representatives to permit Spacelab mission planners to evaluate experiment techniques and operations. The simulations, part of a study program called the Airborne Science Spacelab Experiments System Simulation (ASSESS), would provide valuable information on the interaction between scientific investigators on the ground and experiment operators aboard Spacelab and would aid in estimating the training needed by Spacelab experiment operators. Experiments flown in the simulation mission included infrared observations of the earth’s upper atmosphere, Venus, stars, and other celestial features, and ultraviolet measurements of planetary atmo-pheres. (NASA Release 75—177; ESA Releases, 27 May 75,18 June 75)
Development of a reusable single-stage Space Shuttle that could perform better than the current partially reusable design, and cost less, would be feasible before the end of this century “if pushed aggressively enough,” Robert E. Smylie, Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology for NASA, told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Studies by the agency had shown that structural weight reductions of 25% and propulsion-system improvements of 5 to 6%, relative to current space flight technology, could be achieved in the late 1990s. In other areas of space technology, Smylie cited the concept of solar-electric propulsion that had been considered for planetary missions using the Space Transportation System, and described research in automated processing of microcircuits, robot vehicles for planetary exploration, vitreous materials resistant to laser radiation, and dry iubricant with application in space payloads. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 696, 726, 1130 ff)
The Air Force launched a “spy satellite” from Kennedy Space Center at 12:15 am EST into a stationary orbit at about 36 000 km above earth. Although no announcement had been made of the success or failure of the launch, observers next day concluded that the launch had been successful. The satellite was one of a series designed to monitor missile launchings in China and the Soviet Union to give a 30-min warning of a land-launched attack or about 10-min warning of a missile attack from submarines. It had been launched by a Titan IIIC, 24th of this type launched from Cape Canaveral, and was thought to carry both infrared sensing equipment and still and TV cameras to permit day and night monitoring. (NYT, 16 Dec 75, 14; C Trib, 15 Dec 75, 5)
NASA announced the development of an improved inorganic paint, a potassium silicate zinc-rich coating with a silicon additive that could provide long-term protection from salt spray, fog, heat, and rapid temperature changes. Produced at Goddard Space Flight Center as an anticorrosion coating for use in the space program, the paint had shown no deterioration after 5300 hr of continuous exposure to a 3% brine spray. The paint had also been applied to a 2-m panel mounted under the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco for further testing. (NASA Release 75-213; Newsweek (int’l ed), 18 Aug 75)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aeronautics launched Scats (Taiyo)—Solar Radiation and Thermospheric Structure Satellite— from Uchinoura Space Center at 2:25 pm local time after a 10-day delay because of faulty instrumentation. The three-stage MU3C liquid-fueled launch vehicle placed the 86-kg spacecraft into an orbit with a 3130-km apogee, 247-km perigee, 120.2-min period, and 31.5° inclination. The purpose of the satellite was to observe solar and cosmic phenomena. By 25 Feb. the satellite was reported to be functioning normally, with two NASA tracking stations—one in Ecuador and one in Chile—reporting signals fromSrats. (Kyodo, FBIS— Japan, 18-26 Feb 75) Sessions were held in four areas: transportation efficiency, national defense, space applications, and frontier technologies. The more than 500 attendees of the technical sessions listened to papers on computers in aerospace, short-haul aircraft systems, advanced communications, and satellite technology. Harris M. Schurmeir, Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s manager of the Mariner Jupiter—Saturn 1977 project, delivered the von Karman Lecture 24 Feb., “Planetary Exploration: Earth’s New Horizon.” Schurmeir said that, despite American virtuosity in the unfolding drama of solar-system exploration, the never-abating high launch rate of the Soviet Union would make them competitors if the U.S. failed to exercise its mission options in the late 1970s and 1980s. On 25 Feb. Hans E. W. Hoffman, managing director of West Germany’s ERNO Raumfahrttechnik GmbH, said that the development of Spacelab was exactly on schedule, with a complete engineering model to be delivered to NASA in April 1978. The first flight unit would be delivered 1 yr later. The first mission of the Spacelab would be a joint U.S.—European venture. A call for ideas for experiments had netted 243 proposals, from which a selection would be made; the selection process for European payload specialists would begin in 1975. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, addressed the gathering 26 Feb. He noted that, although aerospace technology had been one of the “key drivers” in retaining the U. S. lead in world technology, a feeling of the importance of technology was “not universally shared.” A decline in the national emphasis on technology “has much to do with the decline in productivity in this country.” The increasing cost and complexity of applying new technology had become a vexing national problem. Finding new ways to reduce costs was a key management task that the aerospace business must face. Caspar W. Weinberger, Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, said in an address 26 Feb. that satellite-delivered services in Alaska had been so successful that the Alaskan Federation of Natives —a highly representative broad-based grassroots organization—had made them the organization’s top priority. The goal was to achieve an operational satellite service for health, education, and other communications needs. The formation of the Public Service Satellite Users Consortium, consisting of health and educational organizations, represented the first effort to organize a market of small independent users sufficient to attract private investment capital for large-scale technology to meet their collective needs. HEW was investigating the possibility of a “social service satellite” to meet the needs of various public and social service communities by means of an inexpensive ground receiver. The satellite could dramatically reduce the cost of such services while greatly increasing the quality. At the Honors Night Banquet 26 Feb., Chairman Hansen was installed as the 13th president of the AIAA. The 19 newly elected fellows included Hans M. Mark, Director of Ames Research Center, and William H. Phillips of Langley Research Center. Other awards presented at the banquet included: Award Recipient Citation (purpose) (Affiliation) Goddard Award (for contributions in propulsion energy conservation) Robert M. Losey Award (for contributions to meteorology as applied to aeronautics) G. Edward Pendray Award (for contributions to aeronautical and astronautical literature) Sylvanus Albert Reed Award (for contributions to aeronautical engineering design or aeronautical sciences) (for improvement in aerospace, aviation, or astronaut training) Louis W. Hill Award (for enterprise and ingenuity in art and science of space flight) ’ Gordon F. Holbrook (General Motors Corp.) George Rosen (United Aircraft Corp.) Paul W. Kadlec (Continental Air Lines, Inc.) Prof. William R. Sears (U. of Arizona) Prof. Antonio Feni (New York U.) Prof. Hugh H. Hurt, Jr. (U. of Southern Calif.) Dr. Rocco A. Petrone (NASA) For leadership in development of turbo-propeller propulsion systems For identifying factors indicating clear air turbulence and publications on meteorological features of high atmosphere For contributions to aeronautical and astronautical literature since 1938 For advances in air-breathing propulsion and airplane design For contributions to flight safety by development of military and civilian texts and training programs For contributions to space flight technology while Director of KSC during last 6 Apollo missions Award (purpose) Recipient (Affiliation) Citation John Jeffries Award (for contributions to aerospace medical research) Col. Malcolm C. Lancaster (USAF) For clinical research in aerospace medicine Spacecraft Design Award (for advancement in spacecraft, launch vehicle, reentry vehicle, or missile design) Dr. Herbert A. Lassen (TRW, Inc.) For conceptual design of spin-stabilized Pioneers 6-11 using high-gain antennas and communications link for attitude reference Space Science Award (for achievements in studies of physics of atmospheres of celestial bodies and dynamics and energy) Dr. Murray Dryer (NOAA) For contributions to understanding of interplanetary shock phenomena generated by solar disturbances Lawrence Sperry Award (for contributions to advancement of aeronautics) Jan R. Tulinius (Rockwell Inl’l Corp.) For development of advanced theoretical aerodynamic design methods (A&A, Feb 75, April 75; AIAA Releases 10—20 Feb 75; AIAA Bulletin, Aug 74; Fletcher speech, text)
The Saturn V dynamic test stand at Marshall Space Flight Center was being modified under a $1 923 400 contract between the Army Corps of Engineers and the Universal Construction Co., to provide a Space Shuttle Mated Ground Vibration Test Facility, MSFC announced. The 123-m-high structure would be used to test the vehicle in launch and boost configuration, to determine the bending modes and dynamic response during launch and ascent conditions. (MSFC Release 75-230)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $4 778 000 contract extension to Bendix Corp.’s Launch Support Div. for support services including operation and maintenance of Launch Complex 39, mobile launchers, mobile service structure, industrial complexes, technical shops, propellant systems, life-support facilities, and a components-cleaning laboratory. The 4rmo extension brought the total value of the contract to $266 662 753. Complex 39, launch site for the Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo-Soyuz Test Project missions, would be the launch and landing site for Space Shuttle. Modification of the facilities was under way. (KSC Release 260— 75)
Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. was studying the economic and technical feasibility of using a rotating flywheel for electrical storage in commercial, utility, and transportation applications. The 9-mo study for the Energy Research and Development Administration was based on technology developed for a prototype spacecraft energy-momentum flywheel that Rockwell had built for NASA’s Langley Research Center. The small prototype spinning at speeds up to 35 000 rpm could provide 2500 w of electrical power as well as spacecraft attitude control. In the flywheel concept, electric motor generators would spin up specially constructed flywheels which kinetically stored energy by their rotation. When electrical power was needed, the rapidly spinning flywheels would drive generators. A significant application of the flywheel would be to store energy for electric utility companies; the flywheels, spun up during off-peak hours, would drive power-producing generators during peak-demand periods. (Rockwell Int’l Release SP—18)
Langley Research Center was flight-testing a new-generation light twin-engine Piper PA—34 Seneca aircraft—called ATLIT (Advanced Technology Light Twin)—fitted with several improvements using NASA advanced aerodynamic technology. One important new component, the GAW—1 (General-Aviation-Whitcomb) airfoil, was 27% smaller than the original wing but was expected to be safer and more efficient, and to reduce fuel consumption by as much as 10%. (NASA Release 75 —84)
Dr. Harold Brown, President of California Institute of Technology, announced the appointment of Dr. Bruce C. Murray as Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, succeeding Dr. William H. Pickering who was retiring after 21 yr in the position. Dr. Murray, a Caltech professor of planetary sciences for 15 yr, had also been a researcher on JPL space missions for more than 10 yr. He was completing scientific descriptions of Venus and Mercury from Mariner 10 data, gathered during a February 1974 encounter with the planet, and comparing the surface histories of Mercury, Venus, Mars, and the moon with the history of the earth. Dr. Pickering had been with JPL since 1944 and had served as its Director since 1954. As Director, Dr. Pickering led JPL in designing and building the first orbiting U.S. satellite, Explorer 1 (launched 31 Jan. 1958). Also under his leadership, JPL had designed the Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner spacecraft that were launched to gather information on the moon and nearby planets. (NASA Release 75—179)
NASA announced the selection of Goodyear Aerospace Corp. for negotiations leading to a $1 000 000 contract to provide a special-purpose processor to support the Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment (LACIE) at Johnson Space Center. (JSC Release 75—17)
Thor-Delta launch operations at the Eastern and Western Test Ranges had resumed on a limited basis despite the continuing strike by employees of the launch vehicle’s manufacturer, McDonnell Douglas Corp. [see 10 Feb.and 22—23 March], Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. With supervisory personnel at the company’s plant completing the hardware in the place of striking workers, McDonnell Douglas hoped to finish 10 of the 12 launch vehicles scheduled for delivery to NASA launch sites by the end of 1975. NASA’s GEOS—C Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite and Canada’s Telestar—C communications satellite, both originally scheduled for March, had been rescheduled for April and May launch on Thor-Delta vehicles delivered before the strike began. Other launch dates would depend on the buildup and checkout of booster hardware at the launch site, and on availability of hardware still at the plant. Other scheduled launches affected by the strike included Nimbus— F experimental satellite, OSO—I Orbiting Solar Observatory, and Communications Satellite Corp.’s Marisat—A maritime communications satellite. (Av Wk, 7 April 75, 17)
The U.S.S.R.’s Baykonur cosmodrome, located in the city of Leninsk near Tyuratam, was three to four times as big as Kennedy Space Center, U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project commander Thomas P. Stafford said at an ASTP press briefing at Johnson Space Center. ASTP astronaut Vance D. Brand said that 50 000 persons inhabited the launch complex. The briefing followed the crew’s return from the Soviet Union where they had participated in the final training session before the scheduled July launch [see 14—30 April]. The astronauts said that at the Soviet spaceport they had been shown “everything we had a requirement to see,” the launch pad, spacecraft, test and checkout facilities, automatic checkout equipment (ACE) rooms, and crew quarters. The one “drastic difference” between the tour received by the Soviet cosmonauts in the U.S. and that of the American astronauts in the U.S.S.R., said Stafford, was “we didn’t go to Disneyland over there.” Astronaut Donald K. Slayton described the launch pad as “relatively simple.” The spacecraft, assembled on top of a railroad car, was hauled to the pad about 4 days before launch. The stacked vehicle was jacked up and set on the pad; after checkout, the vehicle was rotated to the proper launch azimuth. The booster was held to the pad by four support arms which were popped out of the way by counterweights once the vehicle started to move. Stafford said that Leninsk was a new city built in a desert. The continued construction activity indicated that the Soviets “are not slowing down one bit in their space program.” The Soviets had told their U.S. counterparts that they would continue to have several manned flights a year operating in low earth orbit. (Transcript)
The Saturn IB, used to launch three U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts into space [see 15—24 July], had experienced no unscheduled holds whatever during countdown, making it the most perfect launch of the Saturn series, Ellery B. May, manager of the Saturn Program Office at the Marshall Space Flight Center, said. Saturn 210, manufactured in 1967, was 10th of the IB series and had the oldest engine used. All Saturn launches had been successful and had met their objectives; although some had anomalies, such as leaks or faulty wiring, no major configuration changes were ever necessary. The ASTP mission marked the end of the Saturn series, but its impact on technology would continue. “Space Shuttle main engines (SSME) are an outgrowth of technology from Saturn engines,” May explained. The major difference between the two was that the Shuttle must have much higher pressure systems than ever before required and must be reusable. (MSFC Release 75 — 174)
NASA, in cooperation with the Dept, of Transportation, was investigating aircraft wake vortices—turbulent air trailing from an aircraft’s wing-tips and swirling at velocities up to half the flight speed of the aircraft. Safety required an aircraft to travel far enough behind a preceding airplane to permit the vortices to dissipate, adding to congestion at already busy airports. NASA’s objective was to develop methods to reduce the intensity of the vortices and render them harmless 3 km behind the aircraft. This would decrease the amount of fuel wasted and the pollution produced when aircraft were subjected to holding patterns and waits to taxi to a runway, and would permit aircraft to land and take off at a faster rate. Engineers and scientists at Ames and Flight Research Centers were investigating the vortices by flying an instrumented Leaijet and a T—37 jet trainer through wakes created by larger aircraft. Data collected during these flights, checked against wind-tunnel data, suggested several possible ways of alleviating the wake-vortex problem, including tailoring the lift across the aircraft wings, modifying engine placement, and adding wing spoilers and drag devices. (NASA Release 75—136)
Dr. Walter C. Williams’ appointment as NASA Chief Engineer became effective. In his new position, Dr. Williams, who had been vice president and general manager of the Aerospace Corp. Vehicle Systems Div., would be responsible for reviewing the technical excellence of all NASA programs and for assuring their development on a sound engineering basis with proper programmatic controls. From 1940 to 1958 Dr. Williams had been employed by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics and, after 1958, by NASA. His previous positions included chief of the High-Speed Flight Station, Associate Director of Manned Space Center, Associate Director of Mercury’s Space Task Group at Langley Research Center, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Flight Operations at NASA Headquarters. (MSFC Marshall Star, 10 Sept 75, 2)
NASA successfully launched Oso 8 Orbiting Solar Observatory at 7:43 am EDT from Eastern Test Range on a thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster, after a 1-day delay because of an electrical malfunction in the launch vehicle. The spacecraft entered a near-perfect circular orbit with a 560-km apogee, 544-km perigee, 95.74-min period, and 32.94° inclination. By 23 June Oso 8 was stabilized and was accurately tracking the center of the sun as planned. All spacecraft systems were operating normally. By 27 June all eight experiments had been activated and were acquiring data. Primary objective of the Oso 8 mission was to investigate the sun’s lower corona and its chromosphere, and their interface in the ultraviolet spectral region, to better understand the transport of energy from the photosphere into the corona. Secondary objective was to study solar x-rays and earth-sun relationships and to investigate the background component of cosmic x-rays. The 1064-kg spacecraft had two sections: A rotating cylindrical bottom section—the wheel—accommodated experiments that did not require solar reference pointing or that scanned the celestial sphere. The nonspinning rectangular sail section mounted on top of the wheel accommodated experiments that required stable pointing at the sun. The spacecraft carried eight experiments. The two on the sail section were a Univ. of Colo, high-resolution ultraviolet spectrometer to measure solar-ultraviolet line profiles in the range of 1050 to 2300 A and their variation with time and position, and a spectrometer and a Cassegrain telescope that would observe the solar chromospheric structure simultaneously in six lines from 1000 to 4000 A originating from different levels in the sun’s atmosphere. This experiment was provided by France’s Laboratory for Stellar and Planetary Physics under a cooperative agreement between NASA and the French Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. Other experiments—all on the wheel portion of the spacecraft and supplied by U.S. universities, industry, and government agencies— included a high-sensitivity crystal spectrometer to monitor the sun’s emission in the 2- to 8-kev range, obtain a complete spectrum of the sun every 10 sec during flares, and obtain high-resolution spectra of many celestial x-ray sources; a mapping x-ray heliometer to measure location, spectrum, and intensity of intermediate-energy x-rays from individual solar-active regions and to acquire data on extrasolar x-ray sources; an investigation of soft x-ray background radiation using proportional counters; a cosmic x-ray spectroscope to determine the spectra of sources and the diffuse cosmic x-ray background in the energy range of 2 to 60 kev, and to measure intensity variations and identify possible emission lines of discrete x-ray sources; a high-energy celestial x-ray experiment to measure the spectrum of all point x-ray sources observable in the energy range of 0.01 to 1 megaelectron volts, and to search for temporal variations in the intensity and spectrum of the point sources detected; and a study of extreme ultraviolet radiations from earth and space, to determine the behavior of atoms such as hydrogen and neutral and ionized helium in the earth’s atmosphere by measuring the intensity and distribution of solar radiation resonantly scattered by these atoms. Oso 8 was the ninth, and last, in a series of spin-stabilized orbiting solar observatories designed to gather new knowledge of the sun, the earth’s atmosphere, and sun-activated terrestrial phenomena over a broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum not detectable by ground-based equipment. Of the eight OSO launches that began with Oso 1 on 7 March 1962, only one, OSO—C, was unsuccessful, because of a launch-vehicle failure. Discoveries made by OSO spacecraft included gamma-ray emissions from the galactic center; a previously unknown isothermal plateau in the chromosphere of the solar atmosphere; differences in the structure of the extreme ultraviolet corona above quiet and active regions on the solar disk; evidence that the corona above the solar poles was significantly cooler than nonactive coronal regions near the equator; and synoptic observations of “holes” in the corona that survived several solar rotations. Oso 8—built by Hughes Aircraft Co.—was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science. GSFC was also responsible for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASAMORs, 4 June 75,23 June 75,27 June 75; NASA Release 75 — 158) 23 June: NASA and the Energy Research and Development Administration signed an interagency cooperative agreement to enhance the national energy effort. ERDA and NASA management would identify specific program tasks that could be undertaken by NASA centers in support of ERDA programs. ERDA would use NASA’s basic and applied research capabilities in areas including solar heating and cooling systems, gas turbines, fuel cells, hydrogen technology, ground-propulsion technology, bearings, seals, combustion, automatic control systems, and materials and structures technology. NASA would submit proposals and plans to ERDA for specific technology developments including testing, evaluation, and demonstration of projects or hardware; ERDA would also call upon NASA for specific short- and long-term technical and administrative expertise such as technical review boards, evaluation groups, and other assessment techniques. The agreement would establish an ERDA—NASA program committee to annually review NASA research and development work in support of ERDA. (NASA Release 75-182; ERDA Release 75-99)
The Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory and NASA Lewis Research Center had begun a joint research program to determine the feasibility of using synthetic fuels to power military and commercial jet aircraft, the Air Force Systems Command announced. As part of the 10-yr $ 8-million study, Exxon Corp. had been awarded a contract to study the refining processes like hydrogenation required to produce fuels from coal and oil-shale synthetic crudes, and to compare the chemical and physical properties of these fuels with those of petroleum derivatives. Costs of processing the synthetics would depend on definition of engine and fuel-system needs. The decision to begin research on synthetic fuels was part of an Air Force conservation effort. U.S. aircraft, military and commercial, accounted for 8% of U.S. petroleum consumption; fuel costs for military jets alone had more than tripled in the previous 18 mo. The cost of fueling a C — 5 cargo aircraft had risen from $6780 in April 1973 to $22 400 in April 1975. (AFSC Release OIP 070.75)
The current fleet of supersonic transports—including the 16 Anglo-French Concordes and 14 Soviet Tu—144s flying or scheduled for service—would cause minimal damage to the ozone layer, Dr. Alan J. Grobecker, Director of the Dept, of Transportation’s Climatic Impact Assessment Program, announced at a press briefing. Citing a 3-yr DOT study, “The Effects of Stratospheric Pollution by Aircraft,” Dr. Grobecker said it would require 125 Concordes flying 4.5 hr daily to cause a minimally detectable change in the ozone layer. However, the study concluded that future expansion of stratospheric jet fleets should be carefully monitored. Recommendations made by the study included development of engines to meet specific nitrogen oxide-emission standards, development of low-sulfur aviation fuels, and establishment of stratospheric air-quality standards and engine-emission regulations. (AP, NYT, 22 Jan 75, 33; Robinson, Av Wk, 27 Jan 75, 16—17) 22 —25 January: NASA launched Landsat 2 (Landsat—B), formerly called Earth Resources Technology Satellite (ERTS-B), from Western Test Range at 9:56 am PST on a two-stage Thor-Delta booster supplemented by nine strap-on rockets. The satellite entered a near-polar orbit with a 918.23-km apogee, 912.89-km perigee, 103.32-min period, and 99.09° inclination. Primary objective of the mission was to acquire multispectral imagery over the U.S. and foreign countries in quantity sufficient to improve remote-sensing interpretative techniques and to further demonstrate the practiced application of Landsat data. Secondary objectives were to acquire sufficient multispectral coverage over the U.S. to supply data requirements for the Applications System Verification Tests for at least 1 yr, to acquire multispectral coverage for at least 2 yr over the major agricultural areas of the world to illustrate further applications of Landsat imagery for crop inventory, and to demonstrate successful operation of the Data Collection System. A 3-day delay in the launch changed the initial orbital phasing of Landsat 2 relative to Landsat 1 (launched as Erts 1 on 23 July 1972) into a 12- to 6-day repeat cycle instead of the planned 9-day cycle. However, an orbital correction maneuver beginning 27 Jan. and ending 6 Feb. altered phasing to a 9-day repeat cycle. The payload separated from the launch vehicle 50 min 3 sec after launch, followed by solar-panel deployment and earth acquisition using the attitude-control system. The command system was turned on automatically, permitting activation of the payload by ground stations. During the night of 22—23 Jan. the mechanical integrity of the wideband video tape recorder was verified, Data-Collection System (DCS) activated, and data-collection platform experiment data transmitted. By 12:00 pm EST 23 Jan. all spacecraft systems were operating and by 25 Jan. the wideband transmitter, wideband video tape recorder, multispectral scanner (MSS), and return-beam vidicon (RBV) were turned on, and operating normally. Teaming up with Landsat 1, the 953-kg Landsat 2 would provide repetitive coverage of almost the entire earth to demonstrate the practical benefits of resources management from space for NASA in cooperation with the Dept, of Agriculture, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Dept, of the Interior, Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and various state, local, and foreign organizations. Experiments included the cooperative NASA—DOA—NOAA Large Area Crop Inventory (LACIE), which combined crop-acreage measurements derived from Landsat data with meteorological information from ground stations and NOAA satellites to assess crop yields and make production forecasts. During the first yr of operation, LACIE would concentrate on U.S.-grown wheat, but the experiment would later be expanded to other crops and other regions. Other experiments included land-use survey and mapping; mineral resources, geological, structural, and land-form surveys; water resources studies; marine and ocean surveys; meteorological and environmental studies; and interpretative techniques development. Data were being transmitted to three NASA tracking and data-acquisition facilities at Fairbanks, Al.; Goldstone, Calif.; and Greenbelt, Md. In addition, Canada and Brazil operated Landsat ground data-acquisition stations and Italy and Iran were constructing similar facilities. Data received from the satellite were sent to the NASA Data Processing Facility at Goddard Space Flight Center where 1300 images, covering 45 million sq km, could be processed each week. The data would then be forwarded to the Federal Data Center and made available to the public. The Landsat mission was part of a U.S. program to develop remotesensing methods for improved management of earth’s resources. In addition to Landsat 1 and 2, the program included remote-sensor instrument development; data-analysis research using data from spacecraft, aircraft, and ground-truth sites; low-, intermediate-, and high-altitude aircraft flights; and Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP) experiments completed during the 1973 manned Skylab missions. (NASA MORs, 9, 23 Jan 75; NASA Releases 74—329, 75-31)
President Ford told a group of eight congressmen at a White House meeting that he would work to reestablish the Office of Science and Technology as a permanent part of the White House organization, the New York Times reported. Tbe office had been abolished by President Nixon 1 July 1973. The Times quoted Director of the Domestic Council James Cannon as saying that President Ford would propose legislation creating the post of science advisor with a staff of 10 to 15 persons and an annual budget of $1 million to $1.5 million. (NYT, 23 May 75, 14)
A Black Brant VC sounding rocket, first of a series scheduled over the next 5 yrs in a Space Processing Applications Rocket (SPAR) project managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, was launched to an altitude of 225 km from the Army’s White Sands missile range and traveled downrange about 80 km, providing about 5 min of near weightlessness during its coast phase. The rocket carried nine space-processing experiments in a 143-kg payload assembled at MSFC. The next flight had been scheduled for the spring of 1976. (MSFC Release 11 Dec 75)
Energy Research and Development Administration announced the award of a $2 612 000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Hughes Research Laboratories to develop a new mercury valve for use in high-voltage direct-current transmission. The liquid-metal plasma valve was a spinoff from a spacecraft ion engine developed by Hughes for NASA. The valve, a single-anode device that fired a vacuum arc on signal, would be used to convert between alternating current and direct current at the terminals of high-voltage direct-current transmission lines. (ERDA Release 75—25)
Formation of a Federal interagency group—the Federal Interagency Task Force on Inadvertent Modification of the Stratosphere (IMOS)—to investigate the relationship of freons (fluorochlorohydro-carbons) to ozone reduction in the stratosphere was announced by the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality, Dr. Russell W. Peterson, and the Chairman of the Federal Council for Science and Technology, Dr. H. Guyford Stever. The group included representatives from NASA; the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Justice, and Transportation; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; Energy Research and Development Administration; Environmental Protection Agency; National Science Foundation; and Interdepartmental Committee for Atmospheric Sciences. IMOS would prepare a report summarizing atmospheric, medical, and ecological information on the freon/ozone relationship. The report would also evaluate possible economic impacts and alternatives to industry, consider what Federal action could be taken, and propose a Federal program to resolve the issues. (Fed Council for Sci and Tech Release 1)
An Ames Research Center wind tunnel used primarily for testing the Space Shuttle had been shut down after a steel flange failed, setting off a high-powered explosion of compressed gas. The blast scattered hundreds of hot aluminum oxide pebbles over a wide area, causing several fires but no serious injuries. Space Shuttle testing had been postponed until the facility, which generated pressures up to 126 kg/cm2 (1800 psi) in testing models at 14 times the speed of sound, could be declared operational again. An investigation board was formed to determine the cause of the accident and recommend actions to prevent recurrence. (ARC Astrogram, 14 Aug 75, 1; ARC Experimental Fluid Dynamics Br, interview, 27 June 77; UPI, W Post, 1 Aug 75, A17)
An Italian launch crew launched Explorer 53 (SAS—C) Small Astronomy Satellite for NASA from San Marco launch platform, located in the Indian Ocean off the coast of Kenya, at 6:45 pm EDT (1:45 am local time 8 May) on a Scout launch vehicle. The spacecraft entered near-equatorial orbit with a 523.35-km apogee, 502.18-km perigee, 94.88-min period, and 2.995° inclination. Primary objectives of the Explorer 53 mission were to measure the x-ray emission of discrete extragalactic sources, to monitor the intensity and spectra of galactic x-ray sources from 1.0 kev to 50 kev, and to monitor the x-ray intensity of the star Sco X— 1. During a preliminary in-orbit checkout, controllers noticed that a stuck nutation damper was causing the spacecraft nutation, or coning, angle to be 4° rather than the planned 0.2°. Energizing the z-axis coil reduced the coning angle to 0.5°. Although the damper could not be freed despite repeated attempts, the nutation could be kept within reasonable limits so that scientific objectives could be achieved. A committee would evaluate the problem. Other spacecraft anomalies included intermittent operation of the spinning digital solar-aspect detector, and irregular and noisy operation of the spacecraft star sensor. Neither problem was expected to seriously degrade the mission. The 195-kg satellite was designed to extend and complement the capabilities of Explorer 42 (Uhuru, launched 12 Dec. 1970 as the first satellite dedicated entirely to the study of x-ray sources in space) and Explorer 48 (launched 16 Nov. 1970 to study galactic and extragalactic gamma radiation). Explorer 53, with its broad spectral range, provided higher energy resolution than previous satellites and permitted a study of physical conditions near an x-ray source. The spacecraft’s quasi-three-axis stabilization system allowed much longer continuous observation of sources. Data from Explorer 53 would provide the basis for the more detailed x-ray studies to be made by High Energy Astronomy Observatories A and B scheduled for launch in 1977 and 1978. The experiment aboard Explorer 53 was designed and built by the Center for Space Research of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The spacecraft control section was designed by the Applied Physics Laboratory of the Johns Hopkins Univ. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the program for the Office of Space Science. Langley Research Center was responsible for the Scout launch vehicle. Italy was responsible for the assembly, checkout, and launch of the Scout on a cost-reimbursable basis. (NASAMORs 6 May 75, 15 May 75; NASA Releases 75—101, 75—121)
Johnson Space Center announced signing of a $44 800 000 contract amendment with Lockheed Electronics Co., Inc., for electronic, scientific, and computing-center support services at JSC. The services would support JSC programs including Space Shuttle, earth resources, aircraft, health applications, and the Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment. The amendment brought the estimated value of the Lockheed contract to $173 100 000. (JSC Release 75—93)
A NASA-sponsored research program at Massachusetts Institute of Technology had demonstrated that ultraviolet light could convert water into a hydrogen fuel, NASA announced. MIT researchers placed a titanium dioxide crystal and a piece of platinum connected by a wire into a beaker of water in which inert ionic substances were dissolved to allow an electric current to flow. The titanium dioxide and platinum acted as electrodes, establishing electrical contact with the water. When ultraviolet light from a laser illuminated the titanium dioxide, application of electrical potentials as low as 0.2 volts produced hydrogen and oxygen gases. The process thus far was inefficient, only 1% of the light energy being converted into chemical energy. Researchers were experimenting with different electrodes and reaction temperatures to find methods that would decompose water using low-energy visible light instead of high-energy ultraviolet light, which was only a small fraction of the light available from the sun. (NASA Release 75—106) Dr. Michael Boretsky, Dept, of Commerce analyst, agreed, saying that the productivity decline could be attributed in part to the “relative decline in-the overall rate of the United States technological advance.” Since the mid-1960s, output per man-hour had been growing at half the average rate of the previous 100 yr, while productivity gains had been speeding up in other countries. Funds that could correct this situation by supporting the development of new technology had instead been channeled into social commitments. Dr. Ralph Landau, chemical engineer and president of Halcon, Inc., said that, because labor costs in the U.S. and leading foreign nations were virtually equal, it was no longer advantageous for U.S. companies to sell licenses to foreign enterprises to use American patents. Instead pressures existed to keep the technology at home, creating jobs in the U.S., and to sell U.S.-made goods abroad. During the business meeting on 22 April, 84 new members were elected to NAS “in recognition of their distinguished and continuing achievements in original research.” NAE elected 86 U.S. engineers to its membership, including Dr. Kurt H. Debus, former Kennedy Space Center Director; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Associate Administrator; and Dean R. Chapman, Ames Research Center scientist. (NAS Release, 22 April 75; NAE Release, 1 April 75; joint NAS-NAE Release, 9 April 75; McElheny, NYT, 27 April 75, 15)
More than 19 000 aerospace workers struck McDonnell Douglas Corp. facilities in Missouri, California, and Florida, saying that their demands for increased wages and benefits had not been met. In McDonnell’s St. Louis plant, where the Defense Dept.’s F—4 Phantom jets and F—15 Eagle fighters were built, 12 000 employees walked off the job. The press quoted company officials as saying that the strike would slow, and perhaps stop, production. Only the few aircraft ready for final assembly and flight testing would be completed. About 7000 workers walked out of California facilities, including Vandenberg Air Force Base. At Kennedy Space Center, 200 McDonnell Douglas employees struck, causing postponement of the Telesat—C launch scheduled 6 March on a McDonnell-built Delta launch vehicle. (C Trib, 11 Feb 75; NASA PIO, interview, 14 Feb 75)
President Ford signed Executive Order 11834 establishing the Energy Research and Development Administration—under Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.—and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission—under Chairman William A. Anders—effective 19 Jan. Establishment of the two new agencies was provided for in the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, signed into law on 11 Oct. 1974 by President Ford, which abolished the Atomic Energy Commission and reassigned its responsibilities. ERDA would take over AEC’s research and development programs including the development of fossil, nuclear, solar, and geothermal energy to meet present and future needs. ERDA would also take the lead in energy R&D programs transferred from the Dept, of the Interior, National Science Foundation, and Environmental Protection Agency. NRC was assigned AEC’s licensing and regulatory responsibilities. (PD, 20 Jan 75, 54; ERDA Release 75—1; ERDA Fact Sheet) 16 January—8 February: U.S. and U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project working groups held their last major meeting in the U.S. before the scheduled July launches. The five working groups included 80 Soviet aerospace specialists led by Academician Boris N. Petrov and ASTP Technical Director for the U.S.S.R. Konstantin D. Bushuyev. Working Group 3, Soviet specialists in docking systems, arrived 16 Jan. and went directly to Rockwell International Corp. in California for joint tests of the docking system alignment pin and socket. Following the tests, the group returned to JSC to review the results of those tests and others made earlier in Moscow. NASTRAN to analyze Space Shuttle structures. Recipients of the awards included 12 NASA and 12 contractor employees. (NASA Release 75-13) 16 January—8 February: U.S. and U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project working groups held their last major meeting in the U.S. before the scheduled July launches. The five working groups included 80 Soviet aerospace specialists led by Academician Boris N. Petrov and ASTP Technical Director for the U.S.S.R. Konstantin D. Bushuyev. Working Group 3, Soviet specialists in docking systems, arrived 16 Jan. and went directly to Rockwell International Corp. in California for joint tests of the docking system alignment pin and socket. Following the tests, the group returned to JSC to review the results of those tests and others made earlier in Moscow. On 20 Jan. a portion of Working Group 1—for experiments, trajectories, and contingencies plans—arrived at JSC to prepare for joint simulations scheduled for March. Group 4, for communications systems, also arrived to review the results of independent U.S. and Soviet tests of the flight communications system. The latter group—accompanied by Dr. Glynn S. Lunney, U.S. ASTP Technical Director, and Prof. Bushuyev—then traveled to Kennedy Space Center 3 Feb. to make electromagnetic radio and TV compatibility tests. The remaining Soviet specialists arrived in the U.S. on 27 Jan. Working Group 2, for control systems and docking targets, prepared contingency-control modes for the mission, and Working Group 5 prepared the final report on the compatibility of ASTP life-support systems. Group 5 also certified the equipment to be transferred between the two spacecraft. Although a portion of Group 1 would remain in the U.S. through crew training scheduled for 11 Feb., most of the Soviet contingent returned to the Soviet Union 8 Feb. The next major meeting for the working groups was scheduled for mid-May in Moscow. (JSC Release 75—02; Spaceport News, 6 Feb 75, 3)
NASA executed a $3.65-million supplement to a cost-plus-award-fee contract with Serv-Air, Inc., to continue to provide aircraft for earth-observation and astronaut-proficiency training at Johnson Space Center. Contract provisions also called for maintenance, modification, and related ground support of the JSC aircraft; maintenance and ground support of transient aircraft; engineering, design, fabrication, and installation of electronic and mechanical systems, subsystems, components and equipment; and related logistic functions. This agreement provided for the third and final year of the contract which had an estimated total value of $7.57 million. (JSC Release 75 —23) 1 —4 April: In Montreal, the 89-nation International Telecommunications Satellite Organization held its third ordinary meeting of signatories in conjunction with the 25th anniversary of the Canadian signatory, the Canadian Overseas Telecommunications Corp. Significant accomplishments of the meeting included agreement that domestic services provided for Chile by INTELSAT would be considered on the same basis as international services, thus increasing Chile’s voting representation on the board of governors; that any signatory owning shares in INTELSAT totalling 1.25% or more would be entitled to representation on the board of governors; and that the capital ceiling of $500 million for payments and contractual commitments for development of Intelsat V satellites, planned for launch in the late 1970s, would have to be increased by from $200 to‘$400 million. (INTELSAT Release, April 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Moog, Inc. for a $6 685 584 cost-plus-incentive-fee/award fee contract to design, produce, test, and maintain the Solid Rocket Booster Thrust Vector Control (TVC) electrohydraulic servoactuators. The devices move the solid rocket booster exhaust nozzle, providing directional control by gimballing the nozzle during propellant bum. (MSFC Release 75— 232)
The Federal Council for Science and Technology, a committee of officials representing major research and development agencies, released “Report on the Federal R&D Program—FY 1976,” a summary of 17 R&D agencies’ efforts in applying science and technology to national issues. The report stated that the FY 1976 budget included $21 billion for R&D programs, a 15% increase over the FY 1975 R&D budget of $18.8 billion. Of this, approximately $7.4 billion was planned for civilian programs including energy, health, education, agriculture, environment, urban problems, and transportation. Approximately one-fourth the civilian R&D budget was planned for energy, with the largest share of that—$1.55 million—going to the Energy Research and Development Administration. Nine other government agencies would receive increases in R&D budgets, with NASA’s FY 1976 budget estimate increasing to $3,539 billion, up from $3,231 billion in FY 1975, an increase of more than $300 million. Space R&D would continue with projects to explore Mars, Venus, and outer planets, as well as the sun. Satellites would continue to be used for earth resources assessment, weather prediction, and surveys of potential geothermal energy sources. The Federal Aviation Administration would receive increases for air traffic safety, and Dept, of Defense increases would support development of the B—1 manned strategic aircraft, Trident missile systems, and Navy and Air Force air combat fighters. (Text; OMB, Budget of the U.S. Govt., FY 1976)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio) introduced H.R. 9058, a revised bill to establish national science policy and organization, incorporating the most promising features of H.R. 4461 [see 6 March] and the Administration bill H.R. 7830 [see 9 and 11 June]. The proposed bill included a statement of national policy similar to that in H.R. 4461, but with language recommended during an earlier 3 wk of hearings. The proposal to establish an Office of Science and Technology Policy was based on the Administration bill with three major changes: First, H.R. 9058 would give the President the power to appoint up to four assistant directors, giving him the potential of a three- to five-man council as he chose; this would give later Presidents more flexibility of organization. Second, the President-appointed Director and assistants would be subject to confirmation by the Senate. Third, H.R. 9058 described the duties and functions of the new office more precisely than had the Administration biU. H.R. 9058 would establish, within the Executive Office of the President, a Federal Science and Technology Survey Committee to survey the Federal science effort, including missions, goals, personnel, funding, organization, facilities, and general activities. The 5 to 12 committee members would report findings and recommendations to the director of the new advisory office, with particular attention to organizational reform, science information systems, technology innovation and transfer, Federal-state and Federal-industry liaison and cooperation, and improved science budgeting process. Upon completion of the report, the committee would cease to exist. (CR, 30 July 75, E4265)
France would begin deactivating its space center at Kourou, French Guiana, in September, the New York Times reported. A space center spokesman was quoted as saying, “We’ll have to put the space center to sleep for a while because of lack of funds.” The deactivation did not mean that the French were abandoning their ambition to achieve independence from the U.S. in space operations but that it would take longer than originally thought. The European space program at Kourou would resume with launches of several experimental rockets scheduled in 1979 and a satellite launch planned for the 1980s. Since its establishment in April 1968, the Kourou center had launched more than 225 balloons, satellites, and sounding rockets. Its location 5° north of the equator made Kourou especially suitable for equatorial launches. The largest of its disappointments had been the failure of the Europa 2 launch vehicle in 1971, a program finally abandoned in 1973 in favor of the Ariane booster. (Howe, ATT, 14 June 75)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton began a 3-wk preflight medical isolation at 12 pm CDT. Called the flight health stabilization plan, the isolation limited the astronauts to specific working and training areas at Johnson Space Center. In offhours they were being housed in special mobile homes. Only previously screened personnel, wearing surgical face masks, could come into face-to-face contact with the astronauts. (JSC Release 75—59: Ezell e£ al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 313)
“Clear and immediate benefits to society” that NASA could produce would justify a 25% increase in its budget, said Rep. Don Fuqua (D—Fla.), chairman of the House subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, urging the space agency to come up with plans for such a program. Noting that the Administration had been considering across-the-board cuts in the Federal budget, Rep. Fuqua said the President and the Office of Management and Budget should reconsider the NASA cuts, as returns from the space program should give it higher priority than nonproducing areas of the budget. The subcommittee’s three-volume report, “Future Space Programs,” called for new space systems for educational and medical services, and for new earth-survey satellites to provide maritime, agricultural, geological, and demographic data. The report stressed that the agency should offer both short-term and long-term plans. The latter should include plans for lunar bases, orbital colonies, extraterrestrial communications, planetary and stellar exploration, satellite solar power, and disposal of nuclear waste. Chairman Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) of the House Committee on Science and Technology endorsed the subcommittee report, which he said contained “sensible recommendations,” noting particularly the concept of space-based generation of electrical power. Growth of the nation, said Teague, “is fundamentally dependent upon our continuing its number one ranking in science and technology.” (IFPost, 6 Nov 75, A10; NYT, 6 Nov 75, 51; SBD, 6 Nov 75, 28-30)
U.S.S.R. and India signed a 5-yr agreement on scientific exchange and cooperation between the Soviet Academy of Sciences and India’s Dept, of Science and Technology. The agreement provided for wider cooperation between the two countries in various fields of science and technology, and for the exchange of delegations and information. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 6 March 75, Jl) 19 February—19 March: Hairline cracks were discovered in the holddown fittings on the fins of the Saturn IB launch vehicle scheduled to launch the Apollo spacecraft in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July. After an earlier routine inspection at Michoud Assembly Facility had turned up one crack, a more detailed inspection at Kennedy Space Center 19 Feb. revealed 25-cm cracks on the fittings of two of the eight fins. A decision was made to replace the two fins. The cracks would not affect flight, but were in an area carrying the weight of the vehicle as it sat atop the mobile launcher. During a later inspection, cracks also were found in the remaining six fins, making it necessary to replace all eight. Replacement work began 11 March. Engineers strengthened the cracked areas by placing compressive stresses in the surface of the material, by pneumatically pounding it with a small bundle of rods. Six of the fins were replaced by 15 March. The spacecraft was placed atop the Saturn IB on 17 March and replacement of the remaining two fins was completed by 19 March. (KSC Release 27—75; NASA Release 75—50, 75—57\ Marshall Star, 19 March 75)
Employees of McDonnell Douglas Corp. ratified a new contract by a 4609 to 2796 vote, ending a 13-wk strike [see 10 Feb.]. The contract agreement called for a 31% across-the-board wage increase during the first year and 3% boosts during the second and third years. The strike of 19 000 McDonnell aerospace workers, including 200 at Kennedy Space Center, had delayed all NASA’s scheduled Thor-Delta launches. (IF Post, 12 May 75, A16)
NASA announced the appointment of Robert E. Smylie as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, effective immediately, and the return of J. Lloyd Jones, Jr., to Ames Research Center as Chief of the Planning and Analysis Office. Smylie had been Deputy Associate Administrator (Space), OAST, since July 1974. From October 1973 to July 1974 he had been Deputy Associate Administrator for Technology after serving as chief of the Crew Systems Div. at Johnson Space Center. Jones had come to Hq. in 1972 as director of the Aerodynamics and Vehicles Systems Div. in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, a position he held until appointed Deputy Associate Administrator (Aeronautics), OAST, in July 1974. (NASA anno, 21 May 75)
Flight Research Center announced the award of a 30-mo costplusfixed-fee contract, valued at $13 million, to Rockwell International Corp. to design and build two subscale model aircraft for NASA’s Highly Maneuverable Aircraft Technology Program. The two-phase contract called for an initial 60-day effort for detailed program planning; upon satisfactory completion of phase 1, NASA would approve the final design and fabrication. The two vehicles were scheduled for delivery to FRC late in 1977 for flight-testing, using the Remotely Piloted Research Vehicle test technique [see 3 March] developed by FRC. Air-launched from a carrier aircraft, the vehicles would be flown through maneuvers by a ground-based pilot using TV, telemetry, and radar. (FRC Release 7-75)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs since May 1974, would resign effective 30 August. Previously, Dr. Schmitt had been chief of the Astronaut Office, Science and Applications Directorate, at Johnson Space Center. Selected as a scientist-astronaut by NASA in 1965, he had been the lunar module pilot on Apollo 17 (7—19 Dec. 1972) and the only civilian scientist to walk on the moon. Dr. Schmitt planned to return to his home state of N. Mex. to pursue geological consulting and personal activities. (NASA anno, 11 Aug 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it would distribute the first NASA Standard Parts List (NSPL) to all NASA centers and contractors in Jan. The NSPL was to include electronic parts selected from experience in flights, tests, failure analyses, and recent plant surveys, to ensure reliability. The standardization had been undertaken to solve problems of small-quantity buying, high cost, long delivery schedules, market fluctuations, 'part failures, and extensive rework. The cost of correcting problems resulting from failure of parts had been estimated as 100 times the cost of preventing the use of poor-quality parts to begin with. The NASA Standard Parts Lead Office, located at MSFC because of its experience in parts management developed during the Saturn program, would establish requirements for parts, coordinate the effort with all NASA Centers, and issue and maintain the list. (NASA Release 75— 303; MSFC Release 75—259)
Marshall Space Flight Center issued a request for quotations for a proposed study contract to design, build, test, and deliver a full-scale solar-array wing for solar electric propulsion and Space Shuttle payload applications. The selected contractor would establish design requirements and develop techniques for low-cost fabrication and testing incorporating all previously developed technology. (MSFC Release 75—109)
NASA announced approval of Rockwell International Corp. to begin final design and construction of two subscale models of highly maneuverable aircraft. The construction would be completed under an $11.3-milfion contract awarded earlier. The Rockwell design called for a 6.3-m-long 1260-kg model with a “coke bottle” fuselage and two large canards mounted on each end of the 2.5-m wing. The model would be powered by a General Electric Co. supersonic J85 supersonic jet engine. The two unmanned models would be flown from NASA’s Flight Research Center in a joint NASA—Air Force program to develop advanced technology in high-maneuverability aircraft. The models would be air-launched from large carrier aircraft and maneuvered by a pilot in a ground cockpit, using test techniques developed during NASA’s Remotely Piloted Research Vehicle program. (NASA Release 75- 279)
A significant influence on NASA’s ability to maintain viable programs in the face of possibly unstable funding will be the extent to which commercial and foreign government users participate in the development and financial support of future payloads,” Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Av Wk interviewed the Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, Philip E. Culbertson, who said that it would be better, in the long term, to move into a position where more organizations outside NASA were sponsoring and paying for missions and payloads. The agency was encouraged by the interest of industries in flying and funding Space Shuttle missions involving a wide range of basic scientific and technical operations. Foreign reimbursable payloads, already an important part of NASA launch operations, were seen as an even iarger factor in Shuttle payloads development. Japan, already holding discussions with NASA to lay the groundwork for a viable national space program, was considered a serious Shuttle customer; Japan would like to develop both scientific and earth applications programs in the communications, navigation, and weather satellite fields.. Canada’s interest in positioning domestic communications satellites over its territory would continue into the Shuttle era. Even individual Soviet scientists had made inquiries into the possibilities of flying payloads on the U.S. Shuttle. Culbertson pointed out that, unlike earlier NASA manned space programs that included scientific funding in overall program budgets, NASA in-house Shuttle payload development was the sole responsibility of the specific NASA disciplines themselves. NASA’s FY 1976 budget request contained from $50 to $100 million for various efforts that could evolve into Shuttle payloads, and the budget for FY 1977 would markedly increase payload funding. However, with the budget crunch, funding for Shuttle payloads would compete directly with other programs and the payload proposals “will have to stand on their own merit.” Culbertson also said that major decisions would have to be made on how long to keep which expendable launch vehicles in the program. In another interview, NASA Spacelab Program Director Douglas R. Lord said that upcoming major decisions concerning Spacelab included a follow-on procurement plan for Spacelab hardware and priorities on how often ESRO (European Space Research Organization) and other crews and experimental hardware would fly on Shuttle— Spacelab missions. Lord said that operations of overall Spacelab functions would probably be maintained separately from payload operations: Johnson Space Center was the logical place to handle overall operations, and Marshall Space Flight Center was the leading candidate for the Spacelab payload operations center. Goddard Space Flight Center had expressed interest in handling operational needs of the high-energy experiments on Spacelab pallets. (Covault, Av Wk, 17 March 75, 59- 60) 18March: “The expertise and facilities of LeRC [Lewis Research Center], as well as other NASA centers, are being considered by ERDA [Energy Research and Development Administration] as part of its overall definition of a total institutional structure required to carry out the nation’s energy R&D program,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., ERDA Administrator said in a letter to Representative Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio). The letter was a reply to correspondence from members of the Ohio congressional delegation and Cleveland businessmen and industrialists to President Ford calling for increased use of LeRC talent to meet the nation’s energy crisis. Dr. Fletcher and Dr. Seamans noted that the newly established ERDA was the lead Federal agency for managing national energy R&D. ERDA intended to use the expertise and facilities of other Federal agencies where it was feasible and in the national interest with respect to cost, timeliness, and program management. LeRC, NASA’s lead center for aerospace propulsion and power, was already involved in ERDA-sponsored projects in solar heating and cooling, wind energy, and topping cycles to increase the efficiency of coal-fueled steam plants. But LeRC would continue its main task to work on propulsion technology, conducting energy research in support of ERDA “when it was consistent with the requirements of its principal mission within NASA.” (Text, letter to Mosher from Fletcher and Seamans, 18 March 75)
Kennedy Space Center awarded a $74 998 contract to the Univ. of Fla. Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences for continuation of a freeze-prediction study. A1973 contract had provided for study of the application of satellite thermal and infrared imagery to development of a freeze-prediction model; results were so encouraging that a second contract had been awarded in 1974. Also involved in this effort had been meteorologists from the Lakeland office of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and its Environmental Services Center at Auburn, Ala. Freeze-warning information had previously been provided by NOAA’s Ruskin, Fla., facility on the basis of data from 300 recording thermometers operated by a Federal-state agricultural weather system and other reporting stations; the KSC contracts had aimed at developing a computerized system using thermal scanning and infrared imagery from spacecraft and aircraft for more accurate predictions. The study used data from till agencies, including spacecraft readings and actual ground- and leaf-temperature measurements provided by Univ. of Fla. personnel at specific times in selected test areas, combined at KSC for analysis in its earth resources data-analysis facility. The analyzed data had then gone to the university and to NOAA for predictive model development. (KSC Release 294—75)
The U.S.S.R. had turned down a U.S. invitation to participate in another joint manned space mission in 1976, Thomas O’Toole of the Washington Post reported a U.S. space official as saying. O’Toole reported that in 1974 NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. George M. Low had suggested to Soviet Academy of Sciences President Vladimir Kotelnikov that two Soviet cosmonauts and three American astronauts dock with a Soviet Salyut space station and work together in earth orbit for up to 2 wk. However, the Soviets had replied that they would undertake a repeat of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (scheduled for 15 July launch) but could not prepare to fly an Apollo-Salyut in any reasonable length of time. The Post quoted Dr. Low as saying, “Any second American—Russian space flight will have to wait until the 1980s.” The Post also quoted Dr. Low as saying that NASA had suggested an Apollo-Salyut mission as early as 1971, but the Soviets had requested a change back to an Apollo-Soyuz mission during a presummit meeting in April 1972 just before President Nixon’s Moscow visit. Dr. Low said that the Soviets had said that it was too expensive to modify Salyut to accept both a Soyuz and an Apollo spacecraft at the same time. (O’Toole, W Post, 14 July 75, Al)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Secretary of the Interior Thomas S. Kleppe announced the selection of Dr. William Nordberg, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, and Dr. Carlos Brockmann, director of the Landsat project in Bolivia, to receive the 1975 William T. Pecora Award. Dr. Nordberg was selected for his meteorological contributions to the Landsat program and for his management of day-to-day research operations using data from Landsat 1 and 2, launched (as Erts 1) on 23 July 1972 and on 22 Jan. 1975. Dr. Brockmann was selected for his leadership of a multidisciplinary team of Bolivian scientists responsible for the evaluation and application of Landsat images. Within 1 year, the team had produced evaluation reports covering geology, volcanology, forestry, hydrology, and land use of Bolivia; the group also published an improved national atlas of Bolivia. Given annually by NASA and the Dept, of Interior in recognition of “outstanding contributions of individuals or groups toward the understanding of the Earth by means of remote sensing,” the award would be presented at the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. 4-day symposium on earth resources at Sioux Falls, S. Dak., 28—31 Oct. (NASA Releases 75-283,-285)
Rockwell International Corp. announced that its Electronics Research Div., under a contract awarded by NASA on 18 Feb. 1974, had developed a single-chip bubble-domain memory element with a capacity of 102 400 bits, believed to be the largest capacity memory device ever built. The new data recorder—a major milestone in NASA’s continuing program to develop an all-solid-state data recorder for future U. S. spacecraft—was one-third the size and one-half the weight of current equipment. It was expected to use half the power and have 10 times the life expectancy of present recorders. Objective of the effort was to demonstrate the feasibility of fabricating high-capacity memory elements with reasonable yield and operating margins. (Rockwell Int’l Release ERD-1; LaRC proj off, interview, 18 Jan 77) 22 May—7 June: The U.S. and Peru launched more than 40 sounding rockets and balloons in a joint project, called Antarqui for the Inca god of flight, to study the earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere from Chilca Launch Range in Peru, a location on the magnetic equator where the earth’s magnetic field is horizontal. Instruments aboard the rockets and balloons measured the composition of the neutral and ionized atmosphere, density and temperature, wind shear, and turbulence. The measurements would be compared with data from Explorer 51 (Atmosphere Explorer—C, launched 15 Dec. 1973) and the ground-based Jicamarca and Huancayo Observatories. Tbe overall mission included the launch of 4 Nike-Tomahawks, 8 Nike-Apaches, 7 Super Areas, and 10 Super Lokis, as well as two balloons measuring 36 m in diameter and 12 ozonesonde balloons. Project Antarqui was a continuation of a NASA sounding-rocket program conducted during the 1964— 65 International Quiet Sun Year when 77 sounding rockets had been launched during the first 4 mo of 1965 from a sea-going launch platform, the USNS Croatan. Wallops Flight Center managed the program for NASA; the Instituto Geofisico del Peru arranged for the use of the range, supplied range operation and logistics support in Peru, correlated ground-based measurements from Jicamarca and Huancayo, assisted in recovery operations, and performed some preliminary work at the range. In addition to WFC, Goddard Space Flight Center, Dudley Observatory, Univ. of Pittsburgh, Univ. of 111., Penn. State Univ., Univ. of Denver, and GCA Corp. supplied scientific payloads for the sounding rockets and balloons. (WFC Release 75—6; NASA Activities, June 75, 14; WFC proj mgr, interviews, 11—12 Jan 75) 24 May—26 July: Tne U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 18, carrying cosmonauts Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, from Baykonur cosmodrome at 7:58 pm local time (10:58 amEDT). According to the Tassnews agency, the spacecraft entered orbit with a 247-km apogee, 193-km perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced that the purpose of the mission was “to conduct further experiments with the orbital research station ‘Salyut—4,’ started on January 12, during the joint flight of the delivery spaceship ‘Soyuz—17’ and the station ‘Salyut—4’ as well as to test individual elements and systems of the spaceship in various modes of flight.” During the first day in orbit Klimuk and Sevastyanov checked out essential spacecraft and life-support systems and prepared for orbital maneuvering. The crew switched on the main engines twice on 25 May to raise the spacecraft’s orbit in preparation for rendezvous and docking with Salyut 4. On 26 May Soyuz 18 approached the station by an automatic control system. At a distance of 100 km the crew took over control and manually docked the spacecraft with the Salyut 4 station in pitch darkness. After docking, the crew switched on the station’s lights and began activation and checkout of the onboard systems. The crew transferred equipment and boarded the station where they found a “Welcome to our common home” sign left by the station’s previous tenants, Soyuz 17 cosmonauts Aleksey Gubarev and Georgy Grechko. The cosmonauts reported that all systems were operating normally and that they themselves were in good health. By 28 May the station and spacecraft were in an orbit with a 349-km apogee, 338-km perigee, 91.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. During their 63 days in orbit, the cosmonauts studied the sun, planets, and stars in various bands of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation using several x-ray telescopes, including one called “Filin”; investigated geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, photographing the U.S.S.R. in the medium and southern latitudes; studied physical processes in the earth’s atmosphere and in space; performed medical and biological research with particular emphasis on the impact of weightlessness on the human organism; and tested the station’s design and onboard systems. The cosmonauts also raised a garden of onions and peas as a forerunner of providing self-sufficient food supplies in space. Tass reported that, for the first time during a space flight, the polar fights were investigated using integral photography and spectrography methods. Twice during the mission Klimuk and Sevastyanov spoke with cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov who were also in orbit participating in the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project begun 15 July. By 23 July the cosmonauts were preparing the space station for automatic operation. On 26 July at 3:56 pm Baykonur time (6:56 am EDT), Soyuz 18 and its crew undocked from Salyut 4. They softlanded 56 km northeast of Arkalyk in Kazakhstan at 7:18 pm Baykonur time (10:18 am EDT). ' Tass reported that by 27 July the cosmonauts’ slight pulse and blood pressure fluctuations noted immediately after landing had returned to normal. Decreases in erythrocytes and increases in leucocytes disappeared after a few days, and in 1 or 2 wk orthostatic stability and resistance to functional tests had almost reached preflight baselines. Both Klimuk and Sevastyanov had lost some weight—3.8 kilograms and 1.9 kilograms respectively—during the mission. The Soyuz 18 crew’s 62-day 23-hr 40-min mission broke the previous 29-day 13-hr 20-min Soviet record for time in space set by the Soyuz 17. The current world’s record for time in space was held by the Skylab 4 astronauts for their 84-day 1-hr 16-min mission, 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974. Salyut 4, which had been visited by the two crews of Soyuz 17 and 18, was the fourth space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew, launched on Soyuz 10, docked with the station on 24 April but returned to earth without entering. The Soyuz 11 crew, launched 6 June 1971, boarded the station and conducted experiments for 24 days but were killed during a reentry accident. Salyut 2 was launched 3 April 1973 but an explosion of wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable. Salyut 3 was orbited 25 June 1974 and a two-man crew, carried by Soyuz 14, lived and worked aboard the station from 3—19 July 1974. A second crew, launched 26 Aug. 1974, returned to earth in 48 hr after an unsuccessful attempt to dock with the station, which itself reentered the earth’s atmosphere 26 Sept. 1974. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 24 May— 28 July 75; GSFC WklySSR, 22—28 May 75; AP, B Sun, 27 July 75, A3; Lib of Congress, “S&T News Alert,” No 2600, 19 Sept 75) 27 May—14 June: A one-third-scale model of the Space Shuttle Orbiter was tested in Ames Research Center’s 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel, to gather low-speed flight data in support of approach and landing tests of the first full-scale Orbiter at Flight Research Center in 1977. In addition, data were gathered to calibrate the vehicle’s air data probes. The model, built by Shuttle prime contractor Rockwell International Corp., was 13.1 m long and weighed 20 400 kg. Additional wind-tunnel tests were scheduled for November 1975 and February 1976. (4-Strogram, 5 June 75, 1; Young, JSC aerodynamic subsystems mgr, interview, 21 April 77) In a speech, Secretary General of the International Telecommunications Union M. Mili said ITU encouraged Europe’s intention to play an important role in the peaceful uses of outer space; the programs of ESRO—ESA offered a particularly well chosen range of satellites for research and applications. Y. Demerliac, Secretary General of Eurospace—Groupement In-dustriel Europeen D’Etudes Spatiales—reminded the audience that since 1962 Europe had developed 43 satellites, including four communications satellites. In addition, European industry had built 36 of the 104 ground stations or antennas in the network of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT). More than two-thirds of these had been sold to non-European countries. Director General of ESRO Roy Gibson (United Kingdom) said the creation of ESA was of more significance than a mere change in name: the convention of the new agency gave it a specific mandate to work toward a rationalization of Europe’s space program which its predecessors ESRO and ELDO (European Launcher Development Organization) did not have. He hoped that the 3-day presentation of ESRO— ESA and other European programs would give the visitors an impression of the total competence and capability of Europe’s up-to-date, rather dispersed space effort. (ESRO Release 28 May 75)
The Aerospace Corp. had donated its $2-million San Fernando Observatory to Calif. State Univ. at Northridge as an educational center for solar research, Aerospace president Dr. Ivan Getting announced. The nonprofit company, which had used the observatory in support of flights in the Apollo and Skylab projects, was giving away the 7-yr-old facility because its planned solar research had been completed. (SBD, 3 Dec 75, 173)
Preparations continued at Kennedy Space Center for the launch of two Viking spacecraft to Mars. Lander 1 was mated with its Orbiter on 8 March to test compatibility. The Lander and Orbiter were mated with the Centaur launch vehicle shroud and moved to Launch Complex 41 on 27 March to undergo a flight-events demonstration, Orbiter and Lander precountdown tests, and terminal countdown demonstration with the complete vehicle. During a complete 18-hr plugs-out test of Lander 2 on 13 March, data were transmitted to Jet Propulsion Laboratory to provide training for the Viking flight-control team. (KSC Spaceport News, 6 March 75, 6; 20 March 75, 5) April 1975
President Ford transmitted to both Houses of Congress proposed legislation to create, within the Executive Office of the President, an Office of Science and Technology Policy headed by a director who would also serve as presidential science and technology advisor. In his letters of transmittal to Speaker of the House of Representatives Carl Albert and President of the Senate Vice President Nelson A. Rockefeller, President Ford said that the new director would “identify new opportunities for using science and technology to improve our understanding of national problems and to contribute to their solution. He will also chair the Federal Council on Science and Technology, and I expect him to provide advice on the scientific and technological considerations in Federal policies, programs, and budgets.” The President said that the director and deputy director would be presidential appointees. The office would draw extensively on the nation’s scientific and engineering community for advice and assistance, and the director and staff would also call upon Federal agencies for assistance in carrying out their responsibilities. {PD, 16 June 75, 610)
In the general purpose laboratory (GPL) at Marshall Space Flight Center, investigators from MSFC and Johnson Space Center were conducting experiments in high-energy cosmic-ray astronomy, superfluid helium, optical x-ray astronomy, and life sciences. The objective of the experiments, designated concept verification test (CVT) 5, was to verify operational and integration concepts for their applicability to Spacelab, the reusable manned space laboratory being built by the European Space Agency as a payload for the Space Shuttle. The purpose of the high-energy astronomy experiment was to demonstrate the use of minicomputers for experiment operation, control, and data management, and the real-time interaction of payload specialists with experiment operations. The superfluid helium experiment examined characteristics of helium droplets at temperatures near 2.2 K (—512°F), which would help in developing cryogenic techniques for use in Spacelab. The optical astronomy experiment, which demonstrated remote experiment operation by obtaining data from a Ferson 40.6-cm telescope 9.2 kilometers away, gave practice in investigator-experiment interaction and helped in developing computer control techniques, display requirements for telescope operation and data management, and astronomy training requirements for crew members. The four life-sciences experiments included studies of sporophore formation, the vestibular function, a clinical diagnostic system, and muscle-like contractile protein. Investigators also participated in an experiment to demonstrate the use of a computer in real-time mission planning, scheduling, and applications. By involving investigators in the CVT simulations, NASA would be able to plan the most cost-effective use of Spacelab. (MSFC Release 75-178)
NASA and the Energy Research and Development Administration were near agreement on a plan to build a coal gasification plant near NASA’s Michoud assembly facility in La. to provide hydrogen gas for testing and operating the Space Shuttle, said Dr. Myron S. Malkin, director of the Space Shuttle program for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. In testimony before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Dr. Malkin said ERDA would hire a private contractor to build a $65-million plant and would operate it for 3 yr to obtain data on coal gasification; after that, it would turn the plant over to NASA. The facility would produce enough gas daily to provide 30 tons of liquid hydrogen for the Shuttle. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 858, 910)
A massive new power source for earth—transmission of solar energy by microwave frequency—had been under study by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the Goldstone station near Barstow, Calif. The dish antenna equipped with a 450-kw klystron tube for microwave transmission, represented a space station; the tower a mile away with an array of solar receivers to which the experimental power converted to microwave energy had been beamed represented a ground station. This research had been designed to lead to a network of space stations that would collect solar energy 24 hr a day and beam it to ground stations; the Goldstone tests had been the first high-power field trials of the system. Tiny rectifying dipole antennas—called rectennas— collect and convert the radio-frequency beam; the 17 panels in the tower receiver contain 4590 of the rectennas. The system had demonstrated a maximum output of 30.4 kw converting the microwave beam to usable electricity, an efficiency of 82.5%. A space-to-earth system would be 6 times more effective than a surface system, the Los Angeles Times commented, and could probably supply 15% to 20% of the earth’s energy needs in the next century. Development of a utility operating system delivering 10 000 mw of power would cost about $60 billion, as much as NASA has spent to date on space programs. A single equatorial space station carrying a 1-km-diameter antenna transmitting to a U.S. earth station 15 km long and 10 km wide could supply all the electrical needs of New York City or a third of the needs of the Los Angeles basin. (LA Times, 6 Oct 75, 1; NYT, 10 Oct 75, 2)
Under an agreement with the Air Force, Flight Research Center pilots would fly the YF—17 aircraft—contender for selection as the Air Force combat fighter—in a research program to acquire flight data of a high-performance aircraft for comparisons with wind-tunnel tests and other analytical methods, FRC announced. The comparisons would be used to update prediction techniques required for the design of future highly maneuverable aircraft. During the 25 flight hrs, pilots would measure performance and stability at high angles of attack at both high and low altitudes, and perform maneuverability tests and pilot physiological studies during sustained high acceleration levels. (FRC Release 11—75)
NASA had awarded a $152 565 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Corp. for the design, development, and test of the Space Shuttle external tank, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The contract, which covered the first increment of the external tank project for 1 Sept. 1973 to 30 June 1980, called for a maximum production rate of 24 tanks per year and delivery of major ground-test articles and 6 flight-model tanks. The work would be done at Michoud Assembly Facility under the direction of MSFC. (MSFC Release 75—28) During January: Opportunities and Choices in Space Science, 1974, a report published by the Space Science Board of the National Research Council, recommended that NASA undertake the Large Space Telescope as the only new space research start in FY 1976. The telescope should be followed by a series of permanent national and international observatories in orbit. The report also recommended that, budget permitting, NASA undertake in 1977 a lunar—polar mission, a Pioneer—Jupiter orbiter, a Mariner—Jupiter—Uranus mission, and a solar maximum mission. However, NASA should compare the importance of the Pioneer—Jupiter orbiter with the Mariner—Jupiter—Uranus mission if current FY 1977 budget estimates would not support both missions. Other recommendations included an immediate reevaluation of strategy for missions to explore the outer solar system during the next decade and for returning a Martian surface sample to earth instead of landing an unmanned laboratory to perform analyses as current plans propose. The report strongly endorsed the High Energy Astronomical Observatories (HEAO), Pioneer—Venus mission, and Mariner— Jupiter—Saturn mission as vital to the nation’s space science efforts. (Text)
Marshall Space Flight Center was requesting proposals—due 22 Sept.—from the aerospace industry for a study leading to design and development of an Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) as a payload aboard Spacelab, MSFC announced. ACPL experiments would give scientists a knowledge of weather processes important for long-range weather prediction and weather modification. After evaluating the proposals, MSFC would award two parallel 12-mo firm-fixed price contracts. (MSFC Release 75—192)
Radio astronomers in both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had intensified their search for possible civilizations out in space, Walter Sullivan wrote in theNew York Times. Little publicity had been given the search to prevent raising public expectation for “what is likely to be a prolonged effort.” Costs were minimal, because the observations had made use of equipment also used for other research. Dr. Hans Mark, Director of Ames Research Center, had told students at the Polytechnic Inst, of N.Y. that the search for other civilizations would become “one of the major scientific enterprises,” and cited his belief that “communicative civilizations” had been a natural consequence of biological evolution. Dr. Mark pointed out that the U.S. giant antenna at Goldstone, Calif., used for spacecraft communications, could pick up emissions only from the vicinity of the nearest stars. One American search is using the largest antenna on earth—the dish at Arecibo, P.R.—to scan the five nearest galaxies at 1420 mhz, the frequency of radio waves given off by hydrogen atoms, long considered a logical frequency for civilizations trying to make contact. The Arecibo search had been conducted by two Cornell professors, Dr. Frank B. Drake and Dr. Carl Sagan. Another American search had been using the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., to scan 700 stars (resembling earth’s sun) within 80 light years of the solar system for signals at the 1420-mhz wavelength. No obvious signals had been detected, but the recordings had not been subjected to detailed analysis, according to Dr. Patrick Palmer of the Univ. of Chicago and Dr. Benjamin M. Zuckerman of the Univ. of Md. The Soviet program, scanning the entire portion of the celestial sphere visible from the Soviet Union, had been using two networks with a total of eight stations spread across the vast width of the Soviet Union. The November issue of Icarus, international journal of solar-system studies, had carried a prospectus of the Soviet CETI (communication with extraterrestrial intelligence) program divided into two phases. CETI 1* scheduled from 1975 to 1985, included the whole-sky Scan by eight stations plus monitoring by two space stations and a survey of nearby galaxies like the one under way at Arecibo. Only the eight-station project had been initiated, as far as U.S. scientists knew. CETI 2, from 1980 to 1990, had been scheduled to continue satellite monitoring but would also use setnirotatable antennas such as the RAT AN—600 antenna 600 m wide, known to be located high in the Caucasus; the system consisted of numerous plates that had to be aimed individually* calling for hand alignment since no computer had been designed to perform this role. The Soviets also envisioned a monitoring station at the point beyond the moon where the gravitational fields of earth and moon would balance each other; a station at that point would be protected from the earth’s own radio emissions. Identical fluctuations of signal recorded simultaneously at widely separated points would be considered to have extraterrestrial origin rather than to result from a local manmade effect. (NYT, 29 Nov 75, C13) During November: An x-ray telescope assembled at Marshall Space Flight Center for the study of remnants of an exploded star had been shipped from England; where it had undergone payload integration, to the Woomera Rocket Range in Australia for launch. The project, called Skylark for the British sounding rocket on which the telescope would fly, was a joint British-Anierican undertaking to study a supernova remnant known as Puppis A for information on the evolution of stars and perhaps oil the formation of neutron stars. The flight would provide at least 3 min 20 sec for the 346.5-kg payload to make its observations above 120-km altitude. (NASA Release 75—287; MSFC Release 75—238)
Action by the House of Representatives to defer for 1 yr the funds budgeted for the Pioneer—Venus project [see 19 and 24 June] would “jeopardize the possible success of Pioneer—Venus,” Sen. John V. Tunney (D—Calif.) said in a letter to Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.), chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee. The House recommended the delay to permit a budget decision in 1977 between the Large Space Telescope and the Pioneer—Venus mission. Sen. Tunney’s letter said that the probe was timed for the 1978 launch window when earth and Venus would be in unusually favorable relative positions; the next favorable window would not appear for almost 2 yr, during 1980, and Venus would be considerably further away from the earth at that time than it would be during 1978. A delay in funding would postpone the program for at least 18 mo, would require design changes, and might cost $50 million more than original estimates. Sen. Tunney said that the case for continued funding was a strong one. Most scientists felt that investigation of the Venusian atmosphere would provide valuable meteorological information that might substantially enhance weather-prediction capabilities. Another reason for continuation of the program is that, in an era of high unemployment, few sectors had suffered more devastating setbacks than the aerospace industry. The Pioneer—Venus program had created more than 1500jobs, which would be threatened by termination or delay of the program. Curtailment of an ongoing scientific concept like Pioneer—Venus would severely reduce credibility of the government’s long-term commitments, with added time, difficulty, and cost for future projects as private contractors would seek to protect themselves. Sen. Tunney pointed out that the House’s juxtaposition of funding for Pioneer—Venus with funding for the Large Space Telescope was inappropriate; the programs were not competing, but complementary. Pioneer—Venus would provide information on our closest neighbor, whereas LST would collect deep-space data of unprecedented scope and detail. “Cutting one program for the sake of the other would mean sacrificing a distinguishable body of scientific knowledge which would not be replaceable.” (Text, letter, Tunney to Proxmire, 9 July 75; CR, 26 July 75, S13882— 83)
An Apollo-Soyuz Test Project flight readiness review at Kennedy Space Center was attended by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator; ASTP Program Director Chester M. Lee; and top management from NASA Headquarters and Marshall, Johnson, and Kennedy Space Centers. During the meeting Lee said that “ASTP is on schedule and ‘go’ for launch on July 15.” Top management had reviewed and closed out all aspects of flight preparations. ASTP Technical Director Glynn S. Lun-ney reported that no hardware problems remained that might interfere with an. on-time launch. MSFC Saturn Program Manager Ellery B. May reported that the 8-yr-old Saturn IB launch vehicle had been carefully checked out and all components were being monitored by periodic inspections; during one of these inspections corrosion cracks had been discovered in the fins, requiring them to be replaced [see 19 Feb.—19 March], May reported that the vehicle was ready to fly. William H. Rock, manager of the Sciences and Applications Project Office at JSC, said that modifications, including a larger, more effective lightning rod on the launch tower, had been made to the launch pad to minimize the hazards from lightning strikes. Jesse R. Gulick, KSC meteorologist, said that thunderstorm probability for launch day was 23% and that the probability of a tropical storm or hurricane winds was less than 3%. Based on previous years’ data, chances were good that, even if bad weather postponed the primary launch date, the Apollo spacecraft could be launched within 4 days. (MSFC Release 75 — 119; KSC Release 104 —75; Marshall Star, 18 June 75, 1; Ezell et al.. The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 310 — 12)
The first ground-test hardware for the Space Shuttle, a hydraulic actuator for the main engine, had arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center for functional checkout, MSFC announced. Each of the Orbiter’s three main engines would use two of the actuators to gimbal the engine for steering control. After checkout the actuator—one of 8 to be tested—would be sent to the National Space Technology Laboratories where the main engines would be tested. (MSFC Release 75— 68)
NASA was considering resuming exploration of the moon in 1980, using a low-cost unmanned satellite to map the entire lunar surface from orbit, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Marius B. Weinreb told United Press International in a telephone interview. The proposed satellite, together with a small communications relay satellite, would gather information needed by scientists to organize the vast amount of data collected during the Apollo lunar landing missions. One mission of the satellite would be to provide a detailed chart of the lunar gravitational field, including field variations, to tell scientists more about the composition of the moon and perhaps about its origin and evolution. Previous lunar orbiters had merely mapped and photographed the lunar surface. Although scientists had learned much from Apollo data about the gravitational field of the moon’s near side, they knew little about the far side. The proposed satellite— equipped with instruments including x-ray and gamma-ray sensors— and its accompanying high-orbiting comsat, which would remain in range of both the satellite and the earth at all times, would send back to earth data on the entire lunar surface. Weinreb told UPI that NASA administrators had considered including the proposed project in the FY 1977 budget. Budget restrictions might prevent NASA from initiating new projects. (UPI, NYT, 11 Sept 75, 11; interview, Weinreb, 13 June 78)
Eight Soviet scientists would attend a meeting at the Earth Resources Orbiting Satellite (EROS) Data Center in S. Dak. this week to review previous U.S.-U.S.S.R. remote-sensing projects [see 20 Oct.] and to discuss future cooperation on remote sensing of geology and agriculture. The meeting was part of a joint effort by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences to advance studies of the earth from space; the Soviets might set up a ground station to receive remote-sensing data directly from U.S. Landsats. (SBD, 28 Oct 75, 295) 28 —29 October: Principal investigators and other scientists meeting at the Marshall Space Flight Center had presented preliminary findings on the space-processing experiments conducted during the U.S.—Soviet Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July. First day’s discussions would be on the U.S. and West German experiments on electrophoresis—separation of biological materials by means of an electrical field—considered a key to the development of drugs to fight strokes, heart attacks, clots, and blood diseases. Six of the seven materials-processing experiments using a multipurpose electric furnace would be discussed the second day; a Soviet experiment using the furnace would not be discussed. The furnace experiments had demonstrated use of a weightless environment to investigate crystal growth, convection, and solidification processes for future use in space as well as for applications to present earth technology. (MSFC Release 75— 226)
Final joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. simulations for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crews and flight controllers began at Johnson Space Center and at the Moscow Mission Control Center at 6:30 am CDT. The simulations picked up the count at 47 hrs 10 min into the mission and continued for 56 hrs, covering the joint portion of the mission including rendezvous, docking, crew transfers and joint activities, and undocking of the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft. U.S. and Soviet crewmen participated in simulators in their respective countries while both flight-control centers were fully staffed. The U.S. crew would also participate in the countdown demonstration test at Kennedy Space Center on 3 July. (JSC Release 75—61; Ezell eta/., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 314)
A meeting at Goddard Space Flight Center of U.S. and U.S.S.R. officials to discuss a cooperative meteorology program recommended that in May—July 1976 each country, within a single 27-day solar rotation, launch two series of sounding rockets—one under quiet magnetic conditions, the other under disturbed magnetic conditions. In 1977 the two countries should hold a rocket-data comparison test in the vicinity of Wallops Island, Va. Both countries should launch more meteorological rockets during atmospheric warming periods. In 1976—1978 both countries should research radiation transfer as a factor in temperature sensing from satellites. From 1975—1978 joint remote-sensing, experiments using microwave were proposed, along with exchange of information on frequencies and data format to be used with direct-broadcast equipment. (NASA Gen Mgmt Rev Rpt, 17 March 75)
NASA announced the award of a $334 100 contract for the design, fabrication, delivery, installation, and checkout of an optical bench and alignment system for an x-ray telescope test facility at Marshall Space Flight Center. The facility would be used to test x-ray verification and to calibrate x-ray mirrors, telescope systems, and instruments for NASA’s High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) program. The HEAO program was to launch between 1977 and 1979 three unmanned scientific satellites into low circular earth orbit to study black holes, neutron stars, quasars, and supernovae. (MSFC Release 75— 50)
Lewis Research Center had awarded a contract to Rockwell International Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for a laser-heated rocket thrust chamber for spacecraft. The concept included transmitting laser energy from a ground laser-generating station to a spacecraft; propellant carried aboard tho spacecraft would convert laser energy into propulsive thrust. The potential improvement in performance included a 400% increase in payload capability for a Space Tug. Rockwell would build an experimental thruster, to be powered by a 10-kw laser beam and tested at LeRC using an in-house carbon-dioxide laser system, and would provide a preliminary design for a 5000-kw thruster. (Rocketdyne Release RD—16)
Flight Research Center pilots began flight tests as part of a cooperative industry-government program to measure noise levels of five business-class jet aircraft during various landing approach maneuvers. Object of the tests was to define noise characteristics for this class of aircraft and the effectiveness of alternate landing-approach procedures in reducing community noise levels. Using a Rockwell Sabreliner, Grumman Gulfstream II, Gates Learjet, Beech-Hawker 125 provided by the National Business Aircraft Association, and Lockheed Jet Star provided by NASA, FRC pilots flew four landing approaches over a microphone array. A normal 3° approach provided baseline information; a 3° decelerating approach with engines at reduced power, a 4° approach with normal power, and a two-segment approach starting with 6° angle and shallowing into a 3° approach provided additional data. (NASA Release 75-103) During practice sessions similar to those held in the U.S. 7 Feb.— 1 March, the participants practiced communications skills, transfer procedures, joint activities, and contingency situations, using the Soyuz simulator at the Gagarin Cosmonaut Center in Star City. On 19 April the crews visited the mission-control center at Kaliningrad and, on 28 April, became the second group of westerners to visit the Baykonur cosmodrome (French President Charles de Gaulle had been the first western visitor when he witnessed the launch of Cosmos 122 on 25 June 1966). At Baykonur the U.S. crewmen saw the actual flight hardware as well as the primary launch pad 2 km away, and the prime and backup crews each spent an hour in the Soyuz spacecraft. The astronauts later reported to the press that they had found no significant differences between the actual spacecraft and the simulators used during training. (Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 278—280; JSC Releases 75- 22, 75— 25; WPost, 30 April 75, A21 ,SBD, 18 April 75, 273; A&A 66, 223)
NASA launched the first geostationary operational environmental satellite, GOES—A, at 6:40 pm EDT for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration aboard the 106th successful Delta from Kennedy Space Center. Transfer orbit elements were: apogee, 36 795 km; perigee, 200 km; inclination, 23.7°; period, 650.9 min. Apogee boost motor fired at 10:51 am EDT 17 Oct. had put the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit at 36 200 km altitude, where it would drift to its scheduled position approximately 5(FN. When the GOES—A had been moved to position and checked out, it would be designated Goes 1 and turned over to NOAA for operational use. GOES was the first operational version of the prototype synchronous meteorological satellites (Sms 1, launched 17 May 74 into geostationary orbit at 75°W, and Sms 2, launched 6 Feb. 75 and positioned at 115°W). Sms 1, originally stationed over the eastern Atlantic in support of the Global Atmospheric Research Program, had provided the first near-continuous daylight coverage of a major hurricane (Carmen) in Sept. 1974. The day-night time-lapse motion pictures produced from Sms 1 images had aided understanding of hurricanes and tropical storms, as well as the total weather pattern in the Atlantic. Sms 2, from its station over the equator, had viewed the western half of the U.S., including Hawaii. Other NOAA satellites in polar orbit (Essa 8, Noaa 3, and Noaa 4) had collected global data for transmission to ground stations in Alaska and eastern U.S. This information has been available worldwide to any individual or agency with equipment that could receive the transmissions. Goes 1 would provide NOAA scientists with images of a quarter of earth’s surface at 30-min intervals, day and night. The satellite would also collect and relay nonvisual environmental data transmitted from thousands of manned and unmanned remote-sensing facilities on land and sea. Its radiation sensors would monitor solar activity and transmit its findings to NOAA’s Environmental Research Laboratories in Boulder, Colo., for use in predicting solar storms that would affect radio communications on earth. Goes 1 would also transmit weather maps and other material from NOAA’s station at Wallops Island, Va., in a format suitable for use by-ground stations at regional forecast centers. (NASA Release 75—270; KSC Release 251 — 75; MORs E—608— 75 —03,22 Sept and 17 Oct 75; KSC Spaceport News, 31 Oct 75,1; NOAA Release 75—188)
NASA announced that astronaut Thomas P. Stafford would leave the NASA astronaut corps effective 1 Nov. to become commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Serving as a NASA astronaut since September 1962, Stafford made the first rendezvous in space when he flew the Gemini 6 mission (launched 15 Dec. 1965) to meet the already orbiting Gemini 7 crew. He also commanded Gemini 9 (3—6 June 1966), which rendezvoused with the previously launched augmented target docking adapter. Stafford was commander of Apollo 10 (18—26 May 1969), first lunar-orbital mission to use the complete Apollo spacecraft; during the mission he and crew member Eugene A. Cernan flew the lunar module to within 15 km of the surface while John W. Young orbited the moon in the Apollo spacecraft. In July Stafford headed the three-man Apollo crew for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission (15—24 July 1975); he had accumulated a total of 507 hr 43 min in space and flown 6 space missions. (NASA Release 75—241) 27 August—7 September: Field operations of an ocean bathymetry expedition sponsored jointly by NASA and the Cousteau Society had been successfully completed in the Central Bahamas. Objective of the expedition was to evaluate the usefulness of Landsat satellite sensors for measuring water depth in shallow seas and for improving the accuracy of mapping ocean-bottom features. Thirteen satellites— including NASA’s Landsat 1 and 2,Smsl, and Ats 3; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Noaa 3 and 4 and Essa 8; and six satellites of the Navy’s Transit Navigation System, plus two research vessels—Cousteau Society’s Calypso and the Johns Hopkins University’s Beayondan—recorded bathymetric data at selected sites. Scuba divers measured ocean floor reflectivity and water transparency with sophisticated underwater instruments. Participating in the expedition were Cousteau Society head Jacques Cousteau and his son Philippe; NASA Project Manager Dr. Enrico P. Mercanti and science monitor Ross McCluney, both of Goddard Space Flight Center; and Dr. Fabian Polcyn of the Environmental Research Institute of Michigan. NASA Director of User Affairs Russell L. Schweikart coordinated the project. Also participating was President Gerald R. Ford’s son Jack, who accompanied the expedition for the first phase, assisting with several underwater and onboard experiments. (NASA Releases 75— 240, 75— 257)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of two contracts for 356 aluminum hand forgings for Space Shuttle solid-rocket boosters. A $465 935 contract went to Aluminum Co. of America and $62 900 went to Weber Metals & Supply Co. for forward-skirt thrust post fittings, inboard aft-skirt actuator support brackets, aft-skirt splice fittings, and aft-skirt holddown posts. (MSFC Release 75—151)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $1.9-million firm-fixed-price contract to the Martin Marietta Corp. for fabrication, acceptance testing, and delivery of 322 pyrotechnic-initiator controllers (PIC) for the Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters. (MSFC Release 75—182)
Marshall Space Flight Center had selected Moog Inc. Controls Div. to negotiate a cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract totaling $6 685 584 for the design, development, production, and acceptance testing of a thrust-vector control electrical-hydraulic servoactuator on the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster. The servoactuator would control the SRB’s exhaust nozzle. (Marshall Star, 12 Nov 75, 4)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $5 137 000 contract to Mayfair Construction Co. to modify the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) for Space Shuttle operations. The contract provided for modifications to High Bay 3’s extensible work platforms, installation of new checkout cells in High Bay 4, and modifications to the north door of the VAB transfer aisle and related support facilities. (KSC Release 160— 75)
NASA had selected Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio, Tex., as the site for a remote storage facility for 10 to 20% of the 382 kg of lunar material brought back from the moon by the Apollo crews, the Johnson Space Center Roundup reported. All lunar material had previously been stored in JSC’s curatorial facility; the additional site would safeguard against any catastrophe that might affect the material at the main site. Samples at Brooks, a cross section of all lunar materials collected during the Apollo missions, would be held in “dead storage” to keep them in pristine condition for analysis by future generations. (JSC Roundup, 12 Sept 75)
Langley Research Center had awarded General Electric of Phila. a 2.5yr $3.2 million contract to provide an orbital scatterometer for the SEASAT—A spacecraft scheduled for launch in 1978. The scatterometer would measure wind speed and direction. (SBD, 31 Oct 75, 317) During October: Air Force scientists under contract to NASA had completed a study of the physiological effects on man resulting from transfers from one atmosphere to another during the 15—24 July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. The difference between the Soyuz 7031-kg-per-sq-m atmosphere of 30% oxygen and 70% nitrogen and the Apollo’s 3515.5-kg-per-sq-m 100% oxygen represented the transition between 3048 m and 8230 m in altitude. In 1973, scientists, using a hyperbaric chamber to simulate spacecraft environment, had found that volunteer subjects showed symptoms of decompression sickness (the bends) when moving from one atmosphere to the other. During the following year the scientists had found a way to lessen the chance of decompression sickness: The most satisfactory procedure was to increase the time allowed for denitrogenation (breathing 100% oxygen at ground-level pressure). This helped to remove excess nitrogen— cause of the bends—from the body. The Air Force study had helped NASA and Soviet ASTP planners schedule the actual transfers. (ASFC Newsreview, Oct 75, 8)
Goddard Space Flight Center awarded a $20 000 research grant to the University of Florida to establish the feasibility of the electromagnetic wave energy-conversion (EWEC) concept. The EWEC converter used electromagnetic antennas to absorb the sun’s electromagnetic radiation into an array of insulated components and then convert it directly to electricity. The absorber operated similarly to insect antennae and the retina of the eye: Insects communicated by the reception of infrared and other electromagnetic radiation or energy, using their antennae tuned to the proper frequency by nature’s design. Once received, the energy was converted into electrical impulses. (NASA Release 75 — 102) During April—May. NASA conducted Atmospheric Variability Experiment IV and Atmospheric Variability Severe Storms Experiments I and II in cooperation with the U.S. Air Force, Army, National Weather Service, and several universities. Coordinating data collected over the eastern two-thirds of the U.S. by satellites, aircraft, radar, and weather balloons, participants hoped to develop new techniques for predicting where and when tornadoes might strike. The data collected, including information on thunderstorms, updrafts, and wind and cloud data, would be compared with ground-truth observations to determine the relationship between severe storms and their environment. Participating in the experiments were 41 radiosonde stations, 18 radar stations, 7 instrumented aircraft, and 5 meteorological satellites. (MSFC Release 75 — 102) May 1975
Does not include a supplemental request for pay increases, introduced as H.R. 13172 and signed into P.L. 94— 303 on 1 June 1976. The committee also recommended denial of $1 000 000 of the $5 000 000 request for continued studies of the LST, and reduction to $2 000 000 of the $3 000 000 requested for the transition period. The remaining amounts were judged sufficient to complete LST studies. Within the Construction of Facilities category, the committee denied funds requested for construction of the Lunar Curatorial F acil-ity. No funds were to be used for modifying the 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel at Ames Research Center until the committee had reviewed a formal budget request. Reduction in the Research and Program Management request reflected a 10% reduction in the payment of General Services Administration space-rental charges. The committee also recommended language in the bill to permit the replacement of five older aircraft with more modern aircraft for greater efficiency and safety. This would reduce operating costs by $1 300 000 annually. The committee recommended a total appropriation of $925 028 000 for the transition period 1 July through 30 Sept. 1976. This total was $33 872 000 under the total budget request and $122 111 less than the authorization. NASA Transition Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and House-Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) H.R. Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 730.6 700.6 (-30.0) 700.6 (-30.0) Construction of Facilities 14.5 10.8 (-3.8) 10.8 (-3.8) Research & Program Management 213.8 213.8 (0) 213.7 (-0.1) Total 958.9 925.2 (-33.8) 925.0 (-33.9) (H.R. Com Rpt No. 94—313; Budget Chron Hist FY 1976, NASA Ofc of Budget Operations, 16 June 75)
Ground was broken for Marshall Space Flight Center’s x-ray telescope test facility for the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) program. The facility, which would cost $4 million including equipment, would be used to test instruments for the HEAO program as well as to calibrate rocket payloads for x-ray stellar studies and make advance telescope calibrations. The HEAO program included three unmanned scientific satellites to be launched into low earth orbit between 1977 and 1979 to study the invisible light of x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. (Marshall Star, 29 Jan 75, 4)
NASA announced the beginning of a cooperative NASAuniversityindustry program to flight-test a low-cost flight-control system that would improve ride quality, reduce pilot workload, and improve flight safety. The control system—developed and ground-tested by the Univ. of Kansas—was being installed on a Beechcraft 99 commuter airliner for a flight-test program under the direction of NASA’s Flight Research Center. Nearly a third of the aircraft’s control surfaces were controlled by the new automated avionics system, with two-thirds remaining under direct control of the pilot. Any failures in the automated control system could be easily overridden by the pilot, eliminating the need for redundancy in the attitude-control system and permitting mechanization at a much lower cost. With automated controls off, the separate surfaces responded to the pilot’s commands and the control system was essentially that of the Beechcraft airplane. The flight-test program would include functioned tests, envelope expansion, system optimization, and quantitative and qualitative evaluation by the three test pilots. (NASA Release 75—207; FRC Release 22—75)
At the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory’s 50 mw open-jet wind tunnel, engineers had been able to more precisely measure the material and shape endurance of model nosetips for spacecraft and missiles. Using a newly developed flared nozzle with a smoothly decreasing pressure field, and a new technique for reentry simulation, engineers could gradually bring the sample nosetip up to the nozzle mouth, simulating the transition from moderate to maximum temperature and pressure. Previous techniques could show only variations between distinctly different materials; use of the new nozzle could detect subtle differences between very similar materials. (AFSC Release OIP 172.75) During July: The world’s news media commented on the joint U.S.— U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project [see 15—24 July]. A 15 July article in West Germany’s Frankfurter Allgemeine said that “technically the Apollo-Soyuz enterprise will show nothing much.” The reason for the mission had been political since it was agreed upon in 1972. It was “fully in line with the detente and rapprochement policy of the two superpowers.” The astronautic field was particularly useful for propaganda because it could mark the “beginning of an intellectual and scientific exchange of opinion of advantage to both sides.” However, “if one looks. . .at rapprochement in other fields, such as SALT. . . , one must remain skeptical regarding ‘atmospheric’ improvements to be achieved outside the atmosphere of the world.” Milika Sundic, a Yugoslavian commentator, said concerning ASTP, “Nobody doubts its success, or. . .the good intentions and will of the two superpowers.” The technical aspect of the mission was least important, and the political side “constitutes its essence.” The joint undertakings both on earth and in space reflected the superpowers’ belief in a “full equilibrium of forces rather than trust in one another.” This lack of trust was the consequence not only of different systems but different interests which went beyond national borders. The fact that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. were leaders of two military alliances could not lead to greater trust between them. But, “without blocs and without ambitions going beyond national borders, the situation would be. . .more favorable both for the superpowers and for the rest of the world.” One hoped that nobody intended to divide up space along bloc lines and that nobody would misuse it for solving this world’s problems. “Third World countries may not be present at today’s rendezvous in space, but they have a claim on the part played by science in the Soviet-American undertaking.” Regarding their rights on the earth, “the Third World has no intention of renouncing them, and even less of abandoning the fate of peace to the big powers, for peace is indivisible both on earth and in space.” Hungary’s 15 July issue of Nepszabadsag said the joint space flight was a scientific undertaking inseparable from “normalization” between the two states and reflecting the advance of peaceful coexistence. The joint cosmic attempt called attention to the vast possibilities inherent in dynamic scientific cooperation between the two countries in other, no less important, areas. Bulgaria’s 15 July Rabotnichesko said in an editorial that ASTP not only would mark “a new stage in the development of space research and will open up new prospects for cooperation between the U.S.S.R. and U.S.A. but will also be a telling example to be followed by all other states and peoples on the earth. . . .” A 26 July commentary by a Peking correspondent in the People’s Republic of China said that the U.S.-U.S.S.R. handshake in space—despite the show and till the money spent to advertise it— could not “cover up their fierce struggle on earth.” In fact, the two superpowers “regard each other as the enemy in space. They have been contending for military superiority in space ever since the first satellite was launched.” The handshake was but a contention with “each trying to cheat and outwit the other.” Finland’s Karjalaimen called the joint mission “historic” from the point of view of both space technology and world politics. The superpowers had found it necessary to begin together to regulate the world’s conflicts to prevent a world conflagration or wars that could endanger the interests of the superpowers. ASTP was one of the public symbols of this policy. (NCNA, FBIS-PRC, 28July 75, Al; FBIS—Bulgaria, 16 July 75, Cl; FBIS—Hungary, 16 July 75, FI; FBIS—Yugoslavia, 16 July 75, II; FBIS—Finland, 16 July 75, PI)
Cosmic rays—the most energetic particles in the universe—probably originated in supernovas within our own galaxy, Dr. Floyd W. Stecker, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, wrote in an article in Physical Review Letters. Dr. Stecker had based his conclusions on data from NASA’s Explorer 48 (Small Astronomy Satellite—B, launched 16 Nov. 1972). Scientists had been speculating on the source of cosmic radiation since its discovery at the turn of the century, when it was thought to be identical with gamma rays. With the advent of radio astronomy and the rapid development of new experimental techniques and instrumentation, supernovas had been considered a possible source of cosmic rays; however, other scientists believed cosmic radiation had extragalactic origins, such as quasars. Explorer 48, measuring cosmic-ray intensity without interference from earth’s atmosphere, had been able to obtain the gamma-ray information needed to complement ground-based radio-astronomy data. The SAS-B scientific team at GSFC had measured a large amount of gamma radiation coming from the Milky Way galaxy, the most intense coming from the center of the galaxy. As gamma rays resulted primarily from collisions of cosmic rays with interstellar gas, and the detailed Explorer 48 data had identified the direction from which most of the gamma rays came, Dr. Stecker could pinpoint an area of intense activity midway between the galactic center and the earth. The active area was a region containing numerous interstellar gas clouds—but not enough to account for all the gamma-ray production—as well as a large number of supernova remnants. Dr. Stecker deduced that cosmic rays were to be found in the same regions as supernova remnants and in proportion to their number. (Stecker, Physical Review Letters, 21 July 75, 188—90; NASA Release 75—221)
NASA announced the award of a $287-million contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to supply liquid hydrogen for the government’s East Coast requirements over a 12.5-yr period beginning 1 July 1975. The liquid hydrogen would be used primarily in Space Shuttle engine testing at the National Space Technology Laboratories and for Space Shuttle launches. (NASA Release 75—192) During June: Activities continued at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project launch in July. During the week of 2—6 June, KSC engineers and technicians checked the Apollo spacecraft for propellant leaks, filled the liquid-oxygen storage tank at the pad, loaded oxygen and nitrogen onto the docking module, and installed conax valves on the Saturn IB first stage. Spacecraft ordnance was installed 9—13 June and the command module was checked for leaks and prepared for hypergolic loading. Also during the week the liquid-hydrogen tank was filled. Prime crew members—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton—and backup crew members—Jack R. Lousma, Alan L. Bean, and Ronald E. Evans—arrived at KSC on 10 June for command and docking-module crew compartment fit and functional checks. The crew also familiarized themselves with stowage arrangements. (Spaceport News, 12 June 75, 5; 26 June 75, 3)
The Washington Post reported that, after launch of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, more than 1800 persons would lose their jobs. With the liftoff came the end of the Apollo and Saturn programs which had begun 25 May 1961 with President Kennedy’s request for a national commitment to a lunar-landing program. Layoffs would cut the Kennedy Space Center workforce to less than 8500, down from a peak of28 000. Of those who would lose their jobs, 1100 worked for NASA contractors— Rocketdyne Division pf Rockwell, Boeing Co., Chrysler Corp., and McDonnell Douglas Corp.—who built and mated the stages of the Saturn launch vehicle to the Apollo spacecraft. Another 700 worked for contractors such as International Business Machines Inc., TRW Inc., Grumman Corp., Aerojet General Corp., and Rockwell International Corp. Only 100 launch-operations contract employees would remain to help plan the launches of the Space Shuttle. The Shuttle launch force would begin to increase in size in 1977, but would never reach the size of the Saturn team because of increased automation. (O’Toole, W Post, 15 July 75, A9)
NASA announced the appointment of David R. Scott as Director of Flight Research Center to replace Lee R. Scherer, who had become Director of Kennedy Space Center. Scott had been an astronaut on Gemini 8 (16 March 1966), on Apollo 9 (3 — 13 March 1969), and on lunar landing mission Apollo 15 (26 July—7 Aug. 1971). After leaving the astronaut corps in 1972, Scott served as technical assistant to the Apollo Program Manager at Johnson Space Center, and as special assistant for mission operations and government-furnished equipment in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. (NASA anno, 18 April 75)
A NASA-developed low-cost highly efficient solar thermal-energy collector and a ball bearing design with a life expectancy 20 times greater than that of present ball bearings had been selected to receive Industrial Research magazine’s award for two of the 100 most significant new products developed during the year, NASA announced. Developed at Lewis Research Center in cooperation with Honeywell, Inc., the solar collector absorbed 20% more solar-radiated energy and produced a greater flow of high-temperature fluids. The flat-plate collector combined an efficient flow scheme, insulation, dual antireflective glass covers, and black chrome absorption coating to provide heating and cooling, with low cost and low pollution, for both commercial buildings and homes. LeRC developed the bearing with General Electric Co. and Industrial Tectonics, Inc., using computer analysis for maximum performance and reliability. Advanced techniques for producing and melting steel provided a cleaner, longer lived material for the bearing, and advanced fabrication and machining methods contributed greater accuracies and surface finishes to the bearing rings. The bearing was lubricated through holes in the bearing’s split inner ring rather than by a conventional lubricant jet pointed at the bearing rings. This advanced bearing design was expected to replace mainshaft-thrust ball bearings presently used in large turbine engines, pumping systems, electric utilities, and petroleum pipeline operations. (NASA Release 75—258)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $5 768 612 costplus-incentive-fee contract to Sperry Rand Corp. for design, development, test, and delivery of 37 multiplexer-demultiplexers (MDM) for the Space Shuttle rocket boosters. The MDM, an electronic device that permitted sending or receiving more than one message, signal, or unit of information on a single communication channel, was housed in the solid rocket boosters’ integrated electronics assembly. It would process signals for such functions as ignition, thrust vector control, release of nose cap and frustum, jettison of solid rocket motor nozzles, detachment of parachutes, and tum-on of recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—154)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the selection of Bendix Corp. Guidance Systems Div. for negotiations leading to a contract for integrated electronic assemblies for the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster. The cost-plus-incentive-fee contract would cover design, development, test and evaluation, and fabrication of assemblies and assorted test equipment for the first 6 Shuttle flights. The initial contract would call for 33 units, including flight articles, spares, and development and test versions, with delivery to begin in 1976. Each solid rocket booster would have two assembly units, one forward and one aft. Ignition commands would route from the Orbiter through the aft assembly to the forward assembly. During launch, the aft assembly would route commands from the Orbiter to the thrust-vector control system. The forward assembly would release the nose cap and frustum, jettison the solid rocket nozzle, detach the parachutes from the solid rocket booster, and turn on recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—106)
Marshall Space Flight Center had resumed acoustic testing of a 6.4%-scale model of the Space Shuttle to provide information needed in designing the Shuttle and its launch facilities, MSFC announced. The tests would also produce data on effects of hot exhaust gases on the aft portion of the Shuttle immediately after ignition. Data from earlier testing of the model, which included the liquid-fueled engines and solid rocket motors, had alerted designers that special provisions would be needed to deflect hot gases out of the solid rocket boosters away from the facility fuel lines near the launch pad. A pad design based on this analysis had been tested and proven. During the tests, which had begun originally in August 1974, the model was held in a test stand while its engines were fired from 6 to 10 sec. (MSFC Release 75—205) During September: NASA had invited nearly 5000 scientists worldwide to propose experiments for a possible 6-yr mission to Uranus, beginning with a November 1979 launch. The mission, which could include a swing by Neptune, was being studied for inclusion in NASA’s FY 1977 budget request. A mission to Uranus and Neptune would mean that every planet in the solar system except Pluto would have been probed by a U.S. spacecraft by 1988. The spacecraft itself would be adapted directly from the Mariner probe now under development at Jet Propulsion Laboratory for a planned 1977 mission to Saturn; like Mariner-Satum, the Uranus mission would use the gravity of Jupiter to hurl the spacecraft on toward the more remote planet. If the spacecraft remained healthy after it investigated Uranus, it would use the gravity of that planet to fly on to Neptune, more than 1.6 billion km deeper into space. (GSFC Goddard News, Sept 75, 2; UPI, NYT, 4 Sept 75, 20) October 1975
Marshall Space Flight Center plans for the FY 1975 reductioninforce had been revised, MSFC announced. The target date for issuance of RIF notices to MSFC employees had been delayed from mid-January to 29 Jan. with an effective date of 14 Mar. The 2-wk delay resulted from the need for an additional decrease in the end-of-FY 1975 personnel ceiling, from 4145 to 4113. This further reduction was MSFC’s share of the government-wide reduction of 40 000 employees called for by President Ford in 1974. (MSFC Release 75—6)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented 23 awards to Marshall Space Flight Center employees and contractor personnel for contributions to the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission (15—26 July). Ellery B. May, former manager of the Saturn Program Office at MSFC, received NASA’s highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal. Exceptional Service Medals were awarded to 14 MSFC employees; Public Service Awards went to six contractor employees active in the ASTP mission. The Group Achievement Award went to the ASTP Experiments Team and the Stress Corrosion Review Team. ASTP astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton, as well as NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. George M. Low, Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight John F. Yard-ley, and ASTP Program Director Chester M. Lee, attended the ceremony honoring MSFC workers who had provided the Saturn launch vehicle as well as 10 of the 27 onboard experiments for the mission. (MSFC Release 75 — 196; Marshall Star, 17 Sept 75, 1—2)
Lee R. Scherer assumed the duties of Director of Kennedy Space Center, succeeding Dr. Kurt H. Debus, who retired in October 1974. Scherer had been Flight Research Center Director since 1971 and, before that, Assistant Director for Lunar Programs and manager of the Lunar Orbiter program at NASA Hq. (KSC Release 17—75)
The Air Force announced successful test flight of an F— 111D equipped with a turbofan jet engine having all-composite third-stage fan blades 40% lighter than conventional titanium blades. This was the first military operational evaluation of a rotating structural engine component made of composite materials. (AFSC Release OIP 214.75)
The computer aboard Landsat 2 (launched 22 Jan.) was the most advanced of its type ever flown on an unmanned NASA satellite, NASA announced. Able to handle up to 55 ground-station commands controlling spacecraft operations for up to 24 hrs, the compact digital computer was a forerunner of the NASA Standard Space Computer that will be used in a wide variety of unmanned missions. Managed by Goddard Space Flight Center, the standard space computer program was part of an agency-wide program to develop standardized satellite components, both to reduce costs and to increase reliability. The program also covers other spacecraft hardware such as nickel-cadmium batteries, transponders, attitude-control thrusters, pyrotechnic initiators, silicon solar cells, and tape recorders. (NASA Release 75 —85)
A team of Federal and university scientists were using three instrumented aircraft and an elaborate ground network to construct a threedimensional map of the atmosphere’s electrical fields around Kennedy Space Center and to determine the conditions under which a launch penetrating these fields would trigger a lightning strike. By July the team hoped to be able to predict what the electrical conditions would be at the launch pad 10 to 20 min before liftoff. The project, directed by the Dept, of Commerce’s Environmental Research Laboratories and funded by NASA, included scientists from NASA, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Naval Research Laboratory, N. Mex. Inst, of Mining and Technology, and Univ. of Ariz. The experimenters would conduct a month of aircraft flights under and around various convective clouds, measuring electrical fields and making penetrations of frozen cloud anvils—cirrus clouds swept off the tops of thunderstorms by upper level winds. In addition, data from the mapping ground network—24 electrical-field-measuring stations installed around KSC by NOAA in 1973—were fed into a computer whose video component displayed a map of the area and ground stations, total electrical activity in nearby storms, weather radar contours of precipitation, electrical-field contours, and the positions of lightning strikes. The project was a continuation of one begun for NASA by NOAA after the Apollo 12 launch on 12 Nov. 1969 when lightning struck the spacecraft, shutting off the spacecraft’s electrical power and setting off numerous alarms. The spacecraft automatically switched to backup battery power while the crew restored the primary power system. (NOAA Release 75-91; A&A 69, 372-378)
Marshall Space Flight Center issued a request for quotations from industry for development of a flat conductor-cable wiring system suitable for use in residences and commercial establishments. Surface mounting, a feature of the flat cable System originated by NASA to reduce the size and weight of wiring harness in space capsules, would eliminate the need for routing wires in walls, ceilings, and floors because it could be covered by paneling, tile, or even wallpaper. Use of the flat wiring would reduce costs of wiring new construction and permit savings in renovating, remodeling, and rewiring of existing buildings. The successful proposer would develop a surface-mounted baseboard system using a cable 63.5 mm wide; total thickness of the baseboard—channel, airspace, and cover— would be about 11 mm, thickness of the thinnest lumber baseboard strips in use. (MSFC Release 75—257)
A terrestrial solar-energy recording system now installed at Marshall Space Flight Center would provide accurate data on sunfall for use in developing solar-energy measuring systems, MSFC announced. Designed and built by International Business Machines Corp. as part of the center’s earth-based solar-power activities, the monitor would use a sun tracker and stationary sensors to measure and record solar energy. The 203-cm by 178-cm instrument included a pyrheliometer to measure energy coming directly from the solar disc and 2 pyranom-eters to measure direct and scattered energy from any direction in its hemispheric field of view. The system could also evaluate the ability of developmental devices to convert or reflect solar energy. Collected data were recorded on tape for computer analysis. (MSFC Release 75-168)
Total does not include a supplemental authorization for increased pay costs introduced and considered as H.R. 13172. For the transition period 1 July to 30 Sept. 1976, the committee recommended decreasing NASA’s total budget request of $958 900 000 to $929 900 000. The requested $730 600 000 for research and development was reduced to $704 600 000, leaving NASA management to apportion the $26 million reduction. The committee reduced funds requested for construction of facilities from $14 500 000 to $11 500 000 in a series of minor economies. (Sen Com on Aero & Space Sci Rpt 94-103)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory had awarded a $20-mi]lion contract to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. for design and development of Seasat— A, an ocean survey satellite that would circle the earth 14 times a day and view 95% of the surface every 36 hrs. Scheduled for launch in 1978, Seasat would record radar imagery of waves and ice fields, ocean topography, tides, and currents, and would measure wave height, length, and direction; force and direction of sea-surface winds; and temperatures of the sea surface and the air/sea interface. (IT Star, 21 Nov 75, A2; Av Wk, 8 Dec 75, 6; SBD, 21 Nov 75, 118)
A telescope aboard NASA’s Oao 3 Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (named Copernicus and launched 21 Aug. 1972) was observing three nearby stars—epsilon Eridani, tau Ceti, and epsilon Indi—-for signs of other civilizations that might be trying to contact earth with laser beams. The telescope had scanned the first star in November 1974 for 14 orbits while the spectrometer scanned the ultraviolet spectrum for potential laser signals to earth. The data were being analyzed and scientists were planning to scan tau Ceti and epsilon Indi again during the summer and fall of 1975. (NASA Release 75—130)
NASA’s Remotely Piloted Research Vehicle (RPRV) was being equipped with landing gear to enable it to land under control of a pilot on the ground, Flight Research Center announced. Previously helicopters and parachutes had been used in midair recovery of the vehicles. Developed by. FRC, the RPRV—a scale-model airplane up to 9 m long—was an economical and safe way to test advanced aircraft. After air launch of the RPRV, a test pilot in a ground-based cockpit used flight controls and instruments to “fly” the RPRV through maneuvers, while a camera provided visual information. First application of the landing gear would be for a spin test of a 3/8-scale model of the Air Force F—15 fighter. (FRC Release 3—75) .
Dr. John F. Clark, Goddard Space Flight Center Director, and Dr. James W. Smith, president of Greenbelt Homes, Inc., signed a cooperative agreement to install experimental solar heating units in four four-family housing units in Greenbelt, Md. During the first phase of the project, all four of the units would be instrumented to measure heat loss and fuel-consumption characteristics, and two of the four would be fully insulated. Based on the cost-effectiveness of the first phase, the two insulated buildings would be equipped with solar heating units designed to augment existing hot-water radiator systems. The remaining two units would serve as control for comparison. The solar units, which would be designed at GSFC, would be installed in time for the 1975—1976 heating season. (Goddard News, March 75, 1—2; GHI manager’s ofc, interview, 5 Oct 1976)
A prototype of a flexible tunnel to connect the Space Shuttle airlock with the forward end of the Spacelab was being tested at Marshall Space Flight Center. The tunnel would provide a pressurized passageway for crew members and scientists to move to and from the orbiting laboratory without spacesuits. The flexible circular tunnel, built by Goodyear Rubber Corp., would accordion-fold to 0.6 m and extend to a length of more than 4.3 m. Made rigid by steel rings, the tunnel was constructed of layers of aluminum foil, Capran film, and nylon cloth covered by a spongy meteoroid shield. MSFC engineers were testing the tunnel, which would be exposed to the space environment when the Orbiter bay doors were opened, for structural strength, airtight integrity, and materials compatibility. (MSFC Release 75—63)
The House of Representatives’ Committee on Appropriations reported out H.R. 8070, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Independent Agencies Appropriations Bill for FY 1976. The committee proposed the continuation of the Space Shuttle and Viking projects; various planetary, weather, and scientific satellites; and further development of a strong aeronautics program. No new starts were proposed. The committee also directed deferral of the Pioneer—Venus mission for 1 year to permit a budget-priority decision in 1977 between the Large Space Telescope and Pioneer—Venus. The committee recommended reducing the $57 600 000 requested for Pioneer—Venus to $9 200 000 to maintain a management capability during the 1-yr deferral. NASA FY 1976 Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and House-Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) H.R. Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 2678.4 2687.2 (+8.8) 2629.0 (-49.4) Construction of Facilities 84.6 99.1 (+14.5) 82.1 (-2.5) Research & Program Management* 776.0 776.0 (0) 775.5 (-0.5) Totals 3539.0 3562.3 (+23.3) 3486.6 (-52.4)
Press briefings on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project were held at Johnson Space Center. ASTP participants would be conducting experiments in space sciences, life sciences, and applications, ASTP Project Scientist Dr. Thomas Giuli said at an experiments briefing. The five space-science experiments included a soft x-ray experiment to study radiation by scanning across the celestial mode, pointing at known discrete sources in the soft part of the spectrum from 2 kev to 0.1 kev, and investigating 10 specific x-ray sources known to emit only in regions below 2 kev. A helium-glow experiment would investigate temperature and density of the interstellar medium in the vicinity of our solar system by observing two special frequencies of extreme ultraviolet light emitted from the sun after they traveled into interstellar space, hit the interstellar medium, and were reflected back again. Other space-science experiments included a study of the sun’s outer atmosphere during an artificial eclipse created by maneuvering the Apollo spacecraft. During the “eclipse,” the Soyuz crew would photograph the sun’s corona. Among the earth environmental and applications studies was an experiment to measure neutral atomic oxygen and neutral atomic nitrogen of the earth’s upper atmosphere. Another experiment would try to devise a simple means of monitoring the aerosol content of the earth’s atmosphere. A water-resources management experiment, planned and coordinated with the government of India, would photograph the Himalayan area to map drainage patterns and water-reservoir locations. Life-science experiments included a study to observe optical sensations from cosmic rays experienced by the crew, an investigation of mutation in cells grown in space, and studies of the effect of space flight on the ability of microbes to infect humans and of changes in the human immunity system to resist infections under space flight conditions. . At a mission profile briefing, Kenneth A. Young of JSC’s Mission Planning and Analysis Div. said that plans called for a 9-day Apollo mission beginning 7.5 hrs after the launch of Soyuz by the U.S.S.R. The planned rendezvous period would be 2 days, with docking scheduled for the 30th inertial orbit, or third day in flight, of the Apollo spacecraft. Following much negotiation, U.S. and Soviet mission planners determined that the two spacecraft would dock over Soviet territory, providing real-time telemetry coverage for the Soviet Union, but at a location where NASA’s Ats 6 communications satellite could provide communications coverage to the U.S. The first handshake would take place over Spain. The spacecraft would undock on the 5th day and perform several joint experiments while separated. Soyuz was scheduled to land the following day. Apollo would continue unilateral experiments in orbit before landing at the end of the 9th day in space. Astronaut Richard H. Truly said, during a joint crew activities briefing, that while the Apollo and Soyuz were docked, all communications would be conducted in the language of the listener regardless of the nationality of the speaker. (Transcript)
Appointment of Dr. S. Ichtiaque RasooL special assistant to the NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, to be the Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science became effective. In that position Dr. Rasool would be primary adviser to Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science. He would also serve as chairman of the Space Science Steering Committee, responsible for drawing skills and resources of the nation’s scientific community into NASA programs. Dr. Rasool had joined NASA in January 1965 as senior research scientist at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies; in 1971 he was named Deputy Director for Planetary Programs, serving until 1974 when he became special assistant to the Deputy Associate Administrator. (NASA anno, 22 Aug 75) 3 August—6 November: Ariel 5, a U.S.-U.K. cooperative satellite launched 15 Oct. 1974 to study galactic and extragalactic x-rays, detected weak cosmic x-ray emissions from the constellation Orion on 3 Aug. The emissions, subsequently confirmed by NASA’s Explorer 53 (SAS 3 Small Astronomy Satellite launched 7 May 1975), steadily increased in intensity until they were five times greater than any observed to date. New York Times reporter Walter Sullivan quoted Dr. Terry Matilsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist, as saying that when the emissions were first observed “we couldn’t believe it.” Sas 3—operated by Goddard Space Flight Center—was able to pinpoint the location of the emissions to within 1 or 2 arc-min. With this clue scientists hoped to explain the phenomenon using ground-based optical and radio telescopes. Observatories around the world had been alerted and were trying to pinpoint the source. The Philadelphia Inquirer reported MIT’s Dr. Saul A. Rappaport as speculating that the emissions probably had been caused by masses of material falling from a large star into an extremely dense neutron star or black hole. The falling matter would heat up enough to emit bursts of x-rays and visible light. Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, reported 6 Nov. to the House Committee on Science and Technology’s Subcommittee on Science and Applications that the Explorer 53 observations had identified the optical counterpart of the x-ray emissions as a faint, otherwise normal-looking star that had brightened 100 times over previous observations. Dr. Hinners repeated Dr. Rappaport’s theory and told the subcommittee that, because a similar brightening of this star had been observed in 1917, it was being classified as a recurrent nova. (1977 NASA authorization hearing transcripts, vol 1, part 1; Sullivan, NYT, 17 Aug 75, 21; AP, P Inq, 31 Aug 75)
Jackson M. Balch, director of NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL)—formerly the Mississippi Test Facility—announced plans tO'retire. As bead of the test facility for 10 yrs, Balch managed testing of Saturn V rockets for both the Apollo and Skylab programs. (NASA anno, 22 July 75) 22 —23 July: Nearly 200 NASA managers, engineers, and scientists— headed by Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, Langley Research Center Director, and Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.—met at Kennedy Space Center for the Viking launch-readiness review. Those attending—including Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, and Dr. Noel Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science—heard status reports on the launch vehicle, spacecraft, and launch and tracking preparations. Everything was “in excellent shape” for the 11 Aug. launch of the nation’s first mission to land unmanned spacecraft on Mars, said Martin. “We still have three weeks of work ahead, but time to do it in an orderly fashion, and no significant open items.” Viking—A would be mated with the Titan— Centaur launch vehicle on 28 July, followed by specialized tests, including an operational readiness test 6 Aug. during which the entire NASA and contractor Viking team would go through the countdown and several hours of simulated flight. Problems discussed during the review included the x-band radio on the Viking—B Orb iter in which a defective coaxial cable had been replaced. A leak discovered in the Viking—A gas chromatograph mass spectrometer after sterilization was found to be so small— 0.000864 cubic centimeters per day—that it would not affect the mission. (NASA Releases 75—210, 75—216; KSC Release 156—75)
If NASA had unlimited funding, “I would mpve fairly quickly on a manned station because that will become an important outpost foy anything that we do in space,” Dr. Geprge M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in an interview with the San Diego Union. Dr. Low added that he would move quicker in launching a space telescope and bringing back soil samples from Mars, “both enormously important from a scientific point of view.” Dr. Low expressed concern that “we really aren’t being inventive enough. We haven’t discovered a new propulsion system.” All NASA’s rockets so far, including the Space Shuttle, had Used conventional means of propulsion, and with it man was limited. Dr. Low said that the moon landing “was enormously difficult because we are tied to chemical propulsion systems.” NASA was experimenting with solar electric propulsion but to date no one had invented a fission or antigravity system. (San Diego Union, 8 June 75) On 14 June at 9:30 am local time (12:30 am EDT) Venera 10 was successfully launched toward Venus from Baykonur Cosmodroipe. Tass reported that “in design and purpose it is analogous to the ‘Venera-9’ station launched on June 8” and that all spacecraft systems were functioning normally. Venera 10 was also expected to reach Venus in October. In an interview 17 June with the Christian Science Monitor, Boris N. Petrov, chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of International Cooperation in the Study and Exploration of Outer Space, revealed that the Venera mission called for a landing rather than just a flyby. (GSFC SSR, 30 June 75;FBIS—Sov, 8—17 June 75; Pond, CSM, 17 June 75,1; W Post, 8—17 June 75; NYT, 8—17 June 75)
NASA would store $900 million worth of surplus Apollo-Satum hardware instead of scrapping it as planned earlier, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague, Chairman of the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology. The flight hardware would be stored in a manner to minimize costs and to permit restoration, if required, to flight condition. Dr. Fletcher also wrote that, as Space Shuttle launch-readiness schedule and program costs required, NASA would convert Launch Complex 39 and its supporting facilities to handle the Space Shuttle. As requested by the Committee during a 25 March meeting with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight John F. Yardley, NASA would supply the Committee with a summary of options for missions that could be flown using the remaining Apollo-Satum flight hardware. Dr. Fletcher also stated that, because of the “considerable cost” to the government of storing the equipment, NASA would like to discuss the matter with the committee once again during the FY 1977 authorization hearings. (Text, letter Fletcher to Teague, 9 April 1975; UPI, NYT, 17 April 75, 7)
Kennedy Space Center had issued $7.5 million in awards and contracts to small businesses during the first 9 mo of FY 1975, bringing the total awarded to small businesses since FY 1970 to $61 million. The KSC set-aside program required that all procurement requests exceeding $2500 be reviewed by the center’s small-business specialist to determine if they could be set aside exclusively for small businesses. In addition, KSC had successfully participated in a program aimed at awarding contracts to minority-owned firms, with $7 million in awards made since the program began. (KSC Release 70-75) The scientists agreed that the missions under consideration could be undertaken jointly by NASA and the European Space Research Organization: ESRO would have primary responsibility for the spacecraft, and NASA would provide the launch vehicle. (NASA Activities, June 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the formation of a solar heating and cooling task team to support requests made by the Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA). The task team, under the leadership of Donald R. Bowden, would direct MSFC’s role in ERDA’s program to demonstrate heating and cooling applications of solar energy. The team would acquire examples of existing solar heating and cooling systems and would direct additional development of these systems to increase efficiency and lower costs. ERDA had authorized approximately $50 million to MSFC for work which would cover 5 yr ana use 100 persons at MSFC. (MSFC Release 75-130).
The Vertical Motion Simulator (VMS), an aeronautical facility designed to reproduce up-and-down and sideways motions of aircraft during takeoff and landing, was being built at Ames Research Center, NASA announced. Costing about $3.5 million, the VMS would move as much as 18 m in height and 12 m sideways, accurately simulating flare and touchdown. Practice in the simulator would enable pilots to cope better with the complexities of flying sophisticated aircraft such as short takeoff and landing (STOL) and vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) types. (NASA Release 75—224)
Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded contracts worth $500 000 each to Martin Marietta’s Denver Division and to TRW Systems Group, to define the Spacelab payload called AMPS (atmospheric, magnetospheric, and plasmas in space). The definition studies would emphasize flexibility, low cost, and an evolutionary approach to environmental research. One of the first payloads considered for Spacelab, AMPS had been conceived as a manned orbiting scientific laboratory to study the nearspace environment of earth and the effects on it of changes in incident solar energy and of emissions from earth. Instrumentation would include a laser beam to define the composition of the various constituents of earth’s atmosphere. Missions would last from 7 to 30 days, with extensive involvement of the scientist crews in conducting the experiments. (MSFC Release 75— 239; SBD, 20 Nov 75, 108)
In a letter to Rep. Don Fuqua, chairman of the House of Representatives’ Committee on Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher summarized options for missions that could use the remaining Apollo-Saturn flight hardware. Options included an earth-orbital mission as an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project backup; a Skylab revisit; an Apollo geosynchronous mission; a lunar orbital mission; an earth-orbital mission to visit a Soviet space station; and a manned-satellite inspector. The hardware could also be used to launch a U.S. unmanned space station carrying a large U.S.S.R. payload, a large orbiting reflector, a space solar-power demonstration, a planetary probe, or multiple payloads. Another possibility might be to carry an Apollo spacecraft into space aboard the Space Shuttle to provide a crew-rescue capability or to serve as a habitable module, to demonstrate a Shuttle-serviced free-flying module, or to inspect and service orbiting satellites. Dr. Fletcher’s letter added that he did not foresee that funds would be available to support additional Apollo-Saturn missions in the period preceding the Space Shuttle operation. The subcommittee at a 25 March meeting had asked NASA to summarize the options when the agency had sought permission to dispose of surplus Apollo-Saturn equipment [see 9 April]. (Text, letter from Fletcher to Fuqua and attachment “Conceptual Flight Possibilities for Satum-Apollo Hardware,” 15 Sept 75)
The first radar probes of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede had been made by Dr. Richard M. Goldstein of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA announced. Ganymede, at the time some 600 million km distant from earth, was found to have a rougher surface than the inner planets Mercury, Mars, or Venus. Dr. Goldstein scanned Ganymede three or four times on each of six nights in August 1974, using the 64-m antenna at JPL’s Goldstone station of the Deep Space Network; the radar employed a 400-kw microwave beam at a frequency of 12.6 cm. Writing in Science magazine, Dr. Goldstein and co-investigator George A. Morris said the most likely surface of Ganymede was rocky metallic material imbedded in a matrix of ice. Such a surface could be smooth with a top layer of ice rubble but would appear rough to the radar because the ice would be transparent to the microwave beam. The theory was particularly interesting in view of the finding by the Pioneer 10 and 11 flybys (3 Dec. 1973 and 3 Dec. 1974) that Jupiter itself seemed totally gaseous, with no solid surface to produce a radar echo. The JPL scientists theorized that Ganymede was probably meteoritic in origin. (NASA Release 75 — 170; Goldstein et al., Science, 20 June 75, 1211-1212)
Marshall Space Flight Center observed the 15th anniversary of the transfer of personnel, facilities, and responsibilities from the Department of Defense’s U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency to NASA. The center had been formally dedicated at a ceremony 8 Sept. 1960 attended by President Dwight D. Eisenhower; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator; Alabama Governor John Patterson; MSFC Director Dr. Wemher von Braun; and Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the statesman, soldier, and Nobel Peace Prize winner for whom the center was named. With the transfer had gone responsibility for continued development of the Redstone and the Saturn I; soon to come would be the Saturn IY and Y launch vehicles that would carry U.S. astronauts into earth orbit and, eventually, to the moon. More than 100 000 employees in 12 000 companies across the U.S. worked during the peak of developing the Saturn family and its 31 launches with 100% launch success rate. MSFC developed the Lunar Roving Vehicle that carried moon-based astronauts several km from the landing site across rugged lunar terrain. MSFC was also responsible for the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. Launched into earth orbit 14 May 1973, Skylab 1 carried other MSFC developments including solar-observation instruments, the docking adapter, and many experiments. Three three-man crews occupied the space station for a total of 171 days. To date, as the last Saturn booster was preparing to carry three U.S. astronauts to an earth-orbital rendezvous with two Soviet cosmonauts for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, MSFC was heavily involved in development of the Space Transportation System, including the Space Shuttle, Space Tug, Spacelab, and related payloads. MSFC employees were also working on the development of solar heating and cooling systems and other applications projects. In a message to MSFC Director Dr. William P. Lucas, President Gerald R. Ford said that “From its inception, the Marshall center has continued in the forefront of this Nation’s tremendous advancement in the exploration of space. We look forward to more vital contributions . . . from the Marshall center in the years ahead as the United States continues to lead the way in using space for the benefit of all mankind.” (MSFC Releases 75—131, 75—140; Historical Origins of The George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC Historical Monograph No. 1, Dec 1960)
Sea Satellite (SEASAT)—a new program, approved in the FY 1975 NASA authorization, to monitor the oceans and provide continuous weather and sea condition reports—was announced by NASA. SEASAT-A, a proof-of-concept mission scheduled for 1978 launch, would carry sensors to measure wave heights, current directions, surface wind directions, and surface temperatures. Objectives of the initial mission were to disseminate these data to users concerned about weather predictions; to route shipping to avoid storms, adverse currents, and ice fields; and to provide coastal disaster warnings. SEASAT—A would also accumulate scientific data on the curvature of the oceans; ocean circulation; transport of mass, heat, and nutrients by surface currents; and the interaction between air and sea. SEASAT would be managed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory with Langley Research Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, Wallops Flight Center, and JPL each having responsibility for one of the four sensors-off-the-shelf NASA or Air Force spacecraft to which a sensor module would be attached. Existing tracking facilities and support hardware would also be used. Cost of the SEASAT—A mission, as currently planned, was $58.2 million. (NASA Release 75—1)
NASA issued a request for proposals from industry on a space-station systems analysis study. The proposals would be due 26 Jan. 1976. Two $700 000 contracts would be issued in April for parallel 18-mo concept studies, one to be managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, the other by Johnson Space Center. Contractors would study low-orbit and synchronous-orbit facilities, to begin module construction in the mid-1980s. The space station would be used as a test facility and construction base to support the manufacture and assembly in space of various kinds of space structures—e.g., generation of electric power by large solar collectors and transmission to earth by microwave antennas. Other uses would be the retrieval and repair of automated spacecraft, or storage and transfer of fuel and other expendables. Elements of the station would be compatible with the Shuttle cargo bay, 18.3 m long by 4.6 m in diameter. (NASA Release 75-310; MSFC Release 75 -262; JSC Release 75 -99)
The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew was making “excellent progress” recovering from lung ailments that developed when the crew inhaled nitrogen tetroxide during Apollo reentry [see 15—24 July], Johnson Space Center Director of Life Sciences Richard S. Johnston told a crew-status press briefing at JSC. Johnston told reporters that, if the crew continued to progress, they would be released from Tripler Hospital on 29 July. However, their activities would be restricted for an additional 10 days to protect them from undue exposure to large crowds, to ensure continued improvement, and to avoid respiratory complications. (ASTP Transcript PC-59)
Viking 1 was successfully launched at 5:22 pm EDT from Eastern Test Range’s Launch Pad 41 on a Titan Ill-Centaur launch vehicle. The launch, first scheduled for 11 Aug., had been postponed until 14 Aug. to replace a faulty thrust-vector control valve on the launch vehicle [see 11 Aug.]. A second delay had occurred when the spacecraft’s internal batteries had discharged to 9 volts, well below safe limits [see 13 Aug.]. The spacecraft, Viking A, had been removed from the launch vehicle and replaced by Viking B. The range safety officer had issued a waiver of standard procedures and permitted removal and installation of the spacecraft without detanking and depressurizing the launch vehicle, thus allowing the launch to be rescheduled for 20 Aug. Viking 1, consisting of a 2360-kg orbiter attached to an 1180-kg lander, was placed in a trajectory to Mars within the designed 3-sigma limits. Nearly 35 min after trajectory insertion, the Centaur stage separated from the spacecraft. The solar panels were deployed and oriented toward the sun, and the biocap—a container used to hermetically seal the lander while in earth’s atmosphere—was jettisoned. On 27 Aug. at 2:30 pm EDT a trajectory-correction maneuver targeted the spacecraft to its Mars orbital insertion point. By 28 Aug. all systems aboard the spacecraft were operating normally and in a cruise mode. Travel time to Mars was estimated at 10 mo, with a possible Mars landing on 4 July 1976, the height of the U.S. Bicentennial. A second spacecraft, Viking B, had been scheduled for a 1 Sept, launch to arrive at Mars in 12 mos. The Viking missions supported NASA’s planetary program goals of exploring the solar system and gaining knowledge of its origin and evolution, and of the origin and evolution of life and of the dynamic processes that shaped man’s terrestrial environment. Specific purpose of the two Viking missions was to increase knowledge of Mars by making observations from Mars orbit and by direct measurements in the atmosphere and on the surface, with particular emphasis on biological, chemical, and environmental data on past or present existence of life on the planet. Viking 1 was targeted to land in the Martian equatorial region, in a very low area resembling the fluvial plain of a dry river bed—an ideal site to search for organic material. Alternate sites for both Viking landers had been selected and there would be some flexibility until insertion into Mars orbit, after which the available band of landing sites would be narrowed by orbital geometry. Once in orbit, the orbiter would survey prospective landing sites; when the decision on where to land had been made, retrorockets would separate the lander from the orbiter and the lander would descend to the surface, sequentially braked by its aeroshell’s drag, by a parachute, and finally by its retrorockets. After landing, the science instrumentation would be activated and exploration would begin; data would be transmitted back to earth by the lander radio or through a radio-relay link with the orbiter. The orbiter’s main body, an octagonal ring 46 cm high with alternating 140- and 51-cm sides, consisted of 16 modular compartments. The entire structure was 10 m across the tips of the extended solar panels and 3.3 m high from the lander attachment points to the launch vehicle. Besides propulsion, navigation and control, communications, power, computer, and data-storage subsystems, the orbiter carried its science instrumentation mounted on a scan platform that could move with 2 degrees of freedom. The three science instruments were twin high-resolution, slow-scan TV cameras; an infrared atmospheric water detector; and a high-resolution infrared thermal mapper for detecting surface-temperature variations. The lander was a six-sided aluminum and titanium box 46.2 cm deep and enclosed top and bottom by cover plates; it measured 3 m wide and 2 m high from the footpads to the top of the S-band antenna. The six sides measured 109 cm and 56 cm alternately, with the three landing legs attached to the three narrower sides. The three retrorockets were mounted at 120° intervals on the lander; generating up to 2838 newtons (638 lbs) thrust, they would be ignited at an altitude of 1220 m to slow the lander’s descent from 222 kph to 9 kph at landing. Four small engines provided attitude control. In addition to subsystems for thermal control, power, and communications, the lander carried six instruments: twin scanning TV cameras, a sophisticated biology laboratory, a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer, an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer, a meteorology instrument, and a seismometer. Used with numerous temperature, pressure, and magnetic sensors, the instruments would perform entry, landed, and radio experiments. NASA’s investigation of Mars had begun in 1964 with the launch of Mariner 4. That spacecraft’s flyby on 15 July 1965 had revealed the planet to be moonlike with a dry, barren, cratered surface showing little evidence of wind or water erosion and no magnetic field. The better instrumented Mariners 6 and 7 that flew by the planet during the summer of 1969 reported a chaotic view of jumbled ridges and valleys unlike anything found on the earth or moon. The spacecraft also showed wide featureless expanses where craters had been somehow eroded, suggesting that Mars had been geologically active. Mariner 6 and 7 photographs showed a thin layer of snow—probably carbon dioxide—and instruments measured a thin atmosphere of mostly carbon dioxide. High-quality photographs from Mariner 9, placed in Martian orbit on 13 Nov. 1971, provided evidence of fluid erosion, glacial action, and volcanoes. The Viking missions had continued the Mariner explorations of Mars. Viking was managed by Langley Research Center under overall direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science; LaRC also had management responsibility for the lander system designed and built by Martin Marietta Corp. Jet Propulsion Laboratory designed and built the orbiter system. The Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was the responsibility of Lewis Research Center; LaRC managed launch and flight operations executed by Martin Marietta, Kennedy Space Center, and JPL. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for tracking and data systems, and JPL managed the mission control and computing-center system. (NASA MORs S—815—75—01/02, 1 Aug 75, 28 Aug 75, 16 Sept 75; NASA Release 75—183; LaRC Launch and Mission Operations Status Bulletins Nos 9—11; Viking: Mission to Mars (NASA SP—334); W Post, 18-22 Aug 75; NYT, 18-22 Aug 75)
Canada’s Anik 3 (Telesat—3) domestic communications satellite was launched by NASA at 7:35 pmEDTfrom Eastern Test Range on a three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch vehicle. Originally scheduled for March, the launch had been postponed because of a strike by McDonnell Douglas Corp. workers [see 10 Feb.]. The satellite was placed in the planned highly elliptical transfer orbit with a 35 945-km apogee, 231.4-km perigee, 634.3-min period, and 24.75° inclination. Ground control fired the spacecraft’s apogee kick motor at 1:30 pm EDT on 10 May, circularizing the geosynchronous orbit at 38 000 km; the spacecraft was drifting toward its final operational location at approximately 104° west longitude. Anik (Eskimo word for brother) 3 was third in a series of Canadian domestic comsats; Anik 1 (launched 9 Nov. 1972) and Anik 2 (launched 20 April 1973) were operating at 114° and 109p west longitude, providing TV and telephone service to the most remote areas of Canada. Built by Hughes Aircraft Co., Anik 3 was 1.8 m in diameter and 3.3 m high, weighing 544 kg at launch and 272 kg in orbit. With power from 23 000 solar cells and enough battery capacity to maintain full service during a solar eclipse. Anik had 13 channels that could transmit up to 10 color TV transmissions or 9600 telephone circuits or analog or digital data. The NASA—Telesat Canada contract defined the NASA mission objective as the placement of the satellite in a synchronous transfer orhit of sufficient accuracy to allow onboard propulsion systems to place the spacecraft into a stationary orbit with enough residual stationkeeping propulsion to meet mission-lifetime requirements. This objective was met and the mission was adjudged successful on 20 May. NASA would be reimbursed for launch hardware, services, and DOD range support. The project was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the NASA Office of Space Science. (NASA MORs, 25 April 75, 20 May 75; GSFC Wkly SSR, 1—7 May 75; NASA Releases 75—113, 75—131)
The Peoples Republic of China announced the launch of its fifth earth satellite, third launched this year. Reuters, quoted in the New York Times, said observers believed it had been a step toward Peking’s first manned space flight. The fourth China spacecraft, launched 26 Nov., had been recovered, leading observers to believe the Chinese engineers had perfected soft-landing techniques. Weights of the three craft launched this year had not been disclosed, to hide the capacity of the type of rocket used for launch, nor had the current announcement disclosed the satellite’s orbit or height. (NYT, 18 Dec 75, 26; New China News Agency, in FBIS 243, 17 Dec 75)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 782, a biological satellite carrying 4 U.S. experiments as well as materials from Russia, Czechoslovakia, France, Hungary, Poland, and Romania, to be recovered in Soviet territory in about 3 wks. Launched from Plesetsk into an orbit with 405 km apogee, 227 km perigee, 62.8° inclination, and 90.5 min period, the satellite provided an opportunity for U.S. scientists to fly biology and weightlessness experiments that would otherwise have had to await flights of the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. Last U.S. biology research spacecraft, Biosatellite 3, had been launched in 1969. Cosmos 782 was the first satellite equipped to simulate gravity in space, to compare effects on biological processes with those of weightlessness. A specially constructed centrifuge, consisting of a small disk that would rotate at a constant speed, would create a centrifugal force equal to gravity on earth for packages placed at the right spot on the disk. Comparing the specimens exposed to lack of gravity during orbital flight with similar specimens feeling the pull of gravity would prove any effects had resulted from weightlessness. Results of the experiments should be available in about 90 days, according to the Tass news agency. Ames Research Center managed the U.S. participation in the Cosmos 782 flight. It had had no advance notice of the launch date, place of launch, or mode of orbital operation, although life limitations of the biology materials had dictated a launch near this date. NASA had been invited to participate in a second Soviet biosat mission in 1977, and had planned to fly Russian experiments on its Space Shuttle in the early 1980s. (NYT, 27 Nov 75, 62M; NASA Release 75—292; SBD, 28 Nov 75, 145; Aero Daily, 28 Nov 75, 148)
Flat conductor cable developed by NASA for rocket and spacecraft wiring was being installed in Marshall Space Flight Center’s experimental solar house, MSFC announced. The surface-mounted cable was being considered for commercial and residential applications, to provide a wiring system that was lower in cost, easier to install, adaptable to all types of wall construction, and as safe as or safer than conventional roundwire electrical systems. Flat conductor cable could be routed under all paneling, tile, and carpet, and the low-voltage flat cable for lights and receptacles could be routed under wallpaper or simply painted. The cable had already been installed successfully in an MSFC conference room and in six apartments in Yonkers, N.Y., as a joint effort between NASA and the New York State Urban Development Corp. (MSFC Release 75—94)
Flight Research Center was investigating the use of TV to provide visual information to pilots of future aircraft and spacecraft, NASA announced. TV might enhance target visibility for pilots of high-performance aircraft that might have to approach and land at high angles of attack with reduced window area, and for unmanned remotely piloted research vehicles that would augment flight instrumentation with visual. For testing, FRC had installed a TV camera on top of a Piper PA—30 aircraft with a 12.5- by 17.5-m TV screen installed on the instrument panel. A curtain would restrict the test pilot’s view through cockpit windows with a safety pilot riding in the right seat of the aircraft. Besides demonstrating use of TV for approach and landings, the first phase of the program would evaluate the pilot’s ability to judge altitude using TV. The second phase would aim at optimizing the TV system for landing maneuvers. (NASA Release 75-11) •
NASA launched Sms 2 (SMS-B Synchronous Meteorological Satellite) into transfer orbit from the Eastern Test Range at 5:04 pm EST. Launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the three-stage inertially guided Thor-Delta booster placed the satellite in an orbit with a 36 810-km apogee, 197-km perigee, 651.0-min period, and 23.9P inclination. Originally scheduled for 30 Jan., the launch had been delayed to replace the Inertial Measurement Unit of the launch vehicle’s flight-control system with a newer more reliable unit. The spacecraft performed normally during the transfer orbit, and attitude and reorientation maneuvers were performed as planned. The apogee boost motor was fired on second apogee at 9:43 am EST 7 Feb. placing Sms 2 in a synchronous orbit; orbital parameters were 36 685-km apogee,. 35 680-km perigee, 1456.4-min period, and 1.1° inclination. By 10 Feb. the spacecraft was drifting westward at 6° per day toward the final operational station of 115° west longitude. Over several days beginning 10 Feb., the onboard auxiliary propulsion system was fired to place the spacecraft into proper attitude for operational use. First photos were transmitted 11 Feb. NASA objectives—to launch the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit of sufficient accuracy to enable the spacecraft to accomplish its operational mission requirements, conduct an in-orbit evaluation and checkout of the spacecraft, and turn operational control over to NOAA—were met, and the mission was adjudged successful 22 April. NASA turned over control of Sms 2 to NOAA 10 March. The 628-kg cylindrical spacecraft carried five instruments to provide high-quality day and night cloudcover data; take radiance temperatures of the earth’s atmosphere; measure proton, electron, and solar x-ray fluxes, and magnetic fields; transmit processed data from central facilities to regional stations; and transmit environmental information to NOAA from the thousands of manned and unmanned data-collection platforms on land, rivers, lakes, and the sea. Sms 2, together with its sister craft Sms 1 (launched 17 May 1974), provided continuous coverage of the Western Hemisphere, transmitting weather photos every 30 min. SMS photos would be made into film loops of clouds moving over oceans and land masses to help meteorologists determine what types of cloud formations and weather conditions might cause the destructive tornadoes and hurricanes that frequently occur over the eastern U.S. Sms 2 was the second in a series of two operational prototypes and one operational spacecraft (SMS-C, to be called Goes 1 in orbit) developed and funded by NASA to meet the requirements of the Dept, of Commerce’s Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) system. Under a NASA- DOC agreement, NASA was conducting a program to develop improved sensors and techniques—based on technology developed in its Tiros, Nimbus, and Applications Technology Satellite programs—for DOC’s operational program. Follow-on GOES spacecraft were being planned. Goddard Space Flight Center, which managed the SMS program under the direction of NASA’s Office of Applications, also had responsibility for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASA MORs, 9 Jan, 10 Feb, 23 April 75; NASA Releases 75- 6, 75- 27; GSFC Wkly SSR, 6-12 Feb 75)
Salyut 4, launched into earth orbit on 26 Dec. 1974, was continuing its flight, Tass reported. To date, the space station had completed 4200 revolutions of the earth and, in automatic mode, was collecting data and making astrophysical observations with the onboard instrumentation. All systems were functioning normally. Since its launch, Salyut 4 had been inhabited by two two-man crews. The first crew, launched 11 Jan. 1975 aboard Soyuz 17, lived and worked aboard the station for nearly 30 days. A second crew, launched 24 May 1975 aboard Soyuz 18, visited the station for a Soviet manned space flight record of 63 days. A third mission, launched 5 April, was aborted when the booster third stage malfunctioned. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 23 Sept 75, Ul; A&A 74)
Johnson Space Center announced the award to Martin Marietta Corp. of a 10-mo $373 000 study contract to investigate current technology and develop severed conceptual designs of a manned maneuvering unit. When the most promising concept was selected, Martin would execute a detailed design and high-fidelity mockup of the unit and its support station. The contract also called for Martin to design and build a prototype hand controller for the unit. Themaneuvering unit, a direct spinoff from the “Buck Rogers” unit that successfully demonstrated on 1973—74 Skylab missions the precision and control with which an astronaut could maneuver in zero-g, would allow Space Shuttle crew members to maneuver outside the Shuttle for maintenance, inspection, repair, retrieval, assembly, and photography. (JSC Release 75—24) All spacecraft subsystems were checked out 9—10 April with telemetry indicating normal performance. Gravity-gradient stabilization maneuvers were also begun with the firing of the squibs that released the end mass and extended the boom to 0.7 m. Additional boom extension and retraction maneuvers were carried out 11 April with the maximum extension of 6 m occurring that day. The momentum wheel was energized, providing additional three-axis stabilization; the desired pitch damping of ± 1° was achieved by 20 April. By 22 April ground controllers activated doppler and C-band transponders and began tracking. Solid acquisition of return-pulse data was occurring on all passes, and the radar altimeter had operated in the high-intensity mode twice over the Atlantic Ocean. Engineering tests of the Ats 6—Geos 3 satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment were completed. Calibration of radar altimetry began on 21 April and would continue until 20 May. First of its kind, the satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment by Geos 3 and Ats 6 was expected to provide orbit information more precise than that obtainable by ground observations. From its geosynchronous orbit Ats 6 tracked Geos 3 for more than half its orbit while Geos 3 radioed ranging signals through its S-band transponder to Ats 6, which relayed the signals to ground stations. Geos 3 carried an array of quartz reflectors that permitted laser ranging measurements accurate to 10 cm. A laser beam sent to the satellite would be reflected, and then received back at the originating ground site, one of a network of laser ranging stations which would track Geos 3 during its mission lifetime. Powered by 16 solar cell panels, the 340-kg, 8-sided spacecraft was the third in a series of GEOS spacecraft designed to gain knowledge of the earth’s shape and dynamic behavior as part of the National Geodetic Satellite Program (NGSP). The NASA-managed program, begun in 1964 with the cooperation of the Depts. of Defense and Commerce and several universities and international organizations, was initiated to generate a unified world-survey network and to develop a more precise mathematical model of the earth’s gravitational field. Geos 1 {Explorer29, launched 6 Nov. 1965) and Geos2 {Explorer 36, launched 11 Jan. 1968) had demonstrated that the U.S. could make most observations using one satellite and that errors in any system could be discovered and corrected by reference to other systems. Other missions in the NASA geodesy program included Explorer 22 (launched 10 Oct. 1964), Explorer27 (launched 29 April 1965), Pageos 1 (launched 1 July 1966), and the Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP, launched 15 May 1973 aboard Skylab 1). The Geos 3 program was managed by Wallops Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications at NASA Headquarters. Mission operations and the Thor-Delta launch vehicle were managed by Goddard Space Flight Center. The spacecraft, designed and built by the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., cost about $12.5 million. (NASA MORs, 8 April 75, 22 April 75; Wkly SSR, 3—9 April 75; NASA Release 75—88)
A request for proposals for integrated electronic assemblies (IEA) for the Space Shuttle’s solid-rocket boosters had been issued by Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC announced. The proposals would be for design, development, test and evaluation, fabrication, and assembly of 33 IEAs. The Space Shuttle would carry two refurbishable IEAs, one forward and one aft, to route commands from the Orbiter to the thrust-vector control system to release the nosecap and frustum, jettison the solid-rocket motor nozzle, detach parachutes, and turn on the recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—11)
The Soviet Academy of Sciences chose Anatoly Alexandrov, a 72-yr-old nuclear physicist, as its new president, the Tass news agency reported. Peter Osnos commented in the Washington Post that the main speaker at the Academy meeting—Mikhail Suslov, the Communist Party’s chief ideologist, who is not even a member of the Academy— made the only speech on Alexandrov’s behalf. This, said Osnos, showed the extent to which the choice was determined by Kremlin leadership and the Party’s growing influence over the once-autonomous scientific establishment. Academy members traditionally had voted in secret ballots and had maintained their own organizational structure in running the country’s important research facilities; Alexandrov was chosen on a secret ballot, but apparently there were no other candidates. Alexandrov, head of the atomic research institute in Moscow, was one of the few Academy members also a member of the Party central committee. (W Post, 26 Nov 75, A8)
Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite arrived at its new operating station at 35° east longitude over equatorial East Africa where it would relay communications from the docked Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft during the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Upon completion of ASTP, Ats 6 would be used by India to transmit educational TV programs to several thousand remote villages. The satellite had experienced a malfunction in a drive circuit of one of the three momentum wheels used to control spacecraft attitude. A group of hydrazine gas thrusters was being used as a backup system for stabilization while ground controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center were analyzing the problem and developing remedies. (NASA Release 75 — 194)
Kennedy Space Center awarded a $79 991 contract to the Univ. of Florida’s Institute of Food and Agriculture Sciences for research on ffeeze-teittperature prediction. Under the terms of the contract, a follow-on of a 1973 contract to study the feasibility of using remotesensing devices for temperature measurement and evaluation, the Univ. of Florida Would receive Satellite and aircraft data fro/n KSC and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration that would provide actual measurements of leaf and ground temperatures at specific times and places. Following calibration, the data would be Combined into a temperature-prediction model. Then, using known variables such as current temperature, humidity, time, eloudeover, arid wind velocity, the user could accurately forecast where freezing temperatures would occur. (KSC Release 21 — 75)
Doctors had rechecked x-rays of Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronaut Donald K. Slayton’s lungs taken before the 15 July launch and found that they also had shown a shadow revealed by postflight x-rays, Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian, NASA’s ASTP physician, said at a Johnson Space Center press briefing. Dr. Nicogossian said that the spot had not been noticed before because the x-rays were difficult to read and the spot had been covered by normal vasculature and bony structure. Only a 6 Aug. tomogram [see 25 Aug.] had verified that the shadow was a lesion. Dr. Nicogossian said the nitrogen tetroxide inhaled by the ASTP astronauts during reentry [see 15—26 July] had not been shown to have caused or increased the size of the lesion. Dr. Nicogossian added that, if cancer were diagnosed during the surgery, the usual medical procedure was to remove a part of the lobe, but he did not think that would prevent Slayton from flying in the future. Slayton said that he felt “pretty damn lucky” that the lesion had been discovered when it was. “This thing could have been discovered before the flight. . . . And I could have easily gotten jerked off the flight, so that would have been bad. Secondly, if we hadn’t had the gas in the cockpit on reentry, . . . [the doctors] could very easily not have picked this thing up until my next annual physical which is 6 or 8 months off.” Then it would have been a “lot tougher” to fix. Slayton, one of the seven original U.S. astronauts, had been grounded in 1962 because of an erratic heart rate, first detected in 1959, but had been returned to flight status March 1972 in time for assignment to ASTP. He told the briefing that he hoped to be out of the hospital within 7 days and back to work in 2 wk, and on flight status again within a month. (Transcript, ASTP PC—63, 20 Aug 75)
NASA announced appointment of Gerald D. Griffin as Deputy Associate Administrator for Operations in the Office of Manned Space Flight, effective 1 Aug. In his new position Griffin would plan for the most economical and flexible operation of the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. Griffin, who was Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs before this appointfnent, would be replaced by Dr. Joseph P. Allen, an astronaut assigned to the Astronaut Office at Johnson Space Center. (NASA anno 17 July 75)
Plans had been completed for the first U.S. experiments to be flown on a Soviet spacecraft, Dr. David L. Winter, NASA Director of Life Sciences, announced. As a result of joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. working group meetings on space biology and medicine, 4 U.S. life-science experiments and 7 tissue investigations were to fly aboard a Soviet biological satellite scheduled for launch later in the year. The U.S. experiments—all passive and completely autonomous from spacecraft power, telemetry, and data recording—would be housed in 5 Soviet-built containers, each 17.8 cm long by 12.7 cm wide by 11.5 cm high. Maximum weight for each container, including experiments, would be 2.5 kg. Unique to this spacecraft was a Soviet-designed onboard centrifuge. U.S. experiments would be flown both on the centrifuge and on a stationary platform. The 4 flight experiments included a plant tumor-growth experiment to study the effects of weightlessness on sensitive plant systems; a carrot-cell-culture experiment to assess the effects of weightlessness on plant systems and on normal development of embryonic tissues; a heavy-particle radiation experiment to measure high-charge and high-energy particle radiation aboard the spacecraft; and a killifish or mummichog (minnows) embryogenesis experiment to evaluate the effect of weightlessness on development of the vestibular system during embryonic development in a vertebrate animal. Six of the tissue investigations would use rat tissue—and the seventh flies—supplied by the Soviets from their animal experiments. Soviet scientists would prepare the animal tissues for U.S. scientists to use in their investigations and would return the U.S. experiment packages upon completion of the flight. Ames Research Center was managing 3 of the life-science experiments and all tissue investigations. Johnson Space Center would manage the fish-egg development experiment. (NASA Release 75 — 264)
Air Force Systems Command Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory scientists were studying changes in human body weights and sizes as part of a NASA-requested anthropometric study to help engineers design cockpits and crew stations for future use. NASA engineers who wanted to lay out the Space Shuttle work station were concerned that body sizes of the pilots might change before the station was used. The scientists performing the study, using both current data and data that went back as far as the Civil War, estimated that in 1985 a pilot would average nearly 2 kg heavier and 1.5 cm taller than in 1967, when he had weighed 78.5 kg and was 177 cm tall. In addition to statistics, NASA requested drawing board manikins for designing the Shuttle’s work areas. The study had produced two 2dimensional manikins like cardboard dolls with movable joints; each manikin was articulated in nine places to represent typical ranges of body movement. A 95% manikin represented a person 189.0 cm tall; a 5% manikin, representing a 168.3-cm astronaut or pilot, was designed so that only 5% of the 1985 pilot-astronaut population would be smaller. An engineer using both manikins could design a crew station or cockpit that would accommodate 90% of all astronauts and pilots. (AFSC Release OIP 072.75)
HASPA—the Navy’s high-altitude superpressured powered aerostat— failed to reach its predicted altitude when the balloon-inflation mechanism malfunctioned. When fully extended, HASPA had measured 101.5 m long and 20.4 m in diameter. The launch at Kennedy Space Center had been planned as a 3- to 5-hr flight; during launch, the mylar container was inflated with the helium contained in the upper third and restrained there by a collar that would drop away to give the gas room to expand with altitude. The mechanism failed and the balloon inverted at 11.26 km, releasing the helium through a vent in the nose of the balloon, which impacted at KSC a half hour after launch. HASPA had been designed to function as a low-level satellite for a variety of payloads. (Spaceport News, 14 Nov 75; ETR PIO, interview, 5 Nov 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a request for proposals for a 10-mo study of a space-based power-conversion and power-relay system, MSFC announced. The proposed study would examine alternate means for generating electrical power in space, with emphasis on identification and delineation of problem areas and new technology required for these power systems. (MSFC Release 75—90)
Inflation and procurement reforms had hiked NASA’s charge for a Delta launch by about 20% for the average customer, Aerospace Daily said. Prospective users 2 yr ago had been quoted less than $10 million per launch; current cost had risen to $11—12 million, and those wanting 1978 launches had been quoted $13—14 million. The Delta had been the NASA launcher most in demand because of its size and price, most widely applicable among government and commercial users; the Kennedy Space Center, capable of one launch every 5 wk, had been booked solid for the foreseeable future. NASA had been renegotiating payment schedules, but no launch schedules had been changed except for technical reasons not related to cost. (Aero Daily, 4 Nov 75, 11) _
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a request for proposals for a study of alternative means for generating electrical power in space and relaying the power to earth, with emphasis on problem areas and new technology, the Marshall Star reported. Previous studies had defined concepts for the use of large solar-cell panels to generate power in geosynchronous orbit and transmit it to earth via microwaves; also studied had been the transmission via an orbital microwave system of power generated at a remote location on earth and transmitted long distances to the user location. (Marshall Star, 21 May 75, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of United Technologies Corp. for negotiation of a fixed-price contract of $1,775 million for solid-propellant booster separation motors (BSM) for use on the first 6 development flights in the Space Shuttle program, beginning in 1979. The BSMs would separate the two reusable solid rocket boosters (SRB)—each SRB requiring eight BSMs, four forward and four aft—approximately 110 sec after launch. (MSFC Release 75—175)
NASA’s Airborne Infrared Observatory, a four-engine C—141 jet transport equipped with a 91.5-cm infrared telescope, was dedicated to the memory of Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, the founder and former director of the Univ. of Ariz. Lunar and Planetary Laboratory. The Kuiper observatory, based at Ames Research Center, would fly at altitudes up to 13 500 m with the telescope operating through a cavity in the aircraft’s fuselage. Dr. Kuiper, who had died in 1973, had been one of the foremost authorities on lunar science. He had played an active role in NASA’s Ranger and Surveyor programs and, as head of the Ranger scientific team, had directed the photographic analysis to select landing sites for the Apollo astronauts. He also had participated in the Mariner 10 mission, launched 3 Nov. 1973 to Venus andMercury, and the Pioneer 10 mission, launched 2 March 1972 toward a December 1973 encounter with Jupiter. (NASA Release 75—149; A&A 73, 350)
The development of space law, which had begun about the time of the launch of U.S.S.R.’s Sputnik 1 in 1957, was a unique process. “The problems are both literally and symbolically out of this world,” NASA General Counsel Neil S. Hosenball said in an interview with the Orlando Sentinel Star. Does any state have the right to claim the natural resources of celestial bodies? Were earth’s criminal and civil laws applicable in space? What was the difference between establishing a planetary base and planting a nation’s flag? Which court would rule on extraterrestrial squabbles? These were some of the questions lawyers and politicians would have to consider in the space age. Few precedents existed, and no judge had yet heard a case in a legal dispute originating outside the earth’s atmosphere. In fact, a world court, recognized by all major powers, did not exist. In 1962, a United Nations ad hoc committee on peaceful uses of outer space had developed principles later incorporated into the 1967 Outer Space Treaty. These included a ban against military activity in outer space and against any nation’s claiming a section of space or a planet as its own. Other treaties dealt with specific points such as the rescue of astronauts and the registration of spacecraft and space stations. Hosenball stressed that most charters and treaties were drawn up ahead of time in anticipation of problems likely to occur as space exploration expanded. The Sentinel quoted G. P. Zhukov, chief legal counsel of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, as saying that detente between , the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had been assisted by the success of “legal regulation in space. . . . Man’s foot had not yet stepped on the surface of-the moon and we had already formulated what man could and could not do on the moon. The law was ahead of science.” (Orlando Sentinel Star, 12 Aug 75)
Does not include a supplemental request for pay increases introduced as H.R. 13172 and signed into P.L. 94—303 on 1 June 1976. Transitional Period NASA Budget Authorization Congressional Adjustments Program Budget House Senate Conference Conference Request Changes Changes Changes Recommendation Research & Development 730.6 -30.0 -26.0 -30.0 700.6 Research & Program 213.8 0 0 0 213.8 Construction of Facilities Totals 14.5 -6.5 -3.0 -3.7 10.8 958.9 -36.5 -29.0 -33.7 925.2
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D— Mass.) introduced S. 397 to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to acquire and maintain for future generations the site in Auburn, Mass., on which Dr. Robert H. Goddard launched the first liquid-propelled rocket on 16 March 1926. (CR, 27 Jan 75, S884) 27 January—13 February: A joint conference of technical directors for the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project met at Johnson Space Center. Participants in the conference, held while U.S. and Soviet working groups also met at JSC (see 16 Jan. —8 Feb.), reviewed the progress of ASTP preparations and published the necessary documentation. A joint communique issued 13 Feb. stated that discussions and agreements were completed on technical questions relating to the development of new spacecraft equipment and design improvement, mission ground-support equipment, and publication of technical documentation. The communique also stated that communication lines between U.S. and U.S.S.R. centers fully guaranteed the flow of information necessary to conduct the joint mission. Both docking systems were carefully checked and were ready for flight, with final checkouts scheduled at the respective launch sites. Crew training was proceeding satisfactorily (see 7—26 Feb.) with the final joint training session scheduled for April in the U.S.S.R. Soviet ASTP Technical Director, Professor Konstantin D. Bush-uyev, had informed U.S. officials that Soyuz 16 (launched 2 Dec. 1974) had successfully completed a full test of basic flight phases planned for ASTP as well as performance of spacecraft systems and interaction with U.S.S.R. ground Control systems. Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. tracking activity during the flight had shown that the precision of tracking information was satisfactory. During a 13 Feb. press conference at JSC, Professor Bushuyev said that, in addition to changes in the Soyuz life-support systems and the addition of the docking apparatus, other design changes on the Soyuz spacecraft included the installation of a transporter for the Apollo and related antennas, a new interspacecraft communications system, an optical target to permit Apollo to target the approach and rendezvous, and some flashing beacons and orientation lights. (Joint communique text; JSC press briefing transcript, 13 Feb 75)
Kennedy Space Center had awarded a $265 700 contract to Charter Industries of Raleigh, N.C., for rental of 14 geodesic domes to house displays at a bicentennial exposition of science and technology to be sponsored by the government next summer at the spaceport. KSC would be host for the exposition, which would consist of exhibits from government and industry showing applications of science and technology to improve living conditions during the next 200 years. (NASA Release 75—313)
Contracts involving $25 000 or more awarded by Marshall Space Flight Center during the month totaled nearly $200 million. Among them were awards to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Inc., for $67 500 to develop the capability of predicting radiant heating at the base region of the Space Shuttle, and for $49 971 to continue a two-phase study of flow effects on Space Shuttle plume simulation. Lockheed also had received $59 740 to continue analyses of Apollo Telescope Mount data obtained during the Skylab mission. A $29 945 contract had gone to Northrop Services, Inc., to continue studies on Space Tug recovery of a spinning satellite. The U.S.'Army Engineer Div., Ala., had received two contracts. A $2-million contract had been awarded for construction at MSFC of the structural test facility for the Solid Rocket Booster and a $2.93-million contract has been awarded for construction and modifications to the Dynamic Test Facility for vibration testing of the Space Shuttle in the vertical positions. The contracts also included a $152.6-million award to Martin Marietta Corp. for the design, development, test, and evaluation of the Space Shuttle external tank, including six flight units and test hardware. MSFC had awarded the Dept, of Commerce $60 000 for an atmospheric measuring program. Bendix Corp. had received $99 736 for a Skylab control-moment gyro anomaly investigation, and the University of New York had received $36 253 to continue data analysis of a Skylab zodiacal light experiment. (MSFC Release 75— 39) February 1975
NASA launched Nimbus 6 on a thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster from the Western Test Range at 1:12 am PDT after a 6-min delay to clear a ship from the jettison trajectory of the Delta’s solid rockets. The spacecraft entered sun-synchronous polar orbit with a 1103-km apogee, 1094-km perigee, 107-min period, and 99.96° inclination. Separation of the spacecraft from the launch vehicle was normal, at 59 min into the flight. The solar panels were deployed and the attitude-control system quickly acquired earth. A wheel control provided three-axis stabilization. Checkout of the power system, telemetry, command links, and tape recorder was completed on the first day of operation. At 7 hr after launch, a cryogenic vent valve associated with the limb-radiance inversion radiometer was pyrotechnically actuated as planned. This caused unexpected high torques and excessive control-gas usage. Nimbus 6 was put into a safe wideband gravity-gradient mode to conserve gas, and an investigation was begun to find the cause of the problem and determine possible remedies. By 24 June the 9 experiments and all spacecraft systems had been checked out and all instrumentation, except for 2 tape recorders, was working normally. The primary objective of the Nimbus 6 mission was to contribute to the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP) by refining and extending the capability of vertically sounding the temperature and moisture of the atmosphere, with particular regard to altitude resolution and interference effects of clouds. GARP, a cooperative worldwide weather program, was established to improve understanding of meteorological atmospheric processes in the tropics and to improve observation and computing systems for weather prediction and analysis. Nimbus 6 would also monitor environmental conditions such as sea ice and rainfall and would measure the earth’s radiation budget with a precision never before attained. Secondary objective of the mission was to demonstrate the ability to track and relay data from a low-altitude polar-orbiting spacecraft using a geosynchronous satellite as a communications relay. Ats 6, the Applications Technology Satellite launched on 30 May 1974, would be the relay comsat. A data-collection, processing, and relay-to-earth system was also on board to collect data from approximately 300 balloon-borne platforms, designed to float at an altitude of 20 km, and a large number of earth- and sea-based data platforms. Nimbus 6, unlike previous spacecraft, could receive and process up to eight incoming signals at a time. The satellite carried nine new instruments to extend measurements of atmospheric parameters to significantly higher altitudes than had previously been possible: the tracking and data-relay (T&DR) experiment; a high-resolution temperature sounder (HIRS) and a scanning microwave spectrometer (SCAMS) to take temperature soundings in the atmosphere outside the tropics; a tropical wind-energy conversion and reference level experiment (TWERLE) to provide data on tropical areas; a limb-radiance inversion radiometer (LRIR) and a pressure-modulated radiometer (PMR) to provide high-altitude temperature soundings; an earth radiation budget (ERR) experiment to establish the earth’s atmospheric radiation balance; an electrically scanning microwave radiometer (ESMR) to map the liquid-water content of the clouds, ocean rainfall,, and distribution and variation of sea-ice cover; and a temperature/humidity infrared radiometer (THIR) to provide data on cloud cover, ground temperatures, and water-vapor distribution. Nimbus 6 was next to last in a planned series of seven experimental meteorological satellites. Nimbus 1 (launched 28 Aug. 1964) and Nimbus 2 (launched 15 May 1966) achieved all their objectives. Launch of the third Nimbus, on 19 May 1968, failed when the launch vehicle malfunctioned; an identical spacecraft launched 14 April 1969 successfully functioned as Nimbus 3. Nimbus 4 and 5 (launched 8 April 1970 and 10 Dec. 1972) had both completed all mission objectives and were still operating. General Electric Co. was the prime contractor responsible for Nimbus 6 integration and test, stabilization control, control-subsystem integration, and spacecraft structures and antennas. Seven U.S. and two British companies, in addition to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, provided the nine instruments. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the Nimbus program under the direction of the NASA Office of Applications and was also responsible for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASAMORs 21 May 74,12 June 75, 24 June 75; NASA Release 75-145)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 1 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1976 NASA budget called for the authorization of $3,539 billion and net outlays of $3,498 billion for the 12-mo period beginning 1 July, and additional NASA Budget Plan, FY 76 (in millions of dollars) FY 1974- FY 1975 FY 1976 Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 amounts of $958.9 million in authorizations and $905.6 in net outlays for the 3-mo transition period beginning 1 July 1976. Dr. Fletcher said the new budget was “lean but manageable.” For the first time since 1961 the budget provided no new program starts. In accordance with President Ford’s request "to hold FY J975 and FY 1976 expenditures to a minimum, NASA, in FY 1975, had deferred obligations of $72 million and outlays of $70 million, reduced civil service employment by 300, and made program adjustments to stay within the total FY 1975 and 1976 hudgets. Further adjustments might be necessary if the inflation rate continued to grow. Although NASA’s FY 1976 budget was up $300 million from the previous year, $200 million of this increase was specifically anticipated in last year’s budget to carry forward commitments built into programs approved in FY 1975. Therefore, NASA had received an effective increase of only $100 million, or about 3%. This, along with the nation’s current 9% inflation rate, was a “good indicator of the leanness of NASA’s FY 1976 budget.” The budget would permit NASA to proceed with current major programs as planned: The Space Shuttle, scheduled for a first manned orbital flight in mid-1979, and Landsat—C, scheduled for a fall 1977 launch, would continue on schedule. Reduction of fuel use in aircraft remained a principal focus in NASA’s aeronautics research and technology. NASA was also continuing stratospheric studies, including the effects of pollutants on the environment, with significant contributions coming from NASA meteorological and atmospheric satellites, sounding rockets, and balloons and high-flying aircraft. Although there would be no new starts, NASA would continue its study and advanced technical development for science, applications, and aeronautics projects to be started in future years, including preliminary work for payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. The 1975 calendar year launch schedule was one of the most ambitious in U.S. history with 28 launches scheduled, including the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July and the two Viking missions to Mars scheduled for August. Although NASA’s legal responsibilities for energy research and development—designated under the Solar Heating and Cooling Act of 1974—had been transferred to the Energy Research and Development Administration, NASA would work closely with ERDA in various aspects of solar research and development. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said at the press briefing that the largest budget increase was for manned spaceflight, where the increase for the Shuttle was partially offset by reduced spending for the rest of manned spaceflight. The small increase for space science did not tell the whole story: If funds for the Viking program were subtracted, the budget for the rest of science had increased $170 million from FY 1974 to FY 1976. Although applications, aeronautics, and space technology programs each showed small increases, funds for tracking and data acquisition decreased slightly despite increased maintenance costs for tracking stations, because NASA was beginning to close down tracking stations, preparing for the time when tracking and data relay satellites would be available. . NASA Budget Plan (in millions of dollars) FY 1974 FY 1975 FY 1976 Manned space flight 999.9 1110.3 1414.6 Space science 664.5 542.8 582.6 Applications 159.0 174.5 175.0 Aeronautics and space technology 234.3 237.8 250.3 Tracking and data acquisition 244.0 248.0 243.0 Energy programs 4.7 4.4 5.9 Technology utilization 4.5 5.5 7.0 Total Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 Total budget plan 3156.0 3231.2 3539.0 William E. Lilly, NASA Comptroller, said that, of the $84.6 million budgeted for construction of facilities, $47.2 million was to continue the buildup of Space Shuttle facilities, mostly for launch and landing facilities at Kennedy Space Center. The remaining funds were for normal rehabilitation and modification of existing facilities, with smaller amounts for minor construction and for facilities planning and design. Civil service manpower was expected to continue at the same level for FY 1976 with 24 316 employees. However, the number of support service contractors—excluding mission or stage contractors—would decrease from 18 637 in FY 1975 to 17 811 in FY 1976. The estimated 125 000 persons working on NASA programs during FY 1975 was expected to increase by 6000 to 7000 by the end of FY 1976. Distribution of funds to the Centers would change: An increase of $224.3 million would go to Johnson Space Center for the Shuttle program. A decrease of $37.3 million for KSC reflected a decrease in funding for the construction program. Goddard Space Flight Center Estimated Distribution of Total NASA Budget (in millions of dollars) FY 1975 FY 1976 Decrease Johnson Space Center 922.6 1146.9 224.3 John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA 275.9 238.6 -37.3 Marshall Space Flight Center 428.7 541.2 112.5 National Space Technology Laboratories 10.0 10.9 0.9 Goddard Space Flight Center 493.7 461.1 -32.6 Wallops Flight Center 31.9 31.3 -0.6 Jet Propulsion Laboratory 180.9 188.1 7.2 Ames Research Center 168.2 193.0 32.0 Flight Research Center 34.6 40.3 5.7 Langley Research Center 285.5 249.4 -36.1 Lewis Research Center 218.1 253.3 35.2 NASA Headquarters 159.1 166.4 7.3 Undetermined 22.0 18.5 -3.5 Total 3231.2 3539.0 307.8 was down $32.6 million, largely because of a decrease in funding for Delta vehicles. (OMB, Budget of U.S. Govt., FY 76 and Appendix; NASA FY 76 budget briefing, 1 Feb 76, transcript; NASA Release, FY 76 budget briefing background material; Fletcher budget statement, 3 Feb 76, text)
Kennedy Space Center awarded a $1 279 000 contract to George A. Fuller Co., a division of Northrop Corp. of Chicago, for fabrication and erection of a structure for mating and demating the Space Shuttle Orbiter and its Boeing 747 carrier aircraft at NASA’s Flight Research Center in Calif. KSC had been given responsibility for Space Shuttle launch operations and for Orbiter ground operations and support equipment both at KSC in Fla. and at FRC, which was to be Orbiter landing site for the first four missions. The contractor was to complete the structure—including hoist system, access platforms, and utility systems—within 328 days after notice to proceed. (KSC Release 290-75)
NASA announced the appointment of Dr. JohnE. Naugle, Deputy Associate Administrator, to be Acting Associate Administrator until a replacement was named for Dr. Rocco A. Petrone. (NASA anno, 30 April 75) During April: Soviet spending for research and development had risen 50% between 1968 and 1973, representing an increase of from 2.5% to 3.8% of the Soviet gross national product, the Air Forces Journal International quoted a Dept, of Commerce report as saying. During the same period, outlays for U.S. R&D had fallen from 3% to 2.4% of the GNP. The number of Soviet scientists and engineers working in R&D functions nearly doubled in the period, from 594 000 to 1 069 000; by contrast, the U.S. technological pool had risen from 454 000 to 531 000. The growth stemmed from a Soviet decision, announced in 1968, to increase Soviet expenditures for science and technology by more than 60%. The report estimated that 90% of the Soviet technical workforce was in the military and space fields. (AF Joum Int, April 75, 20)
The launch of Viking A had been postponed for the second time [see 11 Aug.] when Jet Propulsion Laboratory technicians discovered that the batteries had dropped from their normal charge of 37 volts to 9 volts. The batteries had been drained because a motorized rotary switch that should have remained off until 7 min before launch had accidentally turned on. The dangerously low voltage decided officials to remove the entire spacecraft from the launch vehicle and return it to the spacecraft assembly and encapsulation facility for troubleshooting. At the same time, the Viking-B spacecraft, in a planned holding mode before mating with its launch vehicle, would be moved to the launch complex to replace its ailing sistercraft and become the Viking-A mission. The launch had been rescheduled for 20 Aug., with the launch window opening at 5:22 pm. (Viking Status Bulletin No 10, 20 Aug 75; NASA Audio News, 14 Aug 75; O’Toole, WPost, 14 Aug 75, A23; McElheny, NYT, 14 Aug 75)
Dale D. Myers, president of Rockwell International Corp.’s North American Aircraft Operations, announced appointment of Bastian Hello as president of Rockwell’s B —1 Bomber Div. Hello, who had been vice president of the division since 1973, was succeeding Robert E. Greer, who was retiring. Before joining the B—1 Div., Hello was vice president and general manager of Rockwell’s Space Div.’s Apollo launch operations organization at Kennedy Space Center. (RI Release LA—2)
S. Neil Hosenball, NASA’s Deputy General Counsel, had been appointed General Counsel, effective immediately, replacing R. Tenney Johnson, who had been named General Counsel of the Energy Research and Development Administration in February. Hosenball, who had been Deputy General Counsel since 1967, had been Assistant General Counsel for Procurement from 1966 to 1967 and previously had served for 4 yr as Chief Counsel at Lewis Research Center. (NASA Release 75—173)
The National Research Council, in its program of conducting technical studies on behalf of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering, had mailed out announcements to more than 5000 individuals and organizations inviting statements on the role of nuclear power in the context of alternative energy systems. Hearings in five major cities had been scheduled for January and early February 1976 to obtain the broadest possible perspective for a comprehensive study. The Energy Research and Development Administration had asked the academies to conduct a 2-yr study, and the announcement represented the first time in the 112-yr history of the National Academy of Sciences that such an extensive effort had been made to solicit the views of the informed public on a projected study. The committee conducting the study would attempt to set forth the current and probable states of energy technology through the year 2010, various policy options, and consequences of each. (NRC Release 24 Dec 75)
NASA announced the award of a $ll-million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Cutler-Hammer, Inc., AIL Div., for acquisition of the Microwave Scanning Beam Landing System ground stations for the Space Shuttle Orbiter. AIL would perform the research and development necessary to build the ground stations for the Shuttle landing sites. Ground-station hardware would be able to transmit localizer and glide slope signals to the Orbiter and respond to distance-measurement interrogations from the Orbiter. (JSC Release 75 —32)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of two contracts for parallel studies on space-processing equipment for Space Shuttle and Spacelab missions. TRW Systems Group was awarded $299 981 and General Electric Co. was awarded $284 974 to provide preliminary designs for equipment that could be used to process various materials, such as metals and crystals, in space. (MSFC Release 75 — 125)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a request for proposals for an x-ray source system for the x-ray telescope facility being constructed at MSFC for use in the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) project, MSFC announced. The proposed contract would include design, fabrication, assembly, preliminary in-plant checkout, installation, and verification. The contractor would also have the option of building a cover for the system. Under the terms of the contract, the x-ray source system would be installed on a 40.6-cm-by-39.3-cm steel flange by 20 Feb. (MSFC Release 75—93)
Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman Joseph H. McConnell told a stockholders’ meeting that ComSatCorp was finalizing a contract with Exxon Corp. for five shipboard terminals for use with ComSatCorp’s Marisat maritime communications satellite scheduled for launch in summer 1975. McConnell also said that ComSatCorp had agreed to lease one shipboard terminal to Seagap, an oil exploration consortium led by Phillips Petroleum Co. Marisat would make available, for the first time, reliable voice, data, teletype, and facsimile communications to ships at sea and to offshore drilling rigs. McConnell said that the success of the Marisat program would depend on the Navy’s use of the system and on ComSatCorp’s ability to develop a substantial market in the commercial shipping industry. (Snider, W Star, 14 May 75, FI) 13 —14 May: More than 500 representatives from government, industry, and universities attended a 2-day conference at Lewis Research Center to review progress in aerospace propulsion. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that high-speed performance was no longer the top priority among the propulsion researchers, emphasis having switched to quiet, clean, and fuel-conserving engines. Presentations and panel discussions included aircraft noise-reduction technology, fuel-conservative engine technology, upper-atmosphere pollution-measurement programs, and engine systems and component technology. LeRC’s John B. Whitlow reported that new technology generated by NASA’s supersonic cruise airplane research (SCAR) would develop an engine far different from the afterburning supersonic turbojet that was to have powered the first U.S. supersonic transport. A potential new engine might be a duct-burning turbofan with features such as a variable-geometry fan that allowed the engine to move as much as possible between straight turbojet and straight turbofan operational cycles. Other objectives for future NASA-developed SST propulsion systems included a 7400-km range with outstanding economy at speeds from mach 2.2 to mach 2.7, good subsonic cruise characteristics, good hold endurance and economy, and low takeoff noise. Whitlow stressed that, because of noise limitations, future SSTs would not be straight turbojets, and SCAR researchers were concentrating on low-bypass-ratio turbofans. As bypass ratio also affects engine weight, fuel consumption, drag, and cost-effective performance, no single bypass ratio of a conventional engine could meet all desired goals simultaneously. Thus SCAR researchers were developing variable-cycle engine technology that could tailor the bypass ratio and perhaps the fan/pressure ratio for optimum performance. Candidate engines included a mini-bypass turbojet, a variable-bypass supersonic turbofan, a duct-burning turbofan, and a rear-valve variable-cycle engine. (LeRC Release 75—19; Yaffee, Av Wk, 14 July 75, 46- 49) 25.5 hr into the simulated mission. With both Soviet and U.S. crewmen participating in simulators in their respective countries and control centers fully manned, the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft were “launched” and put through various maneuvers. Communications between the two control centers included voice, teletype, datafax, and TV. During the simulation, a technical problem prevented observers in Houston from hearing the two Soviet cosmonauts; NASA officials said later that that problem should not happen during a real flight. No other major problems were reported. A second simulation begun at 6:30 am CDT 15 May and continuing for 56 hr rehearsed Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, docking, crew transfers, and undocking and final separation. A third simulation, begun at 6:30 am CDT 19 May, was cancelled when the command module simulator in Houston did not work properly. The simulation, a 9-hr rehearsal of rendezvous and docking, was successfully completed 20 May. Final simulations by Houston and Moscow control centers and crewmen were scheduled for 30 June and 1 July. (NASA Release 75 — 141; Tass, FBIS—Sov, 16 May 75, Ul; Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 285; UPI, NYT, 14 May 75, 69)
The Mass. Inst, of Technology Lincoln Laboratory, under contract to the Air Force, was developing an experimental ground electro-optical deep-space surveillance (GEODSS) system to scan nighttime skies for orbiting and geosynchronous satellites. The system was being installed at White Sands Missile Range, first of a proposed five-site GEODSS worldwide surveillance network. The network would augment the Air Force’s Aerospace Defense Command’s spacetrack coverage which maintained a day-by-day count of all satellites and debris circling the earth. GEODSS combined two sophisticated telescopes with electro-optics, a TV camera, and a digital computer, as well as system-related equipment. Mounted at the focal plane of the larger telescope was a TV camera to transmit the signal to the observatory control room for instant screening and analysis. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 75, 14)
President Ford announced the recipients of the 1974 Presidential Management Improvement Awards, given annually as the highest recognition for outstanding contributions in improving the effectiveness and economy of government operations. Among the recipients was NASA’s Mariner—Venus 1973 management team at NASA Headquarters and Jet Propulsion Laboratory. (PD, 12 May 75, 504)
A group of 28 scientists, engineers, sociologists, and economists concluded a 10-wk (16 June— 22 Aug.) NASA— Stanford University study at Ames Research Center by recommending that the U.S. adopt a space colonization program using available technology. The “city in space” envisioned by the study group could be a 1.5-km-wide wheel-shaped habitat for 10 000 persons positioned on the moon’s orbit at a point 385 000 km from both earth and moon. Costing an estimated $100 billion, the 454-million-kg wheel, or torus, would rotate around its hub at 1 rpm to simulate earth’s gravity. The rim would house inhabitants as well as shops, schools, light industry, and closed-loop agriculture; heavy industry could be located outside to take advantage of weightlessness and high vacuum in space. A major commercial activity of the first colony would be to construct solar-power satellites. Placed in geosynchronous orbit above the earth, the satellites would collect and convert sunlight into energy and beam it to earth as low-density microwaves. The space colony would have several advantages that might make it self-supporting: weightlessness for manufacturing and transportation, massive use of lunar minerals, and continuous natural sunlight for increased agricultural productivity. The study group had considered social, cultural, safety, and ecological difficulties of a space colony, but had found “no unsurmountable problems that would prevent humans from living in space.” (NASA Releases 75—229, 75—249; ARC Release 75—41; Dunstan, W Post, 23 Aug 75)
President Ford had signed legislation establishing a 17-member U.S. Metric Board to plan for voluntary conversion of the nation to the metric system. Dr. Ernest Ambler, acting head of the National Bureau of Standards, said the signing of the bill would encourage U.S. industry and commerce to export products made to metric dimensions, which “should stimulate additional international trade.” (SBD, 30 Dec 75, 299) During December: Goddard Space Flight Center and the Fla. Dept, of Natural Resources had approved the first long-range, space-assisted program to develop an “early warning system” for the onset of red tide, an ocean-borne organism that had left tons of dead fish rotting on beaches around the world. Dr. Warren A. Hovis of GSFC had designed an ocean-color scanner capable of detecting subtle variations in the color of coastal waters that might indicate changes in concentration and species of marine phytoplankton, especially the red-tide dino-flagellate Gymnodinium breve. Red tide had been a major problem because of oxygen depletion in ocean water from fish decomposition, and eye and respiratory infections caused by toxic particles produced in the organism. Shellfish beds affected had been closed for months by authorities. An outbreak of red tide in 1971 had cost the state of Fla. more than $20 million in lost tourist business. The ocean scanner, developed for use in the Nimbus-G pollution-sensing spacecraft scheduled for launch in 1978, could be used in photographic overflights by aircraft and Landsat spacecraft, in connection with on-site sampling of ocean waters by research ships, to detect the organism in time to take countermeasures and warn the public about affected areas. {Spaceflight, Vol 17 No. 12, Dec 75, 425)
X-ray satellites—including Uhuru (Explorer 42 launched 12 Dec. 1970) and Oso 7 (Orbiting Solar Observatory launched 29 Sept 1971)—had revealed a previously unidentified class of x-ray sources associated with very old star clusters, Science reported. In at least five documented cases, satellites had detected x-rays from globular star clusters coming from above and below the pinwheel disk of the Milky Way galaxy. These clusters, left behind when the rest of the primordial galactic matter fell into the disk of the galaxy over 10 billion yrs ago, still orbited the galactic center, bound to it by gravitational forces. Scientific evidence had indicated that the birth of new stars within clusters ended soon after the formation of the clusters themselves; the clusters had not been expected to contain any young binary star systems, those believed to make up the majority of galactic x-ray sources. This fact, along with the finding that sources were much more plentiful in globular clusters than in the galactic disk, indicated that some different process of x-ray production was at work. Scientists offered three explanations for the findings: existence of very large black holes, 1000 times as massive as the sun, within the clusters; a smaller black hole steadily fed with matter from the surrounding disk; and origin of the x-ray emissions in binary stars behaving like x-ray binaries in the galactic disk but with very different origins. Scientists were hoping that two more x-ray satellites, U.K.’s Ariel 5 (launched 15 Oct. 1974) and Ans 1 (Netherlands Astronomical Satellite launched 30 Aug. 1975), would contribute additional data to the study. (Metz, Science, 26 Sept 75, 1073—74)
NASA announced the selection of Sperry Rand Corp. for the negotiation of a fixed-price $8-million contract for a Space Shuttle mission-simulator computer complex at Johnson Space Center. Sperry would design, develop, fabricate, test, and deliver a computing complex and all associated hardware for the Shuttle mission simulator. (JSC Release 75—37)
Johnson Space Center announced that the first of two Space Shuttle training aircraft had been test flown at Grumman American Aviation’s Bethpage, N.Y., plant. The modified Gulfstream II would be used to train crews for Orbiter descent and landing procedures. The cockpit layout and the aerodynamic modifications of the trainers provided motion and visual cues and handling qualities similar to those of the actual Orbiter. The two trainers would be delivered to Johnson Space Center early in 1976. (JSC Roundup, 10 Oct 75, 1)
A new computer-controlled tracking device for telescopes, called VIP (video inertial pointing), had been developed at Ames Research Center to improve the aim of balloon-borne, airborne, and space telescopes. The two main functions of VIP were to help the astronomer steer the telescope, and to continuously update the automatic stabilization system that holds the telescope steady during viewing. Automatically stabilized telescopes heretofore had used gyroscopes to keep the telescope aimed at a point in space and counteract the rotation of the earth and other disturbances; gyroscopes had been found subject to drift, causing the telescope to wander off target. VIP, using a single video sensor, could generate the signals required for all three control axes—roll, pitch, and yaw—and could use the visual information to point at nonvisible (infrared) sources. Previous systems using star trackers had needed from two to six conventional sensors to do the same job. Development of VIP had made use of several state-of-the-art devices: the microprocessor, a complete digital computer on a single printed circuit card, was the computer inside the VIP electronics. Two types of video sensors used by VIP were the solid-state imaging device called a CCD (charge-coupled device) that incorporated a matrix of light-sensitive elements on the surface of a silicon chip measuring 0.01 mm on a side, and an advanced vidicon tube for night vision called an ISIT (intensified-silicon intensified-target) camera. By reducing the amount of hardware required for good performance, use of these new instruments had lowered the cost of the system. Ames would use VIP to provide accurate automatic pointing of the Space-lab Infrared Telescope Facility for the Shuttle that was under development at Ames and on contract. (Ames Astrogram, 9 Oct 75, 1)
Potential propellants for the Space Shuttle had been tested at an underground facility at Arnold Engineering Development Center, the Air Force Systems Command reported. Testing was part of a selection process to find a compatible propellant for the auxiliary motors that would separate the Orbiter from the two solid-rocket boosters. Three candidate propellants were tested at a simulated altitude of 40 000 m. Reusable ballistic test-evaluation system motors, each loaded with 45 kg of propellant, were fired seven times, burning for 2 sec and generating 53 400 newtons of thrust. Exhaust plumes were directed at 15- by 15-cm tiles of thermal protective material at various distances and angles; after the tests, the tiles were checked for erosion of the surfaces and edges. Pressure and temperature were measured in the rocket plumes, and surface temperatures and heating rates were measured on 21 selected material samples. All data and samples were sent to Marshall Space Flight Center for analysis. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75, 3)
States from New England to California had joined the competition to be selected as the site of a proposed Federal Solar Energy Research Institute that might be spending up to $50 million annually within 3 yr after its establishment. Competition had begun even before issuance of formal criteria describing the center’s mission and needs, expected later in November. A report on the center by a special committee of the National Research Council—an agency of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering—had forecast a staff of about 800 professionals and 800 support people. The committee had recommended a single institute administered by a nonprofit corporation, like those that govern many other large national laboratories; geographical location had not been considered as important as “intellectual atmosphere, technical suppliers and availability of services for a substantial laboratory.” Issuance of criteria by the Energy Research and Development Administration would call for proposals early next year, with site to be chosen in April or May 1976 by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Administrator of ERDA. Among those already in competition were the state of N. Mex., which had put a proposal for the solar center in Feb. 1975 when ERDA . was a month old; a consortium of universities and industries on Long Island, N.Y.; the governors of six New England states, sitting as the New England Regional Commission, who voted to “work as a regional force” to get the center for New England; and the state of N.Y., which had designated a coordinator to work on getting the center, including “assembling the necessary real estate” from various areas of the state. (NYT, 9 Nov 75, 33)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Donald K. Slayton, and Vance D. Brand participated in a 9-hr exercise at Kennedy Space Center to test the Apollo spacecraft’s internal systems, earth-landing systems, and instrument packages. The astronauts climbed into the Apollo, which was inside a huge altitude chamber, to test the systems at simulated altitudes of up to 61 000 m while cabin pressure was maintained at 34 474 newtons per sq m. Pressure inside the cabin was also lowered to zero to test the integrity of the astronauts’ space suits. On 16 Jan. the U.S. backup crew for the mission, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Lousma, participated in a similar exercise. (/VASA Activities, Feb 75, 11; KSC Release 5—75)
A 9.6-gram finely powdered lunar sample arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center where scientists would measure in a vacuum the sample’s thermal conductivity, a fundamental property governing heat flow through the surface of the moon. The data, correlated with data obtained from previous studies on simulated lunar samples, would be used to develop a thermophysical model of the moon, helping scientists better to understand the moon’s origin, history, and relationship to the earth. (MSFC Release 75—41)
Reduction-in-force and reduction-in-grade notices were sent to 213 Civil Service employees at Marshall Space Flight Center as a result of the reduction in the end-of-FY 1975 personnel ceiling. In addition to the 93 persons separated and the 120 persons reduced in grade, 191 MSFC employees received reassignments as part of a reclassification survey conducted during the summer of 1974. (MSFC Release 75—24)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists had released “Automobile Power Systems Evaluation Study,” urging adoption of a billion-dollar program to mass-produce, by 1985, a fuel-saving pollution-free replacement for the standard internal combustion engine, Richard Witkin reported in the New York Times. Funded by a $500 000 grant from the Ford Motor Co. with the understanding that the study would be independent and unbiased, JPL’s report recommended accelerated, parallel development of the Brayton gas turbine and Stirling external combustion engine until a clear choice could be made between them. The study found that either engine not only was virtually pollution-free and cut fuel consumption by 30 to 45% but also could be mass-produced at a cost differential small enough to be easily recovered through fuel savings by the first owner. The JPL engineers defined the fuel economy, emissions, and costs of vehicles powered by nine other engines as well as by improved versions of the conventional internal combustion engine. Six sizes of cars were analyzed, covering the range of consumer preferences. Electric and hybrid power systems were also evaluated. Aside from development of the Brayton and Stirling engines, the report recommended other programs to reduce fuel consumption 15 to 35% by improved vehicle packaging, weight reductions, and transmission improvements. The report also recommended that the U.S. work in the interim to improve the fuel economy and emissions level of conventional car engines. (JPL Laboratory, 1975/5, 21; Witkin, NYT, 4 Sept 75, 18)
Dr. Philip Handler, 18th president of the National Academy of Sciences, had been elected for a second 6-yr term, NAS announced. Dr. Handler had served as NAS president since 1 July 1969. Before that he had been chairman of the Department of Biochemistry at Duke Univ. Medical Center. NAS, established in 1863 by an act of Congress, was a private organization of over 1000 scientists and engineers frequently called upon to advise the Federal government on policy questions related to science and technology. (NAS Release, 21 Feb 75)
Space expenditures resulted in tangible economic benefits, according to a report, “The Economic Impact of NASA R&D Spending,” being prepared for NASA by Chase Econometric Associates, Inc., the Philadelphia Inquirer reported. Using methods developed for regular national economic forecasts, Chase predicted that, if NASA’s research and development budget were increased by $1 billion for the 1975—84 period, the U.S. gross national product (GNP) would swell by $23 billion or 2% over the normal rate of growth. Labor productivity in the nonfarm areas of the economy would rise more than 2% over the normal growth rate, and more than one million jobs would be created, reducing the unemployment rate by nearly 0.4% by 1984. According to Chase, the key to NASA’s domestic economic importance was in the agency’s widespread technological advances that benefited a wide range of industries. Although the technological benefits were readily visible, NASA’s influence on the nation’s economy was more subtle, taking about 5 yr to work its way through the system. (Text, NASA Final Rpt, CR 144351, April 76; Holland, PInq, 3 Aug 75)
NASA’s permanent employment level decreased by 521, or 2.1% during FY1975, NASA’s Office of Personnel reported in “The In-House Work Force.” Average age of NASA employees had risen 0.3 yr to age 43 and the average executive age fell 1.3 yr to age 49.6. Average grade of permanent employees remained at GS —11, constant since FY 1973. New hires and separations were down by 4.4 and 6.5%, respectively. Marshall Space Flight Center had had the only NASA reduction-in-force, resulting in 76 separations. The 62 intercenter professional transfers were down from 72 in FY 1974, and the 789 retirements were 30% below the FY 1974 level, although disability retirements continued to rise, totaling 220 in FY 1975—a 147% increase over FY 1970. (Off of Personnel Rpt, “The In-House Work Force,” 30 June 75)
Soyuz 20, the unmanned Soviet spacecraft launched from Baykonur 17 Nov., docked automatically withSalyut 4 using onboard radio devices and computer installations for a program of “testing unit constructions and onboard systems. . .in joint flight,” Tass announced. Salyut 4, the orbiting space station, had been visited by the crew of Soyuz 17 for almost 30 days and by the crew of Soyuz 18 for more than 60 days. The Soyuz 20 mission had been analyzed as transfer of fuel to Salyut 4; in orbit since 26 Dec. 1974, the space station was thought to be running low on maneuvering fuel. Reporters had speculated that a new two-man crew might be sent to Salyut 4 later this year for a stay of 3 mo or longer that would break the 84-day record set by U.S. astronauts in 1974. The value of the automatic docking for resupply would be the economy of not sending men with each flight, although the Soviets had never indicated the cost of their launches. Tass reported that the “space complex Salyut-4— Soyuz-20” was in an orbit with apogee 367 km, perigee 343 km, 51.6° inclination, and 91.4 min period of revolution. (IF Post, 21 Nov 75, B14; NYT, 21 Nov 75, 25; FBIS No. 225, 19 Nov 75, No. 226, 20 Nov 75; Aero Daily, 20 Nov 75, 108) 19 November—23 December: Atmosphere Explorer—E, third in a series of new deep-dipper spacecraft designed to investigate the ionosphere, was launched from Eastern Test Range aboard a Delta vehicle at 9:07 pm EST (0206GMT) into an almost perfect orbit: apogee, 3026 km; perigee, 157 km; inclination, 19.7°; period, 118.1 min. In orbit the satellite became Explorer 55. Major difference between the original and new generation of atmosphere explorers was the unusually large onboard propulsion system that enabled the later spacecraft to move themselves up or down in space by hundreds of km or go from highly elliptical to circular orbits. The name “deep-dippers” meant that the spacecraft could drop into the atmosphere and pull out again, taking measurements only while in the upper reaches of the thermosphere. This region, important because it absorbed most ultraviolet light and heat received from the sun and because movement of that heat determined the structure of the upper atmosphere, had been difficult to study because the altitude was too high for all aircraft and most balloons and too low for other satellites. The dipping orbit prevented accumulation of excessive heat in the metal skins of the AE spacecraft. Explorer 55 would also carry a backscatter ultraviolet spectrophotometer to obtain a vertical profile and density measurements of the ozone layer between 20°N and S; the measurements would be compared with those from Nimbus 4, launched in 1970, to evaluate the long-term accuracy of the Nimbus instrumentation. A mission operations report 23 Dec. said Explorer 55 had completed more than 400 orbits and all subsystems were performing well. (NASA Release 75— 290, 70-29, 72-212; KSC Release 266-75; SBD, 21 Nov 75, 114; KSC Spaceport News, 31 Oct 75, 3; MORs 13 Nov 75, 3 Dec 75, 23 Dec 75)
A Viking Data Review Management Center had been established at Kennedy Space Center, the Spaceport News reported. The center would promptly disseminate data from the two Viking spacecraft to all concerned government agencies and contractors, and would aid in solving launch-related problems as quickly as possible. During the Viking 1 launch on 20 Aug., data and review teams of NASA and contractor personnel at KSC were responsible for rapidly analyzing incoming data for top management. Any anomaly that could affect the launch of Viking B had to be detected and resolved as quickly as possible. Center personnel had tracked some 20 problems from discovery to resolution. (KSC Spaceport News, 5 Sept 75, 2)
Dr. Wernher von Braun—German-born rocketry pioneer and former Marshall Space Flight Center Director and NASA Deputy Associate Administrator—had undergone successful surgery at Johns Hopkins University Hospital in Baltimore for removal of a malignant tumor, the Washington Post reported. (AP, W Post, 13 Aug 75)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists reported that a joint JPL—Univ. of Texas astronomy team had detected carbon monoxide in the atmosphere
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio) introduced H.R. 7830, the President’s bill [see 9 June] “to strengthen staff capabilities for providing advice and assistance to the President with respect to scientific and technological considerations affecting national policies and programs.” The bill was referred to the Committee on Science and Technology. H.R. 7830 called for establishing an Office of Science and Technology with a director who would be the Presidential science adviser, a deputy director, and a 15-member staff. The office would have a budget of $1.5 million. H.R. 7830 was the second bill concerning Presidential science advice introduced by Reps. Teague and Mosher; H.R. 4461 had been introduced 6 March to establish a national science and technology policy. It also included provisions for a council of science advisers and a cabinet-level Dept, of Research and Technology. (CR, 11 June 75, H5346; 6 March 75, H1464)
Flight Research Center’s F—111 Integrated Propulsion Control System (IPCS) aircraft had made its first flight with the new system operating, FRC’sX-Press reported. The IPCS used digital electronics instead of conventional hydromechanical controls for actuating the aircraft’s supersonic jet engine and engine inlet. The new system was expected to allow aircraft to fly at full high-speed performance limits without adverse interaction among the engine, the inlet, and the aerodynamic flow over the fuselage. During the 1-hr flight, the modified inlet and engine were operated entirely under computer control, with routine test transfers between digital and hydromechanical control at all flight conditions. (FRC X-Press, 12 Sept 75, 2)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued requests for proposals for development of solar-energy cooling and heating systems for both residential and commercial applications. The RFPs had been issued in five areas of procurement: firms already producing and marketing solar heating and cooling subsystems; firms developing marketable subsystems and needing government assistance; firms with complete systems under development; firms designing innovative complete systems; and firms to compete for test and evaluation of the subsystems procured under the first two RFPs. The Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974, which requires demonstration of the practical use of solar heating in the U.S. within 3 yr and of combined solar heating and cooling within 5 yr, made the Energy Research and Development Administration responsible for managing and coordinating the national program. ERDA assigned MSFC the responsibility for developing solar heating and cooling systems in an all-out effort to create a viable industrial and commercial capability of producing and distributing such systems. (NASA Release 75— 284)
Bills were introduced in the Senate (S. 573) by Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), and in the House of Representatives (H.R. 2931) by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), “to authorize appropriations to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration for research and development, construction of facilities, and research and program management, and for other purposes.” Bill S. 573 was referred to the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Bill H.R. 2931 was referred to the Committee on Science and Technology. {CR, 5 Feb 75, H659, S1430)
A vertical motion simulator to reproduce the critical maneuvers of aircraft during takeoff and landing was being built at Ames Research Center. Costing $3.5 million, the VMS would use an existing cab and computer system, but would have new hardware to provide large-scale vertical motions. It would move as much as 18 m vertically and 12 m horizontally and would accurately simulate flare and touchdown of such aircraft as the short takeoff and landing (STOL) and vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL). (FRC X-Press, 26 Sept 75, 4)
A decrease in the amount of ozone in the stratosphere would cause an increase in skin cancer in white (the most susceptible) Americans, Walter Sullivan wrote in a New York Times article. The findings were based on the combined results of a 1974 NASA study that used instrumented aircraft to profile ozone and nitrogen oxide in the stratosphere, the National Cancer Institute’s 1974 Third National Cancer Survey, and the Dept, of Transportation’s 3-yr study “The Effects of Stratospheric Pollution by Aircraft” [see 21 Jan.]. The NASA study, which used high-altitude U-2 aircraft, confirmed that atmospheric ozone increased from the equator to the poles and was also influenced by regional and seasonal variations. Ozone molecules above the latitude of Houston were only three fifths as plentiful as above the latitude of Minneapolis. Correspondingly, the Cancer Institute survey showed an annual incidence of nearly 400 skin-cancer cases per 100 000 whites in Dallas, Tex., and less than half that figure in the Minneapolis area. These data, when combined with the DOT study, indicated that the number of skin-cancer cases in the U.S. would increase by 6000, or 1%, a year if 120 supersonic transports operated in the stratosphere for 4 hi daily, thus depleting the zone by 0.5%. (Lowenstein et al., Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, Nov 75, 2185— 90; Sullivan, ATT, 7 Feb 75, 11) 7 February—1 March: The eight prime and backup Soviet cosmonauts training for the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project joined with U.S. prime and backup astronauts in the U.S. to continue training for the joint mission. The cosmonauts—Aleksey A. Leonov, Valery N. Kubasov, Anatoly V. Filipchenko, Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov, Vladimir A. Dzhanebekov, Boris D. Andreyev, Yury V. Romanenko, and Aleksandr S. Ivanchenkov—arrived in Washington, D.C., 7 Feb. and traveled to Kennedy Space Center the following morning. The group toured KSC 8 Feb. giving the cosmonauts their first glimpse of the U.S. launch complex. Col. Leonov commented that the pad from which Alan B. Shepard was launched in 1961 “is a very simple launch stand compared to the ones we use now.” Following a tour of Disney World in Florida 9 Feb., the cosmonauts spent 10 Feb. inspecting the Vehicle Assembly Building, where the Apollo would be stacked on the Saturn IB launch vehicle; the Launch Control Center firing room, from which the rocket would be controlled; and Launch Complex 39 Pad B, from which the Apollo spacecraft would be launched. Press coverage of the first Soviet visit to KSC noted that previous invitations for Soviet officials to visit KSC had been turned down,apparently because of Soviet unwillingness to reciprocate with invitations to Baykonur Cosmodrome. But in May U.S. astronauts would return the visit by going to the Soviet launch site. The astronauts and cosmonauts flew to Johnson Space Center to begin a 2-wk training period that included exercises in command and docking module simulators and mockups; joint language-training sessions; briefings on experiments, contingencies, and mission rules; and practice run-throughs of the planned joint activity days. Following a press conference at which U.S. and Soviet ASTP crew members were introduced to JSC employees, the Soviet cosmonauts returned to the U.S.S.R. in two groups, on 28 Feb. and 1 March. (NASA Release 75—34; JSC Release 75—07; NASA ASTP Status Report No. 7; Spaceport News, 21 Feb 75; JSC Roundup, 28 Feb 75, 1; McElheny, NYT, 10—17 Feb 75)
Explorer 49—Radio Astronomy Explorer B, launched 10 June 1973 into lunar orbit to measure galactic and solar radio noise at frequencies below ionospheric cutoffs and beyond terrestrial background interference by using the moon for o'ccultation, focusing, or aperture blocking for increased resolution and discrimination—had completed nearly 2 yr of successful operation and was adjudged successful. Explorer 49's lunar orbit, away from the noisy environment of earth, had increased the effectiveness of the instrumentation. The spacecraft had been able to detect very weak solar-noise bursts up to 13 mhz and as low as 25 khz. Its predecessor, Explorer 38—Radio Astronomy Explorer A, launched 4 July 1968—had been able to observe relatively intense solar-noise bursts only in the 200 khz to 9 mhz range because of its orbit within the earth’s magnetosphere. Explorer 49 also was able to observe and follow solar bursts out of the ecliptic plane. Data from Explorer 49 had verified two major magneto spheric noise regions, one on the morning side of the earth and the other on the evening side. In addition, spacecraft data showed that intense noise occurred in the 8 to 12 pm time zone with less intense noise in midmoming. The intense late-evening noise was generated within 10 000 to 12 000 km of the earth’s surface, and the dayside emission seemed to come from an altitude of less than 4000 km. (NASA MOR, 3 June 75) 3- 6 June: A Kennedy Space Center team tested a parachute system designed to lower an instrumented probe through the dense atmosphere of Venus to its surface. The tests—made for Ames Research Center in preparation for a Pioneer mission to Venus in 1978—were conducted in KSC’s Vehicle Assembly Building, an ideal wind-free testing facility. Full-scale 3.7-m parachutes with simulated pressure vessels weighing 204 kg were dropped 13 times from heights of up to 137 m to the floor of the VAB with impact cushioned by a honeycomb cardboard impact arrester. The performance of the parachute system was monitored photographically during the drop to determine the aerodynamic trim characteristics of the parachute. The 1978 Pioneer—Venus.mission would include the launch of two separate spacecraft toward Venus. The first would orbit the planet collecting data for about 250 days; the second would carry one large probe, which would use the parachute to descend to the surface, and three small probes decelerated by aerodynamic drag only. The parachute on the largest probe would be used to separate an instrumentbearing pressure vessel and stabilize it for a series of critical scientific measurements as it passed through the Venusian cloud layer. None of the probes was designed to communicate with earth after impact. (KSC Release 98 — 75; Lockyer, Public Affairs Office, interview, 6 Oct 75) FY 1976 NASA Budget Authorization Congressional Adjustments Program Budget Request House Changes Senate Chauges Conference Changes Total Conference Recommendation Research & Development Space Shuttle 1206.0 0 0 0 1206.0 Space Flight Operations 207.1 -4.0 -4.0 -4.0 203.1 Advanced Missions 1.5 + 1.5 -1.5 +0.5 2.0 Physics & Astronomy 155.8 + 1.0 +7.0 +7.0 162.8 Lunar & Planetary 259.9 -1.0 0 0 259.9 Launch Vehicle 166.9 0 0 0 166.9 Space Applications 175.0 +6.5 +8.9 +6.5 181.5 Aeronautical R&D 175.4 0 0 0 175.4 Space & Nuclear R&D 74.9 +2.0 0 0 74.9 Energy Technology 5.9 0 0 0 5.9 Tracking & Data 243.0 -2.2 -2.2 -2.2 240.8 Technology Utilization 7.0 +2.0 0 +1.0 8.0 R&D Totals 2678.4 +5.8 +8.2 +8.8 2687.2 Research and Program Management Basic Submission* 776.0 0 0 0 776.0 R&PM Totals* 776.0 0 0 0 776.0 Construction of Facilities Modification of 11- by 2.7 0 0 0 2.7 11-ft Transonic Tunnel (ARC) Modification of 40- by 0 +12.5 0 +12.5 12.5 80-ft Transonic Tunnel Addition to Lunar 2.5 -2.5 -2.5 -2.5 0 Sample Facility (JSC) Addition to Composite 1.9 0 0 0 1.9 Model & Metal Shop (LaRC) Construction of Transonic 0 +27.5 0 0 0 Tunnel (LaRC) Space Shuttle Facilities 47.2 -0.9 0 0 47.2 Rehabilitation of 16.0 0 0 0 16.0 Minor Construction 5.0 0 0 0 5.0 Facility Planning & 9.3 +4.5 0 +4.5 13.8 Design — — ■—* — C of F Totals 84.6 +41.1 -2.5 +14.5 99.1 “Grand Totals* 3539.0 +46.9 +5.7 +23.3 3562.3
A star tracker, STELLAR (Star Tracker for Economical Long Life Attitude Reference), Was being developed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory for a variety of future manned and unmanned space missions. STELLAR used a solid-state silicon detector, called a charge-coupled device (CCD), for image sensing and a microcomputer to process and format the data. Previous star trackers had used high-voltage vacuum-tube image dissectors for image sensing; the tubes were difficult to produce, had a limited lifetime, developed errors, and could provide attitude-reference data from only a single star in any given observation frame. STELLAR, which substituted a single low-voltage 6-mm-sq CCD chip for the complex and expensive tube, offered the advantages of solid-state reliability and of simple programming to adapt to varying mission requirements. In addition to substantial savings in cost of flight hardware, the CCD imaging devices were expected to revolutionize TV camera design, permitting miniature low-cost home monitors within the next several years. STELLAR, which had been developed under the management of NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, would provide trackers for planetary Mariner spacecraft after the Mariner—Jupiter—Saturn mission in 1977 and for such Space Shuttle payloads as the proposed Shuttle infrared telescope facility. For the telescope facility, STELLAR would track as many as 10 stars simultaneously, providing position coordinates and star magnitudes for each. (NASA Release 75—251)
The appearance of a supernova on 5 July 1054 had been recorded in primitive art by ancient Indians on the walls of a N. Mex. cave, the New York Times reported. Goddard Space Flight Center astronomer Dr. John C. Brandt, leader of the team of astronomers who had discovered the cave art, said that the date of the pictograph—a crescent moon with a nearby object variously described as a circle, cross, or asterisk—coincided with records of the Chinese Sung dynasty. The Chinese had reported that, on the morning of 5 July 1054, a minor star in the constellation Taurus appeared to explode into extraordinary brilliance. Ancient Chinese astronomers had described the event— which modem astronomers identified/as the supernova that had created the Crab Nebula—as visible in daylight for 23 days before fading and at night for another 633 days. Although the modern astronomers could not prove that the cave art depicted the Crab Nebula supernova, “What we have is circumstantial evidence that, to us, looks pretty good,” Dr. Brandt said. No other supernova of known date had been visible from North America near a crescent moon. The supernova pictographs were not the only evidence of astronomical observations by American Indians; Navajo gourd rattles and sand paintings often depicted the Pleiades and Orion constellations, and Hopi designs included representations of the Milky Way, constellations, sun, moon, and stars. Heaps of stones strategically placed centuries ago in Wyo. hills could have been used by Indians to sight stars and to predict and confirm the summer solstice. (Rensberger, ATT, 10 Sept 75, 39)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $59 950 contract to Abbott Laboratories for living human kidney cells to be used by U.S. astronauts in the German electrophoresis experiment during the July U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Abbott Laboratories would provide the cells as part of an experiment to find a way to isolate effectively the one kidney cell in 20 that produced the enzyme urokinase, an enzyme capable of dissolving blood clots. Because gravity made such separations difficult on earth, scientists hoped to develop new technology in the zero-g environment of space. The experiment was being developed, built, and tested by West Germany’s Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm Gmbtt. (MSFC Releases 75- 7, 75-13) mobile launcher inside the Vehicle Assembly Building on 13 Jan. Engineers began electrical and mechanical systems tests on the first stage and installed flame curtains and panels to shroud the outboard engines. The Saturn IVB second stage was mated to the booster 14 Jan. and the instrument unit added to the stack 16 Jan. A boilerplate unit simulating the Apollo command module was added 17 Jan. The boilerplate would be removed and replaced with the actual spacecraft, and the rollout of the entire vehicle to the launch pad was scheduled for March. The docking system and docking module were mated 17 Jan. after combined systems tests. The complete unit would be placed into the spacecraft adapter in February. Swing-arm launch-control center integration was completed 21 Jan. (KSC Release 165—74; MSFC Release 75—19; Spaceport News, 23 Jan 75, 3; 6 Feb 75, 3; Marshall Star, 2 Jan 75, 2)
Pulsars had been discovered to be not only superdense but also superfluid, Columbia University physicists reported in Astrophys-ical Journal. Pulsars, collapsed remnants of exploded stars formed almost entirely of neutrons, had been shown to be so dense that a spoonful would weigh millions of metric tons. Theorists had suspected that such objects, even with a thin rigid crust of iron, would be superfluid—a state produced experimentally on earth in small helium specimens cooled almost to absolute zero, where both friction and viscosity disappear. Material inside such an object, stirred into motion, would swirl indefinitely. The Columbia Univ. experimenters had attempted to measure the surface temperature of a young pulsar, such as the one in the Crab Nebula. If the temperature were less than 8.8 million0C, the object would probably be superfluid; a fast-spinning neutron star would cool rapidly because of its reduced heat capacity. Temperatures of such objects could be detected by x-ray wavelengths, but the x-rays produced could not penetrate earth’s atmosphere. Space observation was necessary, and rockets launched by NASA from Hawaii and N. Mex. tested the Crab nebula pulsar, using the moon as a curtain. As the moon passed across the whole nebula several times, cutting off its various x-ray emissions, the physicists had been able to identify the x-rays indicating temperature. Since the Crab nebula pulsar’s temperature was shown to be less than 5 million °C, the physicists concluded that the pulsar must be superfluid. (ATT, 30 Dec 75, 40)
Marshall Space Flight Center forwarded the experimental payload for the first launch of NASA’s Space Processing Applications Rocket (SPAR) project to Goddard Space Flight Center, where the payload would be integrated with its launcher, a Black Brant sounding rocket. The integrated unit would undergo checkout before being sent to N. Mex. for firing by White Sands Missile Range early in Dec. The payload consisted of nine scientific experiments on processing materials in near-weightlessness. After the first launch, three flights per year carrying similar payloads had been planned through 1980. All payloads were to be recovered by parachute for ground analysis. The low-cost SPAR missions would provide data on space processing until Space Shuttle flights began in the early 1980s. (MSFC Release 75—233)
A Senate and House of Representatives conference committee reported out H.R. 8070, appropriating FY 1976 funds for the Department of Housing and Urban Development and sundry independent executive agencies, after resolving the disagreements of the two congressional bodies. Total NASA FY 1976 appropriation recommended by the committee was $3 551 822 000, changed only with respect to funds allotted for research and development. The FY 1976 NASA Budget Appropriation Congressional Adjustments to Budget Request Program Budget Request House Changes Senate Changes Conference Changes Total Conference Recommendation Research & Development 267B.4 -49.4 + 7.0 -1.0 2677.4 Construction of Facilities 84.6 - 2.5 -2.5 -2.5 82.1 Research & Prog Management 776.0 +0.5 -0.5 -0.5 775.5 Totals 3539.0 -52.4 +4.0 -4.0 3535.0 (H.R. Comm Rpt 94—502; CR, 23 Sept 75, H9035 —38) committee appropriated to NASA $2 677 380 000 for R&D, $48.4 million more than the $2 628 980 000 proposed by the House [see 19 and 24 June] and $8.0 million less than the $2 685 380 000 proposed by the Senate [see 24 and 26 July]. The conference committee agreed that NASA could reprogram $7 000 000 from the R&D total for an upper atmospheric research, technology, and monitoring program. The committee also agreed that $1 000 000 of the total funding of $48 400 000 proposed for a Pioneer-Venus mission might be reprogrammed for further planning of the Large Space Telescope, though not beyond evaluation of phase B studies. Appropriations for construction of facilities and for research and program management had been previously agreed on and remained unchanged.
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a 10-mo $149 325 contract to Econ, Inc., to study the technical and economic feasibility of two different solar power plants, both in space and on the ground, and compare them with conventional terrestrial plants expected to exist ift the future. The first system was an orbiting system which would generate electrical power from the sun and transmit it to industries and cities on earth. A second kind of solar-power generating system, located on a remote area of the earth, could transfer power via an earth-orbiting satellite to users thousands of kilometers away. Econ, Inc., would use results from earlier concept studies to define requirements for payload packaging, development and checkout, and resupply for launch on the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 75—37)
NASA announced that Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Associate Administrator, would leave NASA in May to join the National Center for Resource Recovery as president and chief executive officer. Dr. Petrone, who in 1960 was assigned on loan from the Army to Kennedy Space Center as Saturn project officer, later became Apollo program manager responsible for planning, developing, and activating all launch facilities for the Apollo program. Upon retirement from the Army he served at KSC as director of launch operations from 1966 to 1969, when he was appointed Apollo program director. In 1972 he was assigned additional responsibilities as program director of the NASA portion of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. In Dec. 1972 he was appointed Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, a position he held until his appointment in 1974 as Associate Administrator. (NASA Releases 69-124, 75-98)
Radio transmissions from Mariner 10 ceased after attitude-control gas was depleted and flight controllers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory sent the command for the spacecraft to stop operations at 8:20 am EDT. Before shutdown, spacecraft engineering tests were conducted to try to open the stuck door on the plasma science experiment, rotate the solar panels to various positions, stow the scan platform at 18(f, operate the stuck tape recorder, and provide data for future spacecraft design. During its more than 16 mo in heliocentric orbit, Mariner 10 (launched 3 Nov. 1973) had traveled more than 1.6 billion km and made four planetary encounters, one of Venus and three of Mercury. It had passed within 5800 km of Venus 5 Feb. 1974, and transmitted to earth the first closeup photographs ever taken of the cloud-shrouded planet. Mariner 10 had confirmed the high-speed circulation of Venus’ upper atmosphere and revealed circulation patterns that swirled from the equator toward the poles. It had also revealed a long tail of charged particles trailing behind the planet and away from the sun; verified the presence of a bow shock wave created by the solar wind acting upon the dense atmosphere; detected hydrogen, helium, and argon in the Venusian atmosphere; and discovered temperature-inversion zones suggestive of deeper stratiform cloud layers. First spacecraft to use the technique, Mariner 10 used the gravity of Venus to speed it on toward Mercury. The probe flew by that planet three times, on 29 March and 21 Sept. 1974 and 16 March 1975. At Mercury, Mariner 10 photographed a highly cratered lunar-like surface with large scarps hundreds of kilometers long and over 1.6 kilometers high. Mariner 10 data also revealed the existence of a chemically differentiated light crust, lunar-like near the surface and earth-like at its interior, and an unexpected magnetic field 100 times smaller than earth’s. A slight but measurable atmosphere was found, in addition to streams of high-energy electrons and protons on the planet’s dark side. On its last encounter with Mercury [see 16 March] Mariner 10 came within 327 km of Mercury to take the closest photographs ever made of another primary planet. (NASAMOR, 7 April 75; VASA Activities, April 75, 12—13; NASA Release 75—59; A&A 1974)
The Washington Post reported that NASA had turned down a request by Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.) to postpone the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (scheduled for launch on 15 July) until the U.S.S.R. brought back the two Soyuz 18 cosmonauts who had been docked with the orbiting Salyut 4 space station since 26 May 1975. Sen. Proxmire said that the Soviet Union would be unable to maintain ground control of two manned missions simultaneously. He had based his judgment on closed-door testimony given him as chairman of the Appropriations Subcommittee by Carl Duckett, deputy director for science and technology at the Central Intelligence Agency. The Post quoted Prox-mire as saying that the Soviet command center would be strained to handle two manned flights, particularly if one were in trouble in space. Sen. Proxmire said that it would he a simple matter to deorbit the two Soyuz 18 cosmonauts and bring them home. In a telephone interview with the Post, ASTP Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney said that the Soviet Union had two mission-control centers, one managing the Salyut flight, the other managing ASTP. Lunney said NASA had calculated that the two Soviet spacecraft would cross over the same Soviet tracking stations only twice: One overlap might last as long as 30 sec and the other 90 sec. Soviet officials had assured NASA that ASTP communications would have priority during these two short passes. (O’Toole, W Post, 3 July 75, A33)
A red-tide detection program had been approved by Goddard Space Flight Center and the Florida Department of Natural Resources (FDNR). Caused by an ocean-borne phytoplankton, Gymnodinium breve, “red tide” had left thousands of dead fish rotting on beaches in coastal estuaries. Ocean-color scanners—mounted on Landsat 1 and 2 (launched 23 July 1972 and 22 Jan. 1975) and on NASA’s U-2 research aircraft—could detect subtle color variations in coastal waters, to warn of changes in concentration and species of marine phytoplankton populations and indicate possible red-tide invasions. Research vessels would verify the findings by on-site sampling. Program managers hoped the data would lead to the development of an early warning system that would allow crews to combat effects of the red tide. (NASA Release 75— 242)
U.S. intelligence reports indicated that the Soviet Union had fired 22 missiles and orbited 9 satellites in July, making it one of the most active months in Soviet space history, the Baltimore Sun reported. In an impressive display on 2 July, the Soviets fired 11 ballistic missiles from four different sites within an hour, launched eight SSN—6 submarine-based rockets at 8-sec intervals, and launched an SS—7, SS—8, and SS—11 all within 2 min. Other tests included submarine missile launchings by northern and far eastern fleets, medium- and intermediate-range missile firings from Kapustin Yar, and a test flight of the new SS—17 missile which could carry four warheads. The month’s only failure was the malfunction of the second stage of a SS—19 missile, a vehicle believed to be capable of delivering six nuclear warheads to separate targets over ranges of 9260 km. The nine satellite launches included six Cosmos satellites, a Molniya communications satellite, a Meteor meteorological satellite, and the manned Soyuz 19, the Soviet spacecraft participating in the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (Corddry, B Sun, 14 Aug 75, A2)
Marshall Space Flight Center was seeking industry proposals for procurement of parallel definition studies of the atmospheric, magnetospheric, and plasmas in space (AMPS) payload, a reusable research facility to be integrated with Spacelab. The proposed 12-mo studies were to define an overall AMPS program with special emphasis on ground- and flight-support systems and subsystems, systems engineering and integration, and ground/orbital operations with the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. AMPS, a single laboratory system flown with the Space Shuttle, would perform experiments and observations in atmospheric science, magnetospheric physics, and plasma physics. (MSFC Release 75—172) 4—6 August: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, at its 1975 aircraft systems and technology meeting in Los Angeles, Calif., presented the following aerospace awards. Award Recipient (affiliation) Purpose Aircraft Design Walter E. Fellers (Northrop Corp.) For 30 yr of outstanding achievement in design and development of fighter aircraft to meet rapidly changing requirements Octave Chanute Alan L. Bean Jack R. Lousma Dr. Owen K. Garriott (NASA Skylab 3 astronauts) For outstanding contributions to manned space flight and scientific research. Using the most sophisticated instruments ever flown in space, crew performed scores of scientific experiments and observations vastly expanding man’s knowledge and enhancing quality of life on earth 38th Annual Wright Brothers Lecture Henri Ziegler (Airbus, France) Topic: International Cooperation in Aerospace Projects: cooperation between European industries and between Europe and United States (AIAA Release, 22 July 75)
NASA commemorated the 15th anniversary of the launch of Tiros 1 (Television Infrared Observation Satellite), the world’s first weather satellite. Since its launch 1 April 1960 at Cape Canaveral on a Thor-Delta booster, 30 experimental and operational weather satellites of increasing complexity had been launched to provide continuous information on earth’s environment. Over the 15-yr span the weather satellites had taken more than 2.2 million photographs while traveling through 12.1 billion km of space. Not a single major hurricane or storm had gone undetected or untracked. President Ford issued a statement in recognition of the Tiros 1 anniversary: “More accurate daily weather forecasts. . .have had an immeasurable impact in making the lives of millions more pleasant, productive, and secure. No major storm anywhere goes undetected by NASA or NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration] satellites. We can be proud that people everywhere can benefit from this practical application of U.S. space science and technology.” (NASA Release 75—73; NASA Activities, April 75)
Dr. William R. Lucas, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, announced the establishment of an advanced mineral-extraction task team within the Program Development Directorate. Working with the Dept, of Interior’s Bureau of Mines, the team would use NASA expertise and technology to increase the nation’s ability to extract energy and minerals at acceptable cost and with minimum effect on the environment. One of NASA’s first tasks would be to improve the efficiency of the long-wall shearer—a coal-removing machine used by miners that could leave a foot or more of unrecoverable coal along the edges of a vein—by using sensors, remote controls, and TV monitors to guide the machine. (MSFC Release 75—215)
A new medical diagnostic system known as time-delay spectrometry, using high-frequency sound waves, had been developed by scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The new technique passed continuous, varying high-frequency sound waves through the body; the waves were received and displayed as pictures on a cathode-ray-tube screen. Existing ultrasound systems had operated less effectively, sending into the body a pulse of sound waves and timing the echo after the waves were reflected from the body’s various internal organs. A picture from the JPL system looked like an x-ray and took shape in 2 to 4 min. Bones, muscles, organs, and differences in soft tissue could be clearly seen. The varying pitch of the sound waves and the differences in frequency response and absorption properties of various body tissues would aid the diagnostician in discriminating between, for example, a cyst and a tumor. JPL researchers were planning to evaluate the system’s usefulness in hospital applications, first by demonstrating its ability to detect and identify tumors in the female breast. (NASA Release 75—162)
The Senate Committee on Appropriations reported out H.R. 8070, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development—Independent Agencies Appropriations Bill for FY 1976. NASA FY 1976 Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and Senate Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) Senate Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 2678.4 2687.2 (+8.8) 2685.4 (+7.0) Construction of Facilities 84.6 99.1 (+14.5) 82.1 (-2.5) Research & Program Management* 776.0 776.0 (0) 775.5 (-0.5) Totals* 3539.0 3562.3 (+23.3) 3543.0 (+4.0)
NASA announced the appointment of Donald P. Hearth as Director of Langley Research Center, effective in September. Hearth, Deputy Director of Goddard Space Flight Center since 1970, would replace Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, who is leaving NASA to pursue other interests. Prior to being at GSFC, Hearth had served 3 yr as Director of Planetary Programs at NASA Hq. He came to NASA in 1962 from the Marquardt Corp. where he managed research on hypersonic propulsion and flight systems. Before that, he had been an aeronautical research scientist at Lewis Aeronautical Laboratory of NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. (NASA anno 11 July 75)
NASA announced appointment of William H. Rock as Deputy Director of Flight Research Center, effective 9 Nov. Rock joined NASA in 1964 and had served at NASA Headquarters, at Goddard Space Flight Center, and since 1968 at Kennedy Space Center, where he was associated with various applications and manned flight programs. (NASA anno, 30 Oct 75)
Engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center were completing tests seeking to refine the means of towing to shore for refurbishment and reuse recovered solid rocket boosters from Space Shuttle launches. These tests explored the question of whether the parachute recovery lines and riser lines on the three recovery parachutes to be attached to each booster would, when under tension during descent, stretch enough to develop sufficient latent energy to deploy the 52-mm-dia by 15-m long tow rope from a tray located in the booster’s forward skirt. The tests employed a 10-m Saturn S—II-stage adapter ring, to which the parachute lines were attached. A crane hoisted the adapter ring until the stress on the rings was 12 000 kg, about one-half the stress expected on the parachutes lowering the booster. An explosive bolt was detonated, abruptly freeing the parachute lines; they contracted and the lines and fitting to which they were attached were yanked upward more than 60 m, quite enough energy to deploy the tow line. The recovery system parachutes would be fitted with flotation devices so they could be recovered. On the first six Shuttle developmental flights, the set of parachutes would be cut free from one booster in each set of two and both would be tested to determine which configuration made it easier to retrieve and tow the booster. (MSFC Marshall Star, 10 Sept 75, 2)
Kennedy Space Center announced the selection of General Electric Co.’s Space Div. and Martin Marietta Corp. for competitive negotiation of a contract to check out, control, and monitor subsystem hardware for the Space Shuttle launch processing system. The contractor would design, develop, build, test, and install the hardware. The launch processing system would use modern industrial automation techniques, applied to a modular concept, to meet maintenance and refurbishment requirements for tum-around and launch of the Space Shuttle. The other candidates for the contract had been Grumman Aerospace Corp. and Aeronutronic Ford Corp. (KSC Release 94—75)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a single-source request to Sunstrand Corp. to submit a proposal for the design, development, manufacture, test, and delivery of the auxiliary power unit for the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster’s thrust-vector control subsystem. The APU would include a gas generator, turbine, gearbox, fuel pump, electrical controls, control valves, instrumentation, mounting system, and the mechanical and electrical connections required to interface with other SRB subsystems. Two APUs would be used during prelaunch and ascent phases of flight to provide hydraulic power to the thrust-vector control system of each booster. (MSFC Release 75 —62)
Kennedy Space Center announced the award of a 10-mo $30 000 contract to the Univ. of Miami for preliminary design of a laser system capable of penetrating water to a depth of 100 m to measure factors affecting water quality. The use of lasers to provide remote sensing of the ocean depths had been proved feasible during a NASA contract awarded to the school in 1974. The system, which would provide continuous information on temperature, salinity, and backscatter turbidity, would be tested first in a laboratory, then from a ship, and finally from an aircraft. (KSC Release 35—75)
Observation of the sun’s magnetic fields might make it possible to predict weather 4 days in advance with greater reliability, said scientists at the Institute for Plasma Research at Stanford University. Investigators at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Boulder, Colo., and at Stanford said that magnetic forces from the sun played a role in formation of pressure troughs on earth, which bring rainy weather; observations from space, corroborated from earth measurements, indicate influence on weather from solar flares, sunspots, and high velocities of the solar wind. The weather effect involved two phenomena, the sun’s magnetic-sector structure and a concept called the vorticity-area index. The index is a measure of the size of low-pressure troughs in square kilometers, calculated by computer from twice-daily standard weather-service maps. As solar magnetic sectors and boundaries were measured regularly at Mt. Wilson Observatory, the Astro-physical Observatory in the Crimea, and the Stanford Solar Observatory, scientists could compare the solar magnetic structure with the vorticity-area index to see whether the sun structure affected the nature and size of low-pressure troughs that bring rain and stormy weather. (NYT, 16 Nov 75, 40)
Dr. Maxime A. Faget, director of engineering and development at Johnson Space Center, received the gold medal of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers at its annual winter meeting honors assembly in Houston. Faget had been responsible for design and testing of the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft and the Skylab space station, as well as of the Space Shuttle scheduled for flight in the late 1970s. Previous JSC recipients of the ASME gold medal had been JSC Director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., in 1973 and former JSC Director Robert R. Gilruth in 1970. (JSC Release 75—98)
Three high-speed F—104G aircraft formerly belonging to the German Air Force arrived at Flight Research Center to be used for research purposes. FRC had been flying F—104As, an early version of the same aircraft, but replacement parts were becoming scarce. Parts for the F—104G would be available through the 1980s. The three aircraft left Jever Air Force Base in West Germany on 27 June and made stops in Scotland, Iceland, Greenland, and Labrador before arriving at FRC. (X-Press, 18 July 75, 4)
Landsat 2, launched 22 Jan. 75, had successfully completed more than 10 mos of orbital operations during which it had acquired more than 53 000 frames of imagery. Nearly 300 000 messages from data-collection platforms had been received, processed, and sent to users; imagery from more than 2600 sample sites for the Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment (LACIE) had been processed and shipped to Johnson Space Center. About 62% of domestic investigations and 43% of foreign investigations had been supplied enough Landsat 2 data to meet the major objectives. Primary mission objectives had been declared satisfied, as well as all secondary objectives that were not time-dependent. (MOR E—641—75— 02, 4 Dec 75)
Frank Briscoe Co., Inc., and Santa Fe Engineers, Inc., were the apparent successful bidders on two major Space Shuttle contracts which would be awarded by Kennedy Space Center, KSC announced. Frank Briscoe Co. had bid $8 733 300 on a contract for the construction of the Orbiter processing facility, Orbiter towway, and associated site work and utilities at KSC. It was in the processing facility that the Orbiters would be safed, serviced, and maintained after returning from flights into space and then prepared for their next mission. Phase 1 of the construction—scheduled for March 1977 completion—included a 5000-sq-m building with a low bay area 88 m long, 30 m wide, and 8 m high and two high bay areas 61 m long, 46 m wide, and 29 m high. Santa Fe Engineers had bid $3 567 567 on a contract to construct the Shuttle approach and landing test facilities at Flight Research Center. The contract would include site preparation, construction of a maintenance hangar and shops, Shuttle Orbiter mating structure area, hypergolic fuel and oxidizer area, fire protection pump station, concrete towway and service aprons, parking area and road paving, and necessary utilities. The project was scheduled for completion in September 1976. (KSC Release 73—75) '
Kennedy Space Center announced a reorganization to prepare for the Space Shuttle era of space operations. John J. Neilon, Director of Unmanned Launch Operations since 1970, was named Deputy Director of Technical Support; George F. Page, Chief of Operations, Div. of Manned Spacecraft Operations, would move into Neilon’s former post. The Launch Operations Directorate would be reorganized into four major second-level groups: engineering, payloads, space transportation systems processing, and expendable vehicle operations. (KSC Release 253—75)
The Soviet Union had landed Arctic explorers on an ice floe 600 km from Chukotka to set up Severny Polyus—23, a drifting observatory to study weather and ice conditions in the Arctic Sea, Tass announced. Air search last spring had discovered a flat berg 7 km long and 3 km wide about 500 km from Wrangel Island north of the eastern tip of Siberia. N. Blinov, head of the Soviet high-latitude expedition Sever-27, called this a rare find because the ice appeared to be 20 m thick. Research stations on such floating islands made it possible to trace circulation of Arctic ice over many years; the Severny Polyus—22 station operating in the Arctic for 3 yr had moved in a clockwise anticyclone circular drift and “repeatedly found itself in both the eastern and western hemispheres.” The new station, larger than its predecessor, was expected to last longer. (Tass, in FBIS No. 240,4 Dec 75) ,
NASA’s basic goal in the U.S. stratospheric research program was to determine the normal makeup of the upper atmosphere with emphasis on understanding the dynamic processes occurring and the perturbations caused by natural and man-made events, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said at a hearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. NASA’s current high-altitude program was being carried out by conventional and special purpose aircraft such as the U—2, instrumented packages placed on commercial aircraft, instrumented balloons, sounding rockets, and computer modeling techniques. Satellites still provided the best potential for continuing repetitive global observations of the upper atmosphere. The Nimbus satellites had measured properties affecting the ozone and had made vertical profiles of the upper atmosphere. Atmospheric Explorer (AE) satellites had made coordinated investigations of photochemical processes in the upper atmosphere caused by solar ultraviolet radiation. Dr. Fletcher said that NASA would continue these efforts and had plans for new atmospheric studies. In addition to payloads planned for launch on the Space Shuttle, NASA would use instrumented aircraft, balloons, and sounding rockets to study the effects of chlorofluorometh-anes, or Freon, on atmospheric ozone. (Transcript)
NASA’s Oso 5 Orbiting Solar Observatory began its 7th yr in earth orbit. Launched 22 Jan. 1969 to study the sun and its influence on earth’s atmosphere, Oso 5 had completed more than 34 000 orbits. It was the fifth of eight spacecraft launched in the OSO program to observe the sun during most of its 11-yr solar cycle. Oso 5 had been shut down 3 yr after launch but was reactivated in July 1974 after decay of the orbit of Oso 7 (launched 29 Sept. 1971). Oso 5, which had a planned lifetime of 6 mo, was obtaining data on the frequency and extent of eruptions on the sun’s surface. (NASA Release 75— 46)
A group of 35 representatives from central Fla. planning agencies attended a 1-day workshop at Kennedy Space Center to assess the possibility of using satellite data for land-use planning. Edward J. Hecker of the KSC Office of Earth Resources told the group that the 4-cent-per-sq-mi cost of obtaining satellite data was one-third the cost of aircraft-obtained data. Data collected by “on foot” surveys cost $20 per sq mi, and the cost of using an automobile for this purpose ran about $2 per sq mi. Dr. Garland L. Thomas, coinvestigator for the earth-resources mission of Landsat 2 (launched 22 Jan.) and employee of the Brevard County (Fla.) Planning and Zoning Dept., told the group that, using satellite data and photography, planners could determine which areas were developable and which were not, produce comprehensive land-use planning maps, monitor water quality, and trace the process of eutrophication in central Fla.’s many lakes. (KSC Release 181—75) 8, 9, and 17 September: Data collected by sounding rockets, satellites, instrumented balloons, and high-flying aircraft had supported the hypothesis that fluorocarbons such as those found in aerosol spray cans might be breaking down the earth’s ozone shield, scientists told hearings of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ Subcommittee on the Upper Atmosphere. Ozone in the stratosphere screened the earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation that might increase incidence of cancer and other skin diseases and prove lethal to many life forms as well as damage eyes, crops, and livestock. An increase in atmospheric fluorocarbons could also have a greenhouse effect, permitting sunlight to pass freely but inhibiting the escape of heat in the form of infrared radiation. This would warm the lower atmosphere and the earth, altering aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems and environmental chemicals, and creating climate changes. An extreme greenhouse effect had been blamed for Venus’ oven-hot temperatures. Dr. Warren R. Muir, cochairman of the Interagency Task Force on Inadvertent Modification of the Stratosphere, told the subcommittee, “Based on our preliminary assessment there seems to be a legitimate cause for concern.” If additional government research—with NASA coordinating—had proved more conclusively the danger to the environment, the government should take action for “prompt enactment of toxic substances legislation.” Dr. Wilson K. Talley of the Environmental Protection Agency agreed that fluorocarbons might pose a problem to the stratosphere, and that the total effect of releasing fluorocarbons and other halo carbon compounds into the atmosphere might not become apparent for 10 yrs. But, with evidence of public danger not strong enough to stand up to a court challenge by manufacturers, government regulation of the offending substances would be unenforceable. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 10 Sept 75, 1)
Contrary to the impression of peaceful cooperation created by the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project docking mission [see 15—26 July], both countries had increasingly emphasized the military potential of manned space flight, the Philadelphia Inquirer reported the Center for Defense Information as saying. The Center, a private organization critical of defense spending, charged that the 1967 United Nations treaty which reserved outer space for peaceful uses had not prevented either country from exploiting space for military purposes. Although the Pentagon had listed its space spending at $2.25 billion, it had acknowledged the existence of another $667 million in Air Force “miscellaneous” requests for secret space programs. The Center said that, although the Soviet Union’s space program was 15 yrs behind the U.S., frequent launches indicated that they were attempting to catch up. The Center concluded that, contrary to the spirit of the outer space treaty, space technology and systems were being developed that had the potential for new confrontations between the superpowers. (UPI, P Inq, 10 Aug 75)
NASA’s use of the firefly s two light-producing chemicals, luciferin and luciferase, to test for the chemical presence of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), an energy-storage compound present in every living cell, had increased interest in luminescence as a tool for medical research, the New York Times reported. Research done in 1948 by Johns Hopkins Univ. scientists had demonstrated that ATP was the third essential ingredient—along with luciferin and luciferase—necessary for the firefly’s glow, and that the amount of light generated was directly proportionate to the level of ATP present. The Hopkins scientists had also developed a simple test for life itself, since luciferin and luciferase added to any living matter could reproduce the firefly’s glimmer. NASA applied this information, with more sophisticated lightdetection instruments, to develop a test for life on Mars for use aboard the Viking spacecraft (launched 20 Aug.) NASA scientists working with the firefly chemicals at Goddard Space Flight Center had developed many applications, including a method of detecting bacteria in water; this permitted speedy diagnosis of urinary infections, as well as testing the effect of various antibiotics on particular infections. Univ. of Calif, scientists continued the research, adapting the techniques for related work in measuring creatine phosphokinase (CPK) in the bloodstream. CPK, present in all human blood, was produced in abnormally high quantities during muscle-cell degeneration that accompanied cardiac arrest or muscular dystrophy. CPK could be treated to produce ATP and, with the application of firefly chemicals, to produce a glow proportionate to the amount of CPK in the bloodstream. Researchers had used the measurements as a quick blood test to tell whether a patient had suffered a heart attack. (NYT, 25 Aug 75) 26 August—3 September: NASA launched Symphonie 2, France and West Germany’s second experimental communications satellite at 9:42 pm EDT 26 Aug. from Eastern Test Range. A three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch vehicle boosted the spacecraft into a synchronous transfer orbit with a 37 974-km apogee, 413-km perigee, 678.3-min period, and 13.2° inclination. On 29 Aug. at 11:48 am EDT, ground controllers activated the onboard liquid-fueled apogee motor to circularize the. orbit at geosynchronous altitude. By 31 Aug. Symphonie 2 was in an orbit with a 35 870-km apogee, 35 364-km perigee, 23-hr 47-min period, and O.CP inclination. NASA’s primary objective for the mission—to launch the Symphonie 2 into a synchronous transfer orbit with sufficient accuracy to enable the satellite to accomplish its operational mission—had been successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on 3 Sept. When finally positioned at 11.5° west longitude over the equator, the 402-kgSymphonie 2 would provide 1200 telephone, 8 voice, and 2 TV channels for experimental communications between Europe and the African and South American continents. Second of two experimental comsats developed by the French-West German Consortium Industriel Franee-Allemand pour le Satellite Symphonie (CIFAS), under the direction of Germany’s Gesellschaft fur Weltraumforschung GFW and France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Symphonie 2 would expand the French-West German experimental satellite TV and telegraph communications program begun with the launch of Symphonie 1 on 18 Dec. 1974. In October 1973 NASA had agreed to provide the launch vehicle and services on a cost-reimbursable basis, and in June 1974 had signed a launch services contract with the consortium. Estimated cost of hardware and services was $12 million. Goddard Space Flight Center, under the direction of the Office of Space Science, was responsible for the launch vehicle and for limited tracking during initial activities. When the satellite separated from the vehicle third stage, the Symphonie Project Operations Group in France and West Germany would assume operational responsibility. (NASAMORs S—492— 204— 75— 02, 25 July, 3 Sept; GSFC SSR, 31 Aug 75; GSFC Wkly SSR, 21—27 Aug 75; NASA Release 75— 234)
Boeing Co. scientists were studying a way to cut aircraft fuel consumption as much as 40%, according to the Baltimore Sun. The technique involved cutting many tiny holes in the aircraft wings and applying suction from within. This would control the laminar flow of the airstream, preventing drag-producing turbulence from being created by the change in pressure as the air flows over the wing surface. In the 1960s Northrop Corp. had built the Air Force a plane incorporating the concept but technical problems had discouraged further development. Rising fuel costs and recent improvements in structural materials and manufacturing techniques had sparked new interest in the method. (AP, B Sun, 31 March 75, A7) During March: NASA’s Ats 6 (Applications Technology Satellite, launched 30 May 1974) was the means for coordinating long-distance emergency operations of ships near the Azores Islands during search and rescue tests conducted by Goddard Space Flight Center. The tests evaluated the effectiveness of Ats 6 functioning as a communications relay between a ship in distress and a coordination center thousands of kilometers away. In the tests, a “stricken” ship dropped a buoy equipped with a position-indicating radio beacon into the ocean. Ats 6 picked up the signals and transmitted the ship’s identification and position to a NASA ground station, which relayed them to the Coast Guard’s New York Rescue Coordination Center. The rescue center then sent the information to rescue aircraft and ships. As they neared the area, they could home in on the buoy’s signals. Within 2 hr of the time the buoy was dropped, the ship and the buoy were located. The search and rescue communications tests were part of continuing joint L-band experiments using Ats 6 and conducted by GSFC and the Depts. of Commerce and Transportation, as well as by the European Space Agency and the Canadian Dept, of Communications and Ministry of Transport. (GSFC Goddard News, Oct 75, 3)
Efforts to charge batteries on the Viking 2 lander faded for unknown reasons, but controllers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory were confident that time would allow them to solve the problem. Both Viking 1 and 2 were launched with their lander batteries essentially uncharged to prolong their lives; the batteries aboard the Viking 1 lander were charged without difficulty 2 wk ago, and the same procedure had been scheduled for Viking 2. The spacecraft carried a backup as well as a prime battery charger, but NASA had not attempted to use it in case the problem had originated outside the charger system. Use of the backup before the problem had been identified might have damaged it as well as the prime charger. Viking 2, originally scheduled to be launched first, had been pulled back for repair after its orbiter batteries had been accidentally drained; officials said there was no connection between prelaunch orbiter problems and the lander situation. (NASA Release 75—288; Aero Daily, 4 Dec 75, 10; SBD, 4 Nov 75, 16)
Landsat 2 (launched 22 Jan.) was monitoring water resources in Miss. and the effects of pollution on the water system, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. As part of the NASA earth resources program, three data-collection buoys placed in the Pearl River were transmitting water-quality data to Landsat 2, which relayed the data to a tracking station at NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) for processing. Processed data on water temperature, dissolved oxygen, acidity/alkalinity, and conductivity were received in the Miss. Air and Water Pollution Control Commission, where state investigators could identify a pollution source within 15 min of a satellite pass over the buoys. A similar experiment was being conducted in Mobile Bay by NASA and the Marine Environmental' Sciences Consortium. Data from the experiments would help evaluate the usefulness of the system and suggest improvements. (MSFC Release 75—97)
McDonnell Douglas Corp., working under contract to NASA, began flight and static tests of the refanned engine to demonstrate NASA-developed noise-reduction techniques. More than 2 yr of work at Lewis Research Center; Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft Corp.; Boeing Co.; United Air Lines, Inc.; and American Airlines, Inc., had been spent in modifying a JT8D engine to reduce irritating high-frequency noise. When installed on the McDonnell DC—9, the new engine was expected to reduce by 60% the ground area exposed to excessive noise levels. Similar results were expected with the engine instaUed on Boeing’s 727 and 737 aircraft. During the initial test phase, McDonnell Douglas would fly for 90 hr a DC—9 outfitted with the modified engine, to evaluate noise characteristics and flight performance. The second phase of testing would begin in mid-January when Boeing would flight-test it in a 727. (NASA Release 75—4; LeRC Release 75—2)
Kennedy Space Center announced the award of a $6 473 074 fixedprice indefinite-quantity contract to Modular Computer Systems, Inc., for minicomputers and associated equipment and services for the Space Shuttle. The contract included $4 226 646 in hardware and services already ordered and $2 246 428 in additional hardware. Modular Computer Systems would supply minicomputers, peripheral equipment, special interface devices, associated software, engineering and maintenance support, spares, and documentation. (KSC Release 114—75)
For coating solar collectors that heat and cool homes and buildings, black chrome had been demonstrated by a Lewis Research Center scientist to be some 20% more efficient than current coatings. Being “solar selective,” black chrome allowed absorption of sunlight but prevented the ensuing heat from radiating out of the collector. Because of this, black chrome would raise the temperature of water in the system as much as 5°C (40PF) over the 95°C (200fDF) provided by current coatings. A system with hotter water would require fewer collectors to heat or cool an area. (NASA Release 75 — 55)
Canada would develop the remote manipulator system (RMS) for NASA’s Space Shuttle to permit astronauts inside the Shuttle Orbiter to deploy or retrieve payloads in space, NASA announced. Canada would fund the $30 million project, providing the first flight unit to NASA without charge in 1979. Canada would also supply flight units for follow-on Orbiters. Costs for these units would not include charges for Canada’s research and development. (NASA Release 75 — 135)
NASA launched Cos-B scientific satellite for the European Space Agency at 3:48 pm PDT from Western Test Range on a three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Launch had been delayed for 2 days because a telemetry aircraft was grounded with hydraulic-valve failure. The satellite entered the planned highly elliptical polar orbit with a 99 886-km apogee, 344-km perigee, 36.7-hr period, and 90.13° inclination. NASA’s objective for the launch was to place Cos-B into a highly elliptical near-polar orbit with sufficient accuracy to allow the satellite to conduct its planned scientific experiments. Purpose of the Cos-B mission was to study extraterrestrial gamma radiation in the energy range 25 mev to 1 gev in order to establish the intensity of the average gamma-ray flux; examine large-scale anisotropy of the radiation over angular regions corresponding to galactic features; study quasars, x-ray, and radio sources of small angular size in supernova remnants; measure energy spectra of various galactic radiations; and study time variations of radiation from pulsars, x-ray, and radio sources. On 11 August, ground controllers sent low-voltage commands from ESA’s space operations center (ESOC) in West Germany to check out spacecraft and experiment performance. After a second switch-on at high voltage, a series of inflight tests further validated all onboard systems and experiment performance. On 15 Aug. a complete review of spacecraft operational status showed all air and ground systems were operating normally; by 19 Aug., the first data had been returned to earth. Cos-B, first satellite launched for the newly organized ESA, was the eighth developed by ESA’s predecessor, the European Space Research Organization [see 30—31 May]. Under the direction of the European Space Research and Technology Center (ESTEC) and prime contractor Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm GmbH, Cos-B had been designed and built by organizations in 7 of the 10 ESA member countries. The single experiment—a 115-kg spark chamber—had been assembled from five primary and two subsidiary experiment units supplied by six institutes in four European countries. After separating from the launch vehicle, Cos-B transmitted data in real time to ground stations of the European Space Tracking Network with central control at the European Space Research Operations Center in West Germany. For NASA, Goddard Space Flight Center had the responsibility for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle under the direction of the Office of Space Science. GSFC also had responsibility for limited tracking support. (NASA MOR S-492 -301 -75 -01, 22 July 75, 10 Sept. 75; NASA Release 75—214; Releases 7—19 Aug 75)
Two Ames Research Center research aircraft would be stationed in Hawaii for scientific research missions. A U—2 earth-resources survey aircraft would probe the stratosphere up to 20 km to measure the distribution and extent of ozone, nitric oxide, and aerosol particles in the area between the equator and 4(F N latitude. Conducted by ARC to aid a national study, the sampling program was part of a semi-globed study of the effect of ozone and nitric oxide on the world’s climate over a long period of time. Similar missions had been flown over higher latitudes and polar regions. Another objective of the U—2 flights was to collect remotely sensed data on the Hawaiian Islands in support of several investigations, including one of the decline and die-back of Ohia and Manami trees in the forested areas of Hawaii. NASA’s Kuiper Airborne Observatory, a C—141 jet aircraft equipped with a 91.5-cm infrared telescope, would make 16 flights to collect previously unobtainable data from the region of the galactic center, a highly complex intense source of infrared emission. (ARC Astrogram, 17 July 75, 1)
The government of Indonesia selected Hughes Aircraft Corp. to build a satellite communications system linking 120 million residents of the Indonesian islands. Under the $23.6-million contract signed in Jakarta, Hughes would build two satellites, a master control system, and nine earth stations. Thirty additional stations would be built to Hughes specifications by two other U.S. firms. The satellites were tentatively scheduled for launch in fall 1976. {LA Times, 16 Feb 75) 14 February—17 June: Flight Research Center flew 16 flights using an instrumented B—57 to gather detailed information on jet streams, thermal turbulence, and mountain waves over the western U.S. as part of the Measurement for Atmospheric Turbulence program. Onboard instruments measured velocity and acceleration in the various samples as the B—57 flew through the turbulence for 10 min on a straight-line course at altitudes up to 15 000 m. Langley Research Center, which had been making similar flights over the eastern U.S. since March 1974, would analyze the data for use in making future aircraft safer in turbulent air. (FRC Release 4—75)
Scientists believed that light flashes observed by Skylab 4 crew members during their 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974 mission as they flew through the South Atlantic Anomaly—a slight asymmetry in the earth’s magnetic field where the Van Allen radiation belt dipped unusually low over Brazil—were a previously unsuspected form of radiation, Science magazine reported. The radiation seemed to consist of atomic nuclei heavier than hydrogen which, when stripped of electrons, would carry multiple positive electric charges. The astronauts had seen the flashes when the spacecraft cabin was dark and they were preparing for sleep. Scientists suspected that the flashes were stimulated within the retina of the eye by the high-energy cosmic-ray particles. Normally earth was shielded from cosmic rays by the magnetic field, but strong penetrating cosmic rays could reach as far into the field as the Skylab orbit. Because the magnetic-field shielding of the earth weakened toward the geomagnetic poles, it was possible to predict variations in cosmic-ray exposure as Skylab moved away from the poles. During two test periods, light-flash observations of Astronaut William R. Pogue showed a close correlation with exposure variations. (Pinsky et al., Science, 30 May 75, 928—930; Sullivan, NYT, 29 May 75, 10) The new space agency’s symbol was a rounded “e,” for European, on a globe representing earth, with fine lines suggesting both orbit and axis and a white dot representing a satellite in space. (ESRO—ESA Releases 20 May 75, 23 May 75, 2 June 75) 30 May—8 June: The 31st Annual Paris Air Show was held at Le Bourget Airport in France. New restrictions on flight demonstrations by high-performance aircraft, imposed by the French government after the 1973 Air Show crash of the Soviet Tu —144 supersonic transport, had placed the show’s emphasis on displays of the latest aerospace hardware and technology from throughout the world. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that the general turndown in the economy throughout the western world had caused a decline of 20% in exhibitors from the 1973 show. France emphasized the cooperative nature of its major programs, displaying the French—British Concorde SST, the French—German Alpha Jet trainer-attack aircraft, the French—British Jaguar close-air support aircraft, and the multinational A—300B twin-engine wide-body transport. The U.S. pavilion reflected the changing environment at the show, reserving 66% of its floor space for company exhibits restricted to industry visitors; the remaining 33% contained exhibits open to the general public. In 1973 60% was exhibitor space and 40% for the general public. Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. displayed aircraft that were potential replacements for the Boeing 707 and McDonnell DC— 8 on commercial airlines. The Boeing aircraft, a three-engine member of the 7X7 family, incorporated the NASA-developed supercritical wing. “Blue Planet” was the theme of the public section of the U.S. pavilion which emphasized technological fallout and practical uses on earth of space technology. Included were full-scale models of the Viking spacecraft scheduled for launch to Mars later in the year, and of Martin Marietta Corp.’s large space telescope. The 80 participating British companies emphasized their country’s capability in avionics and equipment and aerospace technology. Among the new aircraft exhibited by the British were the BN2 Islander, a floating aircraft for service between islands; the Lock-spieser LDA— 1, for cargo and agricultural uses; and a new version of the BAC 111 fighter aircraft. West Germany’s display stressed its participation in international consortiums as a major hope for continuing growth. Messerschmitt— Boelkow—Blohm GmbH pointed out in its display that 70% of its revenues in 1974 had been derived from multinational projects. (Av Wk, 2 June 75, 14-20; 9 June 75, 12-17)
Water vapor was detected for the first time deep in the atmosphere of Jupiter in October 1974 by a group of Univ. of Arizona scientists aboard NASA’s C—141 Airborne Infrared Observatory, Ames Research Center announced. The data, combined with data gathered by the Pioneer 10 and 11 flybys of the planet in 1973 and 1974, added to the speculation that organic compounds being formed in Jupiter’s atmosphere might account for the red, brown, and orange coloring of the planet’s clouds. The discovery was made with a 91.5-cm infrared telescope, newly installed aboard the C—141, which was flying above virtually all the water vapor in the earth’s atmosphere. Scientists would use the new data to predict Jupiter’s temperature and pressure, develop a structural model of the planet’s atmosphere, and determine Jupiter’s character at the time of its formation. (ARC Release 75—3; ARC Airborne Astronomy Prog Mgr, interview, 26 July 76; Larson et al., Astrophysical Journal, 1 May 75, L137— 40)
First major inflight tests of the Viking 1 lander scheduled to touch down on Mars in July 1976 had shown the craft to be in excellent health, flight controllers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory reported. JPL engineers completed thorough checks of the nuclear power, propulsion, guidance, attitude control, computer, tape recorder, telemetry, heat control, and radar landing systems, as well as four of the scientific instruments, including two cameras to photograph the Martian surface in closeup. The second Viking lander, scheduled to reach Mars in Sept. 1976, would undergo similar checkout the following week. (Pasadena Star-News, 14 Nov 75, 1)
Evidence that aerosols from spray cans had damaged earth’s ozone layer had been under study by an independent scientific panel that would make its report early in 1976, the Wall Street Journal said, but Federal action against fluorocarbons was not considered likely before that time, and foreign governments were considered unlikely to act before the U.S. did. Fluorocarbon manufacturers and users had insisted that the ozone-depletion theory had not been proved, and warned of damage to an industry that had made products worth $400 million to $450 million a year, with manufacturing facilities worth $300 million. U.S. producers had accounted for about half the world’s production of fluorocarbons, which was approaching about 0.9 billion kg a year. Two Univ. of Chicago chemists—Mario J. Molina and F. Sherwood Roland—had advanced a theory 18 mo ago that fluorocarbons used in spray containers and in refrigerators and air conditioners were getting into the upper atmosphere, encountering ultraviolet fight (more intense at high altitudes) that split the fluorocarbon molecules to release highly active chlorine. The chlorine had depleted the atmospheric ozone by converting it to ordinary oxygen. The theory had been partly confirmed in the laboratory by National Bureau of Standards chemists who showed that ultraviolet lamps would split fluorocarbons to produce either one or two chlorine atoms, depending on the ultraviolet wavelength used. However, no one had discovered a way to measure the ozone to tell whether it had been affected by chlorines from fluorocarbon dissociation. Another clue had been to search for chlorine products such as hydrochloric acid in the stratosphere; tests conducted by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory using U-2 flights and balloons had Confirmed the presence in the stratosphere of hydrochloric acid that had not originated from the earth. Granting the effect of aerosols, opinions had been divided upon the significance of ozone depletion: possible consequences of additional ultraviolet radiation impinging upon earth included increased incidence of skin cancer, harmful effects on animal and plant life, and alteration of temperature patterns in the stratosphere with resulting alteration of weather patterns on earth. Even without proof of damage, public apprehension of risk had increased pressure for a ban on the suspect chemicals, especially in aerosols. (Tannenbaum in WSJ, 3 Dec 75, 1)
NASA had awarded a $2 548 265 contract amendment to Aeronutronic Ford Corp. of Houston for operation of the Mission Control Center at Johnson Space Center. The amendment to a contract originally awarded in 1963 called for additional labor and materials that would bring the value of the contract to $267 710 123. The work would employ 513 persons at the three AFC facilities in Houston, and in Penn, and Calif. (JSC Release 75—94)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and New York City mayor Abraham D. Beame met in New York to review NASA-developed safety standards for handling liquefied natural gas. Following a 1973 gas storage tank fire that killed 40 persons, New York officials had asked NASA to use its experience in handling highly volatile rocket fuels to help the city establish a comprehensive risk-management plan to design, construct, and operate natural gas facilities. The plan, developed at Kennedy Space Center and incorporated into New York City Fire Department operating procedures, identified liquid gas risks, controlled the risks through redundant fail-safe techniques, and set up criteria for discussions to eliminate or accept certain risks. Also discussed was the new fiberglass and aluminum breathing system developed at Johnson Space Center and being tested by firefighters in New York, Houston, and Los Angeles. Results to date indicated that the new unit—which was 30% lighter than conventional systems and featured a high-pressure, longer duration air tank and a face mask allowing better vision—was superior to old-style units. The new system was expected to be introduced commercially later in the year. (NASA Release 75—25)
Astronaut Donald K. (Deke) Slayton had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Operations for Approach and Landing Test at the Johnson Space Center, announced Center Director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr. In the newly created position, Slayton would be responsible for planning and implementing the approach and landing test project for the Space Shuttle program. He most recently had been docking module pilot of the U.S. crew for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA Release 75—314; JSC Release 75—100)
High-speed computer techniques were producing profiles of giant red stars, in a NASA-sponsored research project conducted by California Institute of Technology scientist Dr. Juliana Christy-Sackmann at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Analyzing high-resolution infrared data on successive star flashes representing from a fraction of a year to a million years in the evolution of a red giant, Dr. Christy-Sackmann found that the violent combustion of helium in the heart of the stars, releasing heat up to 260 million°C, produced a predominance of carbon. She stressed the convective role of helium and hydrogen in fueling the stellar fires: A convective tongue of helium was driven through layers of burning shells toward the outer envelope of hydrogen. Hydrogen might also drop down to overlap, giving extra energy to an old star. The release of energy from the interior of the stars varied, apparently because of convective zones that seemed to come and go. Although each flash produced extreme interior disruption, surface changes in most cases were minor. The length of time required for computation had prevented previous investigators from following and analyzing more than a few of the hundreds of successive flashes occurring in a star; using the new computer technique, Dr. Christy-Sackmann planned to analyze hundreds. (JPL Release, 2 Feb 75)
Aerodynamically designed wind-flow aids could reduce wind resistance to tractor-trailer trucks by up to 24%, NASA announced. In a series of tests conducted in 1974 at Flight Research Center, NASA and the Department of Transportation evaluated performance gains of a 15-m trailer outfitted with five different commercially available drag-reduction devices and two different trailer-cab spacings. The tests had been conducted without and then with the devices, at speeds from 45 to 30 km per hour, to evaluate changes in fuel economy resulting from reductions in air drag. (NASA Release 75—39) During February: NASA biochemist B. C. Walverton began planting large quantities of water hyacinths as part of a study to determine the plant’s ability to absorb and concentrate toxic metals and to metabolize various other chemical pollutants. Scientists at NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories had been experimenting since 1971 with vascular aquatic plants, which are equipped with a system of vessels to carry nourishment from the roots to the leaves. Results of the experiments were so promising that NASA, in cooperation with Mississippi state officials and the city of Bay St. Louis, had installed a special system using water hyacinths as a final filtration to remove nitrates, phosphates, and other chemical pollutants from the 245-sq-kmBay St. Louis, Miss, sewage lagoon. The water hyacinths would be harvested and analyzed to determine the amounts and kinds of impurities assimilated; saturated plants would then be recycled , using one of two methods being developed by NASA, into a mixed hydrocarbon fuel similar to natural gas. (NASA Release 74—332) March 1975
Johnson Space Center announced award of a $11.5-million contract to General Electric Co. Space Div. to provide acceptance-checked equipment for the Space Shuttle orbiter. The equipment would be used to conduct standard tests and to detect variances in spacecraft systems in assembly at the Rockwell International Corp. plant. GE would also provide checkout support during the approach and landing phases of the Shuttle missions. (JSC Release 75—92)
Goddard Space Flight Center had awarded a $45.8-million contract to RCA Astro-Electronics Division for design and production of eight third-generation Tiros-N spacecraft, the company announced. Scheduled for launch in 1978, the 635-kg spacecraft would forecast weather 2 days in advance with accuracy equal to that of present 1-day predictions. RCA earlier had received a $16.6 million NASA contract for long lead-time items for the Tiros-N series, bringing the total cost of the satellites to $62.4 million. (SBD, 21 Oct 75, 259)
NASA had awarded Bendix Field Engineering Corp. a $104-million contract to operate and maintain portions of the worldwide Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network that serves the needs of NASA’s earth-orbital space programs, manned and unmanned. The 2-yr cost-plus-award-fee contract would permit negotiation of up to three additional 1-yr extensions, and would be supervised by Goddard Space Flight Center. The contractor would provide technical support for STDN stations and facilities as well as for the Laser Tracking Subnet and for the Magnetic Tape Certification Facility and the NASCOM facilities located at GSFC. (NASA Release 75—315)
During a panel discussion at a 4-day meeting of the Astronomical Association of Northern California, scientists rejected the idea that inhabitants of other planets would send manned spacecraft or unidentified flying objects to establish contact with earth. Such a venture would require enormous expenditures of energy and funds. The Washington Star quoted Ames Research Center scientist John Billingham as saying, “The most logical way to establish contact is radio communication.” Billingham was devoting 2 yr to the subject of intelligent extraterrestrial life, and how to reach it if it existed. He said that several persons around the globe had been constantly trying to make radio contact with outer space by aiming a radio telescope at a suitable star, hoping that an inhabited planet might be orbiting. (UPI, W Star, 11 Aug 75, A16)
Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of PM Facilities Management Corp. for a 2-yr $3 500 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract to provide processing, preparation, retrieval, reproduction, and distribution of space-science data for the National Space Science Data Center. PMI would also maintain, upgrade, develop, and implement plans for improved data-handling information systems, and would provide scientific analyses and programming, prepare reports, maintain files, order supplies and equipment, and operate photographic and microfilm equipment. The Data Center served as a NASA-wide depository for space-science data and a means of analyzing and disseminating this information beyond that provided by principal investigators. (GSFC Release G—24-75)
Does not include a supplemental request for pay increases, introduced as H.R. 13172 and signed into public law P.L. 94— 303 on 1 June 1976 The committee appropriation allowed for no new starts but did permit an increase of $400 million in funding for the Space Shuttle. The committee supported manned NASA activities such as an international cooperative space-docking mission built on the successes of Apollo and Skylab programs, and the development of the Space Shuttle as an economical, versatile transportation system to give a wide variety of users access to space. The committee also endorsed a space science flight program furthering knowledge of the earth, atmosphere, moon, sun, planets, interplanetary space, and stars; a research and development program to identify and demonstrate useful applications of space techniques in areas such as weather and climate, pollution monitoring, earth-resources survey, earth and ocean physics, communications, and space processing; U.S. leadership in aeronautics and space programs; worldwide tracking and data acquisition support for NASA’s manned and unmanned programs; a program to assist in the development of national energy self-sufficiency; and a technology utilization program to speed dissemination of technological and engineering information gained during NASA programs to government, industry, and other users. The committee restored $48.4 million for the two-spacecraft Pioneer—Venus mission scheduled for launch in 1978; the House had cut the funds requested by NASA in the original budget. The Senate agreed with NASA that the project had high scientific priority, and that delaying it to a less opportune launch window when Venus was further from the earth would require redesign of the spacecraft and would cost $50 million more than originally planned. The committee also restored $1 million cut by the House from the $5 million requested for definition studies and advanced technological development of the Large Space Telescope. The study was necessary for NASA to define an optimum design at minimum cost. The committee added $7 million to the $7 million NASA request for research and development to help understand and monitor physical and chemical processes in the upper atmosphere, emphasizing the need for studies of the depletion of stratospheric ozone. Because some committee members had had reservations about the high cost and safety hazards of the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the committee said it would like to be notified well in advance of any future joint space mission to permit an accurate assessment of potential benefits and costs. The committee’s recommendation of $82.1 million for construction of facilities, $25 million less than the request, would allow continuation of previous work including Space Shuttle facilities, facility rehabilitation and modification and minor construction, and facility planning and design. Not only did the committee, agreeing with the House action, cut the $2.5 million requested for an addition to the Lunar-Sample Curatorial Facility at Johnson Space Center, it also agreed with the House in denying funds to modify the 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel at Ames Research Center—not included in the original request but authorized by Congress—until the committee had had an opportunity to review the necessary funding in a formal budget request. The recommendation of $775.5 million for research and program management, the same amount approved by the House, was $0.5 million less than NASA’s request. The reduction reflected a 10% cut in General Services Administration rental charges. The Senate committee recommended a total of $925 028 000 in funds for the transitional period 1 July— 30 Sept. 1976. NASA Transitional Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and House-Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) H.R. Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 730.6 700.6 (-30.0) 700.6 (-30.0) Construction of Facilities 14.5 10.8 (-3.8) 10.8 (-3.8) Research & Program Management* 213.8 213.8(0) 213,7 (-0.1) TOTALS* 958.9 925.2 (-33.8) 925.0 (-33.9)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $3.2-million contract by Space Shuttle prime contractor Martin Marietta Aerospace Co. to Avco Corp. Aerostructures Div. to manufacture the intertank section of the shuttle’s external tank. The intertank would provide support between the liquid-oxygen tank and the larger liquid-hydrogen tank. The disposable external tank, 47 m long and 8.4 m in diameter, would carry liquid propellant for the Space Shuttle’s three main engines. (MSFC Release 75 — 116)
Development of the Spacelab by the European Space Agency for NASA’s Space Shuttle continued. An annual Spacelab status review 4—5 June attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Roy Gibson, ESA Director General, established schedule milestones, determined readiness for the preliminary design review, and discussed arrangements for the first Spacelab flight. They also discussed plans for the instrumentpointing system and the first Spacelab payload, follow-on Spacelab procurement by NASA, and terms and conditions for use of the Space Shuttle—Spacelab system. On 6 June, the recommendations of 10 teams—which had met at Marshall Space Flight Center in May to discuss Spacelab systems, avionics, structures, environmental control and life support, software, test and integration, and payload operations and accommodations—were presented to the NASA Office of Manned Space Flight for concurrence. At the same time ESA was preparing similar recommendations at the European Space Research and Technology Center (ESTEC). Beginning on 9 June, combined NASA—ESA teams met in Noordwijk to consider the 1772 review-item discrepancies prepared by both agencies and, after 2.5 days, had processed all of them. (Spacelab Newsletter 75—2, 3 July 75)
NASA and the Energy Research and Development Administration dedicated a 100-kw wind turbine designed and built by Lewis Research Center at Plum Brook Station for ERDA. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and ERDA Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., attended the ceremony conducted by LeRC Director Dr. Bruce T. Lundin. Objective of the wind turbine project was to test the performance and define the operating and economic characteristics of wind-energy systems for generating commercial electric power in the future. The installation will provide data for use in developing larger and more advanced systems that could be produced commercially by private industry. The Plum Brook installation was the largest wind-energy system in operation and the second largest ever built; the largest, a 1250-kw system operated between 1941 and 1945 in Vermont, had been abandoned because of economic difficulties and availability of less expensive fossil energy. The new generator, with its 38-m-wide propeller blades, was built on top of a 30-m-high open-truss steel tower and could supply the power needs of about 25 homes. NASA was participating in the ERDA program because of its capability in energy-related technology. (NASA Release 75—277)
A NASA Atlas-Centaur vehicle launched Intelsat-IVA F—l at 8:17 pm EDT from Eastern Test Range into the planned synchronous transfer orbit. The communications satellite had been launched for the Communications Satellite Corp. under a cost-reimbursable contract. At 11:18 pm EDT 26 Sept., ComSatCorp fired the apogee kick motor to put the satellite in a geosynchronous orbit with a 35 821km apogee, 35 294-km perigee, 23-hr 44-min period, and 0.1° inclination. NASA objectives for the mission were to review design, performance, and flight readiness for the Federal Communications Commission and to assure compatibility of the Intelsat spacecraft with NASA launch vehicles and launch environmental conditions, and to launch Intelsat-IVA F—l into a transfer orbit that would enable the spacecraft apogee boost motor to inject the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit. Objectives were completed and the mission adjudged successful 29 Jan. 1976. ComSatCorp objectives were to fire the apogee boost motor, position the satellite into the planned geostationary orbit, and operate and manage the system for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT). Intelsat-IVA F—l, built by Hughes Aircraft Co., was 698.5 cm high and 238.2 cm in diameter, with a liftoff weight of 1515 kg and orbital weight of 825.5 kg. The spin-stabilized satellite consisted of two main elements: A rotating section contained the power subsystem, a cylindrical solar array and two nickel-cadmium batteries; the anhydrous hydrazine-powered positioning and orientation system; the solid-fueled apogee motor; and the despin-control system. The despun earth-oriented platform section contained the communications repeater, antennas, and associated elements of the telemetry and command subsystems. All spacecraft antennas were supported by a single tubular mast. For 24 hr after apogee-motor firing, Intelsat-IVA F—l drifted eastward at a rate of Iff per day; then a velocity-correction maneuver slowed the spacecraft drift to 2.9P east per day. While the spacecraft was drifting, the Hawaii earth station checked out the spacecraft systems. Its final operating location, over the Atlantic Ocean at 335° east longitude, would be reached by mid-December. As primary Atlantic satellite in INTELSAT’s global commercial communications satellite system, it would serve more than 40 earth stations, offering users 6250 two-way voice circuits and two TV channels. Intelsat-IVA F—l was the first in the Intelsat IVA series; its communications capacity was two-thirds greater than satellites in the Intelsat IV series, seven of which were still operating. The Intelsat system began with the launch of Intelsat-I F—l (Early Bird, 1) on 6 April 1965; since then NASA had launched 16 successful comsats for ComSatCorp in the Intelsat II, III, and IV series. Although Intelsat IVA satellites had been designed primarily for use over the Atlantic with its heavy communications traffic, INTELSAT planned to launch as many as five additional IVAs, some to provide service for the Pacific and Indian Ocean regions. Intelsat IVAs had a design lifetime of 7 yr and a capacity sufficient to meet international communications requirements through 1979, when the system would be augmented with the even larger capacity Intelsat ^ comsats INTELSAT, created in August 1964 by adoption of the Interim Agreements for the Establishment of a Global Commercial Comsat System, now comprised 91 member nations; a 24-member board of governors exercised overall responsibility for design, development, construction, establishment, operation, and maintenance of the Intelsat space segment. ComSatCorp, a privately owned carrier company operating under a U.S. congressional mandate, had provided technical and operational management services to INTELSAT and the global system under a cost-plus-fixed-fee management services contract. NASA had been responsible for procuring the Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle, conducting preflight testing, and launching the spacecraft from the Eastern Test Range into a synchronous transfer orbit. ComSatCorp engineers in the INTELSAT Spacecraft Technical Control Center in Washington, D.C., then assumed responsibility for the mission. Overall management for the NASA portion of the mission was under the direction of the Office of Applications. Lewis Research Center was responsible for Atlas-Centaur development and operation. Kennedy Space Center was responsible for vehicle checkout and for launch. (NASAMORs E—491— 633— 75— 01,25 Sept 75, 30 Jan 76; NASA Release 75—231; INTELSAT Releases, 21 Sept 75, 1 Oct 75; Singer, Today, 26 Sept 75; NASAPIO, interview, 26 Sept 75; GSFC WklySSR, 25 Sept— 1 Oct 75)
The first of a series of 5 conferences on design requirements for Space Shuttle and Spacelab payloads had been held at Marshall Space Flight Center. About 50 scientists and engineers from government, industry, and universities had met to define functioned requirements for payload equipment to further NASA’s Space Processing Applications (SPA) program, including analysis of selected design approaches and recommendations for getting the most use out of SPA payloads for the materials science and technology community. The meeting would hear presentations on the two SPA competitive engineering designs by General Electric and TRW Systems, Inc. The next 2 days would be used by working groups to discuss their specialties—biological preparations; chemical processes and fluid phenomena; glasses and ceramics; and solidification of metals, alloys, composites, and electronic materials. The 5 scheduled meetings should define payloads that are compatible with the Space Shuttle and Spacelab and that would meet the research needs of the industrial and scientific communities. (MSFC Release 75—218)
Pioneer 10 (launched 2 March 1972), on its way out of the solar system 1.2 billion km from earth and halfway between the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, was making unexplained orientation changes, Ames Research Center announced. The spacecraft’s axis of rotation was changing by 1° every 2 wk. Project officials had said that the changes could be caused by a slight malfunction or by some interplanetary phenomenon, but evidence was contradictory. Further tests were planned to find the cause of the change. (ARC Release 75—30)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.), a critic of the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, reported that the Soviet Union had bugged the conversations of U.S. astronauts and technicians at the Moscow space center before the July space flight. Using information received from two sources and confirmed through official channels, Sen. Proxmire said that the bugs were discovered while the astronauts and technicians were watching a televised Soviet hockey game. Wanting a closer view of the game, U.S. astronaut Robert F. Overmyer moved his chair nearer the TV screen, causing a wire leading from the chair into the floor to snap. The Washington Post quoted a spokesman for NASA as confirming the incident, but saying there was no evidence the wire “had anything to do with a listening device.” (AP, W Post, 2 Aug 75; Av Wk, 11 Aug 75, 17)
Marshall Space Flight Center had opened for competition a research and development program to develop and demonstrate cryogenic components for the Space Tug vehicle. Work would include design of a reusable cryogenic storage system, and fabrication and evaluation of a testing system. Proposals were to be submitted by 31 October. (SBD, 1 Oct 75, 159)
The earth’s ozone layer, a shield of heavy molecules of oxygen that prevents some harmful ultraviolet radiation from reaching the earth’s surface, might be in less danger from aerosol sprays than from the increasing worldwide use of chemical fertilizers. Michael B. McElroy, professor of atmospheric sciences at Harvard University, had predicted that a projected increase in the use of nitrogen fertilizers over the next 25 yr could reduce the ozone layer 20 to 25%. Theoretically, each 1% reduction in the ozone layer could lead to thousands—as many as 15 000—additional cases of skin cancer in the U.S. alone. All life needs nitrogen to make proteins, McElroy pointed out. The earth’s atmosphere would have lost all its nitrogen long ago except for the process by which bacteria “denitrify” decayed matter in the soil; most nitrogen returned to the atmosphere in the same inert pure form in which it was taken and converted to use by earth’s plant life, which then formed a source of nitrogen for other plants and animals; however, some nitrogen returned in a form that acted as a catalyst to destroy ozone. Man had recently been extracting nitrogen from the air and putting it into plant life in the form of fertilizer on a scale rivaling nature; by the year 2000, said McElroy, the amount of nitrogen extracted from the air would be double that removed by natural causes. With a sharp increase in the natural denitrification process, more nitrogen catalysts destructive to ozone would be released. Serious effects should be evident within the next 40 yr, McElroy said. Although aerosol sprays could be dispensed with, nitrogen fertilizers were a necessity for increased world food production. Increased incidence of skin cancer concerned light-skinned humans, who were unlikely to get much sympathy from darker-skinned inhabitants of areas where the fertilizers—and increased food production—are urgently needed. (WSJ, 13 Nov 75, 13)
Rockwell International Corp. Rocketdyne Div. successfully conducted the first ignition test of the Space Shuttle’s Integrated Subsystem Test Bed engine at the National Space Technology Laboratories. The test, conducted for Marshall Space Flight Center, lasted for 0.8 sec. It was first of a series of 8 ignition tests leading up to the firing of the Space Shuttle main engine. Initial evaluation of data indicated that all the test parameters were satisfactory and that the test objective was achieved. All ignition tests would be of short duration, none reaching full engine thrust. (Roundup, 20 June 75, 4; Marshall Star, IT June 75, 4)
Dr. John F. Clark, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, and Daniel J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Corp. Space Div., were awarded the National Aeronautic Association’s Robert J. Collier Trophy for individual accomplishment in making the Landsat— formerly the Earth Resources Technology Satellite—program the outstanding aerospace event of 1974. The presentation was made at a dinner in Washington, D.C., jointly sponsored by the NAA and the National Aviation Club. Choice of the two officials as representative of the NASA-industry team “which abundantly proved during 1974 the value of remote sensing to space” was the unanimous decision of the selection committee of 26 distinguished leaders and authorities. The committee also paid particular tribute to Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Aerospace Group and RCA’s Government and Commercial Systems Group for their roles in the earth-resources and environmental surveys by Landsat. (NAA Release, 6 March 75; NASA Activities, April 75; Goddard News, June 75)
Pioneer 11 had been scheduled to take its first look at Saturn, according to controllers at Ames Research Center. Upon its encounter with Jupiter on 2 Dec. 1974, Pioneer’s trajectory was altered by the gravitational effects of Jupiter to one that would take Pioneer to Saturn on or about 1 Sept. 1979. The spacecraft had returned the only pictures ever taken of Jupiter’s polar regions and probed the planet’s intense inner radiation belts for the first time, attaining the highest speed ever attained by a manmade object (171 000 km per hr). Pioneer was still more than 1287 million km from Saturn, but in a position to observe the ringed planet at a phase angle 4 times larger than the largest angle at which Saturn could be seen from earth. The total amount of light and the polarization of sunlight reflected from a planet’s atmosphere at different angles could reveal the composition of the atmosphere; scientists would watch Saturn throughout Pioneer’s approach to note changes in intensity and polarization of light reflected from the planet with changes in phase angle. The viewing angle would also permit study of the light-reflecting characteristics of Saturn’s rings in large areas of shadow from the planet, an effect not visible from earth. Pioneer was headed upward out of the plane containing the sun’s planets, and in 1977 would attain a distance above this plane of about 161 million km, allowing it to measure phenomena coming from higher latitudes on the sun than previously observable. (ARC Release 75—53; MOR S—811—73—07, 19 Nov 75)
NASA had awarded a $1 388 498 firm-fixed-price contract to Goodyear Aerospace Corp. to produce a special-purpose processor to augment existing computing capability for NASA’s Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment (LACIE), Johnson Space Center announced. The contract included design, fabrication, delivery, and installation of the processor and any associated system software. LACIE, a cooperative program shared by U.S. Dept, of Agriculture, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and NASA, aimed at improving wheat-production forecasts by use of satellite earth-resources data. (JSC Release 75— 20)
The first 10 automatic landings of a powered-lift shorttakeoffandlanding (STOL) aircraft equipped with a STOLAND automatic flight-control system had been completed by Ames Research Center personnel at the Naval Auxiliary Landing Field in Calif. The STOLAND system, a versatile onboard digital computer, provided the pilot with navigation, guidance, and control information. Automatic controls, including control of the aircraft’s lift with automatic flaps and augmenter nozzles, permitted steeper climbouts, approaches, and landings, offering potential relief for airport traffic congestion. Half the aircraft’s lift was provided by engine thrust, permitting flight dt much lower speeds than conventional aircraft. The STOLAND system was developed by Sperry Flight Systems for use in the joint NASA—Dept, of Transportation operating experiments program and the augmentor-wing handling qualities and flight-control programs. (NASA Release 75— 226)
A new antireflection-coated metal oxide semiconductor (AMOS) solar cell developed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists might have potential use in the nation’s solar energy program, JPL scientist Richard J. Stem reported at a Photovoltaic Specialists Conference in Phoenix. The solar cells, made from oxidized gallium arsenide with an extremely thin nearly transparent film of gold on the surface, had demonstrated an efficiency of about 15% in terrestrial sunlight, better than the average silicon solar cell now in standard use. The new cell also had superior resistance to radiation, promising a longer lifetime in space. Dr. Stern said that the technology was potentially adaptable to very low-cost polycrystalline thin films, with only a modest reduction in efficiency. (NASA Release 75—133)
Transfer of the Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Program from the Office of Space Science to the Office of Manned Space flight, and transfer of the NASA Directorate for Life Sciences from the Office of Manned Space Flight to the Office of Space Science became effective. Also, the name of the Office of Manned Space Flight had been changed to Office of Space Flight, and the name of the Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Program had been changed to Expendable Launch Vehicle Programs. In announcing the changes, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had said that the exchange of these functions would “provide a more logical alignment of responsibilities as we move into Space Shuttle operations. The new Office of Space Flight will be concerned primarily with launching. . . and conducting Shuttle operations, while Space Science will have responsibility for the science to be performed on these flights.” (JSC Roundup, 26 Sept 75, 1)
Twenty-five spacecraft on twenty-four vehicles were scheduled for launch by NASA during 1975, NASA announced. The 25 spacecraft included 14 for NASA programs, 10 for other organizations, and 1 as a cooperative program with a foreign government. Highlighting the year would be the 15 July launch of an Apollo spacecraft carrying Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton as the U.S. contribution to the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Apollo would rendezvous and dock with Soyuz 19—launched 7 hr earlier than Apollo and carrying Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov—allowing both crews to exchange visits and perform joint scientific experiments. The two sets of Viking spacecraft, scheduled for 11 and 21 August launches, would journey through space for a year before arriving in the vicinity of Mars. There each set of spacecraft would separate into an orbiter and a lander to make orbital and surface investigations of the Martian environment. Other NASA spacecraft would include ERTS-B Earth Resources Technology Satellite and SMS-B Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, in January; GOES-C Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite, in March; OSO-I Orbiting Solar Observatory, Nimbus-F experimental meteorological satellite, and Explorer 53 (SAS-C Small Astronomy Satellite), in May; GOES-A Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite, in June; Explorers 56 and 57 Dual Air Density Explorers, on a single booster in July or August; Explorer 54 (AE-D Atmospheric Explorer), in September; and Explorer 55 (AE-E), in December. The 10 spacecraft to be launched by NASA for other organizations included 5 comsats for Communications Satellite Corp.: IntelsatIV F—1 in February, Intelsat-IVA F—1 and F—2 in July and October, and Marisat A and B in April and July. Other reimbursable launches would include Telesat—C (Anik 3) for Canada in March, COS-B Celestial Observation Satellite in July for the European Space Agency, Symphonie—B experimental comsat in September for France and West Germany, RCA-A (RCA —Satcom 1, in orbit) comsat in December for RCA Corp., and ITOSE-2 Improved TIROS Operational Satellite in late 1975 for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Helios— B would be launched late in 1975 as a cooperative effort with West Germany. The schedule called for 18 of the 24 launches to be made from Kennedy Space Center, 5 from Western Test Range, and 1 from San Marco. For the launches NASA would use a Saturn IB, 3 Titan-Centaurs, 5 Atlas-Centaurs, and 15 Thor-Delta launch vehicles. (NASA Release 75—5; KSC Release 180—74)
Langley Research Center announced the appointment of Robert E. Smyhe as Director for Space, replacing Eugene S. Love, who was retiring. Smylie had been in NASA Hq as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space, Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. In his new position he would direct Langley’s work in space systems, space applications and technology, environmental quality programs, and the Scout launch vehicle. (LaRC Release 75 — 11)
A 25-member delegation from the Soviet Union, headed by Professor K. D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R. technical director for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July, had begun work at the Johnson Space Center on a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. report on the mission. Cosmonaut Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, who had been U.S.S.R. flight director for ASTP, was a member of the delegation, which had been scheduled to remain at JSC until November 21. Dr. Glynn S. Lunney, who had been U.S. technical director for ASTP, headed the NASA group working with the Soviet specialists. (JSC Release 75— 95)
Helios 1, the U.S.—West German solar probe launched 10 Dec. 1974, passed within 0.309 AU (46 million km) of the sun at 5:13 am EDT, closer than any previous spacecraft had come to the sun. During the perihelion, while traveling at 238 000 km per hr, Helios 1 measured the solar wind, magnetic fields, solar and galactic cosmic rays, electromagnetic waves, micrometeoroids, and zodiacal light. Although the spacecraft encountered a heat load from the sun 10.5 times that encountered on earth, good data were obtained and the spacecraft continued to operate well. Helios 1 was in a solar elliptical orbit with a 0.985—AU aphelion, 0.3095—AU perihelion, 190.15-day period, and 0.02° inclination. It would reach a second perihelion 21 Sept. Helios 1, built by West Germany in cooperation with the U.S., carried 10 experiments, 7 of them West German. Spacecraft operations were controlled from the space operations center near Munich. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for U.S. participation. A second spacecraft, Helios—B, was scheduled for launch in early 1976. (NASAMORs 16 Jan 76,11 April 76; Powers, GSFC Helios thermal control mgr, interview, 21 Sept 76)
Successful lung surgery performed 26 Aug. on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Astronaut Donald K. Slayton revealed no evidence of malignancy, the Johnson Space Center Roundup reported. During the 2.5-hr surgery, doctors at the Texas Medical Center removed a triangular wedge that included the 4-mm nodule detected during postflight x-rays [see 20 Aug.] plus a small amount of normal surrounding tissue. Adjacent lymph nodes were biopsied and found normal; doctors found no signs of any other lesions. Slayton would remain in the hospital for 7 to 10 more days. (JSC Roundup, 29 Aug. 75,1)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio) introduced H.R. 4461 “to establish a science and technology policy for the U.S. to provide for scientific and technological advice and assistance to the President, to provide adequate administrative organization to assure effective Federal support and utilization of research and development, to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, to amend the National Science Foundation Act of 1950, and for other purposes.” The bill was sent jointly to the Committees of Science and Technology and on Government Operations. The legislation proposed the establishment of a new cabinet-level Dept, of Research and Technology Operations to bring together Federal research-related activities through a unified and efficient governmental structure; a five-member Council of Advisors on Science and Technology to help form and implement policy at the highest levels of government; and a Science and Technology Information and Utilization Corp. to assure the widest possible dissemination of scientific and technological information. The proposed legislation would administratively relocate NASA, Energy Research and Development Administration, National Bureau of Standards, National Science Foundation, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration within the new department, but would not alter the basic mission and purpose of each agency. (CR, 6 March 75, H1464; House Com of Sci & Tech Print 48— 694)
A giant 283 200-cu-m balloon carrying a Marshall Space Flight Center gamma ray detector was launched from Palestine, Tex., by the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The balloon reached an altitude of 40 km and traveled 800 km before touching down near Ft. Stockton, Tex., 23 hrs later. The purpose of the flight was to detect the sources and determine the nature of sudden bursts of gamma rays coming from various directions in space. (MSFC Release 75100)
Flight Research Center pilot Einar Enevoldson, in a ground-based instrumented cockpit, guided the remotely piloted research vehicle (RPRV) to its first unpowered landing, at FRC. Following air-launch from a B—52 aircraft flying at 14.6 km, the 7.3-r.i three-eighths-scale vehicle performed maneuvers to measure control effectiveness during spinning flight. The spin was continued until 4.6-km altitude when Enevoldson deployed the landing gear and performed a series of stability and control maneuvers. He initiated final approach at 1524-m altitude. The RPRV landed on the dry lakebed using small steel skids individually mounted on the ends of three conventional automobile shock absorbers installed inside the aircraft’s fuselage. The RPRV had been developed by FRC to provide a more economical and far less hazardous means of flight-testing new vehicles. Earlier versions of the RPRV had been recovered in midair using a parachute and helicopter. (FRC Release 26—75; FRC Proj Off, Rezek, interview, 12 Sept 75)
Prof. Hyron Spinrad, Univ. of Calif, astronomer, had photographed a galaxy 5 to 10 times larger than the Milky Way. Prof. Spinrad photographed the galaxy, designated 3C123, using the 120-in telescope at Lick Observatory and a new device that filtered out backlighting. The huge galaxy was moving away from earth at a speed of about 4.3 trillion km per year. (AP, B Sun, 2 July 75, A3)
Science magazine reported that U.S. scientists had reprogrammed NASA’s Landsat 1 earth resources satellite (formerly called Erts l, launched 23 July 1972) to photograph large areas of the Soviet Union, although not specifically requested to do so by Soviet officials. The magazine reported that the intent of the U.S. scientists was to aid Soviet scientists, after discussions at a series of 1972 joint working group meetings—convened for geological studies of comparable land sites in each country—indicated that the Soviets had nothing available to them equivalent to this kind of satellite imagery. Because the Soviet government was sensitive about U.S. satellites flying over the U.S.S.R., the Soviet scientists who were to benefit had never been directly informed about the reprogramming decision. Resulting images had never been directly handed over to the Soviet scientists lest doing so should violate the 1972 joint space agreement signed by both countries. Science quoted Goddard Space Flight Center’s Dr. William Nordberg, scientist responsible for the reprogramming, as saying, “They knew where they could buy them.” Science also reported that the Soviet scientists had ordered the Landsat images from the U.S. Geological Survey’s Sioux Falls distribution center. Dr. Nordberg denied that any of the reprogrammed imagery had been done for “economic espionage.” (Science, 8 Aug 75, 441—2)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of two 9-mo contracts for parallel design studies of a biological holding facility for Spacelab. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. received $242 640 and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. received $177 360 to develop conceptual designs of habitats for live biological specimens supporting life-sciences space flight research programs. The habitats—consisting of the structure and the environmental-control, food and watering, waste-management, lighting, and instrumentation systems—were to be suitable for a wide variety of specimens with emphasis on the adult rhesus monkey and the adult laboratory rat. (MSFC Release 75-133) 25 June—3 July: The countdown demonstration test, a step-by-step dress rehearsal for the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, was successfully completed at Kennedy Space Center. The rehearsal culminated in actual fueling of the Saturn IB and a simulated launch of the Apollo at 3:50 pm EDT on 2 July. The cryogenic propellants loaded for the “wet” portion of the test were off-loaded and the final portion of the count repeated with crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton aboard the spacecraft. A second simulated ignition and liftoff occurred at 2 pm EDT on 3 July. During the test, a leak detected in Brand’s spacesuit was traced to one of the pressure-sealing slide fasteners. Modifications were made and the spacesuit was successfully retested. {Spaceport News, 26 June 75, 1;KSC Release 115—75;Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 314)
A scientific conference of Soviet scientists and officials was being held in Zvenigorod, near Moscow, to discuss the study of the earth from outer space, Tass reported. Tass quoted Academician Roald Sagdeyev, Director of the Space Research Institute, as saying that the main task of the conference was to work out unified scientific principles and methods for exploring earth resources from outer space and for organizing a systematic control over the environment with the help of artificial earth satellites. To date, scientists had made progress in certain lines of research such as meteorology, but in other areas had received only bits of information. The task was to move from individual discoveries to a qualitative geological study of the planet as a whole. The task called for combined effort by geologists, soil scientists, foresters, and hydrologists. Sagdeyev said that the study of earth from space was becoming an important aspect of international relations because man’s active influences on the environment went beyond national boundaries. (Tass FBIS— Sov, 18 March 75, Ul)
The recent detection of water vapor, and therefore oxygen, on Jupiter by Univ. of Arizona scientists aboard NASA’s C—141 Airborne Infrared Observatory [see 12 Feb.] could stimulate additional support for a probe mission to obtain more detailed information, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Scientists had already known that the proportions of helium and hydrogen on Jupiter were approximately the same as on the sun. The additional information that oxygen existed on Jupiter would strengthen the belief that the planet’s composition was similar to that of the sun, and that the sun and the planet had been formed from the same raw material. The conclusion was important to many scientists who believed that earth’s atmospheric composition had evolved from one similar to Jupiter’s. If this were true and if Jupiter’s atmosphere had changed little from its primitive state, then the Jovian atmosphere could serve as a laboratory for studying the evolution of life on earth. This new information could influence NASA scientists charged with making recommendations for new starts. (Av Wk, 24 Feb 75, 58)
Flight Research Center announced the award of a $146 000 costplusfixed-fee contract to LTV Aerospace Corp.’s Vought Systems Div. to study the possibility of flight-testing the oblique wing on an F—8 jet aircraft. LTV would investigate technical and mechanical problems in modifying the test aircraft and would estimate the cost of modifications. , The oblique wing, developed by Dr. Robert T. Jones of Ames Research Center, was a conventional straight wing mounted on top of an aircraft so that it could be swiveled around a central pivot point. The wing could be fixed at zero degrees—perpendicular to the fuselage— for takeoff and landing, and moved to various sweep positions at different speeds for the best performance. Wind-tunnel tests had indicated the new design could operate with maximum efficiency over a wide range of flight conditions, offering either increased speed or significant fuel savings. (FRC Release 17—25)
Dust storms had been observed on the moon every sunrise and sunset by a three-axis microparticle detector left on the moon by Apollo 17 astronauts during their December 1972 mission, a Nature magazine article reported. The article, based on a report by scientists at Goddard Space Flight Center, said the GSFC scientists suspected that the dust was being lifted from the lunar surface and then driven away from the rising or setting sun by electrostatic fields associated with the transition from day to night, or vice versa. The finding supported a theory advanced 20 yr ago by Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., who had suggested that electrostatic forces transported dust from lunar highlands to lowlands, accounting for the smooth appearance of the lunar seas. Although the Apollo landings had shown that those seas had been formed by lava flooding rather than deep dust accumulations, their surface was covered with very fine dust. Also, because neither wind nor rain existed on the airless moon, some other process must have been responsible for the evident erosion. Electrostatic levitation was being suggested as one possible explanation. Because the lunar vacuum acted as an insulator, the dust cloud hugged the surface, reaching only between 20 and 30 cm high, explaining why it had been detected from a low angle by instruments on the lunar surface but never by orbiting astronauts or earth-based equipment. (Hughes, Nature, 10 April 75, 481—2)
NASA’s Office of Space Science announced assignment to Marshall Space Flight Center of overall responsibility for a definition study of the Atmospheric, Magnetospheric and Plasmas-in-Space (AMPS) Spacelab payload, to fly on the Space Shuttle. AMPS would be a manned laboratory equipped to study the dynamic process of the atmosphere and magnetosphere, using active and passive probing techniques. (NASA Release 75—28)
The Skylab program was closed out at Marshall Space Flight Center and personnel assigned to the program had been reassigned, the Marshall Star announced. Responsibility for the deactivated offices, including storage of hardware and phaseout of remaining contractual and documentary activities, was assigned to the Administration and Program Support Directorate’s Logistics Office. (Marshall Star, 2 July 75, 4)
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, associate director for science at Marshall Space Flight Center, would retire after 30 yrs of Federal service on 28 Dec., NASA announced. Born and educated in Germany, Dr. Stuhlinger became a physicist and had been involved in rocketry and space work since 1943 when he joined the rocket development team at Peenemunde, Germany. He had come to the U.S. after World War II and worked for the U.S. Army before transferring to NASA when MSFC was wet up in 1960. Early planning for lunar exploration and the Apollo telescope mount had been carried out under his direction, as well as early planning on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory and initial phases of the Space Telescope project. His work had included electric propulsion studies and scientific payloads for the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 75—256)
The wingless unpowered X—24B lifting body had made its first landing on a concrete runway at Edwards, Calif., to demonstrate maneuver and safe landing of an unpowered reentry vehicle on a conventional runway. After launch from a B —52 aircraft flying at 14 000 m, test pilot John N. Manke, chief Flight Research Center pilot for the X—24B project, had ignited a small rocket engine, propelling the X—24B to a speed of 1381 km per hr and altitude of 18 300 m. Manke then shut off the engine and glided to a perfect 300-kph landing on the 4600-m runway. The 11.3-m-long X—24B was a part of a joint NASA-Air Force program to study transonic flight characteristics and landing ability of a vehicle designed for hypersonic speeds. (FRC Release 24 —75; LA Times, 6 Aug 75)
A metering truss made of graphite—one of the few materials that expands with cold and contracts with heat—and epoxy, which expands with heat and contracts with cold in the usual way, had been designed to hold stable the mirrors of NASA’s Large Space Telescope without being distorted by temperature changes. Built by Boeing Aerospace Co. under a $185 000 contract with Marshall Space Flight Center, the structure had been subjected to a 2-day vacuum-chamber test at Boeing’s Space Center in Seattle under temperatures ranging from —84°C to +21°C without suffering lens-limiting thermal distortion. (Huntsville Times, 25 Nov 75; Boeing Release A—0459)
A Science magazine article detailed some early findings from the Atlantic Tropical Experiment (GATE) of the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP). GATE, a 72-nation research effort during the summer of 1974 to gather meteorological information on the tropics, found very few cumulus clouds. Clouds in weather disturbances tended to be grouped in patterns, usually in roughly linear bands. Prior to GATE the only visible indicators of these weather-disturbance patterns were cloud clusters seen on satellite photographs, but the details were unknown; GATE demonstrated that these clusters were high cirrus clouds that formed above the weather disturbance and might persist long after the rainclouds themselves had dissipated. The organization of active rainclouds then came under intensive study as the essential feature of atmospheric convection. Although scientists had previously thought that cloud bases formed at a given level in the atmosphere, clouds in the GATE area were found to form at many different altitudes; many did not reach the heights often associated with tropical cumulus clouds until the latter part of the summer. The strength of weather disturbances intensified during the experiment, indicating that the tropical atmosphere probably altered over the course of the summer as its moisture content and convection increased, causing the clouds to grow taller as higher and higher levels of the atmosphere were warmed. GATE scientists also investigated the air layer between the cloud bases and the sea surface, finding that the subcloud layer was profoundly altered by the passage of a cloud. Warm moist air taken up into the cloud to fuel the convection was replaced by cooler drier air from higher in the atmosphere. Scientists believed that the resulting mix might explain cloud spacing and lifetime, and might indicate a continually changing subcloud layer in marked contrast to conditions prevailing in fair weather. GATE experiments documented the existence of atmospheric waves in the tropics and showed that weather disturbances developed near the low-pressure portion of the wave. Scientists also discovered a peculiar rapid meandering of the equatorial undercurrent—an intense eastward flowing stream 100 m below the sea surface at the equator—that shifted north and south about 1° in latitude on either side of the equator with an apparent period of 16 days. (Hammond, Science, 20 June 75, 1195—98)
New members of the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology, led by Committee Chairman Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.), made an orientation tour of Kennedy Space Center. In addition to visits to Launch Complexes 36 and 39, the KSC industrial area, and the Visitors Information Center, the committee members viewed the Apollo spacecraft being readied for the July U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and the Viking lander being prepared for the August twin mission to Mars. The members also received special briefings on Center activities^ (KSC Release 11—75)
Defense, space, and energy accounted for most of a record increase in Federal research and development funding in FY 1976, the National Science Foundation’s report An Analysis of Federal R & D Funding by Function, Fiscal Years 1969— 76 stated. The largest dollar increase, $1860 million, was for national defense; the second and third largest increases, $343 million each, were for space and energy. Relative increases in FY 1976 were largest for education, 102%; energy, 37%; national defense, 20%; and space, 13%. Total Federal obligation for R&D in the 1976 budget of $21.7 billion was a record high. The $2.7-billion increase over FY 1975 was also a record increase for any one year, enough to indicate a real rise in R&D activity, allowing for a reasonable inflation factor. The upward change contrasted with an average annual decline of 2.7% in constant dollars over the period 1969— 75. (NSF Highlights, 25 Aug 75, 1)
Kennedy Space Center announced the award of a $1 612 948 extension to a $600 000 contract to Reynolds, Smith, and Hills Co. for Space Shuttle architectural and engineering services. The contract, which would run until June 1977, provided for modification to Pad A and Mobile Launcher 3 at Launch Complex 39, both being reconfigured for the Space Shuttle. (KSC Release 109—75)
Technology will be available for manned flights well before the year 2000, allowing even better research of the planet’s [Mars’] composition,” Dr. George Sands, associate Viking Project scientist at Langley Research Center, stated in an interview with the Newport News Times Herald. “The Viking missions [scheduled for August launch] are just the prelude of things to come.” Dr. Sands continued, “The results of [the] probe to Mars this month will be very significant for the future of planetary exploration and additional trips to Mars.” (Biggins, Times Herald, 4 Aug 75)
Kennedy Space Center deactivated its hyperbaric decompression chamber after 6 yr of operation. The chamber had never been used for its intended purpose—to save the lives of astronauts in the event of a malfunction during atmospheric chamber tests—but had treated 12 local civilian divers for the bends, a painful crippling illness caused by formation of nitrogen bubbles in the bloodstream when a diver moves too quickly from high-pressure water depths to the surface. The $100 000 chamber intended for the manned space program had been opened to public use by the center director. With the end of the Apollo program and the next manned flight 4 yr in the future, the decision was made to deactivate the chamber. The Orlando Sentinel Star quoted Russell P. Lloyd, KSC engineer in the Support Operations Div., as saying the possibility existed that the chamber would be reactivated for the Space Shuttle program, but for the time being it would remain closed. (Lloyd, interview, 19 Sept 77; Upchurch, Orlando Sentinel Star, 17 Aug 75)
NASA announced award of a $1.5 million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Rockwell International Corp. for development of a solid-state bubble-memory data recorder to meet spacecraft data-storage requirements. The recorder, which would have no moving parts, would offer a capacity of 100 million bits, serial or parallel data input/output operation, user-selected data rates, and direct access to the memory. Rockwell would complete the work in two phases: A prototype would be completed by early 1977, and a flight-qualifiable model would be produced by early 1978. Langley Research Center would manage the contract for NASA. (NASA Release 75—272)
A simple device familiar for centuries—the flywheel—had been the subject of a national symposium as a possible solution for some of America’s critical energy problems. The first conference on flywheel technology, held at Berkeley, Calif., under sponsorship of the Energy Research and Development Administration and the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, had been told that modern materials and design had made possible a superflywheel that could transform the energy picture. The principle upon which flywheels performed—storage of mechanical energy by a spinning wheel—had been enlarged by the use of fiber composites developed for use in spacecraft nosecones that had greater strength-to-weight ratios, being 10 to 20 times stronger than steel and much lighter. As the amount of energy stored by the flywheel varied as the square of the rotation speed, the limit had been on the tensile strength of the material used; the fiber wheel could be spun faster to store more energy per kg than the conventional metal one, and would also cost less. A superflywheel might spin at 100 000 or even 200 000 rpm. Both the Soviet Union and American industry had displayed interest in developing the flywheel; use of the technology in automobiles would reduce pollution and would represent a safety improvement. The flywheels also could act in backup systems for homes using solar energy and windmills for their energy needs. Further investigation of the materials under stress-rupture tests was being conducted at the Lawrence laboratory and elsewhere. (NYT, 30 Nov 75, L84)
A 50 000-kg towing tractor, first piece of operational ground-support equipment manufactured by International Harvester Co. for Kennedy Space Center’s Space Shuttle operations, was accepted for delivery to KSC. The T—500S Paymover tractor would tow NASA’s Boeing 747 carrier aircraft or the orbiter, or the mated 747-orbiter combination after use at the Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif., during orbiter tests. (KSC Release 257—75)
The Ancient Mariner—a power package built as a backup for the unit flown past Venus on Mariner 5 in 1967—was still going strong after more than 5 yr of operating in a space environment, the Boeing Space Center at Kent, Wash., said. Function of the package had been to transform raw power collected by solar panels into electric current acceptable to the spacecraft. NASA had asked Boeing to find out if electronic units like this could stand the rigors of long-distance space flights such as a 12-yr Grand Tour of the outer planets. Boeing put the Mariner instrument in a test chamber—part of an extensive vacuum and space simulation facility—in which temperature had been fixed at 1.6°C and other conditions had been made to conform with those in space. The duplicate had performed perfectly, outlasting much of its ground-support equipment and all but one of the technicians originally assigned to the experiment. The test had proved that flight hardware could stand temperatures as much as 3(^0 cooler than those encountered on missions already completed, and that similar electronic packages had a life expectancy of more than 5 yr, far longer than the period for which they had been designed. (Newport News Times-Herald, 16 Oct 75, 15)
All four batteries on the Viking 2 lander had been fully charged, NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory reported. The problem had been solved by using a backup charger system carried on the orbiter after the primary system failed earlier [see 2 Nov.]. Recharging took about 24 hr per battery. The voltage had to be replenished before the spacecraft entered Mars orbit and before the lander separated from the orbiter. The difficulty with the lander’s primary charger had been traced to failure of one of four resistors in the circuitry. To prevent unforeseen problems with the backup charger, Viking project officials had decided to keep at least one of the batteries charged throughout the remainder of cruise flight, to ensure activation of the switch shifting the lander from its solar-panel power to that from radioisotope thermoelectric generators. The two RTGs had not been used for primary power during flight to avoid thermal problems from the heat given off by the units. (LA Times, 6 Nov 75, 1; AvWk, 10 Nov 75, 6; SBD, 12 Nov 75, 64; Langley Researcher, 14 Nov 75, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of three contracts, part of a program to design, fabricate, test, and demonstrate a low-cost aesthetically appealing solar collector for residential heating and cooling. Chamberlain Manufacturing Corp. was awarded $72 621 and Honeywell, Inc., was awarded $104 255 to deliver a low-cost collector based on existing technology and the requirements of the solar heating and cooling demonstration. A third contract was awarded to PPG Industries which would furnish collector panels from off-the-shelf hardware at essentially no cost. (MSFC Release 75—22)
An interagency agreement between NASA and Department of Interior to use NASA technology for mineral extraction was announced by Secretary of the Interior Rogers C. B. Morton. Funded and directed by Ddl and combining efforts of NASA and contractor scientists, the project Would apply NASA experience in developing of systems for manned and automated operations in hostile environments to demonstrate new coal-mining technology. NASA has designated Marshall Space Flight Center as the lead NASA Center. (NASA Release 75-H) _ _
President Ford sent a $349.4 billion FY1976 budget request to Congress, an increase of $45.0 billion over the FY 1975 request. The recommended deficit of $51.9 billion was a peacetime record high designed to help revive the Nation’s sagging economy. In his budget message to Congress, the President said that his recommendations provided for fiscal policy actions to increase purchasing power and stimulate economic revival; a major new energy program to hold down energy use, accelerate development of domestic energy resources, and promote energy research and development; an increase in outlays for defense to maintain preparedness and preserve force levels in the face of rising costs; a 1-yr moratorium on new Federal spending programs other than energy; and a temporary 5% ceiling on increases in pay for Federal employees and on individual benefits tied to changes in consumer prices. Proposals included a one-time $16-billion tax cut— $12 billion for individual taxpayers and $4 billion for business—to stimulate economic recovery. Energy: The President specifically requested that no new Federal spending programs be initiated in FY 1976 except in the field of energy, which had a total recommended budget authority set at $2,491 billion. Federal energy functions were divided into three broad categories: general operating programs (analysis and development of energy policy), regulatory programs, and research and development programs. General operating programs, with a recommended budget authority of $548 million, would be administered by the Federal Energy Administration (FEA), Dept, of the Interior, and the new Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA). Federal energy regulation, with a recommended budget authority of $178 million, was managed by FEA, Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), and Federal Power Commission. Although the new budget called for support from NASA and the National Science Foundation (NSF) for energy R&D, ERDA would have the major responsibility. The proposed energy program called for an increased fee on imported oil and an excise tax on domestically produced petroleum and natural gas. The proposal also called for decontrol of oil prices—coupled with a windfall profits tax—and deregulation of prices on hew natural gas. (in millions of dollars) 1974 1975 1976 Recommended budget Program or agency actual estimate estimate authority for 1976 General operating programs 223. 152. 498. 548. Regulation 90. 171. 164. 178. Research and development 739. 1131. 1577. 1764. Total energy 606. 1454. 2240. 2491. The Federal government had further expanded its research and development program to provide new and improved technologies necessary to increase domestic energy resources. Outlays for energy R&D would be $1.7 billion in FY 1976, an increase of 36% over FY 1975 and 102% over 1974. Budget recommendations continued a vigorous nuclear R&D program and accelerated non-nuclear energy R&D, particularly in coal and solar energy. General Science, Space, and Technology (in millions of dollars) 1974 1975 1976 Recommended budget Program or agency actual estimate estimate authority for 1976* Space research and technology: Manned space flight Space science, applications, and technology Supporting space activities Subtotal General science and basic research: National Science Foundation Energy Research and Development Administration Earth Sciences: Geological Survey Deductions for offsetting receipts
