A federal judge ordered NASA to reinstate with back pay and benefits the federal employees who lost their jobs at Marshall Space Flight Center to private contractors, the Washington Star reported. In a suit filed in 1967 in the U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C., by the AFL-CIO American Federation of Government Employees, the union contended that 22 MSFC contracts with private companies resulted in the layoff of about 3000 federal workers. Judge Joseph Waddy agreed that the contracts were illegal and ordered that federal employees who lost jobs as a result of work going to the private companies should be rehired, and that any similar contracts be canceled. The decision upheld Civil Service Commission standards that forbid a private contractor from assuming an employer-employee relationship over federal workers. NASA attorney Sid Masri said as many as 2000 employees could be terminated as a result of the decision, which NASA was sure to appeal. (W Star, 18 Aug 76, A-2, B-2; WSJ, 19 Aug 76, 17)
The Energy Research and Development Administration announced plans to launch a giant manned and instrumented balloon, Da Vinci II, between 24 May and mid-June to determine physical and chemical changes in air pollutants over distances of several hundred km from their source. The helium-filled ballopn more than 70 m high—equaling, with its gondola, the height of a 15-story building, and carrying the same crew of 4 that flew on Da Vinci I in November 1974—would fly for up to 36 hr at altitudes from 3 to 9 km from St. Louis, Mo., to a point in 111., Ky., or 0. Da Vinci I flew from Las Cruces to Wagon Mound, N.M., in 12 hr to prove the feasibility of using a manned instrumented balloon for lower atmosphere research. Crew members were Dr. Rudolf J. Engel-mann of NOAA; Otis Imboden, photographer from the National Geographic Society; Jimmie Craig, pilot from the U.S. Naval Weapons Center; and Mrs. Vera Simons, project consultant and experienced balloonist, who originated the idea for the project. The crew would use a variety of instruments to conduct more than 20 experiments to show what happens to a plume of polluted air as it moves across several states. (ERDA Release 76- 128)
The Natl. Science Foundation announced that employment of academic scientists and engineers had increased 3% in 1976; the increase had cut across all major fields of study, from 1% in life sciences and engineering to nearly 7% in social and environmental sciences. The number of full-time scientists and engineers at academic institutions went from 224 800 to 230 500, or 3%, and the number of those employed part time went from 55 900 to 58 700 (5%). Over the period 1965 to 1976, there was a significant shift to teaching. Scientists and engineers employed primarily as teachers increased 223 200 from 1975 to 1976 (3%); those working primarily in research and development increased 51 000 (2%). The number of women employed full time as scientists and engineers increased 5% from 1975 to 1976, a rate more than double that for men. (NSF Highlights, 2 Dec. 76, 1)
Images from 2 Landsats circling the earth 912 km up had helped the state of Md. monitor strip-mining damage and inventory its surface coal-mining activities, NASA announced. The state did not know the location or extent of orphan mines—those abandoned before 1967—and began a mapping program to determine the extent of the disturbed land and the procedures and expense that would be required to reclaim it. A 1967 law required private companies to operate under state-approved reclamation plans; acreage disturbed before 1967 would be reclaimed by the state. The Landsat images showed from 25 to 30% more acreage affected by the mines than anyone had realized. Arthur T. Anderson of Goddard Space Flight Center’s information transfer laboratory compared Landsat images taken over a 3-yr period ending in 1974 to identify and measure effects of strip mining in Western Md. with an accuracy better than that obtainable from aerial photography or field-inspection techniques. Other states using Landsat imagery for reclamation projects were Ohio, Tenn., W. Va., Ky., Pa., S.C., Fla., and the Great Plains states. (NASA Release 76-134)
NASA announced issuance of a patent to Richard T. Whitcomb, an aerospace technologist at Langley Research Center, for an aircraft wing to be used at subsonic speeds. The new wing, called a supercritical or “upside down” wing, was described as increasing speed without need for additional power and as suitable for any aircraft flying near the speed of sound. Whitcomb last year received $25 000 for the invention from NASA’s Inventions and Contributions Board. (ATT, 1 May 76, 31)
The mission of the launch of Comstar B on 22 July 1976 from the Eastern Test Range on an Atlas-Centaur AC-40 was declared successful by John F. Yardley, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, NASA announced in a postlaunch mission operations report. The spacecraft’s apogee motor was successfully fired 24 July 1976, injecting the Comstar into the desired synchronous orbit. (NASA MOR M-491-201-76-02, 13 Dec 76)
A new research aircraft combining the precision hover and low downwash of a helicopter with the long range and high speed of a fixed-wing aircraft made its debut at rollout ceremonies in Arlington, Tex., marking “a major milestone in the joint NASA-Army tilt rotor program,” according to a NASA announcement. The Bell Helicopter Textron’s XV-15 would undergo a 2-yr flight-testing program scheduled by Ames Research Center and the Army’s Air Mobility Research and Development Laboratory. The XV-15 was a 12.8-m-long 9.7-m wing-span aircraft with win grip-mounted engines, transmissions, and 7.6-m propeller rotors that could tilt from the helicopter position for vertical takeoffs and landings and for hovering, to a horizontal position for forward flight at speeds up to more than 482 kph. The tilt rotor would operate with less noise than conventional helicopters or turboprop aircraft of comparable size. The first XV-15 would undergo ground and hover tests, then go to ARC for testing in that center's wind tunnel; the second XV-15 would undergo initial envelope-expansion flight tests at Bell’s Arlington, Tex., facility beginning late in 1977. (NASA Release 76-169; W^Siar^ 24 Oct 76, A-2)
The price of solar cells had come down, the Energy Research and Development Administration announced. Cells that would have cost about $210 ($21 a watt) 6 mo ago today cost $155 ($15.50 a watt). “This 26% price drop in just 6 mo shows that our research and development program is making significant progress,” said Dr. Henry H. Marvin, director of ERDA’s division of solar energy. “However, we have a long way to go to meet our 1986 goal of 50<t a peak watt.” At the goal price, Dr. Marvin said, solar cells could compete with electric power from conventional sources; even at the present high cost, solar cells were competitive for special uses, such as recharging batteries at remote microwave stations operated by railroads and highway departments in southwestern states. Manufacture and sale of solar cells for such uses doubled in the past 18 mo, and the price during that period had dropped almost 50%. NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory would manage solar-cell purchase contracts for ERDA, the announcement said, to establish technical feasibility of uses ranging from remote power sources to integration with existing power systems. (ERDA Release 76-290)
Work began on the world’s largest radiotelescope—the “Very Large Array,” consisting of 27 dish antennas each 25 m wide and weighing 160 tons, plus a Y-shaped layout of rail tracks and underground tuhing along three 21-km legs—and was scheduled for completion in 1981 at a cost of $76 million. The plains of St. Augustine, N.M., isolated and desolate, had been chosen because a ring of mountains would prevent radio interference. The VLA would probe objects such as quasars that appeared to speed away at more than half the speed of light, as well as other puzzles such as black holes, star formation, galactic structures, and interstellar molecules. Its design would improve on three weaknesses of current telescopes: poor resolution, poor sensitivity, and inability to make images or maps quickly. Antenna signals routed through underground waveguides to a control center would be amplified and fed into a computer system that could turn out high-resolution images of the radio source in 8 to 12 hr. The array would be supervised by officials of the National Science Foundation, Associated Universities, Inc., and the National Radio Astronomy Observatory. (CSM, 19 Feb 76, 16)
One of the first in a group of 32 commercial solar heating and cooling systems in ERDA’s nationwide solar-energy demonstration program went into operation in Lynchburg, Va., NASA announced. Local and state government officials attended an open house at the office of Terrell E. Mosely, Inc., where the system is installed, to view the equipment together with businessmen, engineers, architects, and federal representatives. The 32 pilot projects, selected from 308 proposals submitted to ERDA, include ten office buildings, four schools, three hotels or motels, two fire stations, two factories, one hospital, one laboratory, one library, and some miscellaneous buildings. NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center provided technical management for the installations in support of the ERDA program. (NASA Release 76-163; MSFC Release 76-177)
NASA announced selection of Hamilton Standard Division, United Aircraft Corp., for negotiations leading to award of contract for development and production of space suits to be used by men and women during Space Shuttle flights. The basic cost-plus-award fee contract would cost about $15 million through Sept. 1980. The suit system, consisting of a basic suit and built-in support system including breathing-atmosphere and cooling components, would be adjustable instead of custom-made for each astronaut (as in earlier programs) and would come in small, medium, and large sizes to fit candidates varying in height from 1.5 to 2 m. Hamilton Standard would provide hardware and spares needed for 7 suits and support equipment, as well as training, manpower, and equipment needed to support the program at NASA field centers. Johnson Space Center would have technical direction of the contract. (JSC Release 76-46)
A 2-wk experiment to observe the Gulf Stream about 580 km east of NASA’s Wallops Flight Center used a combination of spacecraft, aircraft, and water craft to check the ability of remote-sensors to measure the magnitude and boundaries of the Gulf Stream from space. Gulf Stream measurements would aid in planning more effective use of coastal waters, as in cooling nuclear power plants, or in constructing offshore drilling rigs or airports located on manmade islands. Scientists also wanted more data about the Gulf Stream, which carries heat energy that influences the global balance of energy in the atmosphere and the ocean, affecting weather and climate as well as coastal water movement, besides carrying nutrients important to the Ashing industry. Traditional methods using closely spaced ship stations or buoys to obtain data had proved inadequate for studying fast-changing or large-scale phenomena. Satellite measurements used in the experiment included infrared signatures that identifled the Gulf Stream boundary from space photographs. A precision altimeter on NASA’s Geos 3 (geodynamic experimental ocean satellite) measured surface deviations in the ocean within 20 cm, from which velocity of a current could be calculated; the experiment also used the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Noaa 4 weather satellite. A C-54 research plane from Wallops carried instruments on 3 flights to measure the current by observing wave interactions; surface measurements were taken by the research vessel Advance II from Cape Fear Technical Institute at Wilmington, N.C., manned by ocean scientists from N.C. State University at Raleigh. The project was part of a scientific research task directed by NASA Hq’s Office of Applications. (NASA Release 76-115; WFC Release 76-7)
Dr. John F. Clark would retire 1 July after 10 yr as director of the Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA announced. His successor would be Dr. Robert S. Cooper, deputy director of GSFC. Dr. Clark had come to NASA in 1958, serving from 1963 to 1965 as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications, after which he was appointed to his post at GSFC. An authority in atmospheric and space sciences, Dr. Clark while director at GSFC had been responsible for major advances in communications, weather and climate, earth resources, space physics, and space astronomy. (NASA Release 76-71)
Space-related technology would serve to monitor municipal water pollution and dispose of solid wastes, NASA announced, describing systems for electronic monitoring of water quality in cooperation with the Gulf Coast Waste Disposal Authority and for sewage treatment at a plant midway between Los Angeles and San Diego. Johnson Space Center at Houston developed under contract with Boeing a trailer-mounted automated system to process data from up to 40 different water sensors for rapid indications of pollution, temperature, turbidity, and similar items. The current procedure was to sample city water at regular intervals and send the samples to a laboratory for analysis, with results available days later. JSC and the Goddard Space Flight Center developed a biosensor to give total bacteria count directly, by adding chemicals that caused bacteria to radiate light; this sensor could both detect and quantify living or dead bacteria in a continuous-flow water sample. At Langley Research Center, scientists working on Skylab environmental control had developed an electronic sensor that could detect human or nonhuman fecal coliform bacteria in a few hours, rather than a few days; the device would permit public health authorities to act quickly if large quantities of disease-producing bacteria entered a water supply. The automated monitoring system would eventually include a device to detect known carcinogenic chemicals—chloroform and carbon tetrachloride, for instance—already found in the drinking water of cities surveyed for the project. Some of the pollutants were thought to be byproducts of chlorine added to city water to guard against waterborne diseases. A gas-chromatograph technique developed at Ames Research Center to extract minute samples of organic materials from the atmospheres of other planets would be valuable to concentrate the harmful chemicals detected in city water for rapid onsite analysis. Another Ames system, attaching fluorescent dyes to bacteria so that their presence could be recorded by electronic sensors, could be applied to detection of waterborne viruses. As for sewage disposal, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory used for the new million-gallon-per-day treatment plant at Huntington Beach, Cal., a process invented by Marshall Humphrey, a JPL engineer working on lightweight materials for insulating rocket motors. Using a pyrolytic converter to produce activated carbon by chemical changes induced by heat, he found that sewage solids were excellent raw material for production of carbon. The new process would convert solid sewage to activated carbon, which could then be used to remove impurities from incoming waste water and recycled and reactivated with new incoming sewage. Gases generated from sewage solids would serve as fuel for the converter. Dry black odorless powder of carbon and ash would be the only residue from the process. Even the billion-dollar secondary sewage-treatment plants in compliance with EPA standards had not solved the problem of solid-waste disposal; primary treatment of sewage had left about 40% solid waste in water leaving the plants and discharged into rivers and offshore waters. The JPL process would exceed EPA standards for ocean discharge and reduce capital costs of processing systems as much as 25%. (NASA Release 76-57; KSC News, 4 Mar 76, 2)
Dr. William H. Pickering, director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology since 1954, retired, announcing that he would return to Caltech as a professor of engineering. He had earned all his degrees at that institution and had joined the faculty in 1936, becoming a member of the JPL staff in 1944. The staff at that time numbered a few hundred; when he became director, the total had reached 1000, and numbered about 4000 when he announced his retirement. Born in New Zealand in 1910, Dr. Pickering had become one of the world’s foremost experts in space technology. Under his leadership, JPL had designed Explorer 1, first successful U.S. satellite, and went on to develop and operate the Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner space probes. Dr. Pickering was first president of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1963, and president of the International Astronautical Federation in 1965-66. NASA’s announcement of his retirement said he would work on gaining worldwide scientific support for the proposed International Solar System Decade of research and space exploration of all aspects of the solar system. (NASA anno. 23 June 75; NYT, 21 June 75, 41; LA Times, 31 Mar 76, 1; Pasadena Star-News, 1 Apr 76, 1)
Charles W. Mathews, NASA Associate Administrator of Applications, retired after 33 yr of government service with NASA and its parent organization, NACA. As a member of the science staff at the Langley Research Center since 1943, he was chairman of the group that developed specifications for the Mercury spacecraft before NASA was established. When Mercury became an official program in 1958, Mathews transferred to Houston (now the Johnson Space Center), serving as manager of the Gemini program. Upon completion of Gemini, Mathews went to NASA Hq as director of the Skylab program (then known as Apollo Applications Program); in 1968, he became Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, and remained in that position until 1971. Awarded the NASA Distinguished Service Medal by President Johnson in 1966 for contributions to the manned space program, Mathews received the award a second time in 1969 for contributions to the first manned lunar landing. At his retirement, he stated that he would “continue to devote effort to the further realization of the tremendous potential of space . . .” (NASA Release 76-38)
NASA was preparing to issue requests for proposals in Jan. 1977 for the Large Space Telescope, resulting in contractor selection during the next year if Congress approved the fiscal 1978 funding requested, said Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine. NASA also hoped to issue an announcement of scientific opportunity to the scientific community in Feb., asking for scientific instruments to be carried on the first mission of the 2.4-meter telescope. (Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 9)
Louis Mogavero was appointed Director of NASA’s Technology Utilization Office in the Hq Office of Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, the agency announced. Mogavero, who joined NASA in 1966, had held management and planning positions in the former Office of Manned Space Flight, and in 1972 had worked with a White House study group evaluating new opportunities in technology. Before joining NASA he was operations manager for new product development with the Boeing Co., and received a master’s degree in engineering administration in 1970 from George Washington University. (NASA Hq announcement, 12 Apr 76)
A Spacelab simulation mission known as ASSESS II would be flown jointly next spring by NASA and the European Space Agency, and the payload specialists for the 4-engine jet mission would be named shortly, NASA announced. ASSESS was the acronym for airborne science Spacelab experiment-systems simulation. Carlos C. Hagood, NASA mission manager for Spacelab 2 and ASSESS, said two U.S. candidates would be named as prime payload specialists, with a third as backup; ESA would also select prime and backup specialists. Launch date of the 10-day mission had been set for 15 May 1977. The mission would be flown in the Galileo II, a Convair 990 operated by Ames Research Center, one of several ARC flying laboratories supporting research activities internationally. The aircraft would fly 6.5 hr each day, and the payload specialists would remain in the plane and work another 6 hr on the ground; their off-duty time would be spent in a van containing living quarters connected to the aircraft. ASSESS was developed to involve individual principal investigators (Pi) in defining and operating the scientific payload; to study the investigator working-group (IWG) concept, providing Pis a means of full and direct visibility into mission management and a direct channel for making recommendations; to evaluate the concept of PI selection of payload specialists; and to validate a concept for training and cross-training Pi-selected payload specialists. MSFC was lead center for the ASSESS II mission. Dr. Anthony C. DeLoach was MSFC mission scientist; ESA mission scientist was Dr. John Beckman of the European Space Research and Technology Center at Noordwijk, The Netherlands. ESA mission manager was Johannes de Waard, based in Porz-Wahn, West Germany. NASA candidates for payload specialist would be selected by NASA members of the investigator working group, and European candidates by the ESA members; the selections would be recommeded to the ASSESS program manager, Bernard T. Nolan of NASA Hq Office of Applications. (MSFC Release 76-158)
The Soyuz 21 manned mission to space station Salyut 5 ended abruptly after cosmonauts Vitaly Zholobov and Boris Volynov had been in orbit 48 da. Although the first manned space flight since Apollo-Soyuz failed to break the U.S. 84-day record, no problem was mentioned by the Tass news agency; the first hint of termination came about 10 hr before the landing. The Soyuz 21 descent module landed by parachute on the Karl Marx collective farm near Tselinograd in Kazakhstan at 9:33 pm Moscow time (1:33 pm EST); general condition of the cosmonauts was “satisfactory,” said Tass. Experiments returned to earth for analysis were of 3 kinds: geophysical and astrophysical observations, technological, and biological. Technology experiments used processes potentially useful in constructing a larger space station, such as studies of the behavior of gases and liquids in space and a soldering technique using a chemical reaction to produce the necessary heat. Cytological and genetic experiments should provide additional data on the nature and hazards of solar radiation in prolonged space flight. (Nature, 26 Aug 76, 735; Av Wk, 30 Aug 76, 23; FBIS, Tass in English, 24 Aug 76; NYT, 25 Aug 76, 20; W Post, 25 Aug 76, B-9)
The European aerospace industry was frustrated in attempting to increase its share of commercial and military aircraft sales, said Robert B. Hotz, editor-in-chief, in an editorial in Aviation Week magazine. Although maintenance of a viable European aerospace industry would be in the best interest of the Western world, Hotz said, attempts to organize it on a truly international competitive scale had emphasized inherent weaknesses and failed to achieve fiscal success. Recent developments— nationalization of the British aircraft industry, and French moves toward a transatlantic rather than a cross-channel cooperation—had intensified the problems, characterized by higher wage scales and lower productivity. Suggestions for improvement included organizations based on commercial and technical considerations, rather than on political boundaries and restrictions; marketing goals based on the broadest markets possible, rather than on narrow domestic requirements; and controlling labor costs that had priced European products out of the export market and had held production to a rate below that needed to fill international market requirements. (Av Wk, 3 May 76, 5)
Col. Stuart A. Roosa, 42, an astronaut since 1966, announced in Houston that he would retire from the Air Force and from NASA on 1 Feb., one day after the 5th anniversary of the launch of his only space flight, Apollo 14. Roosa had piloted the command module while Capt. Alan B. Shepard and Cdr. Edgar D. Mitchell had made the third moon landing, and had previously been on the Apollo 9 backup crew. Roosa told associates he was exploring “companies involved in new procedures.” (NYT, 30 Jan 76, 34; W Star, 30 Jan 76, A-2)
NASA was beginning to make headway in efforts to solve basic problems of U.S. aircraft manufacturers caused by a long-term dearth of low-speed aeronautical research, reported Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine. Industry engineers reporting on discussions at a recent Wichita meeting of the Society of Automotive Engineers said use of the workshop technique had been effective in uncovering primary problem areas by crosstalk with such specialized segments as aerodynamicists and propulsion engineers. NASA research being further refined in industry product development included general-aviation aircraft airfoils, aircraft drag reduction, propeller efficiency, and reduction of airflow separation on wing trailing edges. Lewis Research Center had begun exploration of alternatives to conventional reciprocating engines, such as diesel and rotary concepts. NASA had also begun studying the application of advanced technology to agricultural aircraft, said to be responsible for increasing farm production by about $10 billion annually, to solve problems such as corrosion of aircraft structures by agricultural chemicals and control of chemical drift. (Av Wk, 26 Apr 76, 56)
INTELSAT announced plans to conduct a 1977 program of research and development costing more than $5.4 million, to advance technology for its global comsat system. The R&D yearly budget, approved by the recent meeting of the board of governors, would consist of $1.3 million for research to identify technology that appeared promising for the future INTELSAT projects; $2.2 million for contract authority for projects with near-term applications; and $1.9 million for in-house support of such projects. Areas of exploratory research would include spacecraft and microwave technology, communications processing, analysis of propagation and transmission, and studies of materials and devices. Near-term projects would include development of antennas, transponders, and other components; investigation of cross polarization; development of NiH batteries, voice-channel decoders, high-power transistors, and improvement of techniques. (INTELSAT Release 76-33-M)
Establishment of an Office of Science, Engineering, and Technology Policy in the White House, a goal of U.S. scientists since 1973, would become effective within 6 wk or so, the New York Times reported. Since President Nixon had abolished a similar office, the scientific community had been concerned over the lack of provision at the top level of government for sophisticated advice on science and technology affecting U.S. policies on world food supplies, environmental pollution, energy, transportation, disarmament, and similar problems. The Ford Administration had encouraged Congress to establish such an office by law rather than set one up by executive order, and the House of Representatives had passed an Administration-backed bill in Nov. 1975. A Senate bill, “roughly comparable” according to the NYT, had been agreed upon by several committees and was on its way to passage; this measure would establish a White House office with a director and as many as 4 associates, who would work closely with the Office of Management and Budget on science and technology budgets and would prepare an annual report for the President to send to Congress on science, engineering, and technology, with options on federal investment and priorities in the three related fields. The Senate bill would also call for authorization of funds to establish science and technology offices in each state; the House bill did not have similar provisions. (NYT, 25 Jan 76, 26)
Discovery of a new kind of photosynthesis—a bacterial system using purple instead of green pigment to convert sunlight into chemical energy and food—was announced by a team of scientists from NASA’s Ames Research Center and the Univ. of Calif, medical center at San Francisco. Contained in cell membranes of Halobacterium halobium, found in salty waters, the pigment when energized by sunlight could transfer protons across the membrane. It appeared to increase the evaporation rate of salt, with possible applications in desalination of sea water; it also seemed to resemble rhodopsin, the little-understood visual pigment of the eye, and might aid in understanding the evolution and operation of vision. The purple pigment, which acted as a proton pump, might also explain the key process of ion transport in all cells. Deposited on a film and exposed to sunlight, it had already been tried out in crude solar cells. Scientists were excited by the possibility of practical uses of the purple pigment because—although less efficient than chlorophyll—it could be purified and was stable over a broad range of temperatures and activities. The newly discovered process was the first instance of a system other than the one based on green chlorophyll in which cells could use light energy to survive, said Dr. Walter Stoeckenius of the University of Calif., chief researcher. Bacteria used in the research came from salt flats near the Mediterranean, where they had been known for a century to cause pinkeye in salted fish and red herrings to become red. The study in which the discovery was made was part of research into earth organisms living in extreme environments like those expected to exist on other planets. (NASA Release 76-30; ARC Release 76-12; W Post, 3 Mar 76, A— 1; B Sun, 3 Mar 76, A-3)
Isaac T. Gillam IV, NASA Hq Program Manager of Small Launch Vehicles, was designated Director of Space Shuttle Operations at Dryden Flight Research Center, effective 23 May. In his new position, Gillam would be responsible for development of test support facilities, institutional support of test operations, and flight and industrial safety for test operations in support of Shuttle carrier-aircraft testing and orbital approach and landing tests conducted at DFRC. Before coming to NASA Hq in 1963, Gillam served in the U.S. Air Force as pilot, missile launch crew commander, and ROTC instructor; he had done graduate work at Term. State Univ. while serving as assistant professor of military science. From 1963 to 1966, he was resources management specialist at NASA Hq and was then appointed Assistant Delta Program Manager in the Launch Vehicles Directorate. Named Delta Program Manager in Sept. 1968, he became Program Manager of Small Launch Vehicles (including Delta and Scout) in June 1973. He received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his work in the launch-vehicle program. (NASA Release 76-96)
The Enterprise—Space Shuttle Orbiter 101, described by NASA as the flagship of “the new era of space transportation” and by Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) as “probably the best investment the U.S. Congress has ever made”—was rolled out of Rockwell Intl.’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., just before 1 pm EOT, to the strains of the theme from the Star Trek TV show and applause from about 2000 spectators. The audience included Sen. John B. Tunney (D-Calif.); Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology; and Rep. William M. Ketchum (R-Calif.), “representing Antelope Valley” where the Orbiter was built. Also on hand were test-flight crewmen Fred W. Haise, Joe H. Engle, Charles G. Fullerton, and Richard H. Truly, the astronaut team who would put the Orbiter through approach and landing tests scheduled for 1979. Special guests were six members of the original Star Trek cast and ST creator Gene Roddenberry [see 8 Sept.]. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher told those attending that the ceremony was “a proud moment” that would mean “the evolution to man in space—not just astronauts.” (Plans called for the Orbiter to serve as an all-purpose space trainer, carrying a crew of two or more plus up to five scientific or technological investigators working in space in a shirtsleeve environment.) Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., board chairman of Rockwell Inti., predicted “one of the most exciting chapters in American history” in the productive use of space that the Shuttle would make possible. The first Shuttle in orbit was to carry 4500 kg of instruments to measure stress, and the second, a small satellite to be left in orbit; the last of six orbital test flights would carry a payload of about 30 000 kg or as many as six satellites to be left in orbit at altitudes up to 160 km. Resembling “a space-bound DC-9,” according to Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post, the Enterprise was more than 36.5 m long and weighed nearly 70 000 kg, having gained more than 2200 kg over the past 2 yr. Strengthening the wings, landing-gear and payload-bay doors, parts of the fuselage, and the enormous fuel tanks during Shuttle development had added to both the weight and the cost of the vehicle, meaning that its price would be more than the $5.2 billion (in 1971 dollars) estimated by NASA. One change alone, from aluminum to a boron-epoxy composite for landing-gear doors, would cost about $9000 per kg to save 112 kg of weight. Replacing aluminum castings in the fuselage with titanium would cost about $18 000 a kg to save slightly more than 200 kg of weight. Sen. Goldwater reminded those at the rollout that the first U.S. manned orbital Right (that of John Glenn in Friendship 7) had occurred 14 yr previously, in Feb. 1962, and predicted that the Space Shuttle would make manned space flight a “routine” experience. (NASA Release 76-149; NYT, 18 Sept 76, 1, 8; W Post, 18 Sept 76, A-2; fV Star, 18 Sept 76, A—1; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7, 2-7; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 12; 27 Sept 76,12; KSC Spaceport News, 17 Sept 76,1; ISC Roundup, 24 Sept 76, 1)
The space share of federal R&D funding for FY 1977 would increase only slightly, according to a Natl. Science Foundation report, An Analysis of Federal R&D Funding by Function, Fiscal Years 1969-1977. The 1977 estimate of $2940 million was considerably less than the 1969 level of $3732 million; the space share—13%—was much lower than the 24% for the earlier year. Manned space flight, always the leading subfunction, remained predominant with the Space Shuttle accounting for more than 40% of all space activities. Space science, with 20% of the total, reflected a decline from 1976 and showed effects of lower funding for NASA lunar and planetary exploration as Viking and outer planet missions moved into the launch stages. Space technology and NASA support activities would increase during FY 1977. (NSF, Space Science Resources Studies, 19 Aug 76, 1)
An enormous radiotelescope “the size of the earth” to be used in studying the process of star formation in earth’s galaxy had been constructed by linking installations in Washington, D.C., California, Australia, and the Soviet Union, the Naval Research Laboratory announced. Four large radiotelescopes distributed around the world had joined in using very long-baseline interferometry (VLBl) to record microwave signals received at each antenna on videotape, and comparing the recordings. The resultant huge antenna would be able to resolve a source less than 2 ten-thousandths of a second of arc, comparable to the thickness of a human hair at a 161-km distance, or a man’s footprint on the moon. An instrument this size would be needed to study primordial clouds in the constellation Aquila containing water-vapor molecules that emit intense microwave radiation through maser amplification, analogous to the operation of optical lasers. These water-vapor masers seem to be associated with star formation taking place in giant clouds in the galaxy; sizes of the individual masing sources, which may number more than 100 in a single cloud, range from half to 3 times the distance between the sun and the earth. The masing radiation offered a way to study the clouds that obscure radiation at other frequencies and to estimate the physical conditions that surround star formation. Installations in the experiment were NRL’s 26-m antenna at its Maryland Point, Md., observatory; NASA’s Deep Space Network 64-m antenna at Tidbinbilla, Australia; the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory’s 22-m antenna at Semeiz, USSR; and the Calif. Institute of Technology’s 39-m antenna at Owens Valley, Calif. The maximum spacing achievable is the earth’s diameter (12 600 km), a distance approximating the separation between the Md. and Australian antennas (12 091 km). (NRL Release 45-7-76B/HF; NYT, 20 July 76, 13)
Nine sites for the world’s first solar electric-power plant had been proposed by utility companies and government units in the U.S. in response to a request in July 1976, the Energy Research and Development Administration announced. Sites suggested were in Arizona, California, Florida, Mississippi, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, and Texas. The agency planned to complete an evaluation and negotiate a contract with the selected proposer early in 1977; the selected proposer would become a partner with ERDA in constructing and operating a plant to generate electric power from high-pressure steam produced by concentrated power from the sun. Power from this pilot plant would be distributed by the utility to its customers; the plant would produce 10 Mw (10 000 kw) under optimum full-sun conditions, enough to supply a community of 10 000 population. Construction of the plant would begin in 1978 and reach completion in 1980, at an estimated cost of $ 100 million. (ERDA Release 76-294) The Viking 2 lander’s pyrolytic-release instrument, which had been directed to look for evidence of photosynthesis activity in a dry Mars soil sample in the dark to avoid ambiguity, had returned an ambiguous reading, said Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of the Calif. Inst, of Technology, who designed the instrument. The count of radioactive molecules released during the analysis was 21 per minute, far less than the 96 per minute counted in the first similar assay by the Viking 1 lander, but more than the 15 counts per minute the instrument would show in the absence of photosynthesis. The puzzled scientists planned another sampling, this time with a moistened sample under a sun simulator, which had been omitted from the first run to prevent overheating the Viking 2 instrument, working in a location warmer than the Chryse area tested by Viking 1. Although neither of the Viking landers had turned up more than a suggestion of life, Viking 2 had confirmed the presence of water on Mars, and more than had been expected, project scientists announced at a JPL news conference 22 Sept. The permanent northern polar cap was found to be composed entirely of frozen water, not of frozen carbon dioxide as had been thought. A thin layer of dry ice covering the polar caps during most of the Martian year had suggested that both caps consisted of frozen carbon dioxide. Two Viking 2 orbiter measurements that led to the discovery were the unusually high water-vapor content in the atmosphere over the northern pole, and the average-surface-temperature readings on the icecap, which were too warm for frozen carbon dioxide to exist. Dr. Hugh Kieffer of UCLA predicted that a survey of the south polar cap would find it also made entirely of water ice. The new evidence suggested that, when first formed, Mars might have had twice as much water as the earth had at a similar period in its development; even now, scientists described Mars as “a planet-size iceberg.” Other Viking instruments had detected traces of krypton and xenon in the Mars atmosphere. This discovery was the first clue that the planet once had a considerably denser atmosphere that could have supported liquid water and even rainfall. Dr. Gerald Soffen, chief Viking scientist, said that the krypton finding was a “major marker” that would permit deductions about the origin of the Mars atmosphere. On Saturday, 25 Sept., mission scientists at JPL were “relieved” to see photographs transmitted by Viking 2 showing that the lander had followed an order radioed from earth to dig a trench and dump the soil sample into the organic analyzer to screen it for 2 wk in a search for microorganisms. (Mission Status Bulletin 44; NYT, 21 Sept 76, 18; 26 Sept 76, 5; W Post, 23 Sept 76, A-2; 24 Sept 76, A-2; 26 Sept 76, A-6; W Star, 23 Sept 76, A-3; 26 Sept 76, A-14)
Third Century America, the bicentennial exposition on science and technology that opened in May at KSC, closed its gates with a ceremony that included music, fireworks, and cannon salutes. More than 600 000 visitors had seen displays prepared by government agencies, educational institutions, and industry firms, many of which had representatives on the outdoor stage during the closing exercises. A time capsule dedicated during the ceremony would remain on display at the visitor center with duplicates of the items contained in the capsule: 1976 coins, stamps, and medals; items representative of 1976 technology and lifestyle, including space-related materials; newspapers, letters, and a mailorder catalog. The stainless steel cylinder, enclosed in a stainless steel cube with a lexan plastic top, would be opened in 99 yr (on 4 July 2075) in preparation for the U.S. Tricentennial. (Spaceport News, 3 Sept 76, 8; 17 Sept 76, 4)
New Mexico State University and NASA would sponsor a 3-day symposium aimed at motivating Hispanic and Native American college and high-school students to follow science and engineering as career fields, the Johnson Space Center announced. The symposium sent invitations to faculties of 14 colleges and universities with high numbers of Hispanic and Native American students, as well as local area high schools, to hear speakers and view exhibits from NASA field centers and from the aerospace industry. The session from 21 to 23 April would highlight career opportunities in the aerospace field, including a workshop session on the need for additional aerospace courses in the school curriculum and a job fair providing information on placement. (JSC Release 76-23)
Employment in the U.S. aerospace industry continued downward, the annual employment survey by the Aerospace Industries Association said. Employment figures would fall below 900 000 by the end of 1976, compared with 925 000 at the start of the year. Peak employment in the industry was 1 500 000 in 1968. The predicted decline, amounting to 3.5%, would be spread among all sectors of the industry; greatest decline—about 6000—would be in employment on aircraft programs, much of it in plants producing transport aircraft. The continuing erosion of the high-technology manpower base was principally due to slackening demand for commercial jetliners, uncertainties in export markets, the level of government commitment to new or replacement military aircraft, and reduced investment in the space program, the report said. The forecast was based on data provided by 48 major firms representing more than 65% of total aerospace employment. (Aerospace News, 26 Apr 76)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $40 214 contract extension of 12 mo to Ky. State Univ. for continuing its studies of the effects of oxygen atmospheres on animals. The animal under study was the vinegar fly—Drosophila melanogaster—which was grown and tested under 5%, 20%, and 60% oxygen concentrations (normal oxygen content of earth’s atmosphere is 21%). Studies over 2 yr showed that, at the 5% and 20% oxygen levels, survival rates of the initial generation of the flies were the same. Flies in a 60% oxygen environment had a survival rate like that of the flies in the 20% environment, for up to 20 days; after 20 days, flies in the 60% atmosphere died. Tissue studies indicated that exposure to a 60% oxygen environment resulted in physical changes, . including accelerated aging and problems in the nervous system. The contract extension would permit studies of the mortality, fertility, and gene frequencies of the flies over 10 or more generations. The data would aid in establishing proper oxygen content in manned spacecraft atmospheres during future manned missions, and in selecting humans to participate in manned missions and in deep-sea dives. (KSC Release 198-76)
Dryden Flight Research Center announced it would begin a series of YF-17 test flights in mid-May to aid designers of future highly maneuverable aircraft. The YF-17, built by Northrop Corp. for the Air Force’s lightweight fighter program, is a twin-engine aircraft incorporating many innovations to give it high performance and maneuverability. Objectives of the NASA research program would be to collect in-flight data on pressure around the engine nozzles and afterbody, for comparison with wind-tunnel data to improve prediction techniques for future fighter-aircraft design; and to continue NASA studies on improved maneuvering for fighter aircraft in the areas of buffet, stability and control, acceleration, and handling. Under a $255 000 contract funded jointly by NASA and the U.S. Navy, the YF-17 would be flown for about 8 wk by Gary Krier, DFRC’s YF-17 project pilot. (DFRC Release 7-76)
The Energy Research and Development Administration announced plans to build a “power tower” in 1978 and put it in operation by 1981. Plans called for a large number of sun-tracking mirrors, called heliostats, to reflect sunlight on to a boiler located at the top of a tower; water in the boiler, superheated by concentrated sunlight, would produce high-pressure steam to drive a turbine. ERDA was seeking a utility company to construct and operate the pilot plant: the utility would provide the site, install a conventional turbine and generator, and distribute the power to its customers over existing lines. ERDA would provide the solar portions (tower, boiler, heliostats, and storage) and charge the utility for the electricity. Sites proposed for the pilot plant were in Ariz., Calif., Fla., Miss., P.R., R.I., and Tex. Three teams—headed by Honeywell Inc., McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., and Martin Marietta Corp.—were working on designs for the pilot plant, and Boeing Engineering and Construction Corp. was developing a design for the heliostat only. ERDA would choose the best design and test it at a facility under construction at the Sandia Laboratories of ERDA in N.M. (ERDA Release NF-76-12)
The Marshall Star reported that a former student research assistant at MSFC, now a member of the faculty at Alabama A&M Univ., would be principal investigator in a study to develop remote-sensing applications for resources study and management, under a $35 000 grant from NASA and MSFC. The research effort would catalog the transportation network of Ala., including highways, railroads, water systems, and airports, and would devise a system for storing information in quickly retrievable form that could readily be updated. Dr. Oscar Montgomery, who had worked on the study at the outset, had graduated from A&M and had received a Ph. D. from Purdue Univ., returning to A&M in the department of natural resources and environmental studies. He and other researchers at A&M would identify and assist users of remotely sensed data in Ala., develop university facilities and skills to handle, process, and interpret such data, and support “ground truth” and related activities of the Earth Resources Office at MSFC. The grant, part of the Minority Institutions Research Program, would provide remotely sensed data obtained by aircraft or spacecraft to the Ala. Development Office and other state agencies. (Marshall Star, 10 Nov 76, 4)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that 3 different solar collectors procured from industry in an ERDA-sponsored program on technical management and support of solar-energy development were undergoing tests of efficiency versus cost. The collectors, after exposure to weathering, were put into an active situation in which the heat-transfer medium (usually water) passed through them, and measurements were made to determine their efficiency. At the same time, 4 low-cost collectors developed by MSFC were being tested to evaluate the thermal performance of black-nickel and black-chrome absorber coatings that could reduce the amount of collector area required, and thereby lower the cost of a specific application. (MSFC Release 76-121)
Scientists using a NASA S-band radar obtained the first detailed pictures of the surface of Venus, NASA announced. Installed at the Arecibo radar observatory in Puerto Rico under a $3-million NASA contract, the S-band system was 50 times more sensitive than equipment previously available for radar observations of Venus. Optical telescopes had been unable to penetrate the dense cloudcover of Venus, but the Arecibo radar had produced high-quality photograph-like images with a clarity like that of optical photographs of the moon taken from earth. Data were obtained during a series of daily 2-hr observations in the months before and after the close approach of Venus to the earth in late August 1975. Radar echoes of the signal from a powerful transmitter operating at a 12.6-cm wavelength were measured for strength, precise frequency, and time of arrival by a 330-m radiotelescope at Arecibo and an auxiliary 30-m telescope about 10.5 km distant; the two telescopes constituted an interferometer that enabled mapping of areas with detailed definition and precise location of the echoing regions. Venus features as small as 19 km could be distinguished. In the area about 10.25 million sq km mapped by the radar, scientists had observed a large basin bordered by ejecta suggesting its formation by impacts like those that created the maria on the moon, as well as a very bright area “about the size of Oklahoma” tentatively named Maxwell (for the 19th-century physicist) which appeared to result from processes internal to Venus— possibly a large eruption of lava—with long parallel ridges unlike features on either the earth or the moon. (NASA Release 76-153; A^IT, 10 Sept 76, A-l)
Federal agencies allocated $4.5 billion to institutions of higher learning in FY 1975, the Natl. Science Foundation reported, a level of support about the same as the previous year’s but representing an 8% decline when converted to constant (1972) dollars. HEW allocated the largest amount, $3.2 billion, or 70% of the total; the NSF supplied the second largest, $491 million or 11%. Other sponsoring agencies were the Dept, of Agriculture, DOD, ERDA, and NASA. Of the $2.2 billion earmarked for research and development (about half of all allocations to academic institutions), researchers in life sciences received $1.2 billion, more than half of all federal R&D funds; research in physical sciences received $307 million, about 14%, and engineering and environmental sciences each received about 9%. All other fields together received only about 13%. (NSF Release PR76-91) .
The 12th annual meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics opened in Washington with the theme “Aerospace and Public Policy,” offering 9 panel discussions beginning with one on the Space Shuttle during which John F. Yardley, NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Flight, would give the keynote address on shuttle program status and flight operations plans. Other panels would discuss domestic direct-broadcast satellites; inflation, capital formation, and the aerospace industry; national transportation policy; military aircraft selection; exporting aerospace technology; aerospace and energy; transition to the future; and the environmental impact of aerospace operations. The AIAA convention was preceded by a 2-day aerospace sciences meeting during which about 200 papers were presented at 75 technical sessions. The AIAA’s von Karman lecture would be presented by I.E. Garrick, distinguished research associate at NASA’s Langley Research Center, speaking on aeroelasticity. At the honors night banquet 29 Jan., 14 major AIAA awards would be presented; fellows and honorary fellows of 1975 would be honored; and Edgar M. Cortright—former director of LaRC and previously Chief of Advanced Technology, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications and later for Manned Space Flight at NASA Hq—would be installed as AIAA president. Dr. Cortright had left NASA in Sept. 1975 after 17 yr to become vice president and technical director of Owens-Illinois Inc. Speakers at the honors banquet would be Clarence “Kelly” Johnson, chief of Johnson Space Center’s spacecraft design division, who would receive the spacecraft design award of the year, and astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, who commanded Apollo 11 and took the first walk on the moon. (AIAA releases 6 to 16 Jan 76)
Travelers aboard NASA’s Space Shuttle orbiter in the 1980s would use a unique space suit and rescue system, developed at Johnson Space Center. The Shuttle suit, a departure from the customized astronaut suits, would consist of a two-piece upper and lower torso cover in small, medium, and large sizes to accommodate all astronaut candidates or crews, including females. Only the pilot and mission specialist would be outfitted with the space suit; the commander and payload specialists would be provided with a personal rescue system nicknamed the “cosmic soccerball,” consisting of a container nearly a meter in diameter constructed of three layers—urethane, Kevlar, and an outside thermal protective layer, with a small viewing post of tough Lexan—containing its own simplified life-support and communications systems. During a rescue operation in space, a space-suited astronaut could transfer the rescue balls in one of three ways: using the handle to carry the enclosure like a suitcase from one vehicle to another; hooking a device like a clothesline between two spaceships and passing the rescue ball with its passenger from the disabled ship to the other; or using the remote-manipulator arm in the orbiter’s cargo bay to pluck the rescue ball with its passenger from the disabled ship and put it aboard the rescue ship. Materials to be used in the rescue ball and the Shuttle suit would provide longer shelf life, according to technicians who ran pressure and abrasion tests on them; use of the fabric to make joints in the space suits (instead of the Apollo and Skylab suit use of neoprene rubber molded into convolutes containing cables) would provide better mobility and reduce cost and weight of each suit. The new suit also featured a module construction that closed with a body seal at the waist, considered more reliable than the pressure-seal zippers used in the previous suits. The new suits also were designed with an integral portable life-support system as part of the rigid upper torso, instead of the bulky 34-kg package that previously had to be unpacked and connected to the suit. (NASA Release 76-56; JSC Roundup, 26 Mar 76, 1)
Pioneer 10, on its way out of the solar system, spent 24 hr in an enormous magnetic “tail” area of the planet Jupiter, the Ames Research Center reported, registering zero on its solar-wind detector during that time because the magnetic envelope completely shut out the solar wind. Dr. John H. Wolfe, project scientist, said it was conceivable that the solar wind “could have died completely for a whole day without our being in the tail . . . But we believe we’ve found that Jupiter has a very stretched-out magnetic envelope . . .” Exact shape and size were not known, but were estimated as conical and better than 800 billion km long, spanning the distance between the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn. Earth’s magnetic tail had been measured at more than 6 billion km by previous spacecraft; the magnetic tails of the 2 planets had been shown to extend to great distances by the force of the solar wind, a supersonic charged-particle stream constantly emitted from the sun. (NYT, 26 Mar 76, 19; WPost, 27 Mar 76, A-5; NASA Release 76-55; ARC Release 76-22)
Oso 8, an orbiting solar observatory launched 21 June 1975, had performed without failure of any subsystem except a redundant solar sensor, and was judged successful, according to a postlaunch mission operations report. Primary mission objectives were high-resolution spatial and spectral observations of the solar chromosphere and transition regions, obtained by the pointed experiments aboard the observatory; secondary mission objectives were met with “substantial numbers” of observations of solar x-rays, earth airglow, and cosmic x-ray background radiation. At launch, Oso 8 carried the most comprehensive package of cosmic x-ray experiments ever included in a single payload, including the first satellite instrument containing large-area thin plastic window detectors to measure ultrasoft x-rays; the first high-sensitivity crystal spectrometer flown to measure cosmic x-ray sources with extremely high spectral resolution; and the first satellite experiment flown to measure x-ray polarization of cosmic sources with high sensitivity. (MOR S82175- 09 [postlaunch], 10 May 76)
A nickel-zinc battery improved by space technology, installed in a utility van and tested against a regulation lead-acid battery, ran the delivery vehicle nearly twice as far at a constant speed of about 32 kph, Lewis Research Center announced. The improved battery would be able to meet the needs of 95% of the nation’s drivers for a full-service urban vehicle and could help to reduce dependence on petroleum. The improvement consisted of an inorganic separator adapted from space battery technology. L<RC planned further studies of the battery’s life, performance, and competitive cost, using sample batteries in mail pickup and delivery vans with the cooperation of the U.S. Postal Service. (NASA Release 76-155)
Three products developed by Lewis Research Center had appeared in a list of the 100 most significant products developed during the year, published by Industrial Research magazine, said the Lewis News. The magazine yearly considers about 1000 entries from industries throughout the U.S., and presents the IR-100 award for the products selected by a panel of nationally known technical judges. The 1976 award brings to 16 the number won by LeRC since it entered the competition 11 yr ago. Products cited were: a continuous-production cyclotron target, used in producing radioactive isotopes for diagnostic nuclear medicine; a thickness-measuring radar that could measure lake-ice thickness direcdy beneath an overflying aircraft, used by the Coast Guard to help extend the shipping season on the Great Lakes; and a ceramic thermal-barrier coating that would increase the life of metal parts by protecting them from very high-temperature erosive and corrosive gases, used to prolong the usefulness of turbine blades ten times beyond that of uncoated blades. (Lewis News, 1 Oct 76, 1) A letter to the IVY Times had emphasized that the absence not of carbon but of “the extremely complex molecules of carbon that are characteristic of earth life” was the puzzling factor in the Viking findings at Mars. (ATT, 2 Oct 76, 24) Project scientists had offered three possible explanations for the negative results of the attempts to identify organic compounds. First, any organic compounds left on Mars by the solar wind, by meteor fall, or by past life processes could have been destroyed by agents such as ultraviolet radiation, oxygen, or oxidants such as nitrates or metal oxides acting independently or synergistically; “certainly,” the project report published in the Oct. issue of Science said, “continuous exposure to short-wave ultraviolet light in the presence of oxygen will cause rapid chemical decomposition of most organic compounds.” Second, organic compounds might exist in Mars soil in amounts too dilute to be detected by the Viking instruments. Third, organic compounds might be forming on Mars and undergoing rapid destruction. The traces of organic molecules seen in a second Viking 2 lander chemistry test could well have resulted from contaminants known to have been in the test chamber before the spacecraft left earth, Dr. Biemann said. (ATT, 2 Oct 76, 28) The Viking 2 lander pushed at a rock on the surface of Mars but was unable to move it, JPL scientists reported. The shove was preliminary to an attempt to sample soil shielded from solar radiation and more likely to contain organic material. Dr. Louis Kingsland, deputy mission director, announced the lander would be ordered to try again and to turn over a smaller rock if the first choice failed to move. Dr. Priestley Toulmin, director of the inorganic analysis experiments, said the iron-rich topsoil tested by the Viking 2 lander had a striking resemblance to that tested at the Viking 1 site; results of the assay were almost a duplicate of those sent to earth 2 mo ago. The similarity lead scientists to think the soil had been affected by ancient weather conditions that swept over large portions of the planet; however, the results could not show whether the material below the surface was likewise uniform around the planet, (iWStar, 6 Oct 76, A-5; NYT, 8 Oct 76, A26) The third of three Viking 2 lander tests for dead organic matter in the soil of Mars had shown no sign of fossilized life, Dr. Biemann said at JPL. The last test would use soil exposed by turning oveT a rock on the Mars surface that scientists said might have been undisturbed for as long as a million yr. Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of Caltech, who supervised experiments on both Viking 1 and Viking 2 sites that looked for signs of biological activity, said that the results he had obtained “would be convincing for life on Mars if we had found the dead organic matter.” The sample from under the rock would be held for chemical analysis until scientists could examine photographs of the trench where it was dug to make sure the sample was taken from the proper protected place. Another under-rock sample would be dug for biological analysis later, the second Viking 2 test for synthesis of organic matter to be conducted at the Utopia site. (WPost, 12 Oct 76, A-8; NYT, 12 Oct 76, 18) Meanwhile, the seismology instrument on the Viking 2 lander had recorded no marsquake activity in the 2 wk it had been monitoring the planet’s surface, said Dr. Don L. Anderson, seismology team director. The detector, turned up to full sensitivity, could detect a quake as small as a 3 on the Richter scale (enough to cause only slight damage on earth) as far away as 200 km from the lander; Dr. Anderson said it was working well, recording breezes and even picking up vibrations from tape recorders on board the lander. A similar instrument on the Viking 1 lander never was freed from its packaging. (W Star, 15 Oct 76, A-3) The scoop of soil taken from under a rock on the Mars surface also failed to yield a trace of organic molecules, Dr. Biemann announced. However, mission officials planned to go ahead with biological experiments using a sample from under another rock later in the week; the sample would be tested for signs of life processes—growth, metabolism, and respiration. (C Trib, 21 Oct 76, 4-22)
The jumbo jet—“a revolutionary class of elephantine airliner” carrying twice as many passengers as the biggest narrowbodied aircraft—was a jumbo bust, said the Wall Street Journal reporting on declining business in the aircraft industry, especially on a 3-way battle among U.S. manufacturers for British Airways orders. The government-owned British airline would buy 6 widebody jet liners valued at about $165 million with possible options on 3 more, to replace an aging fleet of Boeing 707s and Vickers VClOs on its long-distance routes, and there was no British-made aircraft of the size British Airways needed. McDonnell Douglas had been advertising in London papers “the difference to Britain” of $537 million and 13,000 jobs if the DC-10 were chosen, because it would use the Rolls Royce engine now used in Lockheed’s slightly smaller TriStars. Lockheed, also competing for the order, said the engines on its L—1011 TriStars had already provided more than $750 million of business for Britain, and buying a long-range version of the TriStar for overseas routes would be simply an extension of a proven relationship. The Boeing Company had also been competing for the order, although its 747 was said to be too big for the British Airways’ long-distance routes: it would carry about 400 passengers, compared to 260 for the DC-10 and 240 for the L—1011. Boeing, however, had been talking with Aerospatiale of France on a smaller version of the latter’s widebody twin-engine jet, to be marketed in the U.S. with a revised Boeing-built wing in return for French participation in a bigger version of Boeing’s 737; the French were reported wary of Boeing and leaning toward an agreement with McDonnell Douglas on a modification of the French 150-seat Mercure. The WSJ reported 10 Aug. that U.S. manufacturers’ sales of widebody aircraft had fallen “billions of dollars behind original projections.” McDonnell was producing DC-10s at only 20% of capacity; Boeing had cut output of 747s from 84 a yr to 18; and Lockheed’s production of L-101 Is was “even lower.” U.S. airlines, for which the widebodies were originally designed, had not placed a single new order for passenger jumbos since 1973, and planned to buy “only a handful” before 1980. The jumbo was industry’s answer to the problem of carrying the passenger load predicted for 2 decades without clogging runways, skyways, and airports; the traffic growth had been curtailed by economic recession and the oil embargo that increased fuel prices unexpectedly. Also, the rise in nonstop service between medium-size cities whose traffic formerly was funnelled through major airports had cut into the traffic of the jumbo jets. Makers of the widebodies were far from breaking even on their design and development costs, which had run over $4 billion; about 1200 planes would have to be sold to cover that investment, the WSJ said, and so far the 3 makers reported only about 700 firm orders and deliveries, with another 80 options that might or might not materialize. (WSJ, 6 Aug 76, 12; 10 Aug 76, 1)
Dr. Bruce T. Lundin, director of Lewis Research Center, received the 1976 Astronautics Engineer Award from the National Space Club at its 19th annual Dr. Robert H. Goddard memorial dinner in Washington. The award, made by a group of judges including former NASA scientist Dr. Wernher von Braun, was for outstanding leadership in development and operation of the Centaur high-energy rocket stage, and the Atlas-Centaur and Titan-Centaur launch vehicles. The Atlas-Centaur launched all NASA’s Surveyor spacecraft in the 1960s and many others such as OAOs, the recent Intelsats, Mariners, and Pioneers. The Titan-Centaur, largest U.S. rocket, launched West Germany’s Helios spacecraft toward the sun and the Viking spacecraft to Mars. A NASA employee since 1943, Dr. Lundin became director of LeRC in 1969 after a year and a half at NASA Hq as Deputy Associate Administrator and Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. As leader in the development and operation of the Centaur vehicle, he built the Centaur staff at Lewis and made the decisions that set the character and style of the whole project. (Lewis News, 19 Mar 76, 1; LeRC Release 76-11)
Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the first hitch in operations of the Viking 2 lander—trouble with its digging arm—had been solved: the problem turned out to be in a microswitch. Ground control at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Calif, had commanded the lander’s computer to ignore signals from the malfunctioning switch in future digs. If the corrective commands freed the arm for duty, the experiments needing soil samples would begin receiving them and results would become available within a week or 10 days. Viking 2's lander cameras had returned excellent pictures of the Utopia terrain around the landing site; the meteorological experiment was collecting and returning weather data regularly; and the seismometer (whose parallel on Viking 1 was never uncaged) was ready to monitor marsquakes, the magazine said. (Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 25, 58-61)
Dr. Donald H. Menzel, one of the world’s leading authorities on the sun and its corona, died at Mass. General Hospital after a long illness. During his lifetime, he had viewed 15 total solar eclipses, leading expeditions to distant places like the Sahara (1973) and Siberia (1936), where the Soviets provided a parlor car of the Trans Siberian Railroad for his equipment and camping gear. Dr. Menzel had taught for nearly 40 yr at Harvard; Dr. Fred L. Whipple of Harvard, a colleague and former student of Dr. Menzel, noted that many of the best-known astronomers in the U.S. had also been taught by Dr. Menzel. The Minor Planet Center of the Inti. Astronomical Union recently named an asteroid Menzel in recognition of his contribution to astrophysics. In 1938, Dr. Menzel developed the first coronagraph in the U.S. to permit study of the sun’s corona without an eclipse; in 1933, he had collaborated with J.C. Boyce in establishing the presence of oxygen in the solar corona, and in 1941 he had worked with Winfield W. Salisbury on the initial calculations that enabled the first radio contact with the moon in 1946. He had received a Ph.D. in astrophysics at Princeton in 1924, writing science-fiction stories to help pay his expenses, and had taught at the Univ. of Iowa and Ohio State Univ. before becoming professor of astrophysics at Harvard in 1939. He was director of the Harvard College Observatory from 1954 to 1966, when he was named research scientist at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Laboratory in Cambridge. He had retired from the university in 1971, but had continued to do research there. (ATT, 16 Dec 76, 50)
A team of engineers and scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had devised a way to transfer blood without contamination and lengthen its safe storage time, NASA announced. Using a concept developed in spacecraft sterilization, the team—under contract to the National Heart and Lung Institute of the National Institutes of Health—worked out an aseptic fluid-transfer system on which patents had been applied for by the Calif. Institute of Technology, which operates JPL for NASA. Two dualwalled tubes, fused and penetrated by heat, would permit clean transfer of blood from one container or bag to another; the unique connector would be manufactured as part of the container. Outer portions of the tubing would be polyvinyl chloride, and the inner parts of heat-resistant kapton; application of heat at 200° C through a metal clamp to the flat end links of each tube would effectively fuse the tube and sterilize the adjoining areas. Heat could be applied by a portable device no larger than an ordinary hair dryer. The method was reported to kill 99.999% of all bacteria and spores, even when surfaces had been purposely contaminated. (NASA Release 76-20)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that MSFC engineers had developed an optical processing system that could use earth pictures taken by satellites such as Landsat or Seasat to survey highway traffic. When the New Orleans, La., planning commission asked the Center if space technology could provide an automated way to conduct thorough, reliable, and inexpensive traffic surveys, MSFC responded with a technique used several years ago of scanning phototransparencies with a laser beam; the new laser scanner would sense differences in intensity of the filtered beam, recognize vehicle sizes and shapes, and store size and location data for later use. Data from an aerial traffic survey using the system could be in the hands of users within hours. The new method must start with aircraft photographs, said MSFC engineer Joseph H. Kerr, who patented the rapid survey system; present Landsat satellites passed over a target only once in 18 days, but the project gave NASA a chance to refine the method for use on satellites in the 1980s. Whereas processing of satellite data might now take months, Kerr said his system could produce data 100 times faster. (NASA Release 76-128)
An impartial “science court” to weigh Controversial national issues such as pesticide use or nuclear-reactor safety was one of several ideas under consideration by two advisory groups appointed by the President last year to give the proposed White House office of science and technology a head start in its task of making major policy decisions. Dr. Simon Ramo, chairman of the advisory group on technological contributions to economic strength, pointed out that no procedure existed for dealing with scientific and technical portions of important issues. Dr. William 0. Baker, president of Bell Laboratories, would chair the other advisory group on advances in science and technology. A 2-day meeting of the groups in Washington ended with the plan to test the science-court idea in an experiment, choosing a controversial issue in which a clearcut statement of scientific facts seemed feasible, then arguing the case with advocates and cross examinations for both sides, with an impartial panel of scientific judges to make the decision. Dr. Ramo said the experiment should teach the advisory groups about the issue they chose, help the government agency that must deal with the issue, and demonstrate whether the court idea would work. Major issues , on which the advisory groups would attempt to assist the White House included the world problem of food and nutrition, the issue of technological innovation and its effect on productivity, and the effect of government regulation on advancement in science and technology. {NYT, 16 Jan 76, 32)
Both the Boeing Co. and Japan’s official transport-development corporation announced pending agreement on Japanese participation in a billion-dollar project to develop a new medium-range Boeing jet liner in the 1980s. The new plane, temporarily designated the 7x7 (middle number to be given later), would be a 198-passenger 2-aisle craft, probably with 3 jet engines: one under each wing, and a third on the tail. It would be low-noise and fuel-conservative, with a high-performance bent wing to operate close to the speed of sound. The medium-range jet would fly one-stop trips between N.Y. and San Francisco. The pending agreement was announced separately, Reuters news agency reporting from Tokyo that the Civil Transport Development Corporation representing government and leading aerospace manufacturers had said the parties were ready to proceed; Boeing headquarters in Seattle termed the announcement premature, but verified progress in negotiations. Proposed Japanese share in the venture had ranged from 50 to 30 to 20%, the last amount currently being discussed. Aeritalia, the Italian aerospace-development concern, had agreed to put up 20% and Boeing had favored French, British, and West German participation. (NYT.11 Aug 76, 43)
Reviewing the Energy Research and Development Administration’s first year of operation, ERDA Administrator Robert C. Seamans Jr. said the U.S. had taken major steps to assure adequate energy supplies in the future. Establishment of ERDA on 19 Jan. 1976, bringing together energy research functions formerly located in other agencies, was itself a milestone. Specific steps cited by Seamans included a major solar-heating demonstration and completion of two heating-and-cooling projects; development of a national energy R&D plan emphasizing conservation of energy and development of new sources; demonstration and testing of more efficient recovery and use of coal, oil, and shale; biohazard screening of 150 compounds in fossil fuels to determine which might cause cancer or genetic mutations; and identifying problems in the nuclear-fuel cycle, including reprocessing of fuel and disposal of wastes. Describing fossil and nuclear energy as the near-term and midterm resources of the nation, Seamans said that conservation should enable them to carry the U.S. into the next century, when essentially inexhaustible energy sources should be available: solar electricity, breeder reactors, and fusion power. (ERDA Release 7 6—5)
An ad hoc committee of 9 prominent astronomers, assisted by a group of experts from NASA, ERDA, and the Air Force and the atmospheric and astronomical science communities, reviewed the program of solar research being conducted by the U.S. Air Force’s Sacramento Peak Observatory in N.M., and recommended that the National Science Foundation assume responsibility for its operation after 30 June 1976. The Air Force had established the observatory near Alamogordo in 1952 to research methods of predicting solar geophysical disturbances that might affect military responsibilities of the AF; reduced manpower had forced the AF to earmark the observatory for phaseout. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, director of NSF, announced that NSF would take over the SPO operation and continue its role in solar research at a productive level. Constructed at a cost of about $8 million, SPO had an estimated replacement value of about $20 million. (NSF Release PR76-15)
NASA announced award of a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to evaluate a fuel-saving concept applicable to commercial subsonic transport aircraft. The three companies selected were Boeing Co., McDonnell Douglas Corp., and Lockheed Aircraft Corp.; each company estimated its portion of the contract to be about $1.6 million. The 24-mo contract, to be managed by Langley Research Center, would be for a study of laminar flow control by use of an air-suction system built into aircraft skin surfaces to remove boundary-layer air before it could cause drag and air turbulence that would reduce aircraft speed. (NASA Release 76-161)
A celebration in Moscow of the 15th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s flight into space heard a speech by A.P. Aleksandrov, president of the Academy of Sciences, reviewing Soviet firsts in space: launch of the world’s first artificial satellite, first manned flights and walk in open space, first flight to the moon and delivery to earth of lunar soil samples by automatic devices, creation of orbital stations, and unique experiments in the study of solar-system planets. Aleksandrov recalled that the first manned space flight occurred only 3.5 yr after launch of the first artificial satellite, which he said made the Russian word “sputnik” common to all peoples in all languages of the world. He reviewed Soviet progress in space research and applications, especially in communications, mentioning that the number of Orbita network ground stations to reach remote parts of the Soviet Union had now climbed to 68. He referred to the success of the Apollo-Soyuz joint experimental flight as “a significant contribution to the progress of world cosmonautics.” (FBIS, Tass report 13 Apr 76)
Johnson Space Center announced it had awarded to Klate Holt Co. of Houston a 1-yr $ 1.5-million extension of contract for custodial support services at JSC. The cost-plus-award-fee contract was originally awarded in July 1975. The contractor had provided custodial services in 82 buildings at JSC and to buildings occupied by JSC at nearby Ellington AFB. (JSC Release 76-45)
The Marshall Space Flight Center announced 3 Sept, the start of hot-firing tests of the steering system for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB). First series of tests, which would continue into Oct., would confirm design of the thrust-vector control steering system developed by MSFC engineers as part of the center’s responsibility for SRB design and development. The system under test would provide power to move the nozzle of the SRB in any direction, steering the Shuttle in the first 120 sec of flight during SRB burn. Data from the first series of tests would be evaluated to refine the system design; after any needed modifications, a second series of tests would certify the system. Thrust-vector control units would be provided in 1978 to Thiokol Corp., MSFC contractor for the SRB solid-fuel rocket motor, for testing under actual firing conditions. (MSFC Release 76-163) —MSFC announced it had delivered the first production case segment for the SRB motor to Thiokol’s Wasatch Div. in Utah on 27 Sept., beating the schedule by 3 days. All case segments for the first motor were to arrive at Thiokol by the end of 1976. The delivered segment, almost 4 m in diameter and 4.2 m long, weighed more than 5990 kg. Eleven segments would be used in each motor; joined, the segments and nozzle would measure more than 38 m long, over three fourths of the total SRB length. (MSFC Release 76-173) —MSFC announced 30 Sept, that personnel of the Rocketdyne Div., Rockwell Inti. Corp., had fired a developmental test engine for the Space Shuttle for 650 sec, longest test to date. The same engine had been fired for 300 sec 2 days earlier. The tests, at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratory in Bay St. Louis, Miss., would produce component- and system-operation data from extended-duration firings at increasing power levels. (MSFC Release 76-174)
U.S. worldwide predominance in science and technology had eroded over the past 15 yr, said a National Science Foundation report transmitted to Congress by President Ford. Based on a review of 492 major technological innovations, the report said the U.S. share of the total sank from 75% in 1953-55 to 58% in 1971-73. U.S. spending on research and development declined from a peak of 3% of gross national product in 1963 to 2.3% in 1974. Since 1960, U.S. receipts for use of American inventions abroad had tripled, but payments the other way had increased 4.5 times. Foreign inventors receiving U.S. patents now accounted for more than 30% of all those issued by the Patent Office. The study was the most specific compilation to date on changes in relative support for science in the U.S. and other nations; the USSR, West Germany, France, and Japan had improved their inventiveness and worker productivity faster than the U.S. The message to Congress did not mention the international comparisons, but said inflation and recession had adversely affected science and technology in the U.S. (NYT, 14 Mar 76, 1)
A U.S.-European Space Shuttle project starting in 1980 would recruit 30 more astronauts—including women and participants from the USSR—for the planned 200 flights in the project, U.S spokesmen said at a Paris news conference held at the end of a 3-day meeting between NASA and European Space Agency officials. John F. Yardley, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told newsmen that NASA was already training more than 30 astronauts for this program. Each flight, carrying 3 U.S. astronauts and up to 4 Europeans on space-science missions lasting between a week and a month, would cost between $18 million and $21 million; European scientists had expressed concern that the flights would cost so much that less money would be left for scientific experiments than they had hoped. Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA’s Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, when asked if the Soviets might be involved in the project, said, “We have made it clear in informal discussions that this would be available to them.” Those using the Shuttle would be expected to foot the bill, officials emphasized. {NYT, 15 May 76, 2; W Post, 15 May 76, A-15; W Star, 16 May 76, A-3)
A 2-mo study this summer at the Ames Research Center would bring together a specially chosen panel of a dozen scientists—“authorities on every aspect of space exploration”—to make an in-depth examination of problems anticipated in the colonization of space. Sponsored by NASA, the group would also consider whether satellite power stations for earth could be built by space colonists. In a report by James Barron for the Washington Star, Princeton physicist Gerard K. O’Neill detailed his ideas for a kilometer-plus-wide cylinder with living quarters for 10 000 colonists on its outer rim, the length to be determined by the number of colonists desired; O’Neill emphasized that the colony could be ready by 1990 using existing technology and materials mined from outer space. O’Neill last year took his theories to a NASA-sponsored study group at Stanford University that included 28 physicists, engineers, and social scientists; the panel recommended that the U.S. move toward the colonization of space, saying that it “would represent ‘cashing in’ on the scientific information returned to us by Apollo.” (W Star, 18 June 76, A-l)
NASA announced that Dr. Noel J. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science, had selected Drs. Charles R. Chappell and James L. Burch of Marshall Space Flight Center as members of the flight team for the proposed Electrodynamics Explorer (EE) satellite mission, consisting of 2 satellites in polar orbit to study physical processes in the atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetosphere from high and low orbit. Dr. Chappell’s proposal for the mission was a cold-plasma instrument, a retarding ion-mass .spectrometer; Dr. Burch proposed a high-altitude instrument for measuring medium-energy plasma. The 2 scientists participated in the project study phase during the past yr, and would work on the flight team with the EE study office at Goddard Space Flight Center in preparing a project plan for the dual-satellite mission. (NASA Release 76-123) At ceremonies in the town of Smiljan, Tesla’s birthplace, President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia praised the “orientation” of Tesla and his compatriots in the U.S. in their support for Yugoslavia during World War II. Later, at a luncheon, Tito reviewed Tesla’s achievements and urged the Yugoslavs to create conditions that would induce talented youths to remain and not leave their country to go abroad. At an informal meeting Dr. Fletcher presented Tito with photographs of Yugoslavia taken by a U.S. satellite, and received from the celebration committee a “golden plaque” bearing Tesla’s picture to be presented to President Ford. President Ford’s message at the ceremonies had stated that Tesla’s work “stands as a link between our two countries in the history of notable accomplishments in science and engineering.” (FBIS, Tanjug Domestic Service, 9-10 July 76, 11-16)
The Federal Aviation Administration would stick to its deadline for modifications to McDonnell Douglas DC-10 jumbo jets to withstand sudden depressurization, the Washington Post reported, as FAA Administrator John L. McLucas withdrew from subordinates the authority to extend a 1 Dec. 1977 deadline set at the recommendation of the Natl. Transportation Safety Board. The modification, which applied also to Lockheed L-101 Is and Boeing 747s, was ordered after the 1974 crash near Paris of a DC-10 whose cargo door blew off in flight, resulting in the death of 346 persons on board. Depressurization of the plane crushed control cables running beneath the cabin floor. An official at FAA had granted a 1-yr extension of the deadline in Oct. 1976—without Me Lucas’s knowledge—but all U.S. airlines flying DC-10s had agreed to comply with the original deadline. Compliance dates for the L-1011 and 747 were 31 March 1978 and 30 June 1978, respectively. (WPost, 30 Nov 76, A-9) During November: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, newsletter reported that, during the 69th annual general conference of the Federation Aero-nautique Internationale in Oct. in Iran, the 1975 FAI gold space medal was awarded jointly to Thomas P. Stafford, commander of the Apollo crew on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and to cosmonaut Alexey Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz 19 crew. Stafford and his crew, Donald K. Slayton and Vance Brand, also received the De La Vaulx medal for establishing during the joint mission the world absolute records for duration, distance, and altitude in group flight, as well as the V.M. Komarov Diploma for outstanding performance in space exploration during the previous year. Their Russian counterparts also received the De La Vaulx medal and the Komarov award. Astronauts Slayton and Brand also each received the Yuri Gagarin gold medal, created by the FAI in memory of the first man in space, for their role in the conquest of space for peaceful purposes. Stafford also accepted on behalf of the U.S. ASTP team the Honorary Group Diploma for Astronautics, for the planning and execution of the first international rendezvous and docking mission in space. (NAA newsletter, Nov 76)
Jan A. Bijvoet (pronounced byfoot) of the Netherlands arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center where he would on 1 April become the new representative of the European Space Agency (ESA) in the Spacelab program office. Most of his career had been with transatlantic cooperative programs; from 1961 to 1970, he had worked for NATO as a senior scientist in the evaluation methods section of SHAPE’S technical center. Before coming to MSFC he had spent 6 yr in ESA’s aeronautical satellite program, a joint activity of ESA and the Federal Aviation Administration. At MSFC Bijvoet would be responsible for technical and managerial liaison between NASA and ESA on the Spacelab program. He succeeded Robert Mory, who had been at MSFC since the beginning of the Spacelab program in 1973 and had been reassigned to the Paris office of ESA. (MSFC Release 76-70)
NASA Hq announced that Robert S. Kraemer, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, would become special assistant to Dr. Robert S. Cooper, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, working on the applications missions of the center. Kraemer had been at NASA Hq for 9 yr, 6 of them in his current position. (NASA Hq. special anno., 5 Nov 76)
More new discoveries would be made in space than on the ground during the first 10 to 15 yr of Shuttle operations, a colloquium on bioprocessing in space was told by James H. Bredt, NASA program manager for space processing. The meeting of more than 200 industrial and academic bioscience researchers at Johnson Space Center heard reports on Space Shuttle and Spacelab capabilities and status. Noting that Spacelab would be able to carry 300 to 400 experiments, more on each flight than all other previous manned space missions combined, Bredt urged the audience to submit experiment programs that would make use of the new national resource. Participants recommended formation of a small group of bioscientists to advise NASA in discussions of space processing suggestions, and scheduling of followup meetings to define areas of interest so that programs could be developed before instrumentation development began. NASA spokesmen said more than 1400 experiment proposals for Shuttle flights were on hand, and Shuttle flight opportunities covering the first 2 Spacelab missions would be announced later this year. (Av Wk & Sp Tech, 29 Mar 76, 53)
MSFC announced selection of two NASA payload specialists and a backup for ASSESS II, a Spacelab simulation project to be flown in May 1977 in a four-engine jet aircraft. ASSESS II, a joint mission of NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), would use the two U.S. payload specialists and two selected by ESA [see 27 Aug.]. The two selected, both of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, were Dr. Robert T. Menzies and David S. Biliu; Leon B. Weaver of MSFC was chosen as the backup. Dr. Menzies would be principal investigator (Pi) for the laser absorption spectrometer experiment; Biliu was a member of JPL’s synthetic-aperture radar research team; Weaver, a veteran of the ASSESS Lear 4 mission of Oct. 1974 and presently assistant mission manager, would represent MSFC’s Spacelab Payload Projects Office, and was selected from a group already involved in ASSESS II whose experience would permit training at minimal cost. The ASSESS II payload would include both NASA and ESA experiments in earth resources, monitoring of atmospheric pollution, and infrared astronomy. (MSFC Release 76-170; Marshall Star, 22 Sept 76, 4)
Johnson Space Center announced selection of Mason-Reguard, Lexington, Ky., for negotiations leading to award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for protective support services, including security, operation of police and fire departments, safety engineering, and emergency ambulance service. Proposed Cost of the services from 1 Oct. 1976 through 30 Sept. 1977 would be $1 837 000, with option for extension over two more 1-yr periods. (JSC Release 76-52) During August: The U.S. Air Force files for Project Blue Book, a 20-yr investigation of unidentified flying objects, had drawn many visitors since they were opened to the public at the National Archives in Washington, D.C., on 14 July, according to Science magazine. The USAF investigation had been closed in 1969 after the government decided that none of the 12 618 cases in the file indicated the existence of extraterrestrial vehicles. Only 701 of the total number remained unexplained. Biggest year for sightings was 1952, with 1501 reported; only 146 were reported for 1969, last year of the project, and only 1 of the objects sighted that year remained unidentified. The national preoccupation with UFOs “currently seems to be at a low ebb,” said Science, adding that the most promising investigations might be in the behavioral or subjective aspects of UFO sightings. (Science, 20 Aug 76, 662)
Tests on the Lageos—a geophysical research satellite expected to remain in orbit several million years—concluded at Goddard Space Flight Center at the end of Jan., NASA announced, and the satellite would be shipped to the Western Test Range in California for launch in late April. Called the “cosmic golfball” because of its 426 special reflectors designed to return laser pulses to their exact point of origin on the earth, Lageos would provide a stable point in the sky to permit measurement of the relative locations of participating ground stations within a few centimeters; these measurements would provide scientists with models of earth’s crustal motion, useful in predicting earthquakes. Manager of the Lageos project would be the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. (MSFC Release 76-17)
Simultaneous measurement of ocean-surface conditions from an aircraft and from an altimeter on NASA’s Geos 3 satellite 840 km above the surface was the mission of a NASA-Navy team just back from a month’s expedition to Newfoundland. Correlation of aircraft data on actual surface conditions with remotely sensed data from Geos 3, launched 9 April 1975, would demonstrate satellite capability of making accurate and rapid sea-state measurements. Newfoundland was chosen for the experiments because it exhibited a wide range of climatic and oceanographic conditions within a relatively short time period. Measurements taken were sea ice, sea state, surface-wind field, and determination of atmospheric refractivity. Each pass of the satellite—8 to 10 times a day— would produce 10 to 15 min of data relayed to Goddard Space Flight Center via tracking stations at Bermuda, Madrid, or Winkfield, England. Satellite observations plotted for the North Atlantic would be compared with aircraft data and with daily Navy-NOAA forecast maps. The team consisted of 8 persons from the Naval Research Laboratory and 11 representatives of Wallops Flight Center and Lockheed contractors. (NASA Release 76-39; WFC Release 76-2)
Soviet scientists studying the movement of Phobos and Deimos, moons of Mars, had discovered that the speed of revolution of Phobos was increasing, lzvestia reported. The USSR’s institute of theoretical astronomy had processed nearly 5000 observations of the Martian satellites from various observatories worldwide over the past 100 yr. Phobos was found to revolve at a distance of 9400 km from the center of Mars; Deimos was in an orbit 2.5 times further away. The acceleration of Phobos over the years was believed to be caused by a so-called tidal interaction with Mars, and meant that—“in several tens of millions of years from now”—it would fall on to the planet. (FBIS, 15 Sept 76) ment. Izvestia announced that the docking equipment had been removed and that Soyuz 22 would therefore make no attempt to dock with Salyut 5, vacated only 3 wk earlier by the Soyuz 21 crew. Soyuz 22 had been constructed as a backup vehicle for last year’s Apollo-Soyuz test flight, Izvestia said. (FB1S, Tass in English, 15-16 Sept 76; Inti Service in Russian, 15 Sept 76; IF Star, 15 Sept 76, A-4, 16 Sept 76, A-4; NYT, 16 Sept 76, 21; W Post, 16 Sept 76, A18; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 25) Moscow radio said 16 Sept, that Soyuz 22 photographed the earth’s surface and the upper layers of its atmosphere with the Zeiss multispectral camera built in East Germany for this mission. Pictures of the Soviet Union would be used in agriculture, forestry, and geology research; Anatoly Alexandrov, president of the USSR Academy of Sciences, said the new equipment promised much to the Soviet economy in those fields as well as in mineral prospecting. One unusual task was the study of color effects caused by cosmic-ray particles in light-sensitive cells of the eye. The cosmonauts also took samples of the cabin air to record changes in its composition during the flight. Tass reported 20 Sept, that Soyuz 22 had taken pictures of objects that had never been “targets of space photography”: the northern regions of the Soviet Union, with simultaneous earth and aerial photography to provide the fullest possible comparative data on surface phenomena and processes. The cosmonauts were concluding their final photography sessions 22 Sept, in preparation for their return to earth, the Moscow domestic service reported, packing tapes, logbooks, and other materials in the landing module and checking its engine. After spending 8 days in orbit, the crew of Soyuz 22 soft-landed 23 Sept, at 10:42 am Moscow time (3:42 am EDT) about 150 km northwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan. Cosmonauts Bykovsky and Aksenov were feeling well, Tass reported, and the flight data were being processed and studied. ! Soyuz 22's East German-made Zeiss multispectral camera did not survive the mission; it was built into the orbital module, normally jettisoned before Soviet reentry procedures. The flight director, cosmonaut Aleksey Yeliseyev, emphasized that the crew “enjoyed a large measure of independence in controlling the ship and in carrying out various investigations.” Vladimir Shatalov, in charge of cosmonaut training, said that Bykovsky (as commander of Soyuz 22) oriented and stabilized the ship so that Aksenov (as flight engineer) could position and operate the camera. The crew “carried out all operations ... by heart, so to say, without consulting their instructions,” Tass reported. Postflight medical checks performed at the Baykonur cosmodrome near Leninsk showed the Soyuz 22 cosmonauts to be in good health, Tass reported 27 Sept. One of the scientific directors of the mission said that all twelve of the photo cassettes brought back from Soyuz 22 were in good condition, and that the crew had completed “an immense amount of research” in space during their week-long expedition. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine noted that launching Soyuz 22 on a mission that did not dock with a Salyut space station contradicted an earlier statement by cosmonaut Pyotr Klimuk, commander of the Soyuz 18 mission to Salyut 4, who had told a COSPAR meeting in June that no more Soyuz vehicles would fly missions independent of the Salyut stations. (Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 20; FBIS, Moscow domestic service in Russian, 16 Sept 76,17 Sept 76,22 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76; FBIS, Tass in English, 17-20 Sept 76, 23 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76)
Veteran astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, Apollo commander of the U.S.-Russian Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975, received the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1975, the Natl. Geographic Society announced. Gen. David C. Jones, USAF Chief of Staff, presented the award, honoring the late Air Force Chief of Staff and given annually to the member of the Air Force, military or civilian, who contributed most significantly in the preceding yr to U.S. progress in aerospace. Maj. Gen. Stafford’s citation noted “outstanding contributions ... by his participation in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project . . . [He] was instrumental in establishing the necessary rapport and spirit of cooperation vital to the success of the mission. Under his leadership, the Apollo crew laid the basic groundwork for future international technological achievements in space and proved that the United States is the acknowledged leader in space exploration.” Attending the ceremony with Stafford’s Air Force colleagues and officers of the Natl. Geographic Society were former astronaut Michael Collins, now director of the National Air and Space Museum, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, formerly Secretary of the Air Force and Deputy Administrator of NASA, now Administrator of the Energy Research and Development Administration. (NGS release, 30 Sept 76) During September: Ames Research Center’s Astrogram published an interview with the center’s first female aircraft mechanic: a co-op student, Maria-Elena Sanchez, enrolled in a airframe and power mechanics course at the College of San Mateo. She was one of four females in the program, whose total enrollment was about 200. As a mechanic at ARC, Ms. Sanchez was performing general maintenance and upkeep on Lear jets and the Cessna 402; for her work at Ames, she was receiving both monetary compensation and college credit. The college program required a student to attend for about 30 mo a school approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, then pass a written, oral, and practical test to receive a license in Airframe and Power Plant Mechanics. Ms. Sanchez, who held a commercial pilot’s license and had been flying since 1971, said she hoped to complete the program and obtain the A&P license within a yr. (ARC Astrogram, 9 Sept 76, 1)
Clocks around the world would be set back one second this New Year’s Eve, because the earth’s spin was that much longer in 1976 than it was last year. The backward move would be the sixth in the last 5 yr because of a slowing in the earth’s spin, the Washington Post explained; the changes were made twice in 1972 and once in each of the last 4 yr, each time on New Year’s Eve. The standard U.S. timepiece (at the Natl. Bureau of Standards Laboratory at Boulder, Colo.) would be reset at midnight GMT (7 pm in Washington, D.C.), and similar atomic clocks would be reset at the same moment in more than 80 countries including the Soviet Union and the Peoples Republic of China. The earth’s spin had been slowing for at least 250 yr, when it was first noticed, except for a 10-yr period before 1900 when the rotation speeded up by 25 sec. In 1878, Simon Newcomb, then chief astronomer at the Naval Observatory, first systematically observed a fluctuation in the rate of rotation, which still is verified by 80 observatories around the world who send their findings to the Inti. Time Bureau in Paris, established in 1972 (the year the clocks lost 2 sec). Scientists attributed the slowdown to the moon’s pull on the tides, braking the motion of the earth’s mantle. (W Post, 31 Dec 76, A2) During December: The Air Force Systems Command announced that former astronaut Maj. Gen. Michael Collins had been appointed mobilization assistant to the AFSC commander. The position was the top Air Force Reserve post in AFSC. Collins, who was confirmed by the U.S. Senate as a reserve major general 10 Mar. 1976, would continue to serve as director of the National Air and Space Museum. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 76, 10)
NASA studies in the year past had shown that 5 of 6 types of products considered for space processing could be expected to become profitable, Dr. William R. Lucas, director of Marshall Space Flight Center, told the subcommittee on aerospace technology and national needs of the Senate’s Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. NASA’s spaceprocessing program had deliberately pursued a policy of performing experiments on available missions and sponsoring formal experiments by members of the scientific community, Lucas said; the experiment program had been “reasonably representative” of the scientific potential that scientists foresaw for materials processing in space. Although available mission capabilities had severely restricted what could be done, the program had included demonstrations of crystal growth, solidification of homogeneous mixtures of immersible materials, processing biological materials for medical application, and other phenomena relating to physical metallurgy and fluid physics. Potentials identified with glasses and ceramics had not yet undergone experimentation. Citing the success of experiments in electrophoretic separation and crystal growth on the Skylab and Apollo-Soyuz missions, Lucas emphasized the necessity of developing novel techniques for virtually every experiment; experience so far had justified the early interest in materials processing in space, although many lines of investigation had not been completed because of the program’s operational constraints. Wide response to the program both in the U.S. and abroad was evidence of the scientific community’s interest, he said. Next steps in development would be to finalize payloads for early Shuttle missions, then proceed with design and development; “We expect to proceed with research . . . both through the SPAR [rocket] project and through an expanded program of ground-based research,” he added. “We shall need to reemphasize the ground-based program ... to replenish the fund of new ideas in space processing and build a base of technical support with the breadth that Shuttle experiment operations will need.” (MSFC Release 76-112)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that about 80 scientists from universities, medical facilities, and industry, serving as the Universities Space Research Association, would meet at Huntsville 26-30 July to evaluate experiments proposed for the first Spacelab mission. NASA’s Space Science Steering Committtee would use the evaluations in selecting experiments to be carried on Spacelab 1, scheduled for launch in the 3rd quarter of 1980. The 10 categories in which experiments were proposed were: astrophysics, upper atmosphere, space plasma, biomedicine, atmospheric observations, biology, technology/behavior, communications/navigation, drop dynamics/atmospheric cloud physics, and technology experiments. MSFC was assigned management responsibility for defining, integrating, and operating the payloads for the first 3 Spacelab missions. (MSFC Release 76-130)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced scheduling of further tests in October for prototype cloud-physics experiment hardware to be flown on the Space Shuttle to help researchers understand microphysical processes occurring in the atmosphere. The experiments would develop techniques for accurate prediction and control of weather (increase of snowfall or rain, dissipation of fog, suppression of lightning) to improve man’s environment. The Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) being developed by MSFC would use the low or zero gravity during Shuttle/Spacelab flights to perform experiments without contamination by supporting devices—wires, spider webs, blasts of air or electrical fields—used for test objects in earth laboratories. The prototype equipment was being tested in weightless periods provided by parabolic flights in the Johnson Space Center’s zero-gravity test aircraft. 0. H. Vaughn of the Aerospace Environment Div., Space Science Laboratory at MSFC, had been monitoring performance of the equipment during flights that began in September. (MSFC Release 76-186)
The 50th anniversary of Dr. Robert Goddard’s successful launch of the world’s first liquid-fueled rocket at his aunt’s farm near Auburn, Mass., was observed in a re-enactment at the launching site—now marked by a granite monument—and in 15th anniversary ceremonies at the Goddard Space Flight Center, which also launched a commemorative rocket. Dr. Goddard had written on space navigation while still in high school; his early theoretical writings prompted the New York Times to print an article on its editorial page in 1920 saying that Dr. Goddard was ignorant of elementary physics if he thought a rocket would work in the vacuum of space. The Times ran a correction on 17 July 1969, the morning after the Apollo astronauts were launched toward the first lunar landing. The original rocket launched by Dr. Goddard in 1926 was about 3 m high, traveled a little more than 12 m upward, and attained a speed of 56 m in 2.5 sec. powered by a combination of gasoline and liquid oxygen. By contrast, the Saturn V rocket with its Apollo payload stood over 110 m tall and could cover 25 km in 2.5 sec powered by a mixture of kerosene and liquid oxygen, a fuel remarkably similar to that used by Dr. Goddard. Although, as GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark pointed out at the Center re-enactment, “Not a line appeared in a single paper about the Auburn flight ... In fact, the attention he did get in the early 1920s was adverse . . .,” Dr. Goddard continued his work in New Mexico in the 1930s and flew his rockets to heights over 3 km and at speeds up to supersonic. Of Dr. Goddard’s concepts, Wernher von Braun said: “Goddard did most of the basic research and development that made possible rockets such as the Saturn V.” Dr. Goddard had died in 1945, but his widow had attended the dedication of the Center when it opened in 1961; she had planned to attend the re-enactment in Auburn, but a heavy snowstorm swept New England 16 Mar. and seriously curtailed attendance at the event. Astronaut Eugene Cernan, principal speaker at the Mass, ceremonies, had reached Boston’s Logan Airport only an hour before it was closed down by the storm, and was taken by car to the scene as the scheduled helicopter could not fly. (ATT, 16 Mar 76, 16; W Post, 17 Mar 76, C-2; GSFC News, Mar 76, 1; Worcester Telegram, 17 Mar 76, 1; report of commemorative committee, Auburn Rotary Club, 19 Mar 76)
NASA announced that the U.S. Government Printing Office had published the 3-volume English edition of the joint U.S.-USSR Foundations of Space Biology and Medicine, summarizing biological and medical results of the first 15 yr of space flight. The work was produced by a joint editorial board on space biology and medicine formed in Oct. 1965 by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences; the USSR had published a Russian-language edition in Moscow. The text consisted of 45 chapters, 19 authored by U.S. scientists, 20 by USSR scientists, and 6 by teams of authors from both nations. Volume I was called “Space as a Habitat”; Volume II, “Ecological and Physiological Foundations of Space Biology and Medicine,” responses of man, plants, and animals to space flight; Volume III, “Space Medicine and Biotechnology,” technology and procedures needed to sustain life and permit living creatures to function in space. (NASA Release 76-135) 4-member crew of Da Vinci III included 3 who manned both the Da Vinci 1 flight in Nov. 1974 and the Da Vinci 11 flight in June 1976: Dr. Rudolf J. Engelmann of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; pilot and project originator Ms. Vera Simons; and pilot Jimmie Craig of the U.S. Naval Weapons Center. The new member of the crew was Preston B. Herrington of Sandia Laboratories, Energy Research and Development Administration, which would collect and analyze the flight data as well as conduct all flight operations. Da Vinci was a joint project of ERDA, NOAA, and the Environmental Protection Agency. (ERDA Releases 76-211, 76-245)
A press briefing following the 7th lunar science conference at Johnson Space Center [see 22 Feb.] featured the cochairmen, Dr. Larry Haskins, chief of planetary and earth sciences at JSC, and Dr. Robert Pepin, director of the Lunar Science Institute, and Dr. Deter Hayman of Rice Univ. Dr. Haskins said the conference aimed at broadening the planetary view of people working with lunar samples and data; a substantial interest was developing in the lunar polar-orbiter mission among people more interested than before in planetology, and aware that orbiting and remote-sensing missions would be the principal source for studying geoscientific evolution of these bodies. As an example, long-range operation of the lunar-surface packages had produced information that resulted in a lowered value for lunar heatflow; this in turn “constrained” the composition of the moon and its evolutionary history—“Whatever history it has, the amount of heat in the interior has to match the present heat loss from the body.” Also, said Dr. Haskins, lunar data were being used widely by scientists not previously concerned with lunar research: for example, archived data would be used to tell whether the moon was differentiated only in its outer extent, or more than 50% of it had undergone chemical separation or even developed a core. Another example would be the matching of seismic with magnetic data to get a better overall picture of lunar evolution. Dr. Pepin noted that 740 people had attended the conference, many more than the previous year; the program committee had purposely included discussions of other planetary and meteorite investigations that revealed much about the first 500 million yr of solar-system history, whose clues still exist in the moon (although hard to interpret) but no longer exist on earth. Experience with other planets had been insufficient to say if they had preserved early solar-system records; “best chances are not,” he added. Early solar-system history, especially of the inner planets, was characterized by enormous bombardment of all solid surfaces by objects now referred to as meteorites, but on a scale in those days “that almost suggests we should call them something else.” These huge objects clearly left their mark, with evidence that the bombardment took place more than 4 billion yr ago, then rapidly tapered off. Data from Mercury, Mars, and Venus would be expected to show that the historical record had been erased by time, constant impact, and geological activity in which the surface was pounded, dispersed, or remelted. The intense bombardment had wiped out earth’s early geological record too; terrestrial geologists had tried to put the age of the oldest earth rocks farther and farther back, getting in gradual stages as far back as 3.7 billion yr in a large anorthosite deposit in Greenland.This boundary condition for earth geology was one reason for the growing interest in lunar and general planetary studies: the flow of information had been not only from planetary to terrestrial scientists, but also in the other direction. Lunar scientists had begun to examine terrestrial craters such as the 60-km impact phenomenon called Manicouagan: what would have been referred to 5 yr ago as remnants of a Manicouagan volcano had now been established as an impact, mainly because the ease of sampling (greater there than on the moon) had permitted study of energy partition and formation of rock, glass, and melt material in a large-scale impact. Comparative planetology means applying results of studying one planetary surface to explain phenomena on other planetary surfaces. Earth, unlike other planets we know about, continued as a thermally active planet with volcanism, mountain upheaval and wearing down, and had obliterated much of its earlier record. The early stages of the lunar and planetary program focused attention outward; now these studies had provided knowledge applicable to earth, and the generation and development of lunar-surface morphology as a result of external bombardment was only one example of this application. Over the next 2 to 3 yr, a group of 50 to 100 scientists would be studying in detail the phenomenon of volcanism on all the terrestrial planets as a fundamental stage of planetary development, in a pilot project to define comparative planetology and relate it to a specific aspect. Mercury apparently had basalt flows; Venera pictures suggest recent activity on the surface of Venus that produced what seem to be basalts. Mars clearly had basalts: it had the largest volcano in the solar system, “an enormous structure that would . . . cover the state of Kansas if . . . plunked down there.” In 2 or 3 yr, Dr. Pepin said, we should be able to give an integrated picture of the issuing of basalts from the interior onto the surface, an extremely important process in the development and evolution of a planet. Life in the solar system was an exciting subject now, said Dr. Hayman, and discoveries were coming in at a pace that would make today’s theories outmoded by the time they got into print 6 mo from now. The task of scientists, he said, was to include the general public in the excitement, and to make it filter through to the colleges and universities, to high schools, and even to grade-school levels. One thing that had changed in the past 20 yr since the days of Harold Urey and Hans Seuss was the concept of the solar nebula and the formation of planets and satellites by accretion. The problem was the noncondensable material in the nebula, and where it went: the solar physicists explained its absence by the theory of a solar upheaval that cleaned out the inner parts of the solar system by a superstorm of ions. Applying thermodynamics to this theory made it possible to calculate which compounds would condense out at what temperature. The Allende meteorite that fell in Mexico in 1969 contained compounds similar to what had been predicted as a result of condensation of the solar nebula at high temperatures. Then, 2 or 3 yr ago the idea arose that the sun and planets had formed not only from gases but also from so-called presolar grains, which had not been specifically identified; their identity on the earth and moon would have been lost over time because of geological processes. So the search shifted to meteorites. Although none of the grains had been definitely identified, the conference had heard 2 reports that might be interpreted as finding presolar grains. Metallic nuggets in the Allende meteorite were found to consist of platinum-group metals in extraordinarily small fragments, a millionth of a meter, that did not vaporize or melt readily and might be presolar grains (although it would take a lot of work to settle the question, Dr. Hayman said). Also, a group from Berkeley had dissolved carbonaceous meteorites in hydrofluoric acid to get rid of the silicates; the carbon residue was found to be full of gas called “planetary” because its composition differed from that of the sun and was much more like that of earth. The question was how carbon material could have been of planetary origin under the solar-nebula theory: speculation was that the carbonaceous material might predate the formation of the sun and have originated elsewhere. It could not have undergone great heat without being destroyed, so the objects containing the material must have been created farther out, not in the inner region of the sun and terrestrial planets but in the region of the giant planets. If the heavier elements were synthesized in the stars by nuclear processes, especially in explosions of novas and supernovas that produced all sorts of elements as they blew away their outer envelopes, all the elements are probably represented in this expanding envelope. With rapidly dropping temperatures, the condensation of presolar grains would occur within 10 yr. It would be possible to look at the product of a single event to extrapolate the total of many such events of which all the elements around us would be the product. Dr. Haskins said in summary that developments in methodology and the availability of more precise measurements would make it possible to supplant earlier measurements. Geophysicists were learning to extract information from bits of material instead of bucketsful or large chunks as they had done in the past. The Apollo program had been responsible for a steady progress in the field of measurements: “there simply was not the funding and interest correlated together to do it prior to that time.” Asked what the scientific community had learned about the moon in the 3 yr 3 mo since the last moon mission, Haskins said they were beginning to understand the major stages in the evolution of every planetary body composed of rocky material; the moon had passed through stages that the earth had not reached, and had preserved a record of what had happened—for example, a preview of the kind of rock that would be formed later in earth history. The findings provided a broad framework in which more and different questions could be asked, not just investigation of the more obvious characteristics of the many materials brought back. Queried on the lunar-sample curatorial facility, Dr. Haskins said that moon rocks from the Apollo expeditions were housed in a leaky, flimsy facility that would not protect them for use of future generations of scientists. A new facility was desperately needed, because the present building was not fireproof and the roof leaked; within the building, the rocks had been kept in nitrogen-filled cabinets and handled only in clean-room conditions, to prevent contamination. However, moisture in the surroundings might have led to erroneous deductions regarding the moon environment when scientists analyzed the lunar samples. (Transcript, 7th lunar science conf. press briefing, 19 Mar 76; NASA Release 76-25; JSC Release 76-15; Science, vol. 185, 346; W Post, 21 Mar 76, A-3)
Test pilot William H. Dana had been chosen to receive the AIAA 1976 Haley Space Flight Award, the DFRC X-Press announced. Dana would receive the award at the IAF conference banquet 15 Oct. Named for Andrew G. Haley, one of the founders of the Am. Rocket Society, the award is for “outstanding contribution ... to the advancement of the arts, sciences or technology of astronautics.” Dana would be honored for his service as test pilot on the HL-10, M2-F3, and X-24B lifting bodies, and his 16 flights as project pilot of the X-15 rocket-powered research aircraft. (DFRC X-Press, 8 Oct 76, 2; LA Herald-Examiner, 12 Oct 76, 3; Lancaster, Calif. Ledger-Gazette, 7 Oct 76, 10)
Spaceflight, publication of the British Interplanetary Society, announced that Soviet authorities after a 2-yr delay had released a photograph of Capella—the brightest star in the constellation Auriga—obtained by the “Orion 2” observatory aboard Soyuz 13. Capella is a yellow giant star 150 times as luminous as the sun and 47 light-years away. Soviet scientists believed they had found a “new association of stars” in the several dozen hot stars of extremely low radiation discovered around Capella; they claimed this was the first time in the history of astronomy that a telescope had obtained a spectrogram of a planetary nebula—a huge gaseous formation with a high-temperature star at the center-—and had obtained pictures of a known star with a gaseous envelope rich in Third Century America, sole Bicentennial exposition paid for by the U.S. government, opened to the public 30 May 1976 at Kennedy Space Center. (NASA 76-H-44S) silicon. The Orion 2 equipment could make precision study of stellar objects in the ultraviolet spectrum and provide spectrograms of stars of 13th magnitude “to extend the limits set by the American Skylab, whose crews took pictures of stars down to 7.5th magnitude,” the Russians said. (Spaceflight, May 1976, 177)
A NASA study reported that relocation of crew training and mission-control activities from Johnson Space Center in Tex. to Cape Canaveral in Fla. would offer “no management, technical or budgetary advantages” and “would seriously affect a smoothly functioning, highly efficient organization” at JSC, delaying the Space Shuttle program by up to 2 yr. The study, requested in June 1975 by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of a subcommittee on space science and applications of the House Committee on Science and Technology, said that relocation would cost up to $842 million by 1983, and that the funds would not be recoverable. (ATT, 19 Sept 76, 24)
The Viking 1 lander touched down safely on a plain at the western edge of the Chryse region of Mars at 7:53 am EDT, 11 mo to the day after its journey of more than 700 million km through space began at KSC Launch Complex 41. Landing was within 17 sec of the predicted time; velocity at impact, predicted to be 2.4 ± 0.9 kps, was actually 2.49 kps. Within minutes of the landing, the Viking began relaying a photograph of one of its footpads on the nearby surface up to the Viking orbiter for transmission to earth; a panoramic view of the landing site followed. Distance from earth to Mars at landing time was more than 322 million km, and radio waves took 19 additional minutes to travel back to earth to signal touchdown. Spacecraft controllers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory broke into applause and cheers when the data arrived showing a successful landing; telemetry showed the descent curve fitting preplanned values as the lander’s aeroshell, supersonic parachute, and terminal descent engines braked the descent to the surface of Mars. The site at Chryse Planitia was chosen for the landing after Viking orbiter data and the giant telescope at Arecibo, P.R., showed that the primary landing site and the first alternative were too hazardous. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, who was at JPL for the landing, said that the intensive search for a safe landing site “really paid off.” The Mars landing came on the 7th anniversary of man’s first landing on the moon 20 July 1969 during the Apollo 11 mission. President Ford, who telephoned JPL with congratulations after the landing, asked Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., of LaRC if there were plans for a Viking 3. Martin replied that there were not, but that his team was “ready to take on Viking 3 plus Viking 4, 5, and 6.” The Viking 2 was expected to go into orbit around Mars about 7 Aug. (Mission Status Bulletin 35, 20 July 76; Spaceport News, 23 July 76, 1)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, named the Ames Research Center to lead a program to strengthen helicopter research and development and serve as a focal point for industry participation and program management. A special helicopter management advisory group had made a presentation to Fletcher 28 May reviewing research needs and stressing the need for improvements in helicopters if the U.S. industry were to get a fair share of the market. Overall direction of the program would come from ARC; Lewis Research Center would conduct research on propulsion, and Langley Research Center would do research in structures and materials, avionics, and noise, ARC would also conduct research in aeromechanics, including technology integration and large-scale testing and simulation. (NASA Release 76-112)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced an agreement on loan of a radiometer for 2 yr to the Iranian College of Science and Technology at Tehran for use in propagation experiments in the 12-ghz band, to be used by European relay satellites for long-distance public telecommunications. The experiments would be carried out in “particularly interesting conditions,” ESA said, because of Iran’s geographical and climatic characteristics. (ESA release, 1 Mar 76)
Three space scientists at Johnson Space Center would begin a week-long round-the-clock test of experiments and procedures in a mockup of the Spacelab designed for the Space Shuttle. The team, headed by astronaut-physician Dr. Story Musgrave, would eat, sleep, and perform space-related duties in a mockup of the Shuttle orbiter crew compartment, and would carry out more than 20 experiments in space medicine and one in space physics inside the 6.8-m-by-4.06-m Spacelab mockup. The team inside would be in constant communication with flight operations engineers and scientists at control points outside the mockup, which had been equipped with both instruments and experiments just as the Spacelab would be. The team would demonstrate 14 operational tests whose results would serve in planning inflight crew activities, procedures, and scheduling, and in studying items such as personal hygiene, general housekeeping and special-purpose cleaning and maintenance, and functional utility of the orbiter aft deck from which many of the Spacelab experiments would be monitored. The simulation was also designed to evaluate ground-support procedures and data-handling techniques. (JSC Release 76-04)
Scientists at Johnson Space Center had used helium-filled balloons as the preferred means of carrying payloads to study the atmosphere above the ozone layer. Although sounding rockets and airplanes could operate in the medium between 30 and 50 km over the earth’s surface, neither could remain stationary for very long, the rocket’s time in the stratosphere being measurable in minutes; also, payload weight for an airplane must decrease with the altitude it can maintain, whereas a balloon would be capable of taking an 1800-kg payload as high as 50 km. JSC’s Environmental Effects Office had used balloons to study effects on the ozone layer of fluorocarbons and other chemical interactions in the upper atmosphere; recent Natl. Research Council recommendations on reduction of use of freons had been partially based on JSC balloon-flight data. The JSC Space Physics Branch had used balloons to carry cosmic-ray instrumentation for the study of high-energy particles, and had worked with the Utrecht Space Sciences lab in carrying an ultraviolet telescope by balloon for use in a range of light that was opaque to observation from earth. Balloons and payloads prepared by JSC were launched from Palestine, Tex., by the Natl. Center for Atmospheric Research, with parachutes for recoverable experiments. (JSC Release 76-70; JSC Roundup, 19 Nov 76, 1)
Third Century America, the U.S. Bicentennial exposition on science and technology, opened to the public with 30 000 persons attending; 32 000 employes of the Kennedy Space Center had attended a preview the day before. Built within 4 mo, after President Ford in Feb. called on NASA to create a Bicentennial fair at Cape Canaveral, the exposition occupied 30 acres and 15 geodesic domes clustered around the mammoth Vehicle Assembly Building, so large that the U.N. Secretariat could be mounted on wheels and rolled easily through its doors. “The message from NASA, 16 other federal agencies, and a conglomeration of defense contractors,” said the Washington Post, was that America had spent her technology tax dollars well. The show was put together with $3 million in grants from the Dept, of Commerce, a $500 000 loan from NASA’s budget, and an $800 000 advance from the KSC visitor center account. Before it opened, the show was expected to draw 800 000 to 2 million persons; in July, average daily attendance was about 5000, and expectations were reduced to 500 000 before the fair closed 7 Sept. Many Fla. attractions reported a drop in attendance this summer. (W Post, 25 July 76, G-5) During May: Rockwell International Corp. awarded contracts for the Air Force B-l strategic bomber program. On 18 May, Rockwell awarded a $2.4-million contract to Hamilton-Standard Division, United Technologies Corp., for air conditioning and pressurization equipment and air-recirculation loops for the fourth B-l in the 4-plane prototype program. The firm had supplied similar equipment for 3 earlier B-ls. On 24 May, Rockwell awarded a $1.8-million subcontract to Martin Marietta Aerospace for tail assemblies, consisting of 2 horizontal stabilizers and a single vertical stabilizer, for the fourth B-l prototype aircraft. Martin Marietta had supplied stabilizers for the other 3 B-Is. Rockwell, system contractor on the B-l program, had developed the B-l to modernize the strategic bomber force; its advantage over previous heavy bombers was the design ability to avoid enemy defense by flying at nearly some speed at treetop height to avoid radar detection. The first 2 prototypes were in flight test, and the third was scheduled to fly later in 1976. (Rockwell Releases LA-3, LA-4)
NASA announced plans to roll out the first of 2 rotor systems research aircraft (RSRA) 7 June at the Sikorsky Aircraft Division in Conn. The RSRA, capable of conventional cruise flight as well as typical helicopter performance, was the product of a joint NASA-Army research program to reduce rotor noise and vibration—with attendant high maintenance costs—and improve performance and cruise speed of future civil and military helicopters. The RSRA was the first helicopter designed with research capability in mind; devices in the main rotor-support structure would permit accurate measurement of rotor forces in flight, and force-measurement systems were also incorporated in the wing, tail rotor, and auxiliary engine to permit measurement and control of the lift and drag of the rotor system. The Army, world’s leading user of helicopters, would make the RSRA available to the U.S. helicopter industry for rotor-systems tests; most of the technology would also be applicable to civil vehicles. NASA’s goal would be to meet predictions of increased usage in the civil helicopter industry to enable the U.S. to compete favorably in the growing world market. (NASA Release 76-105)
Marshall Space Flight Center and Dryden Flight Research Center officials signed an agreement to conduct jointly a comprehensive program of tests on the parachute recovery system for the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster. The program, to begin early in 1977, would consist of drogue-parachute tests and main-parachute tests, using single parachutes, and test deployment of the 3-parachute cluster (actual flight configuration) to be used in recovery of the solid rockets, largest ever flown. The parachutes, some 36.5 m in diameter, would be the largest used in the space program; Apollo spacecraft parachutes were about 24.5 m in diameter. The Dryden center would provide the B-52 aircraft for the test drops, as well as the flight and maintenance crews, and would perform the tests over the National Parachute Test Range about an hour’s flight from Edwards AFB in Calif. MSFC engineers would evaluate the test data to determine the adequacy of the system. (NASA Release 76-94; DFRC Release 6-76; MSFC Release 76-87)
A NASA earth-survey aircraft—one of two U-2 high-altitude research planes flown by the agency—had been studying the stratosphere over Central America, South America, Canada, the Caribbean, and the Pacific Ocean to measure ozone, nitric oxide, and manmade pollutants as part of a long-term global effort to understand the effects of pollutants on global climate over a long period of time. The data flights used 4 scientific instruments: a stratospheric air sampler, to measure ozone and nitrogen ozide; an aerosol particle sampler, to measure minute aerosols; a stratospheric cryogenic sampler to measure halocarbons (freons) and methane levels; and a foil sampler, to measure aerosols and trace gases for the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The other 3 studies were under the direction of NASA’s Ames Research Center. Data from the flights would be available to the other governments involved in the studies. (NASA Release 76-60)
NASA announced that its Viking Undergraduate Intern Program, permitting U.S. college students to participate in the Viking mission to Mars, was under way at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. Fifty-eight students from about 600 applicants had been selected to spend 30 days during the summer working with Viking scientists in a number of scientific areas at JPL, where more than 72 science teams were conducting a detailed examination of the planet, including a search for life. The program was the idea of Prof. Thomas Mutch of Brown Univ., leader of the Viking imaging team, who was assisted by a teammate, Prof. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ.; the 2 professors reviewed each of the applicants’ qualifications and selected the 58 students for the summer’s work. The program, designed to directly involve undergraduates with a strong interest in planetary science, was funded by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and by NASA’s Planetary Geology Office. (NASA Release 76-139)
A fully metallic replica of the Spacelab—called a “hard” mockup—had begun assembly near Bremen, West Germany, at the plant of ERNO, a subsidiary of VFW-Fokker and prime contractor for the Spacelab. The role of the replica was to ensure that all nonelectrical elements of the complex craft would be compatible; 4 additional Spacelabs would be constructed, including the flight unit, only one of which would be constructed. The next model would be the “high fidelity” model, to be built after final design details are agreed on later in 1976; it would be used for crew training. The next—Engineering Mockup 1—would be sent to the U.S. in 1978 for fitting into the Shuttle. The flight unit would be scheduled for shipment to Kennedy Space Center a year later; finally, Engineering Mockup 2 would be built and kept in Europe to help members of the European Space Agency (ESA) prepare missions over the 10-yr operational period. The single flight version, designed to make at least 50 flights, would carry a wide range of scientific and technological experiments for which the experimenters would be expected to pay a fee. The Europeans hoped to modify this policy in view of their nearly $400 million investment in the project. (NYT, 4 June 76, A—15)
President Ford would name Dr. H. Guyford Stever, director of the National Science Foundation for the past 4 yr, to head the recently reestablished White House Office of Science and Technology, the New York Times reported. The post had been abolished by President Nixon 3 yr ago “amid reports that he did not like the advice he was getting from it, particularly concerning antiballistic missiles and supersonic planes,” the Times said. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine had reported earlier that 4 conservative Republican senators had warned President Ford that Stever’s nomination would be an “affront” to Congress; the NSF had been a target of some congressmen because of funding projects that Congress considered questionable, Av Wk said. Other candidates for the position had shied away because of a possible change in administration after the forthcoming elections. Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) urged quick action on the nomination; the Senate Appropriations Committee had just cut $1 million from a $3.3-million budget estimate for the Office of Science and Technology. (NYT, 22 July 76, 37; Av Wk, 5 July 76, 13) with pleasure at the accomplishment,” when “it was commercial time . . . and the 9 a.m. programs.” Viewers were “left wondering whether there was really an event of such magnitude being televised or more science fiction,” the Star commented. (WStar, 21 July 76, B-l) Commentary on the Viking landing on Mars: The Chicago Tribune hailed the mission as “an epoch-making success . . . The achievement is the greater because the world has known from the beginning what we were attempting to do. There would have been no way to hide a failure.” (C Trib, 21 July 76, 1-7) The Phila. Inquirer called the landing “another giant leap for mankind” that “underscores the sophistication of unmanned spacecraft . . . Risks can be taken . . . that could not be justified with persons aboard ... Its performance in the first hours on Mars speaks more eloquently than words.” (P Inq, 21 July 76, 5-A) The NY Times said the TV networks were criticized for their coverage; Dr. J. Richard Keefe, former NASA scientist now at the Univ. of Louisville, said the coverage was “downright disgusting . . . Talk about being blase about space exploration, this was just incredible ... I think the population has become apathetic about the whole space program. It’s kind of sad, I think.” Spokesmen for the network told the Times they had given 20 to 25 min of coverage, showing the 2 pictures transmitted by Viking 1 and released by JPL where the transmission was received. NBC said its New York City switchboard had about 30 calls asking for more; ABC reported 25, and CBS reported 8 or 10. ABC said the number of calls was significant “for the time of day.” “What they may not have understood was that we showed whatever we had,” the spokesman said. “That was it.” (NYT, 21 July 76, 12) The Wall Street Journal said in an editorial that it could not “speculate with any confidence on why yesterday’s Viking / landing on Mars was important. And yet we are confident that it was.” The TV networks that “spent tedious hours broadcasting the dullest political convention on record” a wk ago “were preoccupied with game shows” while Viking was sending back its first pictures of the surface of another planet. However, those who said the $1 billion cost of the project was wasted unless Viking’s cameras pick up “ something interesting, like a local resident,” would be missing the point, WSJ added. The project demonstrated application of the most advanced technology to a single objective, advanced managerial skills as “a triumph of human organization,” and left mankind with the psychic effects of the visit to another planet. “ . . . After each leap deeper into space, nothing is quite the same again.” (WSJ, 21 July 76, 22) A Washington Star editorial said that Viking 1 may have “ended generations of fanciful imaginings” about life on Mars, and asked if it was worth 7 yr of effort and $1 billion “to get a rather sobering view of what our imaginations told us was a fascinating planet.” Although it was much too early to predict the “ultimate scientific harvest,” the Star said “we have no doubt that the ultimate payoff will be more than adequate in scientific if not in fictional terms.” (W Star, 22 July 76, A-14) The first color photograph of Mars, showing a dramatic blue sky against a rust-red soil surface, was in error, Viking project scientists announced. Astronomer Carl Sagan said that someone had given the wrong weighting to the color filters in reconstructing the electronic image on earth, and that corrected photos would show a pinker sky. The seismometer on the Viking lander had apparently jammed and would impair detection of “marsquakes” unless corrected; Lou Kingsland, deputy mission director, said the proper command might not have been issued or the problem might be in the electrical circuits. {WStar, 22 July 76, A—1) Having successfully set down the Viking 1 lander in a safe spot, Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., announced that Viking 2 would be sent to a region likely to be more scientifically interesting even with less assurance of safe touchdown. Cydonia, a region halfway between the Mars equator and north pole, was considered because of a greater likelihood of water, required for the presence of life as we know it. Viking project scientists said they were eager to survey a site as different physically from the desert Chryse site as possible. Viking 2, still more than 1.6 million km from Mars, would arrive in orbit there early in Aug. and land about 4 Sept, if all went well. Debate on the second landing site focused on possible hazards in the northern region, out of range of the radar signals that led to choice of the first site. Astronomer Carl Sagan said the first landing was “reasonably lucky,” with chances of success calculated at only 60%, and the northern site would be less promising. However, he and the other scientists voted overwhelmingly for Cydonia because, as Sagan said, “it is not only the probability of success but the significance of success” that merited consideration. (WStar, 22 July 76, A-6) Asked about the role of luck in the successful Viking 1 landing on Mars, Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., replied, “I don’t plan on luck .... I believe that most of what you call luck you make yourself. It’s people doing that extra job ...” Martin’s management approach during his 8 yr with the Viking project had been to “get into the details of everything .... I’ve never known any other way to be successful .... It inspires and motivates the next level of management to get involved.” (ATT, 22 July 76, 24) The “most electrifying new information” received from Mars since the Viking 1 landing was that the Martian atmosphere contained 3% nitrogen, an element essential to life as we know it, said the NY Times. Until this week, the absence of nitrogen on Mars had been the most compelling argument against existence of life “in any form” on Mars; now this argument had been removed. (ATT, 22 July 76, 30) JPL scientists were still hedging on the color of the Martian sky, after announcing that photographs released earlier showing a blue sky might have been processed wrongly. Astronomer Carl Sagan noted that the “boos given to (the) announcement about a pink sky reflect our wish for Mars to be just like the earth.” Dr. Thomas Mutch, leader of the Viking imaging team, said computer verification of the filtered signals for color reconstruction could take another wk or two. (WStar, 23 July 76, A-l) Viking Mission Director A. Thomas Young told a news conference that the problem with the lander’s soil-sampling arm was probably an error in the computer command that failed to drop a locking pin near the arm’s “wrist.” A new set of commands to extend the arm further and free the pin would be sent 24 or 25 July. The arm would scoop up soil and drop it in a hopper on the spacecraft that would distribute it to 3 biology experiments aimed at detecting signs of life on the planet. Other scoops would be used for chemical analysis. (ATT, 24 July 76, 1) Besides the trouble with its soil sampler, the Viking 1 lander was having radio problems, said Project Manager Martin. One of two receivers getting direct communications from earth was not working properly, and the radio for relaying data from the lander to its orbiter was operating in a low-power mode. Also, the instrument for detecting “mars-quakes” had not been released from its “caged” position on the lander despite repeated commands. A special scientific team was checking to see if all the problems were related, perhaps in the computer signals to the electrical circuitry. ( W Star, 23 July 76, A-3) Mars was a very much richer and larger planet than the airless and waterless moon, said a NY Times editorial, with a firm surface and virtually every essential required for life. Barring the catastrophe of a nuclear war, Mars could be sustaining a human population “by the time of this nation’s Tricentennial,” the paper said. (NYT, 25 July 76, A— 16) “I really do not know what the fuss is all about—landing on Mars, I mean. I landed there 40 years ago,” said Buster Crabbe, who played both Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers in movies of the 1930s. Crabbe, who won the 400-m freestyle swimming gold medal in the 1932 Olympic games, was hired by Paramount Pictures to do a Tarzan film, and wentron to star in space pictures. “People still remember old Flash,” the 68-yr-old Crabbe said. “Here I am still around, no ill effects from my space travel .... I do feel sorry for our space people though, having to go through all the things we did years ago. I don’t think they know what’s in store for them. Just wait till they run into the clay men and the hawk men and the shark men.” (NYT, 25 July 76, E17; Tucson Ariz. Daily Star, 30 July 76, A-19) Viking 1 did not relay any picture of life-sized Martians to earth because it landed in the wrong place, charged columnist Art Buchwald in the Wash. Post. Buchwald reported his friend, a science-fiction buff, as saying the scientists were interested only in finding “a smooth place to set down the camera.” If the/Martians sent a camera to earth, the smoothest place to land it would be the Sahara desert. “If you lived on Mars you wouldn’t pitch a tent on some barren spot where nothing was happening,” argued the friend. “If Viking had landed next to one of their canals, the Martians would have sailed their tall ships up to it and given us the greatest show ever seen on television.” (WPost, 25 July 76, H-l) A series of simple commands from earth freed the mechanical arm on the Viking 1 spacecraft reported to have jammed 22 July. The extendable arm would be able to dig into the Martian soil as planned, and the second Viking spacecraft would be able to land in Cydonia now that the Chryse area could be explored. The Viking was commanded to extend its arm twice as far as previously and to rotate it several times to free a locking pin inserted to protect the arm from vibration during its flight in space and landing on Mars. The command was timed to precede transmission of a spacecraft camera image taken soon after receipt of the command; the boom would not be in the picture if it had not responded to the order to extend itself in front of the camera eye. When the picture came in a half hour later, the mechanical arm was in clear view, and a surface shot clearly showed the locking pin had fallen free. Flight directors had not succeeded in uncaging a seismometer, composed of 3 delicate balancing beams to detect movements in the planet’s crust, that had been wired together for protection from vibrations. Spacecraft computer signals to electrify and burn the wire were not received, and a second command bypassing the computer apparently failed also. Detection of marsquakes might have to depend on Viking 2, scheduled to land in the Cydonia basin about 4 Sept. (WPost, 26 July 76, A— 1) The atmosphere of Mars was once 10 times thicker and richer in gas than it is today, and “we could breathe that atmosphere” if it were richer in oxygen, said Dr. Tobias Owen of the State Univ. of N.Y., a member of the project science team at JPL, where the first samplings by the Viking 1 mass spectrometer were analyzed. Mars’s atmosphere was now 95% carbon dioxide, 2 to 3% nitrogen, 1 to 2% argon, 0.3% oxygen; earth’s atmosphere is 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, 0.9% argon-40, and 0.03% carbon dioxide. “Mars is an intermediate planet between the earth and the moon,” said Dr. Owen. “We do not see a hugely abundant biology, but that doesn’t say there’s none at all.” Color pictures of the Martian surface near the Viking lander revealed a soil even redder than in the original picture received last week. Rocks strewn over the desert sands exhibited a red coating laid down years ago when Mars’s atmosphere was richer in oxygen and water, “through oxidation of the iron and hydration of the minerals,” said Viking geologist Alan S. Hinder. “We propose to test the hypothesis by cracking open one of the red rocks ... to see if there is any rust inside.” (W Post, 27 July 76, A-l; W Star, 27 July 76, A-3; C Trib, 27 July 76, 5) Viking 1 ’s mechanical arm scooped its first sample of the Mars surface 28 July, leaving a sharp-edged trench clearly visible in a picture transmitted afterward by the unmanned lander. The 3-m arm, a tube about 38 mm in diameter, ended in a sharp-edged scoop that could dig into the surface with a force of about 13 kg if necessary. When the cover snapped shut on the sample, the arm retracted and swiveled to sift the sample into a funnel feeding into the “biology box.” This container, about the size of a large milk carton, encased the 3 experiments designed to detect life. Two other experiments, also located under funnels, were the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer to detect organic molecules and an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer to identify inorganic materials, Sensors inside the funnels would tell whether the samples were sufficient. The 3 biology experiments were the “pyrolytic release” experiment of Dr. Norman Horowitz, to look for microorganisms that used the sun as a source of energy like photosynthesis on earth to build organic compounds, through exposure of the sample to radioactive carbon dioxide under artificial sunlight; a “labeled release” experiment by Dr. Gilbert Levin of Biospherics, Inc., to look for signs of microbial metabolism by tracing radioactive organic compounds injected into the Mars sample to see if they were consumed, releasing gaseous wastes that could be detected; and a “gas exchange” experiment by Vance Oyama of NASA’s Ames Research Center to provide a rich variety of foods in a liquid form—“chicken soup”—to the Mars sample and iook for changes in gas composition inside the experiment chamber that would indicate the food was being used. The biology-box samples would incubate for from 5 to 12 days before results were announced, and a positive finding would be confirmed by subsequent control experiments. The science team anticipated a long wait for any kind of answer, as well as the possibility that the answers might be contradictory. Dr. Gerald Soffen, chief scientist for Viking, pointed out that results would be difficult to interpret: “you have to put yourself on the level of a microbe,” he added. The microbes might drown in the liquid, ingest the wrong food, or burn up in the warm experiment chambers. (W Star, 28 July, A-l, A-5) One of the five soil-testing experiments on Viking 1 did not receive enough soil to actuate it, project officials announced, and two attempts to start the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer working on a sample apparently failed. Project Manager Martin said the flight engineers were not yet able to determine what went wrong, because the sampling arm apparently worked as planned but the sample never got into the instrument. The motor driving a stirring rod to brush particles through a strainer did not come on, and scientists speculated the sample might still be sitting on the strainer. A photograph of the trench dug to obtain the sample had shown that the soil was surprisingly cohesive, “like wet sand,” according to Princeton Univ. scientist Dr. Robert B. Hargraves. After delivering soil to the experiments in the biology box, the mechanical arm made 2 attempts to dig and deliver a sample to the mass spectrometer but the instrument did not signal receipt of the sample either time. It was not clear, Martin said, whether the arm lost the soil on the swing back or was off the mark when it deposited the soil, or the soil in the hopper never filtered down to the instrument. The arm responded properly to the following command and delivered a spoonful of soil to the x-ray spectrometer with no difficulty. (ATT, 29 July 76, 1; W Post, 29 July 76, A-3; W Star, 29 July 76, A-3; WSJ, 29 July 76, 1) Viking project scientists debated the makeup of the Mars soil sample that might have been too thick to filter into an instrument opening. Dr. Ronald Scott said that, although the material was somewhat cohesive, “certainly something must have gotten through.” Deputy Mission Director Kingsland said the most likely causes of the apparent malfunction were failure of the mechanical scoop to obtain a full sample, or failure of the “level full” indicator in the instrument to signal properly. Dr. Klaus Biemann of MIT, chief of the gas chromatograph experiment, said the arm might have come up empty from the trench after scooping for the biology experiments, and that a repeat attempt next week would take both possible explanations of the problem into account. Kingsland said the material seemed to have a consistency “something like wet clay.” Dr. Scott emphasized that this did not indicate water in the soil. The other instruments seemed to be processing their samples normally, and results from the inorganic-chemistry sampling in the x-ray spectrometer should provide the first assay of Martian soil as early as tomorrow. (ATT, 30 July 76, A-22; WStar, 30 July 76, A-5; CTrib, 31 July 76, 2) The first experimental results from Mars, returned 30 July by Viking 1 ’s lander, showed that the surface consisted of iron, calcium, silicon, titanium, and aluminum, in amounts that would be determined within a few days. The entire surface around the lander was covered with a very thin coating of vivid orange-red iron oxides that gave the plant its red or rusty appearance. “Mars is a painted desert,” said Dr. Gerald Soffen, one of the project scientists. Dr. Priestly Toulmin, leader of the inorganic-chemistry team, noted that Mars soil up to now could be analyzed only by long-distance methods such as light reflections from the surface; Viking had “picked up a piece of Mars and put it into an analytical instrument.” Dr. Benton Clark, also of the inorganic-chemistry team, said that Viking had not detected trace elements like vanadium or molybdenum considered essential for plant growth on earth; this did not mean the elements were not present, nor had elements like arsenic been detected that would make earth soil sterile. The results “do not rule out the possibility of some form of life,” Dr. Clark added. Results from the 3 biology experiments would be transmitted to earth within a few days. (NYT, 31 July 76, A—1)
Scientists attempting to find a source of unlimited energy like that which powers the sun had taken two potentially significant directions, Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times, Soviet researchers had shifted from emphasis on laser beams for crushing nuclear fuel to superdensity, to use of electron beams for that purpose. Although 90% of U.S. effort had been on converging pulses of laser light, a new system of using ion beams had shown advantages over the electron-beam method from which it evolved: the apparatus would deliver a vast amount of energy to a fuel pellet, causing the shell to explode both inward and outward. The inward blast, crushing the pellet core to 1000 times its original density, would produce a fusion reaction resulting in helium, and a small amount of mass would be converted into a large amount of energy. The U.S. electron-beam study was based at Sandia Laboratories, in N.M., one of three research centers operated by the Energy Research and Development Administration. Although the U.S. use of ions was the chief novelty in the fusion-energy field, laser fusion was still the front runner, Sullivan noted. (NYT, 15 Jan 76, 22)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced development of a solar-simulator test facility, believed to be the largest of its kind in existence, to compare the efficiency of solar-energy collectors in MSFC’s program of assisting the Energy Research and Development Administration in its solar energy program. Designed to provide variable levels of energy similar to ground-level solar radiation, the simulator contained a lamp array with 405 tungsten halogen 300-watt lamps paired with the same number of Fresnel lenses to provide an illuminated area for solar collectors up to 1.2 by 2.4 meters. After a 6-wk checkout of the lamp array, power equipment, and solar-collector fluid-flow systems, the simulator would serve to test solar-energy collectors that used either air or liquid as the heat-transfer medium. (MSFC Release 76-111) ,
Scientists at the Naval Research Laboratory successfully used a computer system to orient sensors on high-altitude balloons orbiting the earth on observation flights of up to 100 days, NRL announced. The long-duration missions were required to monitor high-energy solar flares, cosmic gamma-ray bursts, and transient x-ray sources. The NRL system, designed for superpressure balloons flying at 40-km altitude, used a microcomputer programmable for as many as 32 observation tasks, which could be modified in flight by ground command. An L-band telemetry link from the balloon permitted receipt and recording of data on position and sidereal time, used by the microcomputer to orient the detector. Data could be relayed through geosynchronous satellites, using the computer to orient a high-gain antenna toward the satellite. Realtime long-duration monitoring by balloons could offer a low-cost and frequently more sensitive alternative to satellite experiments, NRL stated. (NRL Release 44-7-76B)
NASA announced selection of 8 scientists as a team to develop experiments for a proposed unmanned lunar mission in 1980, under study at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The mission would use a low-cost instrumented polar-orbiting spacecraft with a smaller companion subsatellite, launched together from Cape Canaveral on a single Delta vehicle, to orbit the moon for a yr and examine nearly the entire lunar surface from pole to pole, on both near and far sides, to expand knowledge gained from the small areas visited by previous U.S. and Soviet missions to the whole of the moon. This first U.S. lunar mission since Apollo 17 in 1972 would also be the first global survey of a body other than earth. The 8 experiment areas would provide measurements for scientists to determine the moon’s gravity, magnetism, and heat flow, and the chemical and mineral composition of the moon’s surface. Advanced remote sensing—gamma-ray, x-ray, and reflection spectroscopy—would be used in 3 of the experiments to create chemical maps of the lunar surface; a fourth experiment, spectrostereo imaging, would provide photographic data to match these maps with individual features of the lunar landscape. Magnetometer and electron reflector experiments would map electrical and magnetic properties of the lunar surface and subsurface; the remaining 2 experiments—heat flow and gravity field—would provide information on the deep interior of the moon. The gravity field would be mapped by tracking the polar-orbiting spacecraft circling at an altitude of 100 km above the lunar surface; the subsatellite, in a higher orbit up to 5000 km, would track the orbiter when it was hidden from earth by the moon. Mascons (mass concentrations) on the near side of the moon had been discovered by analyzing similar tracking data during the early lunar-orbiter flights in the l960s; the proposed experiment would determine whether such mascons existed on the far side of the moon, besides providing information on the lunar interior. Principal investigators named were: gamma-ray spectrometry, Dr. James R. Arnold, Univ. of Calif, at San Diego; spectrostereo imaging, Merton E. Davies, RAND Corp.; electron reflection, Dr. Robert P. Lin, Univ. of Calif, at Berkeley; infrared spectrometry, Dr. Thomas B. McCord, MIT; microwave radiometry, Dr. Duane 0. Muhleman, CalTech; gravity and altimetry, Dr. Roger J. Phillips, JPL; magnetometry, Dr. Christopher T. Russell, Univ. of Calif, at Los Angeles; x-ray spectrometry, Dr. Jacob L. Trombka, Goddard Space Flight Center. Each of the 8 principal investigators would be accompanied by groups of coinvestigators; the 71-member science team would be aided by JPL staff members. JPL scientist in charge of the study was Dr. T.V. Johnson. (NASA Release 76-119)
NASA announced a first-time use of satellite relay of medical data from a moving ambulance to a hospital. Scientists and engineers at the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) at Bay St. Louis, Miss., worked with General Electric’s Science Services Laboratory to develop a special portable transmitter and antenna that could continuously transmit voice and medical data—including electrocardiograms—from a moving ambulance to the satellite and down to a hospital receiving station. During demonstrations of the system on a highway near Bay St. Louis, communications from the ambulance had been received as far away as N. Mex. The NSTL system, using the data-collection system on Goes 3, was similar to a telemedicine system being demonstrated by Johnson Space Center at the Papago Indian Reservation in N. Mex., and use of the Ats 6 for medical communications in Alaska. Use of an inexpensive receiver at the medical center could make remote health care economically feasible; the system might eventually lead to development of a special medical satellite to relay emergency data from remote hospitals, ships, offshore oil platforms, and other remote locations to major medical centers for consultation. (NASA Release 76-86)
The House passed, 330 to 35, and sent to the Senate an authorization bill of $3.t billion for the nation’s space programs for FY 1977, slightly less than the administration request, but $ 133 million more than for FY 1976. Research and development authorizations totaled $2.77 billion, nearly $10 million more than requested. The Space Shuttle would use $ 1.29 billion in R&D money, plus $40 million for 8 construction projects. (W Post, 23 March 76, 6)
Dr. James B. Pollack, research scientist at Ames Research Center, had been named to receive the H. Julian Allen award for 1975, for major findings about the atmosphere of Venus. Dr. Pollack and coworkers used airborne infrared telescope observations in 1974 to show that the top 20 km of Venus’s heavy cloud cover consisted of a water solution of concentrated sulfuric acid. The heat absorption peculiar to sulfuric acid might account for conditions of extreme heat near the surface of Venus. Dr. Pollack would share honors with 8 other Ames employees; the award, given for outstanding papers written by members of the Ames staff, would be accompanied by an honorarium of $1000. (ARC Release 76-11)
A proposal for consolidating about 60 current federal programs— in areas such as health, education, child nutrition, and social services—into “block grants” to the states, with few strings attached. Proposed spending for defense represented a turnaround of sorts: defense spending had fallen for a while after Vietnam, then rose again in FY 1975 with the end of the draft and conversion to higher priced all-volunteer armed forces with an upward pressure on wages. The outlay in FY 1977 would be for weapons; more than half the recommended increase would go for procurement, research, and development. Defense at $101.1 billion would constitute a fourth of the total budget, as in recent years, and Social Security about another fifth. Interest on the public debt would add a tenth; these three items would account for more than half. Five other basic budget items—Medicare-Medicaid, unemployment compensation, civil service retirement, and veterans benefits—would make up three fourths of the total, leaving only a fourth of the total budget for all remaining government spending. Science, represented by $23.5 billion in federal R&D spending proposed for FY 1977, would use more than half that amount for military projects; the space program would get $3.6 billion, only 4% more than the current year and much less than price escalation. Highest priorities for increases in civilian spending on science would be colleges and universities, which would get $2.6 billion in research funds, and the National Science Foundation, which would get $812 million. NASA, under the proposed budget, would postpone purchase of one of the Space Shuttles for a year, and would drop its plan for a Mars-Jupiter-Saturn explorer. At the height of spending for the Apollo program 10 yr ago, civilian and nonspace science got 20% of R&D funding; in FY 1977, it would get 37%. (W Star, 21 Jan 76, A-l, A-10, A-ll; W Post, 22 Jan 76, A-l, A-l4, A-15, A-16; NYT, 22 Jan 76, 1, 24, 25, 26) At a hearing on solar power from satellites conducted by the subcommittee on aerospace technology and national needs of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Deputy Administrator George M-Low and Dr. John M. Teem, ERDA’s Assistant Administrator for Solar, Geothermal, and Advanced Energy Systems, were questioned closely by Sen. Wendell H. Ford (D-Ky), subcommittee chairman, on the ERDA and NASA responsibilities for the program. Testimony revealed that ERDA had prime responsibility for solar, as well as other, power-generating concepts, and that NASA had not requested funds for developing an independent program but was working on solar-power ideas to use in satellite missions. Primary goal of ERDA’s program, Dr. Teem testified, was development and demonstration of terrestrial solar-energy applications that were commercially attractive and environmentally acceptable: solar thermal electric, photovoltaic, wind, and ocean-energy conversion. Dr. Teem pointed out that the FY 1977 budget included no direct funding for energy R&D for NASA, as the basic responsibility rested with ERDA. Dr. Low added that, when ERDA decided that research should proceed, NASA would do the work with ERDA funding. (Text, pp. 192-227)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that the Space Div. of Rockwell Inti. Corp. at Palmdale, Calif., had received delivery of three dummy main engines for the Space Shuttle—known officially as flight mass simulators—for mounting on Shuttle Orbiter 101, which would be used for approach and landing tests at Dryden Flight Research Center and for ground vibration tests at MSFC. The simulator engines, resembling the real main engines in size and weight, could be adjusted in weight and center-of-gravity and gimballed to provide various positions for testing. Orbiter 101, after vibration testing, would be returned to Palmdale for replacement of the simulators with flight engines and placed in flight status. (MSFC Release 76-162)
The USSR launched a geophysical rocket, Vertikal 4, from an undisclosed site “in the medium latitudes” of European Russia to an altitude of 1512 km. Carrying “more than 10 complex and diverse scientific instruments” developed and built by specialists from Bulgaria, East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and the USSR, the rocket was designed to sample a vertical cross section of the neutral upper atmosphere and ionospheric plasma in a 15-min time period. In a Pravda interview, Academician B. N. Petrov noted that composition of the atmosphere and ionosphere changed with height, the lighter gases being at the top. None of the previous Vertikal rockets (launched in 1970, 1971, and 1975) had reached altitudes of more than about 500 km, the oxygen section of the ionosphere. Vertikal 4 had reached the hydrogen region, or protonosphere, and had measured properties of the plasma affecting radio-wave absorption and investigated effects of shortwave solar radiation on the earth’s atmosphere. Results of the investigation would extend knowledge of weather and climate, Petrov said. (FBIS, Tass in English, 14 Oct 76; Pravda in Russian, 17 Oct 76; Moscow Domestic Service in Russian, 29 Oct 76) At what the NY Times described as “a restricted press conference before liftoff,” the rookie cosmonauts said their mission was to concentrate on practical scientific uses of the Soviet space stations, especially extraterrestrial manufacture of metals, glass, and pharmaceuticals. Rozhdestvensky said that every ruble invested in space exploration had “already been returned tenfold to the national budget in one way or another.’,’ Tass announced at noon Moscow time on 16 Oct. (5 am EDT) that the docking of Soyuz 23 with Salyut 5 had been cancelled “because of the off-design regime of [the] approach control system,” and the crew had been ordered to return to earth. The NY Times noted that this was “the first occasion on which the Russians have made public their problems before the completion of a space flight.” Usually no announcement had been forthcoming until the crew had returned to earth. At 8:46 pm Moscow time (1:46 pm EDT)—almost exactly 48 hr after liftoff—the descent module landed 195 km southwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan “on the surface of Lake Tengiz” in a heavy snowfall. The search and rescue teams, working under difficult nighttime conditions, recovered the descent module and the cosmonauts from the first splashdown in the 15-yr history of Soviet manned space flight. Announcement of the adverse conditions of the landing was not made until 12 hr afterwards, a delay suggesting some difficulty in locating the capsule. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, director of cosmonaut training, said that helicopter and amphibious craft had aided the recovery. Residents of the nearby town of Arkalyk welcomed the returned cosmonauts at the airport and made them honorary citizens. The crew returned to the Baykonur cosmodrome by plane on the morning of 17 Oct. The splashdown of Soyuz 23 resulted from chance rather than planning, said the newspaper Izvestia on 18 Oct., describing fears at recovery-team headquarters that the landing craft might have gone into swamps near the lake, after a report that the craft had tilted on impact, putting the porthole below the water’s surface. The pilot of a plane had reported the capsule’s position and a helicopter had towed the capsule to shore amid fog, snow, and broken ice. The official comments were regarded as “an effort to avoid blaming the astronauts for the mission’s failure,” said the NY Times. The Soyuz 23 difficulty marked the fourth failure of a Soyuz mission to rendezvous; radar trouble had forced the crews of Soyuz 3, Soyuz 8, and Soyuz 15 to return to earth without docking. The Wash. Post noted that about one in three Soyuz flights had failed to carry out its mission: Soyuz 1 and Soyuz 11 resulted in the deaths of one and three cosmonauts respectively, and two cosmonauts on an unnumbered mission in April 1975 had been forced to abort their flight before reaching earth orbit. (NYT, 15 Oct 76, A 13; 16 Oct 76, 6; 17 Oct 76, 29; 18 Oct 76, 32; 19 Oct 76, 17; W Post, 15 Oct 76, A-21; 17 Oct 76, A-17; 18 Oct 76, A-16; C Trib, 15 Oct 76, 1-5; 17 Oct 76, 1-3; 18 Oct 76, 1-8; WStar, 17 Oct 76, A-14; FBIS, Tass in English, 14-17 Oct 76)
Johnson Space Center announced signing of a supplemental agreement with Lockheed Electronics Co. of Houston for $2.57 million, for additional scientific and technical support at the Slidell Computer Complex of the Earth Resources Laboratory in La. The supplemental agreement brought the total value of the contract to $7.1 million. (JSC Release 76-49)
First mainstage test of the Space Shuttle main engine occurred at the National Space Technology Laboratories in Hancock County, Miss., Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The engine—called the Integrated Subsystem Test Bed—was fired for 3.38 sec, reaching and stabilizing at its minimum power level: 50% of its rated power level of 1 668 075 newtons at sea level, or 2 090 654 newtons at altitude. Tests were conducted by the prime contractor for the engine, Rocketdyne Div. of Rockwell International Corp., under MSFC direction. (MSFC Release 76-29; Rockwell Release RD-2)
The European Space Agency announced plans for a NASA presentation on current status of the Space Transportation System to be held in Paris 12 to 14 May, for about 250 representatives of governments, national institutes and agencies, and industry of the ESA member states. Opened by Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, the program would be introduced by Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA’s Assistant Administrator for International Alfairs. Other NASA speakers would be John F. Yardley, Associate Administrator, Office of Space Flight; Chester M. Lee, director of space transportation system operations; and Harold E. Gartrell, deputy manager of the Shuttle payload integration'office. The Space Transportation System would include the U.S. Space Shuttle and the ESA Spacelab, as well as a new upper propulsion stage and a U.S.-developed tracking and data system. ESA representatives scheduled to present the Spacelab portion of the 3-day program would include Bernard Deloffre, director of the Spacelab program for ESA; Heinz Stoewer, Spacelab project manager; Jan J. Burger, Spacelab payload adviser; and Jacques Collet of ESA’s planning directorate. (ESA release 10 May 76)
Two scientific experiments carried on last July’s Apollo-Soyuz (ASTP) mission had produced spinoffs that would benefit sufferers from phlebitis and leukemia. Each of the experiments had used electrophoresis—passing an electric current through a solution to separate differing types of cellular matter—under the weightless conditions of space flight to produce results unobtainable in earth’s gravity. One experiment used human kidney cells in isolating pure samples of the 5% of cells that manufactured an enzyme (urokinase) effective in removing blood clots from veins and arteries, with major potential for treating persons with conditions such as phlebitis. The separated cells, frozen and returned for use as starters in a culturing process, provided 6 to 7 times more urokinase than the original sample. The other spinoff was the successful testing of a preservative medium developed for use on the ASTP mission that would make it possible to perform transfusions of a certain type of white blood cells in the treatment of leukemia; the preservative, used to freeze granulocytes on the mission, actually improved the survivability of the cells so that a stock of the material could be kept frozen for use upon demand, instead of searching for donors with resultant delay in emergencies. (NASA Releases 76-3, 76-5)
Scientists all over the world had been invited to propose experiments for the second Spacelab mission, NASA announced, asking that they submit by 1 Oct. their letters of intent to propose, with actual proposals due by 3 Dec. Final selection of experiments would be made in Aug. 1977; proposals would be evaluated in the areas of space science (including life sciences), applications, and space technology. Primary intent of the second Spacelab mission would be to evaluate the laboratory’s system and subsystem performance, but space and resources would be available for experiments. Second objective of the The 26-m “Venus disk" at NASA's Goldstone tracking station near Barstow, Calif., in use with rectenna (in. background) for solar-energy conversion experiments. (NASA 76-H-685) mission would be to demonstrate the broad capabilities of Spacelab for scientific research, especially in astrophysics (astronomy, high-energy astrophysics, and solar physics). Proposals should designate a principal investigator as the point of contact with NASA, to manage the efforts of any other persons involved in the experiments. As the second mission payload would not include a pressurized module as the design for Spacelab 1 did, instruments would be mounted on pallets exposed to space with a remote manipulator system available if needed. Experiments would be controlled remotely by persons at the payload-specialist station in the Space Shuttle orbiter’s aft flight deck. Power, data distribution, and thermal control would be available from flight subsystems in a pressurized igloo on the forward pallet. Spacelab, a reusable space laboratory, was under construction in Europe by the European Space Agency for NASA. Marshall Space Flight Center was the lead center for Spacelab development, as well as for the Shuttle main engine, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster. (NASA Release 76-152)
Ames Research Center announced award of a $939 000 contract to Rattelle Memorial Institute of Columbus, 0., for aid in administering an early-warning aviation safety system for the Federal Aviation Administration. Under the 2-yr contract, Rattelle would implement a reporting system to obtain from persons in the national aviation system information on potential threats to flight safety; the reports would be processed to preserve anonymity of the informants and to make the data quickly usable to avoid or reduce aircraft accidents. An aviation-safety reporting system instituted by FAA in May 1975 had met with reluctance on the part of the public to report directly to a regulatory agency. NASA, invited to act as a third party, agreed to act as collection point for safety reports to encourage participation by pilots, controllers, and others using the nation’s airways. (NASA Release 76-52; ARC Release 76-34)
First flight of a new fly-by-wire control system for jet aircraft was scheduled for 27 Aug. at Dryden Flight Research Center, NASA announced. The system would use 3 digital computers for primary control (and a 3-channel analog system for emergencies) to translate pilot signals to aircraft-control surfaces by lightweight wires instead of the conventional control systems, reducing the aerodynamic load as much as 20% and saving up to 10% in production costs. In Phase I of the program, a modified G-8 jet was flown 42 times to establish the feasibility of digital fly-by-wire control, using a single-channel digital computer developed for the flight-control system of the Apollo lunar module. Phase II would use a triplex system that could be modified to use Shuttle software, leading to a digital system with applications both to Shuttle and to other advanced transport systems. Project pilot Gary Krier would fly the checkout tests, scheduled to last through 1978 with about 30 flights planned. (NASA Release 76-150; DFRC Release 74-76)
Dr. Maxime A. Faget, director of engineering and development at Johnson Space Center, had been chosen to receive awards from both the American Astronautical Society and the Instrument Society of America, the JSC Roundup reported. Dr. Faget, one of the original 35 members of the NASA Space Task Force Group, received from the AAS its Space Flight Award, given for the greatest contribution to the advancement of space flight and space exploration. Dr. Faget had received AAS’s Lovelace award in 1971. The ISA had selected him for the Albert F. Sperry Award, for “advancing spacecraft, laboratory and biomedical instrumentation through technical and engineering leadership of manned space flight programs.” Dr. Faget in 1969 received NASA’s medal for exceptional service and distinguished service medal—the agency’s highest award—and had been inducted into the Natl. Space Hall of Fame. (JSC Roundup, 8 Oct 76, 1)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $2 250 000 contract to the Beech Aircraft Corp., Boulder, Co., for development of a Space Shuttle orbiter fuel-cell servicing system. An orbiter would carry 3 fuel cells using cryogenically stored hydrogen and oxygen to provide electrical power; each cell would connect to a separate power bus, but only 2 cells would be used during minimum power load. Peak or average power load would use all 3 cells. The contract called for Beech to design, fabricate, test, and deliver a complete cryogenic remotely controlled unit that would provide liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen for the fuel cells, delivery to be completed by 1 Dec. 1977. (KSC Release 333-76)
Johnson Space Center announced delivery and acceptance of the Sperry Rand computer system, Univac 110/46, that would drive the Shuttle mission simulators. Dr. Bruce B. Johnson, technical manager of the contract, said that JSC had tested the computer complex round the clock for 30 days before its acceptance, and that the complex had demonstrated reliability “far in excess of contractual requirements.” Completed 3 wk ahead of schedule, the Univac 1100/46 contained 10 processors, making it one of the most powerful digital computers built to date, with 900 000 36-bit words in the main memory and 2 billion characters in mass storage capacity. The computer would simulate a wide range of mission situations—prelaunch, ascent, aborts, orbit rendezvous and docking, entry, and landing—in the process of training flight crews and ground personnel in all phases of the Shuttle program. Total cost of the computer complex was $7 934 876. (JSC Release 76-47)
President Ford announced his intention to nominate Alan M. Lovelace, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, to succeed George M. Low as Deputy Administrator. Lovelace had occupied his position since September 1974. Before coming to NASA, he had been director of research and development for the Air Force Systems Command at Wright-Patterson AFB, 0., 1967-1972; director of science and technology for Air Force R&D, assigned to Andrews AFB; and acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for Research and Development for the Air Force in October 1973. The nomination required Senate confirmation, but no opposition was expected; if the Senate did not act by the end of the week, before its 4 July recess, confirmation might be delayed until after 19 July. (Pres Doc, 21 June 76, 1072; Av Wk, 28 June 76, 21; NASA Release 76-118)
Eighty percent of the 114 federal research laboratories had not adopted cost-cutting activities recommended 6 yr ago by the General Accounting Office. A new GAO survey found that agencies had not made periodic inspections of equipment to find unused items that could be sold; had not established equipment pools to eliminate duplication and underuse of costly scientific tools; and had not started using “time meters” as a check on how often the equipment was used. Agencies following the three recommendations could save millions of dollars, said Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.) in releasing the GAO report, citing an atomic research facility that saved $24.2 million by disposing of unneeded equipment. Aspin also referred to purchases of expensive sophisticated equipment for a single experiment that was never used again, when it could have been sold or passed along to another agency. (W Star, 13 Jan 76, C8)
ERDA conducted a demonstration at Ft. Belvoir, Va., for military decisionmakers on the use of solar cells by the armed forces. Arranged in cooperation with the U.S. Army’s Mobility Equipment Research and Development Command, the exhibit would show the advantages of solar cells over conventional sources of electricity in applications such as communications and surveillance. Increased purchase by the military could improve availability of solar cells to the general population, ERDA said, by stimulating mass production and thereby lowering costs. (ERDA release 1 Nov 76)
Johnson Space Center announced that NASA had awarded the Singer Co. Simulations Products Division, Binghamton, N.Y., a $6.5-million 2-yr contract for maintenance, modification, and operational support of JSC’s simulation complex at Houston to be used in training flight crews for the Space Shuttle program. Initially, the simulation complex would consist of the Shuttle procedures simulator and the crew procedures evaluation simulator; later, an orbiter aeroflight simulator would be added, followed by the Shuttle mission simulator. In addition to systems and hardware engineering, configuration control, installation and tests of modifications, and development, drafting, and illustration of software, the contract would require maintenance, servicing, and operational support of the equipment as well as documentation and logistics support. Extensions of 24 and 6 mo would be optional. McDonnell Douglas Corp. also negotiated for this contract (see 10 May). (JSC Release 76-48)
A $4.5-million structural test data-acquisition system to be used for tests on Space Shuttle components was nearing completion of installation and checkout at Marshall Space Flight Center, MFSC announced. Developed by Avco Electronics, the system included a central facility with a computer system, 6 line printers, 5 graphics display units, a printer-plotter, 2 card readers, and 4 video hard-copy units; 4 data-selector units; and 24 static-input units. The central facility, to be located in MSFC’s Test Laboratory, was designed for a lifespan of 10 yr and would combine extreme accuracy with high reliability and ruggedness. Testing the external tanks, solid-fuel rocket booster, and other parts of the Shuttle for structural integrity would require monitoring up to 6000 channels of data simultaneously, fed into the computers from test hardware elsewhere at the Center. The Avco contract also provided for training MSFC personnel to operate the system when completed late in 1976. (MSFC Release 76-73)
MSFC reported an unprecedented amount of data distributed to and used by the scientific community as a result of rapport, established under an arrangement known as the Skylab solar workshops, among principal investigators in the Skylab Apollo telescope mount (ATM) project and other scientists. The workshops, supported by NASA, had provided a means of “intense interaction and collaboration” by the participants, MSFC said. The first workshop, held in Oct. 1975 on coronal holes, was attended by 60 scientists representing 19 universities and other institutions; a second workshop in Feb. and the last this wk would conclude the series. The workshops met near the High Altitude Observatory at Boulder, Colo., under fairly isolated conditions; the scientists were together most of the time, passing on information, explaining discoveries, and talking shop from breakfast until late at night. Jack Zirker of the Univ. of Hawaii’s Institute of Astronomy, director of the first workshop series, said the workshop procedure was “an ideal way to deal with the topic” because participants collaborated closely between meetings, planning and carrying out projects that otherwise might have languished. The next workshop in the series, on solar flares, was scheduled to begin with a first meeting in the last week of Oct. 1976. Discussions at the first meeting would define the total effort; participants would return home to work on individual pieces of the problem. A second meeting 4 or 5 mo later would be a midterm status review and working meeting, with participants contributing information relevant to the total project. At the final workshop, participants would sum up their findings and identify unsolved problems, preparatory to publishing their results. The workshop would produce a monograph summarizing the state of the art at that point. Scientists taking part in the solar workshop series said the system could be adapted readily to research in other scientific fields and was highly productive. (MSFC Release 76-145)
NASA announced an agreement with the Indian Space Research Organization (1SRO) to add a solar-energy experiment to the cooperative satellite instructional television experiment (SITE) now under way using Ats 6, the applications technology satellite. In May, 1SRO was sent 2 solar arrays capable of producing 260 watt-hr of power a day under Indian sunlight conditions; the arrays would provide electricity to run 2 of the SITE TV receivers during the 4 hr each day that Indian programming would be broadcast to some 5000 villages using Ats 6. When India’s National Committee for Space Research studied power alternatives for the SITE terminals in 1969, solar cells were used almost exclusively in spacecraft and were considered too expensive for use on the ground; since that time, demand had increased sharply, the price had come down, and the sharp rise in petroleum prices had made the price of solar power more attractive. Although current cost of a solar-power system for a SITE terminal was estimated as $311 per yr (26% higher than the $247 cost of kerosene generators), research and production should bring the cost down to about $139 a yr by 1979, while the price of kerosene-generated electricity could well be higher. Also, arrays from solar cells could be produced in India and other developing countries by using existing technology, which would add to the advantages of solar power for use throughout the world. Solar power had proved desirable for use in areas not having central power stations; the solar-power systems were simple to install, had no moving parts, and needed only cleaning of array surfaces and maintenance of electrolyte levels as operational maintenance. NASA’s Lewis Research Center had demonstrated a solar array as a power source for an Ats 6 ground station last year; the India project would be one of many conducted by L<RC to support the U.S. Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA) in demonstrating terrestrial applications of solar-cell-generated electricity. An ISRO engineer would visit LeRC for training in assembly and operation of the solar arrays. (NASA Release 76-95)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced a number of activities, centered on the Space Shuttle, including testing, procurement, and completion of facilities. —During July, MSFC awarded 14 contracts each of which totaled more than $50 000. (MSFC Release 76-155) —MSFC completed preparation of a 2.8% scale model of the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) that would be tested in Ames Research Center wind tunnels (the 2 supersonic facilities and the 4.2m transonic facility). MSFC had used a 0.5% scale model in its smaller trisonic (over mach 3) wirid tunnel to develop preliminary environmental data; the smaller tunnel ft as cheaper to operate, and a smaller model was cheaper to alter. Data from the ARC tests would be use in SRB component vibration and acoustic design and in establishing qualification-test criteria, and finally for generation of data on the acoustic environment for reentry of an actual full-scale SRB. (MSFC Release 76-120) —Completing the first phase of acoustic testing that used scale models of the Space Shuttle with models of the Kennedy Space Center launch pad, MSFC announced that it had begun another test program using a scale model of the Vandenberg AFB, Calif., launch pad and a Shuttle model having working main engines and solid-fuel rocket boosters to the same scale. The Vandenberg launch pad differed from that at KSC, but MSFC said that much of the information obtained since Aug. 1974 in 150 test firings to evaluate different acoustic methods for the KSC launch pad would be useful in suppressing noise at the Vandenberg site. The tests were made to determine the best way to control noise and ignition overpressure when Shuttle engines and boosters were ignited at launch; uncontrolled pressures and acoustics could damage the Shuttle or its payload. Tests were scheduled for completion in Dec. 1976. (MSFC Release 76-117) —MSFC announced award of a $247 363 contract to Rockwell’s Space Div. for a 12-mo study of Shuttle booster and external tank options that could reduce cost per flight and increase payload weight capability. (MSFC Release 76-118) —MSFC announced that the first flight-configuration nozzle for the Shuttle main engine under development by Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Div. had been completed and successfully proof-tested. Completion of the nozzle represented a significant design and manufacturing achievement; the nozzle consisted of 1080 precisely formed tapering tubes brazed to a shell and stiffened by bands. It was about 3m tall and 2.7m in diameter, weighing about 454 kg. Attached to the main combustion chamber of the main engine, the nozzle would allow exhaust gases to expand to obtain maximum thrust, contributing to highly efficient burn. (MSFC Release 76-128) —MSFC announced completion of tests conducted with KSC to determine the effects of salty and brackish water on materials used in elements of the Space Shuttle. Recovery of 2 Shuttle boosters after each launch would require towing the boosters in the salty Atlantic Ocean and into the brackish waters of a Fla. river. The studies used an integrated test bed constructed from the same materials and covered with the same sealants and paints planned for use on flight rockets, carrying samples of electrical and electronic equipment and hydraulic systems being considered for Shuttle use. The test bed, shipped to KSC, was put into the ocean for 7 days and in the Banana River for 3 days, at a depth that closely simulated actual booster-recovery conditions. Returned to MSFC, the test bed had been subjected to study by engineers and technicians to discover the effects of the ocean and river environments, and to look for corrosion or marine biological growth. After this study, the refurbished test bed would be used again for tests in the ocean by KSC personnel. (MSFC Release 76-131) —MSFC announced it had requested bids from industry on development of range-safety receivers for the Space Shuttle. Each Shuttle’s 2 booster solid rockets would carry 2 receivers and the external tank 1, a total of 5 for each launch. The receivers would be part of a safety system that would let the range safety officer destroy the vehicle in case of a malfunction at launch. NASA planned to reuse the receivers up to 20 times, recovering and returning the equipment to the manufacturer for testing before it was shipped to the assembly contractor for reuse. (MSFC Release 76-132) —MSFC announced that assembly of the first Space Shuttle external tank had begun at the Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. Assembly should be completed and the tank delivered to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Miss., in mid-1977 for use in the test program for the main propulsion engine. The tests would use the tank, three Shuttle main engines, and other components in actual firings to verify the design and operation of the main propulsion system. The program would consist of 15 test firings, 11 at or near the full 8-min duration. (MSFC Release 76-137) —MSFC announced preparations for the arrival of the first Space Shuttle orbiter in mid-July for a series of tests at MSFC’s dynamic test facility. The orbiter would arrive at the Redstone airfield in 1978 atop a modified Boeing 747 and be off-loaded by KSC personnel. On the ground, the orbiter would become the responsibility of MSFC personnel, who would move it to the test facility and mate it with the rest of the Space Shuttle elements for vibration tests. This would be the first time all elements of the Shuttle were united. Tests were scheduled to run from spring to winter of 1978. (MSFC Release 76-141) —MSFC announced completion of tests on minitank 5, a small aluminum tank coated with a spray insulation that would be used to protect the Space Shuttle’s external tank and its highly volatile liquid hydrogen contents from engine exhaust or aerodynamic heat. This was the fifth of 13 such tanks to be tested at MSFC. The tests were to determine the effectiveness of Martin Marietta’s foam insulation against stress encountered during Shuttle launch and space flight. Besides acoustic and vacuum tests, the minitanks would undergo pressure, boiloff, and holding tests with liquid hydrogen; the hold test would determine the effect of a 7-hr idle period on a full tank’s insulation system. The test period of 7 hr was estimated to be the longest time a fueled Shuttle would have to wait on a launch pad before liftoff. %ISFC Release 76-142) —MSFC announced completion^, the only totally new structure built exclusively for testing the Space Shuttle external tank: the pneumatic test facility at Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans, which would accommodate the tank measuring 47 m long (more than half the length of a football field) and 8.4 m in diameter. Empty, the tank would weigh about 34 000 kg. The pneumatic facility would be used for proof tests and leak tests of the external tank’s liquid hydrogen tank; the proof test would pressurize the tank with gaseous nitrogen and apply a series of external loads with 9 hydraulic cylinders. The leak test would verify that no out-of-specification leaks existed. Martin Marietta Aerospace was prime contractor at Michoud for external tank production. (MSFC Release 76-143)
The Flight Research Center at Edwards, Calif., NASA’s prime site for experimental research in aeronautics, was renamed the Hugh L. Dryden Flight Research Center in memory of the pioneer aeronautical researcher who was first Deputy Administrator of NASA, a position he held until his death in 1965. Dr. Dryden’s contributions to aeronautical research included investigation of high-speed airfoils, supersonic propeller-tip velocities, boundary layers, and airflow wind turbulence, and development of high-speed wind tunnels. He was director of the former National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics from 1947 until that agency became NASA in 1958. (NASA Release 76-7; FRC Release 1-76; Goddard News, Feb 76, 6)
Kennedy Space Center announced award to Pan American Technical Services, Inc., Cocoa Beach, Fla., of the first contract to modify KSC facilities for Spacelab processing as part of the Space Shuttle program. The $129 627 contract included architect and engineer services to design the modifications of the Operations and Checkout Bldg., including changes in utilities (gaseous nitrogen, helium, high-pressure air, water and airconditioning) and adaptation of Apollo equipment acceptance and checkout rooms to make them compatible with ground-support equipment provided by the European Space Agency for automated Spacelab testing. Spacelab—to be carried into space by the Space Shuttle orbiter—was being designed, developed, and built by 9 member nations of ESA at a cost of $300 to $400 million. At the end of each mission, the Spacelab would be removed from the landed orbiter and prepared for the next mission. The engineering model to be used for facility and orbiter checkout was scheduled to arrive at KSC in July 1978; the first flight model was due in June 1979. (KSC Release 128-76)
Women would definitely be admitted to the U.S. space program, the Chicago Tribune reported, and NASA would make a formal announcement in July. Only one woman—Russia’s Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited for 3 days on Vostok 6 in June 1963—had been in space so far. The U.S. space women would fly on the Space Shuttle scheduled to be operational by 1980; the exact number had not been determined, but they would form part of a group of 15 mission specialists who would be chosen within the coming year. Screening, evaluation, and physical examination of applicants would be completed by Dec. 1977, and selectees would join NASA as candidates for space flight by July 1978. (B Sun, 3 Mar 76, A-3)
Dr. Mary Helen Johnston, metallurgist at MSFC, was principal guest speaker at the Federal Women’s Day program at Wallops Flight Center. Dr. Johnston, who said she wanted to be one of the first American women chosen for space flight, participated in 1974 as part of an all-women crew of experimenters in a 5-day tryout of the general-purpose laboratory at MSFC, a cylindrical mockup of the Spacelab being built in Europe for Space Shuttle flights. Using the neutral-buoyancy simulator, a working area for handling experiment packages in a zero-gravity environment, the crew developed techniques for use on Spacelab. As principal investigator for three scientific experiments and co-investigator on another, Dr. Johnston had planned the work in hopes of going on orbital missions in the 1980s. Also on the program was Audrey Rowe Colom, director of women’s activities for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and current president of the Natl. Women’s Political Caucus. Besides the speakers, the program included jskits by WFC employees and a costumed narration of “Two Centuries of American Women on Parade.” (WFC Release 76-15)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Science Applications, Inc., of Los Angeles and Rockwell Inti. Corp. for negotiation of contracts to study space industrialization. The study program would lead from Shuttle Spacelab and early space-station experiments to permanent, practical, commercial use of space. The space-industrialization accomplishments so far achieved would be expanded into disciplines other than communications and meteorology; the study program would attempt to define a balance between future opportunities (satellite power systems) and relatively immediate benefits (space processing of materials). Possible areas of activity would include development of new techniques and materials, new development of earth resources, and eventually the movement of people to space for tourism or medical purposes, and the industrialization of the moon. The parallel studies would proceed in two phases, each requiring about 8 mo, and would cost about $200 000 each. (MSFC Release 76-160)
The Energy Research and Development Administration announced selection of 2 firms, one in Mass, and the other in Calif., to study potential wind-power use by utilities to generate electricity in their own localities. The JBF Scientific Corp., a small research company in Wilmington, Mass., would study potential wind-power use by the Cambridge Light Co. and the New Bedford Gas and Edison Light Co. in New England; the utilities would provide information about their power needs and other data. The Aerospace Corp. of El Segundo, Calif., would assess potential wind-power use by the Hawaiian Electric Co., which serves most of that state; the Univ. of Hawaii would also participate in the study. Besides examining the utilities and their power needs, the contractors would study other ways of generating electricity (such as coal and nuclear plants), comparing them with wind energy to see if conversion would be practical and economical. The regional studies would last 1 yr each and would cost about $500 000 overall. The resulting data would supply a model for utilities throughout the country to assess the use of wind energy in their own regions. (ERDA Release 76-180)
Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld announced that the Ford administration had decided to authorize construction of the controversial B-l bomber, under a contract arrangement that would allow the incoming Carter administration 5 mo to review the $22.8-billion program. Rumsfeld’s announcement said that B-l testing was complete and that it was “in the national interest” to proceed with production. During the campaign, candidate Carter had said he was opposed to immediate production but held out the possibility of further research on the bomber, which the Pentagon now declared completed. The unusual contract arrangement of month-by-month funding until the end of June was an extension of the 1 Feb. deadline set by Congress for commitment of funds for the program; the Air Force awarded contracts totaling $704.9 million to Rockwell Inti., General Electric, and the Boeing Company for the first three production models of the bomber, plus procurement to make eight more. The contracts, however, limited government liability to a monthly total of $87 million through June. Air Force Secretary Thomas C. Reed said at a news conference that keeping the B-l in the research state was unnecessary and wasteful, and that “it would be irresponsible not to initiate B-l production at this time” in view of the expansion of Soviet strategic forces. A manned bomber, he said, was the third part of a triad—including land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles and missile-bearing submarines—that would present “an insoluble problem” to the USSR and make it a losing proposition to attack the U.S. because of retaliation that would follow. The swing-wing B-l, although only two-thirds the size of the B-52, could carry twice the payload, was faster in takeoff and flight, and carried electronic systems more difficult to jam than those of the B-52. Opponents claimed that $ 100 million apiece was too high a price to pay for a bomber in the age of antiaircraft missiles, and suggested alternatives such as loading a commercial Boeing 747 with cruise missiles that could be fired while the plane was a safe distance from enemy defenses. (NYT, 3 Dec 76, A18; W Post, 3 Dec 76, A—1)
Pluto—outermost of the 9 planets circling the sun—might have a surface of frozen methane, putting its temperature in its near-vacuum environment at close to absolute zero (total absence of heat) and indicating that never since the ice formed had the sun’s heat been able to boil off the covering, according to a team at the Kitt Peak National Observatory in Ariz. Dr. David Morrison of the University of Hawaii said that Pluto might look and behave just the way it did when it was formed during the creation of the solar system; nowhere but on Pluto had methane been found as a solid, and nowhere else was it present in such abundance. The frozen surface also meant that astronomers might have been fooled since Pluto’s discovery in 1930 into thinking it larger than it really was; instead of being the size of the earth, Dr. Morrison said, “it might he only half our size or even smaller.” Pluto, 4.8 billion km distant, was the last planet to have scientists define its surface composition. (NYT, 2 Apr 76, 37; W Post, 2 Apr 76, A—1; Science, 23 Apr 76, 362)
Payload responsibilities for the first 6 flights of the Space Shuttle had been allocated by NASA, according to Aviation Wk and. Space Technology magazine. The first 6 orbital missions scheduled for 1979-1980 would be verifications of the overall Shuttle system; the first flight would carry no payload except a 45 000-kg data-analysis system, but the other 5 flight-test missions would carry scientifically meaningful payloads. NASA had assigned the second and fifth flight tests to its Office of Applications; the fourth and sixth, to the Office of Space Science; and the third, to the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. The Office of Applications would be involved with space-processing hardware, and the Office of Space Science would oversee the use of existing research instruments; the OAST had been considering a space “workbench” on which various instruments could be deployed for 3- to 9-mo periods. The orbital flight-test missions would begin with a duration of only a few orbits, which should increase to about 7 days by the sixth flight mission; the first 4 flights would land at Dryden Flight Research Center, and the latter 2 at Kennedy Space Center. {AvWk, 17 May 76, 21)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans for a day-long meeting 16 Sept, at MSFC to review the status of the spinning solid upper stage (SSUS) that would deliver spacecraft from the Space Shuttle in low orbit to their operational synchronous orbits. The SSUS, carrying a satellite of the type now being launched by expendable Atlas-Centaur or Thor-Delta vehicles, would be launched from earth in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle. In orbit, the SSUS with its payload would be extended from the cargo bay on a cradle with a spin table that would stabilize the SSUS as it ejected from the cradle, before its own engine ignited to send it and its payload into the proper orbit. After reaching the required altitude, the payload’s propulsion system would position it in the desired orbital attitude. Industry representatives invited to the status review would hear presentations by NASA and Aerospace Corp. on concepts and current mission models for the SSUS. MSFC planned to issue requests for proposals for Phase B (preliminary design definition) about 1 Oct., with contracts being issued in Feb. Plans were to have the SSUS ready for flight in Dec. 1979. (MSFC Release 76-166; Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 46)
Every ruble spent on space research had been returned many times to the Soviet national economy, said Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov in a Tass interview during observations of the 15th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s space flight. Leonov was one of the two USSR participants in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and had been the first man to walk in space during a Voskhod 2 flight 18 Mar. 1965. He stated that 496 spacecraft had been launched from Soviet cosmodromes in the last 5 yrs, 35 of them communications satellites, 13 Meteor weather satellites, and several Prognoz science satellites, as well as about 400 in the Cosmos series. The long-functioning Salyut stations were the main line of Soviet space activity, Leonov said, carrying out research in cartography, geology, agriculture, forestry, and hydrology as only a few of the many fields of knowledge expanded by work on orbital stations. Leonov also stressed the importance of the Soviet-American Apollo-Soyuz test project. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6 Apr 76)
A 2-yr comparative study of data on dust storms on Mars and earth revealed that Martian dust storms were much like severe ones on earth, “only more so,” the Jet Propulsion Lab. announced. JPL investigator Peter M. Woiceshyn used Lowell Observatory data to conclude that a wall of dust more than 50 km high swept down the slopes of the Hellas area on Mars in July 1971 at speeds greater than 480 km per hr. Mariner 9 occultation data verified that winds of extreme velocity would be required to raise surface dust in the low atmospheric pressure of Mars, where the air density was only 1/100th that on earth. When Mariner 9 arrived at Mars in Nov. 1971, another dust storm had been raging for several weeks, and dust-cloud tops were estimated to be 50 to 70 km above the surface. The JPL report said the two 1971 storms and another detected by astronomers in 1956 began in the same location on the slopes of Hellas, triggered by a cold jet stream from the Martian north pole funneling down a long valley across the planet’s equator. Similar storms on earth in Russia, in Iran, and on the U.S. plains east of the Rockies caused great damage from soil erosion, similar to that on Mars revealed by Mariner 9. More storm data from Mars would be sought by the Viking spacecraft scheduled to land there in July and Sept. 76. (JPL release 13 Apr 76)
Gerald D. Griffin, Deputy Associate Administrator for Operations in NASA Hq’s Office of Space Flight, had been named Deputy Director of the Dryden Flight Research Center effective 1 May, NASA announced. Griffin joined NASA in 1964 and served as a flight controller at Johnson Space Center during the Gemini program before being named an Apollo flight director in 1968; he served in that position on all 11 Apollo missions, and was lead flight director on Apollo missions 12, 15, and 17. He went to NASA Hq in 1973 and had previously been Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs. He had served in the Air Force and was an aerospace engineer with Lockheed and with General Dynamics before coming to NASA. (NASA Release 76-66; DFRC Release 5-76)
Johnson Space Center announced “the most successful balloon flight of its type ever conducted” when a football-field-sized balloon carried a scientific instruments package at a 40-km altitude across the central Texas night sky for 12 hr to gather information on far distant giant and super-giant stars. The 589-kg package known as BUSS—for balloon-borne ultraviolet stellar spectrometer—gathered data on 16 separate stars, including Arcturus, a giant star in constellation Bootes; super-giant Antares (alpha Scorpii); Vega (alpha Lyrae); and Spica (alpha Virginis), super-hot star and one of the brightest observed during the flight. Of special interest was super-giant Deneb in constellation Cygnus, 1400 light years distant, whose light recorded by BUSS was emitted before the Anglo-Saxons settled in England; Deneb was so large that, if the sun were located in its center, the earth would orbit the sun entirely within the star’s outer limits. The BUSS payload was the culmination of a 3-yr international collaboration between JSC and the Space Research Laboratory of Utrecht in the Netherlands. Dr. Yoji Kondo of JSC was U.S. coprincipal investigator, with Dr. Thomas H. Morgan and Dr. Jerry L. Modisette of Houston Raptist University; the Dutch team was led by Dr. Cees de Jager. Purpose of the balloon flights in a series of star studies that began in 1971 was to evaluate the experiment systems for use on the Space Shuttle; the BUSS package was designed to obtain data on spectral variations of a variety of stars and aid scientists in determining their structure and evolution. Previous flights had obtained some information but only a fiftieth of the spectral range covered by the BUSS payload. The package was landed by a parachute about 26 m in diameter, similar to those used on the Apollo command module; the payload, chute, and balloon were recovered between Abilene and Ft. Worth by NASA engineers who returned the material to Houston. The data would be analyzed by the U.S. team and by the Dutch scientists, who had returned to Holland, in preparation for another balloon flight scheduled for the fall of 1976. (JSC Release 76-39)
Fred W. Haise, Jr., astronaut on the Apollo 13 lunar mission of April 1970 that nearly ended in disaster, would command the first free-flight test of the Space Shuttle, Johnson Space Center officials announced. A research pilot for NASA since 1959, Haise worked at Lewis Research Center and the Flight Research Center before his selection as a civilian astronaut in 1966. He was technical assistant to the manager of the Shuttle orbiter project from April 1973 to January 1976. With Haise on the test Shuttle flight would be Air Force Lt. Col. Charles G. Fullerton, appointed astronaut in 1969, who had never flown in space. The Shuttle was scheduled to fly piggyback in 1977 on a modified Boeing 747 jet transport, then in free-flight testing and landing after release at about 8-km altitude. Haise and Col. Fullerton would guide the Shuttle to an unpowered landing at the Dryden Flight Research Center in Calif, to demonstrate handling and reusability. (B Sun, 25 Feb 76, A-7; W Post, 25 Feb 76, B 5; NASA Release 76-35; JSC Release 76-17)
A program conducted jointly by NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center and Langley Research Center had been trying literally to work the bugs out of aircraft, by studying materials and methods to keep insects from sticking to the leading edge of aircraft wings. The study was part of NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program, aimed at developing an advanced long-range aircraft with possible savings of 20 to 40% in fuel consumption. The laminar flow-control technology on which the advanced craft would depend for savings required smooth airflow over the wings; impacted insects sticking to the leading edge of the wing could interrupt the airflow and cause turbulence. The test planes used at LaRC and DFRC had variously coated panels installed on the leading edges, with instrumented probes above them to register airflow changes resulting from adherence of insects and monitor differences attributable to the panel coatings. After a low flight over areas where insects would impact the wing surfaces, the aircraft would land for preliminary measurements and then fly at high altitudes and speeds to measure the effects on airflow. (DFRC Release 20-76; LaRC Release 76-41; NASA Release 76-190)
One of the environmental disasters of the century” was the appearance of water hyacinth in the Sudan’s Nile river basin, reported an international conference of scientists representing the U.S., the Democratic Republic of the Sudan, Egypt, Ethiopia, the Federal Republic of Germany, Indonesia, and Mozambique, after a meeting sponsored by the Natl. Academy of Science’s Board on Science and Technology for International Development, and by the Sudan Agricultural Research Council. Besides choking watercourses and interfering with fishing and navigation, water hyacinth flourishing in warm river waters around the world had proved to harbor carriers of bilharzia and malaria. Measures suggested for control included herbicides, biological intervention, exchange of information and trade restrictions, and stimulation of economic incentive to harvest the plants. The report cited a NASA discovery that water hyacinth was a possible source of biogas production, and recommended harvesting to exploit this resource as well as using the plant for water-buffalo fodder. (NAS News Report, Dec 76, 2)
Evaluation of data and pictures from a dendrite-remelting experiment flown in Dec. 1975 on a space processing applications rocket (SPAR 1) confirmed the belief that space processing could produce better materials than was possible on earth, NASA announced. The experiment, one of nine sent to a 225-km altitude for about 5 min of near weightlessness, included a camera to record solidification of aluminum chloride solution in a transparent vial in the absence of gravity. No fluid motion was detected in the liquid, which solidified uniformly without the formation of crystals (dendrites) that broke off and settled to the bottom of the solution in a control experiment on earth. This experiment was the first in which scientists had viewed the process of solidification under weightless conditions, said the co-investigators, Carolyn Griner and Dr. Mary Helen Johnston of Marshall Space Flight Center. Controlling the crystalline structure of materials would enable scientists to make them uniformly strong to meet specific needs. (NASA Release 76-159; MSFC Release 76-167)
First of 4 U.S.-West German rocket launches to investigate the source of the aurora borealis, in a study called Project Porcupine, would be fired to an altitude of 500 km from northern Sweden, NASA announced. Two identical 250-kg payloads would be flown at twilight between 17 Mar. and 4 Apr. when moonlight interference would be at a minimum; a second pair of rockets would be launched in 1977. The instrument packages would have 12 quill-like booms sticking out to gather data for aurora-probe experiments beyond the orbits of the U.S. Skylab and USSR Salyut space stations. At about 450 km altitude, canisters of barium would be exploded to identify magnetic-field lines and plasma drifts; a NASA jet from Ames Research Center would be in flight over Greece to photograph the clouds released from the rockets. Data from Project Porcupine would be compared with energetic-particle and magnetic-field data gathered by NASA’s Ats 6. The payloads, largest and most complex to be fired on sounding rockets, would he the first flown on the new Aries rocket, modified from Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missile parts provided by the U.S. Air Force. Project Porcupine would be part of the 1976-78 International Magnetospheric Study, a 40-nation effort to explore the upper atmosphere. (NASA Release 76-44; NYT, 28 Mar 76, 21)
A reorganization of the NASA office (NaPO) located at the contractor-operated Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena became effective. NaPO would no longer report to the Associate Administrator for Center Operations at NASA Hq in Washington, D.C.; a resident legal office would report to the NASA General Counsel, and a resident procurement office would report to the NASA Assistant Administrator for Procurement at Hq. E.S. Groo, the Associate Administrator for Center Operations, said the change was made to relate the NaPO functions more directly to the functions performed by their Hq counterparts, or by certain NASA field centers. NaPO’s cryogenics procurement activities and personnel would be relocated to the MSFC resident office at Canoga Park, Calif., and would be functionally responsible to MSFC; the Delta procurement activities and personnel would remain at JPL but would be functionally transferred to GSFC at Greenbelt, Md. (NASA Release 76-50; Groo anno. 15 Mar 76)
Having completed a yr of service to India’s Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE), Ats 6 began a 4-mo journey back to an orbital location over the Western Hemisphere to take part in experiments using direct broadcasting for education and health care. During its journey, it would be used by NASA in a project with the U.S. Agency for Inti. Development (AID) to demonstrate the potential of direct broadcasting to officials in more than 24 developing countries. The first set of demonstrations—known as AIDSAT, for AID space-age technology—would begin between 1 and 26 Aug. for 11 developing countries and one international conference; the program would consist of 3 films created especially for the purpose, one on communications technology for national development, one on use of satellites for natural resources monitoring, and one on use of satellites for disaster prediction and relief. After these films the host country would transmit a 30-min program originated in the terminal in each nation’s capital; then a 2-way discussion would be shown in which U.S. officials conversant with space technology and U.S. assistance would talk with representatives of the host country. President Ford would present an initial greeting, and astronaut Owen K. Garriott would be moderator of the first 5 programs. Of the 12 programs planned, those to Thailand, Pakistan, and Bangladesh were broadcast first, and subsequent ones were scheduled 9 Aug. to the United Arab Emirates, 10 Aug. to Oman, 16 Aug. to Jordan, 17 Aug. to Kenya, and 18 Aug. to Yemen. On 23 Aug. the program would address the Conference on Applied Science and Technology in the Arab World at Rabat, Morocco; programs to Libya, Sudan, and Morocco would be broadcast during the remainder of August. A second group of demonstrations would begin in late Sept., and 15 more countries in Africa, Central and South America, and the Caribbean had been invited to participate. (NASA Release 76-140)
Kennedy Space Center announced a broad program of research projects to use the KSC spaceport and its resources to obtain information on thunderstorms and the hazards they offered to launch operations. Meteorological and electronics scientists from the U.S. and abroad converged on the center for sessions of observing the thunderstorms, whose incidence is high in Fla. during the summer months. More than 70 scientists, many of them graduate students, would participate in experiments under the program; 19 principal investigators would represent organizations such as the Naval Research Laboratory, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s environmental research laboratory, the Atlantic Science Corporation, Mass. Institute of Technology, N. Mex. Institute of Mining and Technology, S. Dak. School of Mines and Technology, and the Universities of Miami, Arizona, Florida, New York at Albany, and Manchester (England). NASA’s Johnson Space Center and Goddard Space Flight center also were participating. Experiments would investigate precipitation formation, lightning behavior, air motions in thunderstorm clouds, and intracloud electrical discharges, among the numerous projects beginning this June and continuing through the summers of 1977 and 1978. Experimenters would provide their own instruments for the experiments, but much KSC equipment and material would be available, such as the instrumented aircraft used in previous lightning studies; weather radars; the detection and ranging system and electric-field measuring system used to monitor buildup of electrical charges that might interfere with launches; a weather-information network display; a satellite imagery acquisition system, with equipment for processing weather pictures, and an automatic picture-transmission (APT) recording system with timing and camera devices. An earlier program in 1948 studied dynamics of thunderstorms; the current program would emphasize electrical characteristics. (KSC Release 279-76)
Former astronaut William A. Anders, serving as chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, was appointed U.S. ambassador to Norway by President Ford. Anders, 42, had served at NRC since Dec. 1974 and had told the President he wished to remain in the post for only a yr. Selected as an astronaut by NASA in 1963, Anders was one of the 3 crewmen of Apollo 8 to orbit the moon at Christmastime 1968. Anders left the corps of astronauts in 1969 to become executive secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, a White House post abolished by President Nixon 4 yr later; he then was appointed head of the Atomic Energy Commission (whose functions were reorganized in 1974 into the Energy Research and Development Administration and NRC). He had turned down an offer of reappointment at NRC for a 5-yr term. {WSJ, 9 Mar 76, 3; W Post, 8 Mar 76, A-20)
Johnson Space Center announced delivery of the first of 2 training aircraft to Ellington AFB, Tex., for JSC’s use in training Space Shuttle crews. The aircraft (STA) was a modified Grumman twin-engine Gulf-stream II jet designed to simulate flight characteristics of the Space Shuttle orbiter, using thrust-reverser engines and direct lift control to vary the jet plane’s dynamics to resemble those of the orbiter. After JSC personnel conducted a receiving inspection on the plane, it would be returned to Grumman at Bethpage, N.Y., for installation of an electric aileron-trim system; this modification should take about a week. The second STA, scheduled for delivery in late July, would remain at Bethpage to ensure that the plane could duplicate the various landing flight modes of the orbiter during the flight tests. Remaining tests would verify STA’s ability to match orbiter trajectory during the period from 10-11 km altitude through touchdown and would check out recent engineering changes. (NASA Release 76-108; JSC Release 76-38)
A mysterious radio signal apparently emanating from the Soviet Union had been so powerful that it had disrupted maritime, aeronautical, telecommunications, and amateur radio operations throughout the world for months, the New York Times reported. The U.S. Federal Communications Commission had forwarded four complaints to the USSR Ministry of Post and Telecommunications since 25 Aug., but had not received an answer. Colin Thomas of Leeds, England, worldwide coordinator of interference reports for the Inti. Amateur Radio Union, said that amateurs in Sweden, Norway, West Germany, the U.S., and Australia had complained of the interference; protests by the British Home Office to the USSR had not received a reply, he said. The Inti. Telecommunications Union in Geneva, Switzerland, to which the matter was referred, said it had no power to enforce treaties against interference but tried to mediate such situations. An FCC spokesman said complaints had been received almost daily since early July; direction-finding equipment had confirmed the source of the signals as the eastern side of the Baltic Sea. An extremely wideband signal pulsing 10 times per second was causing the interference, which had generated complaints from every type of shortwave user. What generated the signals, what type of intelligence they might be carrying, and what the purpose was, remained unanswered questions, the ATT said. (NYT, 30 Oct 76, 5) During October: Numbers of ham radio operators had received pictures transmitted by the Viking lander from the surface of Mars more than 370 million km away, the Associated Press reported in a story reprinted by the New York Times. Retired printing foreman Bob Walton of Des Moines, la., said that a third of the 260 000 hams in the U.S. might be capable of receiving the pictures if they spent about $700 on equipment. Last July the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena broadcast on its 20m band that off-duty personnel would relay Mars pictures through their amateur radio station; Walton found a junked TV set, replaced some parts, and began receiving the Mars pictures. The JPL signals, tape-recorded and put through a converter, turned the sound into pictures when played back. Vocal explanations of the pictures could also be taped for playback. Storms in Iowa had prevented Walton from receiving some of the Mars pictures, but ham operators in Tex. and Fla. sent him the ones he had missed, he reported. (NYT, 7 Oct 76, 10 C) Video transmissions of Viking lander pictures from the JPL ham radio station N6V (NASA 1976 Viking) at Pasadena had bypassed ham radio operators in San Diego County nearby, wrote Cliff Smith, science writer for the San Diego Union. The shortwave radio signals, good for longdistance communications, had been received by “about 13 000 hams around the world equipped to receive the pictures,” but not by the score of ham operators around San Diego. The locals pointed out that special converter devices N6V used for picture transmission and reception had been made by a company in San Diego, and that the local ham organization had donated to N6V the converter used by the station for its Viking transmissions. After a representative of the San Diego Reporter Assn, called the situation to the attention of the N6V broadcasters—all hams employed as technicians at JPL, the Viking control center—N6V corrected the omission by beaming its broadcasts to a repeater station on Otay Mt. that most area hams could receive. Pictures received since the change had included shots of the Viking 2 mechanical arm trying to turn over a rock; closeups of the Martian moons, Deimos and Phobos; and a weird-looking alien whose image the JPL station transmitted as a joke. (San Diego Union, 8 Oct 76)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award to Martin Marietta’s Denver division of a cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract for $9 282 667 to deliver parachute decelerator subsystems for recovery of 12 solid-fuel rocket boosters from 6 Space Shuttle flights. The contract, effective through Dec. 1980, covers design, development, manufacture, and refurbishment of the subsystems. Work was authorized to start 6 July at Martin’s plant in Colorado and at Pioneer Parachute Co. of Manchester, Conn., subcontractor. (MSFC Release 76-135)
NASA announced plans for a seventh Lunar Science Conference to be held 15 to 19 March at JSC, bringing together scientists in geology, chemistry, physics, astronomy, engineering, and biology under joint sponsorship of JSC and the Lunar Science Institute of Houston. Discoveries about the moon would be applied to problems of the origin and early history of the solar system, for instance using lunar data to interpret craters and volcanoes photographed on the surfaces of Mercury and Mars. Other papers would discuss meteorites, satellites of Jupiter (about the size of earth’s moon), and use of earth-based telescopes to measure chemical composition of asteroids. Lunar science conferences had been held yearly since 1970, when the first such assembly heard scientific results from the Apollo 11 moon-landing mission. More than 700 scientists from as far away as Australia attended the 1975 conference. (NASA Release 76-25)
Successful completion of the Da Vinci 11 scientific balloon flight by 4 crew members was announced by the Energy Research and Development Administration. Launched west of St. Louis on 8 June, the balloon had flown over the city during the day and moved eastward across the Mississippi River toward evening; it had flown across 111. and landed near Griffin, Ind., a distance of more than 240 km in 24 hr. Purpose of the flight—a joint project of ERDA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the Environmental Protection Agency—was to follow industrial and urban air pollution across the surrounding countryside and to record its changing concentration and chemistry. The crew reported excellent scientific data, especially on concentrations of sulfur dioxide. The crew, its 3m-square gondola, and more than 900 kg of scientific equipment landed safely and in good condition. (ERDA Release 76-170)
Kennedy Space Center announced that Mae Walterhouse, coordinator of the Federal Women’s Program at KSC and recently elected national president of Federally Employed Women, Inc. (FEW), would participate in the 1976-1977 Career Development Program at NASA Hq. Ms. Walterhouse would report to Washington 7 Sept, for a yr of experience in the Office of Resources Management. The NASA program would assist the centers in developing potential supervisors and managers at all levels throughout the agency, foster understanding of Hq functions on the part of center personnel, and provide training in specific disciplines or functional areas. Ms. Walterhouse, who received a national award this summer for service to the FEW organization, planned to return to KSC and join the Administration Directorate after the yr at NASA Hq. (KSC Release 376-76)
NASA announced appointment of Jerry Hlass, Director of Space Flight Facilities at NASA Hq, as Manager of the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Mo., effective 1 Sept. Hlass came to Hq from GSFC, where he was head of the Data Acquisition Facility Section between 1961 and 1963. He received a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering in 1949 from N.C. State Univ., and a master’s in engineering administration from Geo. Washington Univ. in 1971. As manager of NSTL, Hlass would report to the Hq Associate Administrator for Center Operations. (NASA anno. 18 Aug 76; NASA Release 76-147)
NASA announced it would use starlight that left the surface of a nearby star 200 yr ago to signal the lighting of a giant 200-candle Bicentennial birthday cake at the new Superdome stadium in New Orleans just before midnight on 3 July. Photons of light that left Gamma Bootes just before midnight 3 July 1776—when the signers of the Declaration of Independence were officially witnessing the birth of the U.S.—would arrive on earth to activate a 1000-cycle tone at the Goddard Space Flight Center. The tone, transmitted to New Orleans on commercial telephone lines, would signal the lighting of the cake. GSFC’s orbiting astronomical observatory Copernicus, passing over Hawaii in its 740-km orbit, would receive the photons on its star detector and transmit a digital signal to the NASA ground station in Hawaii; this signal, retransmitted to the West Coast and via microwave to GSFC, would activate a relay connecting the tone to New Orleans, where it would be heard on the stadium’s public address system for 1 min before the candles would be lighted. Astronaut Story Musgrave would participate in the Superdome activities. (NASA Release 76-121)
Dr. John A. O’Keefe, geophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, published a book, Tektites and Their Origin, which noted that a piece of the moon could be purchased for a small amount. Tektites, the glass pebbles that fall from the sky, are ejecta from lunar volcanoes and not debris of meteorite impacts on the moon or the earth as previously suggested. Lunar missions that discovered tektite-like glass in the dust at some sites, the study of microscopic tektites from the bottom of earth’s seas, and the volcanic appearance of some layered tektites caused the change in ideas. (Goddard News, July 76, 3)
The Energy Research and Development Administration requested proposals for what the Wall Street Journal called a “scaled-down” Institute for Solar Research, a modest facility with a budget of $4 to $6 million in its first year. The National Academy of Sciences months ago recommended an institute with a wide research role, a staff of about 1500, and an annual budget of $50 million; unsolicited proposals had been arriving from nearly every state, with many politicians interested in having the institute locate in their constituency. ERDA would operate the facility through contracts with any organization, including nonprofit groups, corporations, universities, or state or local governments, and operations should begin by early 1980, according to Robert Hirsch, an acting assistant administrator of ERDA, at the press conference. The institute was a requirement of a 1974 law calling for various solar-energy demonstrations to be financed by the federal government; ERDA wanted initial proposals for a 5-yr operation, with future functioning dependent on performance and availability of funds. As ERDA currently contracted out most of its solar research to private facilities, a reporter asked why its work called for a special institute instead of expanding the current research program; Hirsch responded, “because the law requires it.” {WSJ, 16 Mar 76, 3)
Blueprints for future Mars explorations, triggered by the Viking 1 landing on Mars, included not only the dispatch of roving robot vehicles to the surface of Mars but also collection and return of Mars samples by a “sailing ship”—a spacecraft carrying an onionskin-thin sail of aluminum-coated plastic measuring more than 185 m' and powered by the pressure of solar electromagnetic radiation. Space flight would become possible with less reliance on heavy and expensive rockets, said John Noble Wilford in the New York Times; a space-sailer could be launched from an earth-orbiting Shuttle, deploy landers to collect and return samples, and return to earth with larger amounts of Martian samples than possible by other methods. JPL’s plans for future missions might include a fleet of the sailers (to be called Yankee Clippers) “flying the routes from earth orbit to the vicinity of Mars, hauling supplies and portable habitats, and finally explorers, to a Mars base.” (NYT, 25 July 76, 44)
Moon rocks—prime celebrities 5 yr ago—had become has-beens, wrote reporter James P. Sterba in the New York Times. Astronauts had brought back from the six moon missions about 382 kg of lunar material; Dr. Michael G. Duke, curator of moon rocks at Johnson Space Center, claimed to know the disposition of every gram. Fragments returned from Apollo 11 went to 137 heads of state and 51 U.S. governors; chunks returned by Apollo 17 in Dec. 1972 had been dispensed to nations and states. Scientists in 15 nations, 26 states, and the Virgin Is. had been studying samples under NASA-sponsored research grants, and their findings would fill a shelf 1.5 m wide. “We know more about the composition of the moon than we do about the earth,” Dr. Duke said, although less than 20% of the lunar samples had been circulated for research and exhibits. Lately the calls for samples to exhibit had dwindled, and the number of scientists studying them had been halved. Security had remained tight because of the efforts of rock collectors to obtain samples; however, the moon rocks had lost ground in public interest compared to the Mars rocks being turned over by Vikings 1 and 2, Sterba wrote. (ATT, 11 Oct 76, 27)
NASA’s Wallops Flight Center received a National Safety Council award for its performance in on-the-job safety. The Council selected Wallops for a third-place award in its annual contest honoring the lowest disabling-injury frequency achieved by NSC member organizations. Wallops qualified for its award with a recorded rate of zero lost-time injuries per million man-hours worked, as compared to a rate of 1.4 injuries for all competing units in the Aerospace Section, Research and Development Division. (WFC Release 76-4)
Problems confronting physicists in a major effort to discover “the true nature of the most basic components of matter and the laws that govern them” were the subject of last week’s annual meeting of the Am. Physical Society’s Division of Particles and Fields, held at the Brookhaven Natl. Laboratory on Long Island, said Walter Sullivan in the NY Times. Scientists from the U.S., the Soviet Union, and other countries were considering the construction of a “world machine,” a particle accelerator that would dwarf any now in existence, measuring about 48 km in circumference and generating ten thousand billion electron volts. Its cost, estimated as 3 to 6 times that of the largest accelerator in existence, would be met on a global basis with the U.S. and the USSR “playing major roles,” Sullivan said. Although the project had been discussed at several international conferences and would not be built until the end of the century, proponents believed that groundwork should begin immediately and had asked the Inti. Union of Pure and Applied Physics to take the lead in organizing the effort. Design decisions would await the results of several machines now projected or being built, that might show how problems should be most effectively handled. The most powerful machine now operating (at the Fermi Natl. Accelerator Laboratory in 111.) had a 6.5-km ring that could boost protons to 500 Gev (one Gev equaling a billion electron volts). A modification now in progress, called the doubler, would increase the potential to i 000 Gev by the late 1970s and would cost between $40 and $50 billion. Fermi’s closest rival was a super proton synchrotron at CERN—the European Center for Nuclear Research at Geneva, Switzerland—also with a 6,5-km ring slightly less powerful spanning the Swiss-French border, deep beneath rolling farmland. According to the CERN newsletter, The Courier, the most ambitious project was a complex planned by the USSR called UNK (from its Russian name) consisting of two machines in underground tunnels at Serpukhov, south of Moscow; one tunnel, forming a ring nearly 18 km in circumference, would house a device to accelerate protons to 2000 Gev, while the other tunnel would contain a 20-Gev electron accelerator whose beam would collide with the proton beam. Such collisions, at energies higher than now available, might provide answers to puzzles that baffle the theorists, Sullivan said. The Brookhaven conference heard plans for Isabelle, a 3.2-km machine for colliding proton beams at energies up to 300 Gev, that would take 3 yr to build and cost $166 million. CERN was drawing up plans for a machine to collide beams of 100-Gev positrons and electrons; energies achieved in such collisions are lower than those from proton accelerators because the positron is less massive than the proton. A powerful machine of this type operating at Stanford Univ., Palo Alto, had been called SPEAR; a larger version known as PEP (positron-electron project), more than 2 km in circumference, would be completed there in 1980 at a cost of $78 million, and would generate beams of 18 Gev. The collision of positrons and electrons was considered a “clean” way to produce exotic particles because the collision would annihilate the primary particles in an extremely intense burst of energy, which would then form itself into new particles. Among questions discussed at the Brookhaven meeting were the nature of the basic building-blocks of matter such as quarks or maons (particles tinier than quarks, said to have been suggested as a possibility by Mao Tse-Tung when told of the quark concept by a visiting physicist). Recent work had shown “how little we understand about the internal dynamics” of particles, and the use of higher energies would be one way to solve some of the problems, Sullivan suggested. (NYT, 10 Oct 76, 7) 10-16 October: More than 1000 of the world’s top government and industry space experts assembled in Anaheim, Calif., at the wk-long 27th Congress of the Inti. Astronautical Federation. Theme of the meeting was “The New Era of Space Transportation.” Delegates would have the opportunity to hear more than 300 technical papers on topics such as safety in space, the future of space law, and the proposed moon treaty. Also scheduled for discussion were the use of direct-broadcast satellites, space rescue, and the use of solar energy in space. Chairman of the conference was Dr. George E. Mueller, president and chairman of System Development Corp. in Santa Monica and former associate administrator of NASA (1963 to 1969) in charge of manned space flight. Delegates arriving Sunday evening had a choice of Disneyland tour or a wine and cheese reception before the sessions began. At opening ceremonies on the eve of Columbus Day, Dr. Mueller read a greeting from President Ford and spoke of the Bicentennial and Columbus as symbols of international cooperation. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher joined with John F. Yardley, associate administrator for manned space flight, in sounding an optimistic note on potential uses of space. Fletcher said that mankind had “entered a new world ... in less than two decades,” pointing to the scheduling of Shuttle flights beginning in 1981 that would make space travel attainable, even economically feasible, for the conduct of previously earthbound activities. Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, said the member nations of ESA were suffering from an economic downturn and might have trouble maintaining ESA’s present funding level, estimated at $550 million a year. However, he maintained that space programs were justifiable on the basis of economic return, and that ESA would recommend no program “unless it makes good economic sense for the users.” Dr. Leonard Jaflfe, president of the IAF, told the delegates that astronautics involved all technical fields and affected all human institutions. Dr. Lubos Perek, chief of the United Nations’ Outer Space Affairs Division, brought greetings from the UN secretary general and summarized UN activities in space, from identifying objects in orbit to supporting remote sensing and telecommunications—a span of interests, he said, “from Astronomy to Gastronomy.” A panel on space transportation discussed 14 questions, from details of the Shuttle mission to clarification of payload prices and legal liability for aborted payloads. The electronic environment of the session— wireless microphones and wireless translation headsets—illustrated collateral benefits from astronautics, said Rob Weadd of the Los Angeles section, AIAA, in the convention newsletter. On Monday afternoon, officials of the Soviet and U.S. space programs reported jointly and individually on results of the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission. A current-events session Monday afternoon heard Boris Petrov, chairman of the Soviet Intercosmos Council, call for renewal of the 1972 agreement that led to the Apollo-Soyuz mission, after the agreement expired in 1977. Shigebumi Saito, commissioner of the Space Activities Committee of Japan, said his country hoped to participate in another Spacelab in the 1980s and looked toward cooperation with ESA as a result of the recent visit of ESA director Roy Gibson. Lawrence Morley of Canada’s Dept, of Mines and Resources said that Canada was “made for remote sensing” and would be looking for partners in the study of ocean management. On Tuesday, 12 Oct., the Inti. Institute of Space Law held its 19th colloquium in morning and afternoon sessions, continuing through the remainder of the convention. Since 1967, when an initial treaty of principles was signed, space lawyers had worked out international agreements on liability for space accidents, registration of space objects, and rescue and return of astronauts. Two current problems demanding attention were treaties to govern direct broadcasting from space and the monitoring and sensing of terrestrial phenomena. Also, a draft treaty on moon exploration and resource extraction was under way. Among papers presented, that by Dr. V. S. Vereshchetin of the Moscow Institute of State and Law proposed that the legality of each type of practical use of space should depend on its compliance with principles of state sovereignty and sovereign equality of states. Dr. Stephen Gorove of the Univ. of Miss, law school described the legal regime likely to apply to space colonies, pointing out gaps in existng law and recommending changes. In another paper, Dr. Gorove called the moon treaty a landmark in the development of space law, and cited many areas of general agreement, adding that lack of agreement was equally instructive in revealing problems in the process of international lawmaking. Dr. D. Krstic of Yugoslavia stated that the era of sovereignty was gradually disappearing, and that space activities should be a product of all mankind, not just the strong powers. On Wednesday, 13 Oct., some of the congress delegates “including a large group of Russian cosmonauts and scientists” took a bus tour and had a briefing on the Space Shuttle program at the Rockwell Inti, plant at Downey, Calif. Dr. Krafft Ehricke, scientific adviser at Rockwell Inti., described studies of Lunetta and Soletta systems that would use huge reflectors on thin plastic assembled in space to illumine areas of earth either by day or by night, lengthening agricultural activities in season or lighting polar regions for increased access to petroleum or mineral deposits in areas where nights might last for 3 mo. Other delegates went in four busloads to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena for an all-day program during which the guests in four groups rotated among exhibitions and lectures on the Viking spacecraft, the space flight operations and spacecraft assembly facilities, and future planetary missions. Speakers included Dr. Bruce Murray, director of JPL, and A. Thomas Young, deputy Viking project manager, as well as John Casani, manager of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn project. On Thursday, 14 Oct., IAF delegate R. Gilbert Moore became the first Shuttle customer to hand over a letter of intent to purchase NASA’s “getaway special”—a 90-kg 0.14-cu-m package to be carried by the Orbiter on a space-available basis, for $10 000. Moore, general manager of Thiokol Corp.’s Astro-Met plant at Ogden, Ut., said he would buy the ticket for himself, not his company. He had been active for some time in obtaining space rides for student experiments, and said he might open his Shuttle package for students or sublet some of it to recover costs, but had not decided yet what use to make of the package, “It’s such a bargain,” he said. “You can’t get a ride anywhere else for that kind of money.” Moore handed his letter of intent to Chester Lee, director of space transportation systems operations in NASA’s Office of Space Flight, who was in charge of rounding up Shuttle customers; the letter went by Comsat satellite to Lee’s office in Washington, D.C. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the Soviet representatives at the IAF meeting questioned officials about the Shuttle’s thermal protection system, its main-engine refurbishment, and its handling characteristics, being “especially interested in the use of cathode-ray tube displays.” The briefings were part of the Rockwell tour offered to IAF groups. NASA had approved Soviet inspection of the orbiter, the magazine said, because no technology transfer problems were involved and the Soviets had shown Salyut and Soyuz vehicles to U.S. personnel; however, the Soviets had never discussed or shown future vehicles to U.S. representatives, the article added. Upon questioning the Soviet representatives unofficially about any USSR shuttle plans, NASA was told only that analytical studies were under way. The Washington Star and Av Wk reported that Soviet Intercosmos chairman Dr. Boris N. Petrov and Vasily A. Sarychev, another member of the Soviet IAF delegation, were robbed at gunpoint in the lobby of then-motel and escaped when a number of people got off an elevator. Petrov and Sarychev did not understand the gunman’s demands at first, but finally surrendered $37 before the unidentified robber fled. Although local police were notified, Petrov did not register a formal complaint, and the delegation stayed at the convention two days longer, after which Petrov and other Soviet officials flew to Washington to discuss future joint space missions. Besides Petrov, the IAF delegates included Dr.Ver-eshchetin, deputy chairman of Intercosmos; V. C. Vachnadze and A. I. Tsarev, Intercosmos members; R. Z. Sagdeyev, director of the USSR Academy of Sciences institute of outer space, and his associate, Y. P. Semenov; and D. S. Chetveryakov, M. V. Sokolov, and V. P. Legostayev. As the IAF convention closed on Saturday, 16 Oct., Dr. Mueller said the panels and presentations at the meeting had demonstrated again the benefits and feasibility of international cooperation. He said it was up to the members to convince the President and U.S. Congress to provide sufficient funds for the Shuttle over the next 5 yr. (IAF news 27th Congress, text; list of abstracts; LA Times, 12 Oct 76, 11; 14 Oct 76; Av Wk, 18 Oct 76, 25; 25 Oct 76, 22, 23; W Star, 20 Oct 76, A-2; W Post, 27 Oct 76, A-2)
In a special message to Congress, President Ford requested an increase in federal spending to $24.7 billion for scientific research and development in the energy, defense, and space programs. Ford said his request for the 1977 fiscal year, an 11% increase over 1976 estimates, included $2.5 billion for basic research. The budget asked $2.6 billion for energy R&I), a 35% increase over 1976, including funds for nuclear power, development of solar and geothermal energy, and fusion power; major increases were for energy conservation and for research on fossil fuels to improve direct combustion of coal for production of oil and gas. The President also asked congressional conferees to act quickly on bills to establish the Office of Science and Technology. (W Star, 22 Mar 76, 7)
A simple, inexpensive, and effective method of suppressing noise in windtunnel testing of space vehicles would be patented by two MSFC engineers, MSFC announced. While developing an acoustic environment for reentry of the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster, Paul W. Howard and Luke A. Schutzenhofer of MSFC’s Systems Dynamics Lab. found their acoustic data distorted by background noise reflected at transonic speeds from the walls of the wind tunnel, causing shock waves. The primary aerodynamic cause of the background noise was found to be the edgetone effect of high-velocity windflow over holes in the perforated walls of the tunnel; covering the perforated walls with wire screening minimized direct contact between the airstream and the edges of the holes, and the noise was greatly reduced. The temporary fix proved so successful that the screens were permanently installed, and the patent should be issued to the public by early summer. (MSFC Release 76-44)
Johnson Space Center announced receipt of delivery on the second of two Space Shuttle training aircraft. The first had been delivered 8 June 1976. The modified Grumman Gulfstream II twin-engine jet, flown to Ellington AFB from the plant in N.Y., would simulate Shuttle Orbiter handling qualities, performance, and flight-control procedures during subsonic flight phase, from 10.6-km altitude to simulated Orbiter touchdown. Crew training for approach and landing tests of the Shuttle Orbiter would begin late in Oct. (JSC Release 76-58)
First flight tests of a unique oblique-wing aircraft model designed for future supersonic use would begin early in Aug. at the Dry den Flight Research Center, NASA announced. The remotely piloted research vehicle (RPRV) to be tested had a wingspan of 6.7 m, weighed 400 kg, and was powered by a 4-cylinder 90-hp engine; its wing angle relative to the fuselage could be varied during flight, and angles up to 45° would be tested. The RPRV would be flown by radio control from a ground cockpit, with a TV camera in the aircraft nose giving the ground controller a pilot’s-eye view. Use of the oblique wing was a proposal of Dr. Robert T. Jones, senior scientist at Ames Research Center, to alleviate sonic boom and increase energy effectiveness of supersonic aircraft; positioned at right angles to the fuselage in slower flight, the wing would allow landing and takeoff with minimum power and less noise, but rotated with respect to the fuselage it would provide the high speed possible with the swept-wing design. Studies indicated possible fuel savings even at speeds up to 1600 kph. (l)FRC Release 13-76)
Beginning with the 1976 forest-fire season, a new satellitelinked monitoring system of 23 NASA-designed ground stations would monitor forest conditions throughout thousands of sq km in Calif.’s Region One redwood area, providing data every 3 hr to foresters in Sacramento by means of a geostationary weather satellite. The 90-kg self-powered stations developed by NASA’s Ames Research Center in cooperation with the state Division of Forestry would transmit continuous reports on wind speed and direction, air temperature, solar radiation, relative humidity, and the moisture content of forest litter such as pine needles and grass. Sensors to be added would measure rainfall and air pollution, including particulate matter and ozone concentration. The Synchronous Meteorological Satellite 2 (Sms 2) operated by NOAA from its vantage point over the equator would receive and relay the data. (JSC Roundup, 21 Feb 76, 3; NASA Release 76-28; ARC Release 76-07)
A joint U.S.-British astronomy project to study the remnant of an exploded star failed when a rocket-motor malfunction kept the x-ray telescope aboard from acquiring its target, a supernova remnant called Puppis A some 10 trillion km from earth. An English Skylark sounding rocket fired from the Woomera Rocket Range in Australia carried a NASA-designed flight telescope, fabricated and assembled at Marshall Space Flight Center, to obtain information on evolution of stars and the formation of neutron stars. Although the telescope assembly, as well as the detectors and electronics supplied by the United Kingdom, worked perfectly, a hole burned through one side of the rocket’s aft end produced more spin than the despin device could offset, said Richard Hoover of MSFC, principal U.S. investigator for the project. “Even with the residual spin, we scanned a portion of the sky in the area of the prime target and acquired data on the diffuse x-ray background [a secondary objective] . . . but we couldn’t lock on Puppis A in order to get a high-resolution map as desired.” The payload was recovered by parachute about 160 km down-range in excellent condition, Hoover said. (NASA Releases 76-62, 76-92; MSFC Release 76-54; MFSC Star, 17 Mar 76, 3)
New federal policies deriving from the Occupational Health and Safety Act and. the National Environmental Policy Act would affect about 30% of the USAF’s Aerospace Medical Division investment in biotechnology research and development, said an article in Aviation Week magazine. “USAF has yet to appreciate...how important these two laws are going to be. The day is rapidly coming when even major weapons systems will never get through [a Defense System Acquisition Review council] without having to come to grips with...the occupational safety of the people that have to work around the system and the impact of...noise, electromagnetic radiation effects and toxic effluents,” said Col. George C. Mohr, director of AMD research and development. Among items of special interest were the rocket fuels—unsymmet-rical dimethylhydrazine and monomethylhydrazine—and the hydrochloric-acid fallout expected from Shuttle motor exhaust during launches at Vandenberg AFB; effects of laser exposure on eyes and skin; effects of multiple stress, including that caused by locating or operating equipment; and development of hardware, such as a lightweight 1-kg helmet to replace the standard 2-kg helmet that caused “high moment” effects on the wearer during sustained high-gravity maneuvers in the new generation of fighter aircraft. Another environmental-safety hardware item was a new 9-layer 25-mm windshield for planes to overcome the bird-strike problem, in place of the standard 2-layer 8.5-mm-thick windshield. A major problem, Col. Mohr said, has been that biotechnology standards and criteria often were not considered until after the system concept had been finalized; another problem is the DOD policy of tri-service planning, an attempt to ensure that the services do not duplicate research. Use of mathematical modeling in biotechnology had tended to “drive aerospace medicine research toward an engineering discipline,” the article said; the data output is usable by design engineers, while new legislation prevents use of humans in hazardous testing, and cost of laboratory animals has soared. (Av Wk, 19 July 76, 219)
An around-the-world auto race planned for mid-1976 as part of the U.S. Bicentennial celebration would feature a 1914 Model T Ford, tracked by a NASA satellite from the starting point in Paris to its termination in New York City, NASA announced. The car, driven by Goddard Space Flight Center employee Robert H. Pickard, would carry a 13.6-kg electronics package that would transmit the car’s ground speed to the random-access measuring system (RAMS) carried on NASA’S Nimbus 6 meteorological satellite that covers the entire globe once every 12 hr. Nimbus 6 would relay information to GSFC through a ground station in Alaska. The auto race would demonstrate use of the RAMS system for ground tracking applications where transmissions could encounter various kinds of interference; normally, RAMS would collect data from instruments on moving platforms such as balloons or buoys to allow calculation of wind or sea-surface movements. Pickard, a car enthusiast, had worked in the space program since the Vanguard days and was presently project manager for the comsat-metesat system called GOES (geostationary operational environmental satellite). (NASA Release 76-23)
Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, pilot of the docking module on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, had been appointed to a newly created position as Deputy Director of Flight Operations for approach and landing tests of the Space Shuttle at Johnson Space Center, the Spaceport News of KSC reported. Slayton would be responsible for planning and implementing the shuttle approach and landing test project, under the Director of Flight Operations for the Space Shuttle project. (Spaceport News, 18 Mar 76, 5)
Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of Johnson Space Center, had received the highest honor given by the government of France to a citizen of another country: the insignia of the Knight of the Legion of Honor, the JSC Roundup reported. The award was given for Kraft’s “tireless efforts toward better understanding and cooperation between the people of the United States and France.” He had also received the Natl. Civil Service League’s career-service award for 1976, as one of ten chosen for “excellence in the public service.” Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, former director of JSC, was one of 35 space pioneers inducted into the Space Hall of Fame 5 Oct. during the dedication of the new facility at Alamogordo, N.M. At a JSC ceremony 18 Oct., astronaut Donald K. Slayton received the American Heart Assn.’s 1976 Heart of the Year award for inspiring millions of Americans by “overcoming a heart problem that had grounded him for 10 years, enabling him to resume his distinguished participation in America’s space program.” (JSC Roundup, 22 Oct 76, 1)
The largest American flag ever painted would be exhibited on an outside wall of the Vehicle Assembly Building at Kennedy Space Center as part of KSC’s preparation for the Bicentennial exposition Third Century America, scheduled from 20 May through Labor Day 1976. The flag, measuring 64 m by 33.5 m, would be painted on the VAB—world’s second largest building—along with a huge Bicentennial symbol 33.5 m in diameter. More than 1900 liters of specially formulated paint had been donated by the Montgomery Ward paint laboratories, and the Bicentennial administration would pay for the painting. The 160-m-high south wall of the VAB would be washed down, rinsed, and primed with white before the finishing coat of white could be added and the design overlaid in red and blue. KSC had been chosen by President Ford to house the Third Century America exposition, featuring exhibits by 16 federal agencies and many U.S. industries, the only such exposition to be sponsored by the government during the Bicentennial year. (KSC Release 112-76)
Ames Research Center announced that a NOAA scientist, Dr. Peter M. Kuhn, had discovered a way to give airplane pilots up to 12 min. warning of air turbulence ahead, during his investigation of infrared radiation emitted from atmospheric water vapor using ARC’s Convair aircraft. While measuring background infrared radiation in the atmosphere to define sources of astronomical infrared, Dr. Kuhn had seen sudden drastic changes in water-vapor content followed closely by turbulence. A radiometer in the aircraft wheel well of the Galileo II flying laboratory could detect atmospheric infrared from water vapor, and predict accompanying turbulence with an 81% reliability. Experiments with varying infrared wavelengths had permitted detection of turbulence more than 100 km ahead of the plane. The water-vapor anomalies resulted from wave motions in the atmosphere caused by lee waves over high terrain or by sudden shifts in wind speed or direction with resulting friction between adjacent streams of air. Although water-vapor content would usually be fairly constant, the wave motions would thin the vapor in one place and concentrate it in another, making the turbulence detectable. (ARC Release 76-80; Av Wk, 15 Nov 76, 25; NOAA Release 76-251)
Johnson Space Center awarded a $96 000 contract to Martin Marietta Aerospace Co. of Denver for a study of equipment needed to construct a solar-power satellite (SPS) in geosynchronous orbit, in or about 1990. The 9-mo contract called for conceptual design and system definition of equipment to support construction of large space systems in orbit, assuming use of the Space Shuttle, and for defining development and maintenance costs of such equipment. (JSC Release 76-62) —JSC selected Alpha Bldg. Corp. of Houston for negotiations leading to award of a $1 369 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract for construction support services at the Center, including minor construction and other site work—alteration of laboratory systems, facilities, utilities, roads, sewers, walks, etc.—required by space programs and normally for projects estimated at $10 000 or less. The contract would begin 1 December 1976 and end 30 November 1977, with the option for the government to extend the contract for two additional 1-yr periods. (JSC Release 76-63) November 1976
McDonnell Douglas Corp. would join Aerospatiale and Dassault-Breguet of France in a transatlantic consortium to develop and market a new medium-range jetliner for the 1980s, announced France’s Transportation Secretary Marcel Cavaille at Toulouse, capital of the French aerospace industry. Tentatively named Mercure 200, the 160-to 180-seat twin-jet aircraft would have a range of about 3000 km; a modification of the current Mercure plane, it was estimated to cost about $240 million to develop, whereas a totally new plane would have cost more than $1 billion. The new plane, designed to save about 20% of fuel costs over the current Mercure, would be powered by a CFM 56 engine jointly designed by General Electric and France’s government-owned Snecma (Societe Nationale d’Etude et de Construction de Moteurs d’Aviation). Aerospatiale—the state-owned National Society of Aerospace Industry—would get 40% of the construction work, which would cushion it from layoffs when construction of the Concorde ended this year; Dassault, the private company that designed the plane, would get 5%, probably the final assembly. McDonnell would get 15%, the rest to be offered to other European manufacturers. Including McDonnell Douglas in the consortium would give the Mercure 200 an unprecedented entry into the American market, which amounted to half the world market, noted the New York Times. Although the new aircraft would compete with Boeing’s 727 and 737, which previously had a monopoly on the medium-range market, exploratory talks with Boeing had come to nothing because French officials feared the size of Boeing’s operation would relegate the French to little more than a subcontractor, the preliminary agreement with McDonnell Douglas awaited a McDonnell promise not to build a plane competing with the French-German passenger-transport Airbus. (NYT, 13 Aug 76, D3; WSJ, 13 Aug 76, 4)
Scientists at JPL, where the Viking 1 mission was being directed, were startled at responses from 2 of 3 instruments reporting on the first Mars surface samplings. The labeled-release instrument, designed to count radioactive molecules released by a process feeding tagged nutrients to a soil sample, had counted 4 times as many radioactive releases as would have resulted from a similar earth sample: 4537 per min for the first 9 hr 20 min it counted, compared to about 100 counts per min from Calif, soil sampled in a prelaunch test, and no more than 750 per min from soil gathered in the dry valleys of Antarctica. The rapidity and magnitude of the response were “quite surprising,” said Dr. Gilbert Levin of Biospherics, Inc., which built the instrument. Another Viking instrument, the gas-exchange experiment that dampened a surface sample with nutrients and monitored the resultant release of gas, detected an increase in oxygen released by the sample 15 times greater than was explainable by the Mars atmosphere or by oxidation of minerals similar to earth soils. The same instrument 24 hr later reported an increase in oxygen release 30% greater than that detected the first day. Scientists said the results might be attributed to superoxides, produced by intense ultraviolet solar radiation on the Mars surface, reacting with the extemely iron-rich Martian soil, not shielded by atmosphere as earth’s surface is. Further information would be needed to reach firm conclusions, said Dr. Harold Klein of Ames Research Center, chief Viking biologist. (WPost, 1 Aug 76, A-l; NYT, 1 Aug 76, 4-8)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $209 368 contract to a small business firm, Northern Research and Engineering Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., for designing, assembling, and demonstrating a portable self-contained firefighting module conceived as a joint effort of NASA’s Technology Utilization Office and the U.S. Coast Guard. The module would be a lightweight unit complete with pump, hose, firefighter suits, and other equipment that could be transported by helicopter to the deck of any medium-sized boat in the area of a shipboard or dock fire; it would be able to pump about 5700 liters of sea water per min for an uninterrupted 3 hr. (MSFC Release 76-116)
The U.S. Air Force announced selection of the Boeing Aerospace Corp., a unit of the Boeing Company, to design and produce an interim upper-stage (IUS) solid-fuel rocket motor for the Space Shuttle, to lift Shuttle craft from low earth orbit to higher mission altitudes. Boeing, chosen over Martin Marietta, Lockheed, and General Dynamics Corp., still had to negotiate a contract, estimated to be ultimately worth about $300 million. (ATT, 10 Aug 76, 45; WSJ, 10 Aug 76, .3)
Solar power would charge batteries in 2 electric vehicles used by the National Capital Parks, Dept, of the Interior, during this summer’s Bicentennial Festival of American Folklife in Washington, D.C., NASA announced. The golfcart-like vehicles, each equipped with 6 standard traction batteries, would get energy from photovoltaic cells capable of providing 1.7 kwh of electricity during peak sunlight; the array was prepared by Lewis Research Center as one of several demonstrations of solar energy it was conducting as manager of ERDA’s photovoltaic test and demonstration project. Cells were provided by NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, to which ERDA assigned responsibility for the low-cost silicon solar-array project. The solar-powered vehicles would be used from July through Sept, at the festival, one for transportation of festival workers, the other fitted with a vacuum cleaner for refuse pickup. (NASA Release 76-129;,ERDA Release 76-218)
Pure carbon materials originally developed as ablative heatshields on the Apollo spacecraft were being used at medical centers across the U.S. in research on artificial limbs and implants in human tissue. The inert tendencies and high degree of purity exhibited by the carbon materials made them suitable for implantation without causing infection or rejection. Northwestern Univ. in 111. and the Rancho Los Amigos hospital center run by the Univ. of Southern Calif, at Los Angeles had studied the materials in skeletal fixation devices that used carbon-button implants to connect the devices to nerves. Other projects included carbon implants to control pain (especially in the lower back) and neuroelectric stimulators to relax contracted muscles in paralyzed patients. Much of the technology used in purifying the carbon materials originated at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center. (MSFC Release 76-45)
Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator of NASA, announced that he would leave government service at the end of June to become president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, where he received his bachelor’s degree in aeronautical engineering in 1948 and master’s in 1950. He had been a trustee of the institute since 1971. In 1949 Low became an aeronautical research scientist at NACA’s Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in Cleveland. When NASA was formed 9 yr later, he came to Hq^ as Chief of Manned Space Flight and was chairman of the committee that planned the Apollo lunar landing program. He became Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight before transferring to the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston in Feb. 1964 as Deputy Director. In April 1967 after the Apollo 204 fire, Low became manager of the Apollo spacecraft program; under his leadership, the spacecraft was redesigned, manned space missions resumed 23 mo later, and Apollo 11 made the first manned lunar landing in July 1969. Appointed Deputy Administrator of NASA by the President in Dec. 1969, Low negotiated the agreements with the USSR that led to the Apollo-Soyuz flight and other cooperative space projects. (NASA Release 76-54; Admr’s letter, 19 Mar 76; NYT, 20 Mar 76, 17; Marshall Star, 24 Mar 76, 1)
NASA announced selection of a team consisting of General Electric Co. and Hamilton Standard Division of United Technology Corp. for negotiating with NASA and ERDA a $7-million contract to design, build, and test by 1978 a 1.5-Mw wind-turbine electricity-generating system, biggest in history. The experimental system, a windmill with 2 horizontally rotating fiberglass rotor blades about 61m long mounted on a 45-m tower, could produce annually enough energy to supply more than 500 homes at a site with average winds of 29 kph. Located at a utility-company site, the NASA-ERDA system would supply electricity to the local utility for public use, to determine the economics and operating characteristics of large wind turbines coupled to conventional power plants. Utility companies had proposed 17 sites across the U.S.; ERDA would measure their wind characteristics over the coming year and would choose the site late in 1976. Lewis Research Center would manage the project for ERDA. The new system would be bigger than the 1.25-Mw system, 53 m in diameter, built near Rutland, Vt., in the 1940s; that project could not compete economically with the then low cost of fossil fuels, and had been abandoned. (NASA Release 76-136)
About 3000 people attended a ceremony dedicating the Space Hall of Fame at Alamogordo, N.M., honoring men and women involved in space exploration. Original inductees, numbering 35, included U.S. astronaut Neil Armstrong and Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin. Nine of the 35 were from the Soviet Union; eight each from the U.S. and West Germany; three from Austria, two from France, and one each from Great Britain, Hungary, Italy, Romania, and Switzerland. Dr. Frederick Durant of the Smithsonian Institution announced the names of the pioneers, nominated by the Inti. Academy of Astronautics in Paris with final selection by a committee appointed by the governor of N.M. for the Hall of Fame. Lubas Perek, head of the UN’s outer space affairs division, told the audience that the choice of persons to be honored “will surely reflect the grand international character of outer space research.” (W Star, 6 Oct 76, 2; NYT, 10 Oct 76, 26; Inti Space Hall of Fame, media release; Alamogordo Daily News, 3 Oct 76, dedication edition)
A “tethered” satellite—suspended by a cable from the Space Shuttle orbiter’s cargo bay—could serve to deploy and control materials used in constructing a space station, or to transfer articles from one manned vehicle to another, said NASA scientists at the Marshall Space Flight Center. The orbiter could also “troll” a tethered satellite through a low-altitude earth orbit to explore the atmospheric region between 80 and 120 km above earth’s surface; previous exploration vehicles— sounding rockets and low-altitude satellites—could not remain in that region long enough for extensive studies before being forced back to earth by atmospheric drag and gravity. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory would aid NASA in system-dynamics studies for the tethered satellite system. MSFC would manage program development, integrate experiments, and support orbital operations. If the tethered system proved feasible, MSFC would begin spacecraft system design, and the first mission could be scheduled as early as 1980. (NASA Release 76-138)
Two engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center had developed a solarenergy collector using air rather than water for heat transfer; this might be the key to low-cost solar-energy systems. The collector consisted of 3 parts: a rigid foam structure, a metal collector plate, and a transparent cover. The device needed no tools or fasteners, but could be fitted together, and required no insulation; it measured 1 by 2 m and weighed about 17 kg. The inventors said their collector had shown itself in tests to be as efficient as other more costly and complicated collectors, and the chief patent counsel at MSFC was considering it for patenting. An average house of about 140 m“ would require about 67 m" of collector area, or a 40-collector system, to provide sufficient heating. A solar-energy system could save a household about 75% of its normal winter heating expense, and could be modified to heat water year round. (NASA Release 76-56)
NASA announced signature of an agreement between the Universities Space Research Association (USRA) and the Langley Research Center to provide university participation in the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) space research program managed by LaRC, which would use the Space Shuttle to launch and retrieve an earth-orbiting multipurpose-experiment carrier starting late in 1979. USRA was established in 1969 through the National Academy of Sciences as a consortium of 50 universities in the U.S., through which the academic community could work with NASA on scientific and technological developments in the space program; its headquarters was at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville. The agreement with LaRC called for USRA to solicit, select, and implement university experiments for each LDEF mission, with funds provided by the sponsoring organizations. NASA would also seek participants in the LDEF program through a formal announcement of opportunity inviting private companies, research and engineering institutes, and other government agencies to provide space experiments for LDEF missions. (NASA Release 76-99)
To prove that enthusiastic but untrained high school and college-age students can build a 5-kw solar generator,” a project called Sunfire managed by JPL’s Space Exploration Post would huild such a generator for inhabitants of Pitcairn Is. in the South Pacific about 8000 km east of Australia. In 1974, Howard Broyles of JPL became interested in using solar energy to supply power at low cost, and discovered that the Pitcairn residents could use the power; he interested a physics teacher at the local high school in the actual construction of a solar electric generator, and work began as a class project. When the site of construction became unavailable at the end of the school year, the project, under the name Seep (solar energy experimentation project), was offered to the JPL Space Exploration Post and approved by Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director. Sunfire—backward acronym for Energy for Remote Islands From the Sun—would be a 5-kw generator converting solar rays into electricity by using a parabolic mirror to focus the rays on a boiler that makes steam, turning a double set of turbines that run alternators to produce the power. The Pitcairn residents, fewer in number “than JPL’s Building 180 has employes,” are mostly descendants of the crew of HMS Bounty, which mutinied in 1790 and found refuge on the small remote island. (LabOmtory, 1976-4, 8) August 1976
President Ford signed legislation reestablishing the post of White House science adviser, a job abolished by President Nixon 3 yr previously. The signing took place in the White House rose garden, at a ceremony attended by leading scientists. President Ford had asked for legislation to set up the position and the White House Office of Science and Technology on the recommendation of Vice President Rockefeller and at the urging of major scientific groups; the job had previously existed under executive order. Originally established by President Roosevelt during World War II, the position lapsed until 1957 when President Eisenhower reactivated it after the launch of Sputnik. President Ford was expected to make a early choice of science adviser, who would direct the Office of Science and Technology Policy and would also be a member of the Domestic Council and adviser to the National Security Council. (W Post, 12 May 76, A-21)
Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International Corp. announced it had been awarded a $ 10.8-million contract by Lewis Research Center for 8 Atlas MA-5 propulsion systems, with an option for 2 additional systems. The contract would run through August 1978. The engines would be used to launch high-energy astronomical observatories (HEAO), or commercial comsats for the Communications Satellite Corporation on a reimbursable basis. Originally developed by Rocketdyne for the USAF’s first intercontinental ballistic missile, the Atlas had flown space missions since 1958 when it launched Echo, first U.S. comsat. Atlas had powered more than 400 payloads with launch reliability of more than 99%. (Rockwell Release RD-18)
Ames Research Center had contracted with Goodyear Aerospace Corp. of Akron, 0., for studies of 2 lighter-than-air vehicle concepts for civilian use, NASA announced. New requirements for transporting heavy loads in power-plant construction, transferring ship cargoes to shore points, and providing quiet energy-saving intercity transportation had revived interest in lighter-than-air vehicles, formerly the only means of nonstop rapid travel across the world’s oceans. Use of airships for military missions also had come under consideration; principal potential use was transport of ship cargoes over a beach to shore points. NASA, in conjunction with the U.S. Navy, was also studying military applications for conventional airships that would use the great endurance potential of the airship in activities such as antisubmarine warfare and sea control. One of the concepts under study, a feeder airliner 60 m long carrying 80 passengers, would be used as a short-haul transport system, landing and taking off vertically and cruising at 160 knots. The other concept, a vehicle to transport large heavy payloads over comparatively short distances, would combine features of large dirigibles and helicopter rotors to provide lifting capacity far beyond that of either type of vehicle alone; the dirigible buoyance would lift the empty weight of the vehicle, and the total lifting capacity of the rotor system would lift and support the payload. The heavy lifter would be most likely to have immediate application, NASA said, because of the need for transport of heavy powergenerating equipment or other outsize industrial equipment to a remote destination not served by any other heavy transport systems. Increased engineering knowledge and better understanding of weather phenomena, as well as substituting inert helium for the volatile hydrogen used in German airships of the 1920s, would make a modern airship safe. (NASA Release 76-93)
Comet West, one of the few such objects visible to the unaided eye in daylight, reached maximum visibility in the eastern sky before sunrise this week. Having skirted the sun a week ago, the comet had become less brilliant as its distance from the sun increased, but was more easily seen as it moved away from the sun. The comet was said to be the brightest such object since Comet Bennett’s appearance in 1970. The comet had appeared in photographs taken in August 1975 at an observatory in the Chilean Andes, but was not identified until Richard West, a Dane working in Geneva, studied the photographs. Comets are of special interest because they are thought to be composed of materials from the outer fringes of the solar system. Reports from Italy, Switzerland, and elsewhere described the comet’s tail as 2 to 4 times the apparent diameter of the moon, unusually short for so bright a comet. NASA reported extensive observations of the comet using rockets, highflying aircraft, and ground-based instruments; smog or clouds might make ground observation difficult. (NYT, 2 Mar 76, 17; 9 Mar 76, 43; B Sun, 3 Mar 76, A-3)
NASA announced selection of IBM Corp., Gaithersburg, Md., for award of a $24-million 44-mo cost-plus-award-fee contract to supply a Space Shuttle data-processing complex for the mission control center at Johnson Space Center. The complex would consist of 3 computers and peripheral equipment for support of the Shuttle program; work to be performed would include design, fabrication, delivery, installation, and checkout of the computer complex and associated software. Control Data Corp. of Minneapolis also submitted a proposal. (NASA Release 76-104; JSC Release 76-37)
NASA announced award of an $8.8-million extension for 1 yr of a contract with Northrop Services, Inc., of Houston for operation and maintenance of lab and test facilities at Johnson Space Center. Northrop had provided these services to JSC for the past 3 yr; the extension would bring the value of the contract to $37 416 742. Northrop had used 425 employes to maintain and operate the life sciences and engineering labs and the lunar curatorial lab. NASA also announced award of a $6.8-million extension for 2 yr of a contract with the Charles Stark Draper Labs., Cambridge, Mass., for technical support of Space Shuttle orbiter avionics software development. Draper had provided this support to JSC since 1974. The effort, employing 55 people, would include software design, verification, simulation, requirements formulation, and analysis as required for programming the guidance, navigation, and control computer for the Shuttle orbiter. (JSC Releases 76-12, 76-14)
NASA announced appointment of Glynn S. Lunney, manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development program office at JSC, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Hq, replacing Dr. William C. Schneider. Dr. Schneider had been assigned as director of project management at GSFC. Lunney’s NASA career began at LeRC in 1958; he transferred to the Space Task Group at LaRC in 1959, and moved with that group to JSC. He was manager of the Apollo spacecraft program in 1972, and served as technical director of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA Release 76-183; JSC Release 76-71; JSC Roundup, 19 Nov 76, 1)
Gene Sivertson of Langley Research Center’s Space Systems Div. had developed a new idea for search and rescue' operations using passive reflectors with imaging or side-looking radar to locate persons in emergency situations. The passive reflectors could be rigid, inflatable, or erectable structures that would show up on a radar system as bright spots easily distinguishable from clutter signals of the terrain. The reflectors could be carried as standard equipment by aircraft, ships and small boats, earth vehicles, and individuals; different packages could be tailored to the user’s needs. The inflatable concept would use a balloon containing a reflector structure of aluminized mylar, with a small helium or hydrogen gas generator in the canister holding the mylar-saran balloon. Deployed in an emergency situation, the reflector would mark a distress site and provide a radar target. The concept had been field-tested in Mich, and Fla. with excellent test films as a result. Sivertson hoped to have the imaging radar on satellites with continuous global monitoring, and to test the system on the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. (Langley Researcher, 9 July 76, 3)
Johnson Space Center employees Herbert A. Zook and Richard W. High received a patent this week for invention of a “capture cell,” a device to capture meteoroids traveling through space and preserve them for scientific analysis. The cube-shaped cell had an open side covered by a thin membrane; a meteoroid striking the membrane would enter the cell and shatter, but the remnants and any vapor created by the heat of impact would remain inside the cell, which was constructed of a material like polyethylene. Large arrays of the cells would be exposed on a spacecraft for a long time, up to a year, to allow time for a number of strikes to occur. Interest in the composition of meteoroids springs from the possible information on larger bodies such as comets or asteroids on which they originated. (NYT, 31 July 76, 27) Daring July: Scientists at JPL completed a list of “purple pigeons”—bright birds of the future—as unmanned planetary missions considered feasible for the period 1980-1990. In hopes that Viking l’s successful landing on Mars might prompt wider support for such missions, JPL proposed 7 advanced missions that would probably be reduced to 3 or 4 to be forwarded to NASA Hq. The list includes: return to Mars with rover vehicles to extend exploration of the Martian surface; a lander for one of Jupiter’s moons, accompanied by a satellite around the planet; a similar mission to Saturn and its moon Titan; asteroid rendezvous and near-range photographic mission; a radar-mapper satellite for Venus; flight to Halley’s Comet with a solar-sailer satellite (propelled by solar radiation); and establishment of an automated station on the moon for extended study of the lunar environment, probably by an international scientific group. (Av Wk, 26 July 76, 16)
NASA announced award of a $7-million contract to General Electric Co. and the Hamilton Standard Div. of United Technologies Corp. for design and construction of the world’s largest windmill to be located at one of 17 possible utility-company sites where it could produce energy for as many as 500 homes a yr [see 30 July]. Sponsored by the Energy Research and Development Administration and NASA, the project would be directed by LeRC’s wind-power office. Richard L. Puthoff, program manager of LeRC’s wind-power office, said that wind as an energy source could provide 5 to 10% of U.S. needs at maximum efficiency and usage. The 100-kw system built in 1975 at LeRC’s Plum Brook test area had been used as an experimental apparatus in developing the large windmill. (NYT, 8 Aug 76, 20; WSJ, 6 Aug 76, 6)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced development of a solar concentrator-collector that would use a large plastic Fresnel lens to focus sunlight on a tube containing heat-transport fluid, for use in constructing or converting cooling systems in large buildings or in manufacturing processes requiring heat in the 200-370°C range. A Fresnel lens, consisting of a thin transparent material grooved on one surface, would serve the function of a heavier ordinary curved lens in focusing incoming light in the desired direction. MSFC’s lens, thought to be the largest tried in a solar-energy application, was assembled from multiple lens panels and measured 1.8 by 3.6 meters; it had been undergoing tests at Wyle Laboratories in Huntsville since July 1976. It would be moved to MSFC and integrated into a solar test bed for further analysis of performance. Primary advantage of the Fresnel lens would be its adaptability to mass-production techniques, permitting low cost; besides the light weight and space saving of the acrylic plastic, MSFC cited durability and mechanical strength, as well as ease of cleaning, of lenses exposed to weather. The test article, to minimize technology requirements and to interface with existing systems, used off-the-shelf materials and hardware as fully as possible. MSFC findings would be made available to industry after further testing and evaluation. (MSFC Release 76-169)
A Stanford Research Institute study requested by Ames Research Center of ways to detect possible intelligence signals from outer space reported that the most effective and economical technique would be use of a hemispheric antenna more than 3 km in diameter, orbiting the earth opposite the moon but shielded from earth’s radio emissions. The orbiting antenna would occupy one of the points in the moon’s orbit where the gravity field of earth and moon would balance one another. Two other strategies assessed in the study were an “orchard” of parabolic antennas (similar to that suggested in 1971 for Project Cyclops, a joint ARC-Stanford proposal to use massed 100m antennas for signalseeking and for radio astronomy), and a group of antennas in craters on the far side of the moon shielded from earth interference to sweep the entire range of the heavens during each month. Choice of the best strategy would depend on estimates of how far the system would need to look to find another technological civilization; Walter Sullivan noted in the NY Times “a strong suspicion that the nearest possible civilization may be 500 light years or more away.” {NYT, 3 Nov 76, 70)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a contract to Ivey’s Plumbing and Electrical Co. of Kosciusko, Miss., for construction of a test facility at MSFC for the solar heating and cooling development program MSFC is directing for the Energy Research and Development Administration. The $647,243 contract was awarded by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which would monitor construction activities; completion date set by the contract was 1 Nov. 1976. The facility would be located in an area formerly used as a swing-arm test facility for Saturn; data-acquisition equipment—instrument terminals and cabling from pad to blockhouse—used for Saturn would be available for the heating and cooling tests. The facility would consist of 4 test areas, 2 designed for complete system or subsystem tests; a third would be used to test liquid energy storage subsystems, and the fourth for passively testing solar collectors. A solar simulator constructed in a nearby building would be linked to the test facility for data collection. Subsystems and components to be tested would include solar collectors, thermal-energy storage equipment, and solar heating and cooling devices. Testing the hardware against predetermined performance standards would produce data for input to analytical programs; the analyses in turn would be used to evaluate total systems performance under environmental conditions other than those simulated during tests. Components of the facility—heat exchangers, cooling towers, chillers, fans, pumps, and control valves—would be arranged to permit maximum flexibility for future modifications and use of other test positions or procedures. (MSFC Release 76-59)
NASA announced that the proceedings of its Nov. 1976 workshop on space battery technology were available from GSFC, where the sessions had been held annually since 1968. Batteries had proved to be the major limiting factor in long-life space systems used for research in communications, weather, and earth-resources detection and monitoring; current life expectancy for batteries was 3 to 7 yr, depending on orbital altitude. (Spacecraft in synchronous orbit at 35 000 km altitude derived power from electrochemical batteries charged by solar cells on the spacecraft surface; batteries on these craft, continuously in the sun except for two eclipse periods per year, would escape the charge-discharge cycling that wore out similar batteries carried on spacecraft circling the earth every 90 min at lower altitudes, discharging their power in the resultant periods of darkness.) NASA had begun the workshops to exchange information between manufacturers and users for increasing efficiency and lifetime of the batteries, resulting in improvements by industry in batteries used for heart pacemakers, aircraft, and consumer goods such as portable tape recorders, radios, and flashlights. Gerald Halpert, CSFC chairman of the battery workshop, said the Nov. session had reviewed a new technique of fabricating battery plates electrochemically at temperatures of 100°C, which would reduce the number of steps in the process and provide a more uniform product. Also discussed was a rechargeable nickel-hydrogen battery, a new product that could provide more energy per kg for larger systems, with storage capacities ranging from 25 to 100 ampere-hr. The nickel-hydrogen unit would be used for the first time on the Navigational Technology Satellite-2, part of the joint services research program for a global satellite system. Another topic was the special procedures developed at GSFC for battery improvement that had been implemented in industry for quality control and evaluation of the product. (NASA Release 76-200)
First microwave observations of carbon monoxide in the upper atmospheres of earth, Venus, and Mars were reported by a team of scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena. Establishment of carbon monoxide as a common component of the upper atmospheres of the planets should lead to a better understanding of the delicate balances in earth’s atmosphere, said Dr. Joe W. Waters, who headed the team. Carbon monoxide at lower altitudes on Venus and Mars, as well as on earth, had previously been measured by infrared techniques that had also detected CO on Jupiter last year, according to JPL’s Dr. Reinhold Beer. JPL microwave observations used a radiotelescope at Aerospace Corp.’s electronic research laboratory to detect the carbon-monoxide absorption frequency at high altitudes, well above the smog layer over Los Angeles; calculations indicated that the same technique could measure CO in the upper atmospheres of the other planets. The Mars experiment used the larger radiotelescope at Kitt Peak, Ariz., to record the identifying signal. CO occurred in 20 parts per million at 80 km altitude on earth, and about 1000 parts per million at 100 km above Venus; the Mars readings were still being analyzed. (NASA Release 76-40)
A new comet now approaching the sun—named Comet West, after Richard M. West of the European Southern Observatory at Geneva, Switzerland, who discovered it in Nov. 1975—would be the object of extensive space and ground-based study to identify and measure its constituents, NASA announced. Comet West would come closest to the sun on 25 Feb., but would not be readily visible until about 2 March because of solar brightness; it would provide the first opportunity for extensive comet study since the appearance in 1973 of Comet Kouhoutek (a “visual disappointment” from which more had been learned about comets than in all the time that had gone before). NASA would participate in the study along with the Naval Research Laboratory, and with the Univ. of Colo, at Boulder and the Johns Hopkins Univ. (NASA Release 76-31)
The Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International Corporation was awarded a $6.9 million contract by Goddard Space Flight Center to produce RS-27 engine systems for the Delta launch vehicle. The contract called for delivery of 10 engines between March and Sept. 1977. NASA had returned 12 Rocketdyne-built H-1 engines for use in producing the new RS-27 systems. (Rockwell Release RD-6)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced that a team of fishermen, engineers, physicists, oceanographers, biologists, and computer specialists had used a satellite to find fish off the coast of Louisiana in a government-industry cooperative program begun by NOAA last year. Water turbidity, measured by Landsat sensors as variations in color, would reflect the distribution of fish; the fishing vessels, working with spotter aircraft, confirmed the presence of fish in most areas predicted by the Landsat data. This technique of locating concentrations of fish would aid in better understanding of coastal fishery ecology and better resources assessment and management, NOAA said. On 19 July, Landsat 1 had passed over a selected study area, sending multispectral scanner data to Goddard Space Flight Center; the data tapes were hand-carried to NASA’s Earth Resources Laboratory in La. for processing. Less than 21 hr after the scan, the spotter pilots and fishing-vessel captains were being called to check their findings with predicted locations. The satellite reports were valid, NOAA said. Installation of an operational system would require 3 to 5 yr to develop special computer programs and facilities. (NOAA Release 76-196; JSC Release 76—50; JSC Roundup, 10 Sept 76, 4)
Robert G. Deissler, technical consultant to NASA’s Lewis Research Center, received the 1975 Max Jakob Memorial Award at the 16th National Heat Transfer Conference in St. Louis. The award, established in 1961 by the American Society for Mechanical Engineering and the American Institute for Chemical Engineering, commemorated a pioneer in the science of heat transmission, and was given for distinguished service in the field of heat transfer. Deissler, who joined Lewis in 1947 and gained early recognition for work in turbulent flow and heat transfer of variable-property fluids in pipes or tubes, was cited for “outstanding contributions to the theory of turbulence and turbulent transport...for his ability to perceive and derive the fundamental theory required to advance applied research and development in convective heat transfer.” Author of about 70 technical papers, Deissler had received an Exceptional Service Award in 1957 from NACA, NASA’s predecessor. (LeRC News, 6 Aug 75, 1; Cl PD, 10 Aug 76)
Marshall Space Flight Center forecast completion by 1 April of a unique facility—one of the largest and most significant construction jobs undertaken in the past 10 yr—at the Center, an x-ray test facility costing about $4 million. The new facility included a 305-m-long stainless steel x-ray path guide tube nearly a meter in diameter, connecting the x-ray source with a 6-m-diameter instrument chamber housing the telescopes and other instruments to be tested. Work began in January 1975, and would be completed on schedule. The facility, the only one of its size and type, would be used first to test instruments for NASA’s High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) program; later it would be used in x-ray verification testing and calibration of mirrors, telescope systems, and instruments, for rocket payloads in x-ray stellar studies and similar projects. After checkout, the facility would be turned over to MSFC’s Science and Engineering Directorate. (Marshall Star, 31 Mar 76, 4; MSFC Release 76-53)
Harris M. (Bud) Schurmeier, manager since 1972 of the Mariner Jupiter/Saturn project at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, was named Assistant Laboratory Director for Civil Systems, JPL Director Bruce C. Murray announced. The new post would direct Civil Systems activities at JPL, begun in the 1960s to apply specific JPL capabilities in technical and management areas to critical problems of society, including technological transfer to energy, environment, biomedical, and transportation systems. Replacing Schurmeier as manager of the Jupiter/Saturn project that would send 2 instrumented Mariner spacecraft to the giant outer planets next year would be John R. Casani, former manager of JPL’s Guidance and Control Division. While serving as Mariner Jupiter/Saturn project manager, Schurmeier had also acted as Deputy Assistant Laboratory Director for Flight Projects for the past 6 yr; the latter position would not be filled immediately. (JPL release 5 Apr 76)
The board of governors of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced that, at its recent meeting in The Hague 19—27 May, it adopted a 10-m class Standard B ground station to supplement the Standard A station long the foundation of INTELSAT’s global system. Currently, 114 Standard A ground stations with 30-m antennas were operating throughout the world, as well as 29 smaller stations used for domestic service, telemetry, tracking and control, monitoring, and limited telecommunications between 2 or 3 destinations. Broadest use of the Standard B station would be in developing countries that had limited telecommunications requirements. Under study for some years, the Standard B.station would use single-channel-per-carrier (SCPC) equipment that allowed routing of traffic on a circuit-by-circuit basis instead of in large groups or bundles, minimizing the capacity loss associated with smaller antennas; it also worked with voice activation, which would be mandatory, using satellite capacity for telephone service only when activated by voice signals. Adoption of the second standard for international service would mean a 40% drop in rates paid for use of the satellites, plus ability to route traffic to any ground stations equipped to receive the user’s signals, with no restriction on the total amount of traffic. Previously, the drain on satellite power limited small ground stations to providing service to only 1 or 2 other points. (INTELSAT Release 76-17-1) Viking 1 would scan and map the surface for 2 wk; its cameras would photograph the prime landing site near an ancient rift valley, and other instruments would measure surface temperatures and search the Mars atmosphere for signs of water. The new orbit would bring Viking over the planned landing site once each 24.6-hr Mars day (called a sol). The 2 wk of photographs and measurements were needed so that scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, where the flight had been directed since launch in April 1975, could choose the safest and most interesting spot for their 4-ton bird to alight. The landing attempt would be the first U.S. try at putting a spacecraft down on another planet; the USSR had made 5 unmanned attempts, 3 on Venus and 2 on Mars. The 2 Venera spacecraft had survived on the surface long enough to send back 1 picture each; the third crashed. One Mars spacecraft had crashed, and the other was blown over after it landed by winds clocked at more than 300 kph. After Viking’s braking engine was fired, the main job of flight directors would be to navigate it into a path where its orbit would be lowered again, with apogee reduced from about 19 000 km to 12 500 km. The firing was successful 19 June, and the Viking neared the end of a 690-million-km voyage that began 10 mo ago. William J. O’Neill of JPL said the precision of the flight could be likened to “shooting a basketball in Los Angeles and putting it through a hoop in Madison Square Garden in New York City.” Viking was following a northeasterly path around Mars that would bring it within 1450 km of the planet’s surface; flight directors planned a second maneuver to bring it still closer over an area 20°N of the equator, called Chryse, where Viking would attempt to land 4 July, selected as a good place to search for signs of life or fossilized life that thrived when a river flowed there a billion years ago. Harold S. Masursky of the U.S. Geological Survey, chief geologist for Viking, said that Chryse resembled California’s Death Valley or the water-worn dry valleys of Nevada or Wyoming, where ancient rivers overflowed their banks millions of years ago to deposit alluvial soils on the valley floors. Rock and soil in the Chryse valley appeared red from millions of years of iron oxide deposits brought down by the river overflow; Masursky and his colleagues hoped that the red soils would contain organic molecules, signs of a once-existent life on Mars. A photograph taken 19 June and released by JPL on Sunday, 20 June, showed the “awesome” Valles Marineris from about 360 000 km up— parallel canyons south of the Mars equator that, if extended together on earth, would reach from Calif, to Penna. The smaller was about 3 km deep, 64 km wide, and 645 km long; the larger was 6 km deep, 96 km wide, and more than 3200 km long. (Arizona’s Grand Canyon, largest on earth, is about 2 km deep, 21 km wide at its greatest breadth, and only 350 km long.) The northern hemisphere of Mars appeared covered with haze, which scientists said was probably from water vapor misting out of the cold surface as the sun warmed it during the longer summer days. Successful firing of the braking engine at 1:25 pm EDT Monday, 21 June, put Viking 1 into a lower orbit so that its cameras could begin to photograph steep slopes, craters, boulder fields, and other potential obstacles. On 27 June, Viking project manager James S. Martin announced that the 4 July landing was off; pictures of the primary landing area showed “too many unknowns,” and the site appeared too hazardous to risk landing without investigating other sites. As the Viking 1 cameras could not distinguish objects “smaller than a football field,” objects as yet invisible could endanger the landing. However, as there was no assurance of any hazard-free area roughly 20 km by 100 km anywhere on Mars, some scientists had wanted to go ahead with the planned landing. Previous closeups taken by Mariner 9 were not as detailed as those from Viking, and dangerous details of the primary landing site became more obvious with photos from Viking 1 coming in more clearly. The New York Times reported that the first alternative site was an area called Chryse Phoenicia, a basin about 30 km northwest of the original site; if that site appeared too rough, scientists would look at Tritonis Lacus, about 6400 km east of Chryse, although if this happened, the landing might be delayed until as late as the first wk of August. Project Manager Martin suggested delaying the Viking 1 landing, if it were not down by 25 July, until the Viking 2 (now 8 million km away) arrived in Mars orbit; possibly 2 Viking spacecraft might be orbiting simultaneously. JPL said flight tracking and control facilities there were insufficient to handle full operations of both spacecraft simultaneously, and a number of preorbital maneuvers for Viking 2 would be required starting about 27 July. John Noble Wilford said in the New York Times that the earliest possible Viking 1 landing would be 9 July, and other alternatives would take longer. Scientists, he said, were “dismayed by the rugged Martian terrain”—the primary landing area being heavily pocked with craters, steep escarpments, and a sprinkling of knoblike features probably remnants of erosion like that in the Grand Canyon. On 28 June, Viking 1 photographed a site about 300 km northwest of Chryse—the “northwest territory”—after pictures of the prime site showed it to be far more rugged than expected; the scientists wanted a landing as close as possible to the original site because they thought it offered the best chance of finding signs of existing or fossil life. The alternate site would be somewhat flatter and safer, but less interesting scientifically, O’Toole said in the Post 29 June. Photographs released 29 June at JPL showed a plateau in the Chryse valley originally picked as the Viking 1 landing site, where a curving and rugged coastline at the plateau’s base could have been formed only by an ocean-like surf. Pictures taken from an altitude of about 1450 km showed a crater with lava-flow traces more than 30 km wide, “a truly enormous scale” according to chief geologist Masursky. “The biggest lava flooding ... on earth are the basalt floods on Iceland, which are no bigger than a few kilometers across.” Temperature changes mapped by Viking were also dramatic: instruments on Viking registered differences of more than 60°C (140°F) between day and night in the same parts of the planet. Dr. Hugh H. Kieffer, atmospheric scientist on the Viking team, said that the atmosphere on Mars was almost perfectly transparent to sunlight, as little water was present to absorb it; “whatever sunlight reaches the planet gets right to the surface, which then radiates the heat back to the atmosphere to warm it up.” An instrument aboard Viking could tell when day broke on the Mars surface although it had no way of “seeing”; it measured water vapor in the atmosphere, and registered its presence when the sun warmed the permafrost that “literally pops [water] into the atmosphere when that sun hits the surface first thing in the morning,” according to Dr. Barney Farmer of JPL. Besides surveying possibilities for its own landing, Viking 1 was photographing potential landing sites for Viking 2 to give scientists an idea whether they might have to shift sites for that spacecraft also. (W Post, 12 June 76, A-12; 19 June, A-3; 20 June, A—1; 21 June, A-9; 22 June, A—17; 28 June, A-3; 29 June, C-4; 30 June, A-27; ATT, 21 June, 10; 28 June, 17; Av Wk, 28 June 76, 14)
Observations from NASA’s airborne Kuiper observatory by a group of Cornell University scientists reported the first occultation, or eclipse, of a star by a planet observed from above the lower layers of earth’s atmosphere. The occultation was observed from an altitude of 12.4 km over the Atlantic near Bermuda, using the 1 -m telescope to view the passage of Mars between the earth and the star Epsilon in the constellation Gemini. Light from the star passed through the Martian atmosphere before reaching earth; changes in the light after it passed through the planet’s atmosphere would give astronomers new information about the density and composition of that atmosphere, thought to consist of argon rather than water and carbon dioxide which had been frozen into the Martian polar caps. The two unmanned Viking spacecraft scheduled for Mars landing later this year would also measure the argon present in the Mars atmosphere. (NSF Release PR76-36)
The National Science Foundation reported that U.S. spending for research and development (R&D) would reach $38.1 billion in 1976, 8% above the 1975 level. R&D expenditures would account for 2.2% of the gross national product in 1976, down from 2.3% in 1975. Of the total R&D spending, federal agencies would account for $20.1 billion; industry, about $16.6 billion; universities and colleges, about $800 million; and other nonprofit institutions, about $600 million. The figures appeared in a NSF report, National Patterns ofR&D Resources: Funds and Manpower in the United States 1953-1976, updated annually in a continuing analysis of the nation’s scientific and technological resources. (NSF Release PR76-68)
Successful testing of a solar receiver developed with heat-transfer technology used by Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell International Corp., for the U.S. space program was “a major step forward in development of solar electricity generating systems,” said Dr. Jack Silverman, director of energy systems for Rocketdyne. Using a large field of mirrors individually focusing the sun’s rays to a central receiver on a high tower, where the concentrated heat served to boil water into superheated steam, the system generated the steam at 1366 K and 738 newtons per cm". The central receiver was exposed to high heatflows approaching those encountered in rocket engines, and many times higher than those in conventional steam boilers. The development program was sponsored by the Energy Research and Development Administration; Rocketdyne was also under contract to McDonnell Douglas and ERDA to develop a similar receiver and thermal storage subsystems for a 10 000-kw solar electricity-generating pilot plant to be in operation by the end of the decade. (Rockwell Release RD-9) called Comstar D-l after achieving orbit. (NASA Release 76-75; NYT, 13 May 76, 51; Comsat General Release CG 76-115; MOR M-491-201-76-01 [postlaunch] 27 May 76)
A device used in training Apollo astronauts was adapted to assist persons incapable of supporting their entire weight with their legs. Developed at Langley Research Center, the flying lunar-excursion experimental platform would exert a constant weight-relieving force during any vertical movement by the patient; the supporting force would be selected for a particular patient, and could be changed as the patient’s condition improved. Besides its application as a device for exercise during rehabilitation, the apparatus showed potential for use in warehouses and storage facilities where heavy equipment was handled. The project was directed by LaRC’s Technology Utilization Office. (Langley Researcher, 5 Mar 76, 7)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced shipment of the first production segment of a motor case for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motor from the manufacturer (Ladish Co. of Cudahy, Wis.) to the Cal-Doran Metallurgical Services plant at Los Angeles, where it would undergo heat treatment and cleaning before being forwarded to Rohr Industries at Chula Vista, Calif. Rohr—subcontractor to prime contractor Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. in Utah—would process the cylindrical segment, with a finished weight of about 5060 kg, for delivery to Thiokol in Sept. 1976. Thiokol would load the solid propellants into 4 motor-case segments over 3 m in dia. and 45.5 m long, each holding about 500 000 kg of propellant. The 4 segments joined would stretch to more than 35 m and constitute about three fourths of the solid-fuel rocket booster. Each launch of the Shuttle would use 2 boosters, burning from ignition on the pad to burnout at an altitude of about 42 km; at that point, the SRBs would be separated and descend by parachute into the ocean for recovery, refueling, and reuse. (MSFC Release 76-76)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced a new approach to issuance of 2 parallel contracts, to be awarded for studies of a space industrialization effort that would run from 1980 to 2010. One of the study contracts would be awarded to an aerospace firm, the other to a research or “think-tank” firm, to obtain different viewpoints. The proposed work would consist of 2 phases, each lasting about 8 mo, and each contract would cost about $200 000. Replies to today’s requests for proposals were due 29 June, and contracts were to be awarded this fall. Whereas the space program had so far emphasized scientific and other exploratory activities, space industrialization would emphasize production of goods and services for economic benefit. First phase of the study would define goals, establish the rationale for a space program on the basis of terrestrial alternatives, and set up a time frame with options and budgetary considerations. The second phase would study future mission opportunities and the optimum role of man in the program, responsiveness of the concepts to national and industrial needs and goals, and technological implications as against costs. (MSFC Release 76-98; NASA Release 76-107)
President Ford proclaimed 20 July as “Space Exploration Day” to coincide with the date 7 yr ago when U.S. astronaut Neil Armstrong became the first man to set foot on the moon. NASA’s Viking 1 lander was expected to touch down on the surface of Mars about 8 am 20 July,, reported nationally on network television; transmission of the first picture from the lander should be completed before 9 am. In his proclamation, the President said, “We begin our third century with ... the most ambitious of all deep space explorations . . . Wherever we reach, we will have come in peace for all mankind.” In an accompanying statement to NASA employees, Administrator James C. Fletcher said “the President has in effect commended all of you who work (for) the national space agency.” (Text; NASA Release 76-133; Fletcher anno, 20 July 76) First panoramic view of Mars surface from Viking 1, 20 July 1976: upper half of picture is Left half of view, lower photo joins it on the right. Upper view shows housing for Viking sampler arm; lower view shows (at right) high-gain antenna for direct communication with earth. (NASA 7§-H~557)
The Johnson Space Center announced award of a 1-yr extension of the Pan American World Airways contract for plant maintenance and operations services at the Center. Pan American had been selected 13 Feb. 1974 to receive a cost-plus-award-fee contract for operation of all utility systems and maintenance of utilities, buildings, roads, ditches, and special equipment at JSC; the current award represented the second of 2 planned extensions and would extend the effective period through 12 Feb. 1977. Annual estimated amount of the contract was $7.4 million. (JSC Release 76-25)
A new computer program developed at Johnson Space Center from Landsat digital data could compile maps on any scale desired showing water surfaces in excess of 0.024 sq km, said specialists in the Earth Observations Division at JSC. Nations needing an inventory of their water resources could obtain maps of their lakes and reservoirs, and state governments could use the service in choosing between recreational and industrial use of available water supplies. The program, called Detection and Mapping (DAM) Package, required only $300 worth of computer time to map more than 33 800 sq km. As the two Landsats cover about 95 percent of the earth’s land mass, the system could produce surface-water maps for virtually all populated regions with almost 100% accuracy for water areas as large as 0.04 sq km; position accuracy—the degree to which the maps match the terrain—would be within 90m of dead center. User training would be typically no more than a day, and the system would need no experts to implement it. (NASA Release 76-4; JSC Release 76-01)
The concept of a “science court’”—an impartial quasi-judicial body of scientists to conduct inquiries into conflicting scientific claims— was advanced by Dr. Arthur Kantrowitz, director of Avco-Everett Laboratories, a high-technology industrial firm in Mass. The proposal would be a means of assuring a rational and orderly assessment of scientific facts underlying highly complex issues of public concern. Although hearings had been held by Congress and federal agencies on issues such as radiation, automotive safety, air pollution, drugs, and pesticides, these had frequently been superficial and led to no resolution of facts. A recent Harvard University book on the subject said in part: “The principal shortcoming of such hearings can be revealed simply by asking how ‘adversary’ these adversary hearings are . . . direct battle over facts, if it occurs at all, takes place as a free-for-all in the mass media.” Conflicting statements by experts had added to confusion and paralyzed decision-making processes. A test of the “science court” concept had been recommended as part of the new White House office of science and technology policy. {NYT, 29 Feb 76, 8)
A “house of the future” incorporating technology from aerospace research would be open to the public at Langley Research Center after July 1, NASA announced. The Tech House, a project of NASA’s technology utilization program, would demonstrate how an average family could cut fuel consumption by two thirds and water consumption by one half, using innovative energy and water management systems integrated with building designs and materials. Building started in late Jan.; all equipment and features in the house would be available to the public within 5 yr, or are available now. A family selected by NASA would live in the house for at least a year, beginning early in 1977; a systems engineer would monitor all use of the systems in the normal life of the family and record day-to-day savings. The contemporary one-story house would have an enclosed living space of about 500 sq m; its major feature combined solar collectors with night radiators and heat pump for one of the most cost-effective heating and cooling systems now available. Contributing to the NASA project were the National Association of Home Builders, the National Bureau of Standards, and the Department of Housing and Urban Development. (NASA Release 76-26)
Physicians at Johnson Space Center were gathering data on female physiological performance and tolerance limits as a basis for establishing criteria in recruiting NASA’s first women astronauts. Women employees of the center were asked to volunteer for testing on a treadmill and in a lower body negative-pressure device, to see whether women responded differently from men of comparable age to treadmill exercise and to stresses on the circulatory system induced by decreased pressures on the lower body. On the treadmill test, researchers would monitor the subject’s heart rate and blood pressure as they varied the speed and tilt of the moving treadmill. The pressure device, encasing the subject from the waist down, would have the pressure reduced while researchers monitored the reaction of the cardiovascular system to the change in pressure. NASA had issued a call for at least 30 Space Shuttle astronauts (15 pilot candidates, 15 mission specialist candidates) in July 197 6, with a closing date of 30 June 1977. Selection would be completed by December 1977. (JSC Release 76-65)
Agreements between the French government and the European Space Agency for use of launch facilities at Kourou, French Guiana, were signed in Paris by Michel d’Ornano, minister for industry and research, and Roy Gibson, director general of ESA. The Kourou facilities include the Guiana Space Centre belonging to France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) and the Ariane launching site belonging to ESA that replaced the former equatorial base belonging to the defunct ELDO organization [see 11 Jan.]. The meeting of the European Space Conference in April 1975 had decided that all ESA member states would contribute to the costs of the Guiana space center until the end of 1980. Ariane (the ESA heavy launcher now under development) would provide Europe with a satellite launch capability of its own after 1980. (ESA newsletter, Aug 76, 2)
NASA announced it had completed negotiations with Owens-Illinois, Inc., for replacement of a mirror blank for the Infrared Telescope Facility being built at Mauna Kea, Hawaii. The 126-cm-dia. replacement would be ready for processing at the Kitt Peak National Observatory that would turn it into a telescope mirror. Opticians at Kitt Peak had cut a center hole in the original disc preparatory to grinding it when a fracture was detected last Sept.; the crack, extending radially more than 86 cm from the center hole, rendered the mirror blank useless. The original and replacement were cast from Cervit, a transparent ceramic material obtained by NASA for testing as part of the Space Telescope. When a different material was decided on for the Space Telescope, the Cervit blank was transferred to the infrared telescope project. Cervit had practically zero thermal expansion, making it ideal for telescope materials, and had been used in 2 of the world’s 5 largest telescopes. Under the new agreement, Owens-Illinois would provide a replacement lens for $200,000 and return of ownership of the damaged blank to the Ohio firm. (NASA Release 76-42)
William Allan Patterson, pioneer of many firsts in the airline industry, would receive the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at an annual dinner in Dec. sponsored by the Natl. Aeronautic Assn., announced NAA President John P. Henebry. The 77-yr-old Patterson, who retired as board chairman of United Airlines in 1963, had joined Boeing Company in 1929 and in 1934 was elected president of United (created in 1931 by Boeing’s merger with 3 other airlines to form a transcontinental system), a position he held for 29 yr. Patterson had declared himself most proud of establishing in 1930 the occupation of air stewardess; he had been instrumental in passage of the Federal Aviation Act in 1958, establishing a single federal agency with full authority for air traffic control, and in obtaining appropriation of federal funds for installation of landing and navigation aids at major airports across the U.S. The trophy, a miniature silver copy of the plane flown by the Wright Brothers at Kitty Hawk in 1903, had been awarded yearly by the NAA for significant public service of enduring value to aviation in the U.S. (NAA release, 21 Sept 76)
NASA launched the Gravitational Probe-A (GP-A) from Wallops Flight Center at 7:41 am EDT on a Scout vehicle into a trajectory with peak altitude of 889 km and total flight time of 6960 sec. The 102.5-kg probe was designed to measure the gravitational red shift predicted by the equivalence principle laid down by Einstein in 1907 as the cornerstone of the general theory of relativity: GP-A would directly determine the effect of gravitation on time by comparing the rate of a rocket-borne clock to an identical clock on earth. During the flight, the probe clock would be in a weaker gravitational field than the identical clock on earth; as the probe clock rose through increasingly weaker gravity to its maximum altitude, it would appear to run increasingly faster, and its rate would slow as it returned to the stronger gravity at lower altitudes. The experiment required not only extremely accurate telemetry throughout the probe’s ascent and descent, but also an extremely accurate set of clocks; those used were atomic-hydrogen masers of extraordinary stability, according to Dr. R.F.C. Vessot of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, principal investigator. (“Maser” is an acronym for microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.) The clocks were expected to provide measurement accuracy within 5 thousandths of 1% (5 x 10 5) of the predicted effect. The experiment and its support systems performed normally, but Dr. Vessot said that 1 to 3 mo of data reduction would be needed to determine whether the scientific objective had been met. (NASA Release 76-106; MOR S-879-76-01 [prelaunch] 14 June 76, [postlaunch] 23 June 76; MSFC Release 76-113)
The Natl. Science Foundation announced that U.S. and Canadian astronomers had succeeded in using telescopes more than 800 km apart, linked by satellite, to simulate a telescope nearly as large as the earth. A radio telescope at the Natl. Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., had been linked through a joint U.S.-Canadian satellite to a radio telescope at the Algonquin Radio Observatory in Ontario, allowing the observers to review the results while the observations were in process. The technique would permit astronomers to measure the size and shape of a distant galaxy or quasar with a precision better than 1/1000 arcsec, equivalent to measuring the size and shape of a penny more than 4000 km distant. The satellite would transmit information at a rate equivalent to 10 000 simultaneous telephone calls; the large data rate would increase the sensitivity of measurements, allowing the study of very faint objects in space. Besides the principal investigator, Dr. George W. Swenson, Jr. of the Univ. of 111., the team included S.H. Knowles and W.B. Walton of NRL; N.W. Broten and D.N. Fort of Canada’s Natl. Research Council; K.I. Kellermann and Benno Rayhrer of NRAO; and J.L. Yen of the Univ. of Toronto. (NSF Release PR76-106)
NASA would appeal a decision of the U.S. District Court ordering the agency to rehire all Marshall Space Flight Center civil service employees laid off since 1967 as the result of awarding support-services contracts to private business, Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported. The court had ruled that all such contracts awarded at MSFC since 1967 were illegal. NASA spokesmen estimated that up to 1500 contractor employees now at MSFC could be fired as a result of the ruling, and that 17 000 contractor employees throughout the agency might be affected by the decision, which ordered NASA to rehire the civil service personnel with back pay in amounts depending on the period of unemployment. Had all the employees affected been unemployed for the full 10 yr (the “worst-case situation”), necessary back pay might go as high as $ 150 million, NASA said, although the actual funds required would be less. An appeals court had already granted NASA a stay until 1 Feb. 1977 before the district court’s ruling became effective, so that the agency could ask Congress for supplemental funds to cover the back-pay requirements. (Av Wk, 1 Nov 77, 22)
Dr. Michael Duke, curator of lunar samples at NASA’s Johnson Space Center, returned from Moscow with two half-gram samples of moon soil brought to earth in Aug. 1976 by the USSR’s Luna 24 spacecraft. The samples were part of a 2-meter-long core of lunar material obtained by a hollow drill from the surface of Mare Crisium, a region of the moon from which the U.S. had not had any samples. This was the third time U.S. scientists had obtained a Soviet sample in exchange for material collected by Apollo astronauts from other places on the moon. Other members of the U.S. scientific delegation to Moscow this week were Dr. Charles Simonds, Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex., and Prof. Gerald J. Wasserburg of the Calif. Institute of Technology. The small size of the sample would not detract from its usefulness, according to Dr. Bevan French, chief of NASA’s program of research on extraterrestrial materials; methods routinely used for extracting information from samples of meteorite or deep-sea basalt could produce hundreds of chemical analyses from a single tiny crystal or determine the age of a fragment smaller than an aspirin tablet. (JSC Release 76-75)
Thermal protection fabrics developed for use in the Apollo and Skylab programs would be the basis for research into improved clothing and equipment for firefighters, under a contract signed between NASA and the Department of Commerce’s National Fire Prevention and Control Administration. The agreement assigned management responsibility to Marshall Space Flight Center for a 3-yr program funded jointly by NASA and NFPCA at a cost of $300 000 in the first year. The program would emphasize weight reduction, performance, and cost of equipment to improve the chances of a firefighter’s surviving any fire uninjured, in a job described as the most hazardous in the U.S. (MSFC Release 76-31)
Atmosphere Explorer D, second in a series of 3 maneuverable unmanned spacecraft designed to explore a specific area of earth’s outer atmosphere, had ceased functioning, spacecraft controllers at GSFC said. AE—D had stopped working 29 Jan. when a power-supply electronics malfunction disabled its solar array. Launched 6 Oct. 1975, AE—D had transmitted important data on energy transfer in the upper atmosphere and on processes critical to the atmospheric heat balance; although it did not last its design lifetime of 1 yr, it did transmit a full set of lower thermosphere data on the daylight side from North to South Pole at constant times during its 4—mo operation. AE-C, launched in 1973, was still functioning normally, returning upper-atmosphere data in the region above 128 km; AE-E, launched in Nov. 1975, had a payload similar to that of the others but also carried equipment to measure earth’s ozone layer between 20 °N and S. (NASA Release 76-24)
NASA announced the appointment of Harold E. Pryor as Deputy Administrative Assistant for Technology Utilization in the NASA Hq Office of Industry Affairs. Pryor had been with NASA since 1964, serving as director of the management systems office, the staff operations division in the Office of Procurement, and the NASA/DOD Contract Administration Services Office in the Defense Supply Agency Hq. He was also executive assistant to the Director, Manned Space Flight Management Operations, until July 1973, when he became director of the Scientific and Technical Information Office. Pryor earned bachelor’s degrees in naval science and tactics and in aeronautical engineering; he served in the U.S. Navy during World War II. He would succeed Clare F. Farley, recently retired from NASA. (NASA anno. 27 July 76)
The Air Force Systems Command announced completion of vibration and performance tests at Arnold Engineering Development Center on a small solid-propellant rocket motor scheduled to boost the Inti. Ultraviolet Explorer spacecraft into orbit in 1977. The motor, Thiokol Corp.’s TE-M-604-4, would be fired about 24 hr after launch to move the IUE into a near-synchronous orbit at altitudes of from 24 000 to 48 000 km. IUE, a cooperative research program shared by NASA, ESA, and the U.K. Science Research Council, would carry a 45-mm-diameter ultraviolet telescope to investigate characteristics of stars and planets. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 76, 4)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) had joined in research in Antarctica on stratospheric pollution with a team from the Univ. of Wyo. supported by the National Science Foundation. NOAA’s Aeronomy Laboratory would launch 2 balloons carrying probes with containers that would open at different altitudes to collect a vertical profile of fluorocarbons and nitrogen oxides in the relatively clean stratosphere over Antarctica. The measurements would be used in testing two theories of ozone destruction in the stratosphere, the first being the production of destructive chlorine through breakdown of manmade fluorocarbon aerosols migrating into the upper atmosphere. The other theory posed a natural ozone-limiting cycle, involving dissociation in the stratosphere of bacterially produced nitrous oxide that became nitric oxide harmful to the ozone layer. The Antarctic launches would help to explain variations in nitrous oxide measurements as a function of latitude, season, or some other cause. (NOAA Release 76-17)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that Barbara S. Askins, a chemist in MSFC’s Astronomy Branch, had applied for patent on an improved process, autoradiographic film intensification, that would improve photographic images after films or plates had been developed. Exposing silver or other imaging material on a developed film or plate to a radioactive environment would convert the material to a radioactive compound; placing the radioactivated material in contact with a receiver emulsion on an unexposed film or plate would reproduce the original image with increased contrast and density. The hazards and complexity of handling radioactive material had limited the use of such a process, but the new process did not require special training, expensive equipment, or extraordinary safety precautions, as it used an isotopic organo-sulfur 35 compound and could be adapted easily to an ordinary photographic laboratory. Askins said the process would be used in astronomy and other scientific research where low light levels were encountered. (MSFC Release 76-13)
The Smithsonian Institution awarded its Langley gold medal for aeronautics to James E. Webb, former head of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the late Grover Loening. Webb was cited for management skills in leading the U.S. to “pre-eminence in space flight research and development.” Loening [see 29 Feb.] was honored as “a pioneer aeronautical inventor” who developed the Loening amphibian plane and the design of the strut-braced monoplane. (W Post, 8 May 76, E—3)
Venus—whose dense atmosphere had prevented observation of the surface, except by radar—might be as tectonically active as Mars, and possibly as active as the earth, researchers at JPL’s Goldstone tracking station announced. As reported in Science magazine, new high-resolution maps from 2 different radiotelescopes disclosed the planet’s surface with enough detail to permit a study of its geology. A series of 8 maps taken by the 64-m steerable dish at Goldstone revealed a 1500-km-long trough near Venus’s equator comparable to large earth rift systems such as the East African, giving “strong evidence of exten-sional tectonic activity” on Venus. Evidence of a fault movement seemed to appear in another Goldstone map showing a long arc-shaped mountain range crossed and bowed by another linear feature. A high-resolution image obtained at the Arecibo observatory in P.R. showed a large part of the Venus northern hemisphere including a basin-like feature about 1000 km across with a bright sharp rim; “the shape is wrong” for an impact basin, according to the Arecibo report. The new maps raised as many questions as they answered, Science commented. (Science, 30 Apr 76, 454)
SPAR II, a Black Brant VC sounding rocket carrying materials-processing experiments, was launched from the White Sands Missile Range in the second of a series of 15 planned during the next 5 yr in the SPAR (space-processing applications rocket) program managed by Marshall Space Flight Center. The 225.7-kg payload consisted of 10 experiments, 6 similar to those carried on SPAR I launched 11 Dec. 1975; the rocket reached an altitude of 188 km, providing about 5 min of nearweightlessness during the coast phase, and the payload was recovered by parachute and delivered to the investigators for analysis. MSFC employees Carolyn Griner and Dr. Mary Helen Johnston were principal investigators for 2 experiments, both on dendrite remelting and macrosegregation. Other experimenters were Robert B. Pond (Johns Hopkins University), 2 experiments on solidification of lead antimony eutectic; Dr. James W. Patten (Battelle-Northwest Research Institute), 2 experiments on producing closed-cell metal foams; Dr. S.H. Gelles (Battelle Memorial Institute), agglomeration in immiscible liquids; Dr. H. Ahlborn (University of Hamburg), behavior of aluminum alloys under zero gravity; and Dr. Louis Raymond (Aerospace Corp.), 2 experiments in casting thoria dispersion-strengthened composites at zero gravity. (MSFC Release 76-83, 76-94)
Dr. William H. Pickering, who retired as director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at CalTech 31 March, was named to receive a 1975 National Medal of Science, reported Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine. The medal is the U.S. government’s highest award for distinguished achievement in science and engineering. (Av Wk, 28 June 76, 11)
Soon after Rockwell International Corp. was named prime contractor on a $5-billion Space-Shuttle program, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, had accepted an invitation for a trip to Rockwell’s resort in the Bahamas. Teague’s name was added to a list of senators and representatives who had accepted invitations from Rockwell, a prime government contractor; most went to hunt at the company’s lodge in Maryland. Three Senate staff members had accepted invitations to hunt at the Maryland lodge of another contractor, Northrop Corp. During the previous week, the Pentagon had rebuked 38 civilian and military officials, including admirals and generals, for accepting similar invitations from Northrop. House rules prevented members, officers, or employees from accepting gifts “of substantial value, directly or indirectly, from any persons, organization, or corporation having a direct interest in legislation before the Congress;” the Senate had no similar written regulation. (IF Post, 29 Jan 76, F-5)
The Great Galactic Ghoul struck again, reported Washington Post staff writer Thomas O’Toole, when one of the unmanned Viking spacecraft (Viking 2) approached the orbit of Mars and lost one of its three ovens designed to heat samples of the Martian surface and look in the gases for signs of Martian life. Space scientists found that almost all the accidents with Mars-bound spacecraft—three failures and four nearfailures—had occurred in the same region, which had no unusual features such as extra cosmic dust or increased solar wind, magnetic field, or background radiation. First “victims of the Ghoul” were Soviet spacecraft—Zond 2 in 1964, and Mars 1 a year later—whose batteries died when they crossed the area and never came on again. One Mariner lost its radio in the Ghoul’s orbit but came back on when it reached Mars; another lost one or two instruments to cosmic dust; two others lost their guidance stars when they reached the Ghoul’s orbit, but locked on them again when they left it. Most costly casualty of the Ghoul was Mariner 7, whose battery exploded the day in 1969 when it crossed the Ghoul’s orbit, damaging the rest of the spacecraft so that it was useless by the time it flew past Mars. The area was about 56 million km from earth and 209 million km from the sun, and Viking 2 would not leave it until some time in February; scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory were hoping for no further damage to it or to the other Viking, which was coming along a month behind the first. (W Post, 25 Jan 76, A-3)
NASA announced that Robert N. Lindley, director of project management at GSFC, would begin a temporary assignment in Paris 24 Oct. as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight (European Operations), serving as senior NASA adviser to ESA for the Spacelab program. During this assignment, Dr. William C. Schneider, currently Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Hq, would act as director of project mangement at GSFC. Both officials would return to their original positions at the end of the ESA assignment. (NASA anno 13 Oct 76)
Lewis Research Center announced award of a $73.6 million contract to General Dynamics Corp. ’s Convair Div. for 8 Atlas-Centaur launch vehicles to be used in NASA missions over the next 4 yr. Launches would include Intelsat V comsats, High Energy Astronomical Observatory (HEAO) satellites, FLTSATCOM satellites for a worldwide DOD communications system, and the Pioneer Venus mission to provide details on the Venus atmosphere. The fixed-price incentive contract would run from 3 Sept. 1976 through Sept. 1980; work would be done at the contractor’s plant in San Diego, Calif. (NASA Release 76-154)
Food preparation and packaging techniques developed by NASA to feed Apollo and Skylab crews during space flight had been used in a pilot program to provide balanced nutrition to elderly persons living alone, the Johnson Space Center announced. The program, called Meal Systems for the Elderly, was part of JSC’s Technology Utilization program to apply space-developed technology to solution of earthbound problems. The goal was to provide a meal system that could be opened, cooked, eaten, and cleaned up by older people living alone; each meal would provide at least a third of the daily diet allowance for an older person, and a field demonstration had been scheduled that would evaluate the meal design and delivery methods by the end of 1976. The JSC team developing the program would aim at a shelf-stable, multimeal package that could be distributed by several methods—even parcel post—to senior citizens living beyond the range of hot-meal delivery or to those in areas where meals were not provided. (NASA Release 76-6; JSC Release 76-02)
NASA announced delivery of experiment hardware for the first of three High Energy Astronomy Observatories (HEAO) to the prime contractor, TRW Systems of Redondo Beach, Calif. The hardware consisted of 4 experiments to survey and map x-ray sources during the 6-mo mission of HEAO-A in 1977. A Naval Research Laboratory experiment (Dr. Herbert Friedman, principal investigator) would use a large-area survey instrument to locate x-ray sources and obtain data for studying the physics and evolution of energy sources. An experiment built by Goddard Space Flight Center with assistance from the Calif. Institute of Technology would measure emissions and absorptions of diffuse x-rays and correlate results with radio and visible light ray emission; principal investigators were GSFC’s Dr. Elihu Boldt and Caltech’s Dr. Gordon Garmire. A third experiment, for the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and MIT, was a scanning modulation collimator to determine precise celestial positions of selected x-ray sources and investigate their size and structure; principal investigators were SAO’s Dr. Herbert Gursky and MIT’s Dr. Hale Bradt. The fourth experiment, for the University of Calif, at San Diego and MIT, would determine the position, spectrum, time variations, intensity, and other properties of hard x-rays and low-energy gamma rays; principal investigators were UCSD’s Dr. Laurence Peterson and MIT’s Dr. Walter Lewin. Data gathered by the HEAO missions could lead to new theories about energy production and high-density nuclear matter. Marshall Space Flight Center, which would manage HEAO for the Office of Space Science, directed TRW in designing and building the observatories and integrating and testing the overall system, including the experiments. (NASA Release 76-100; MSFC Release 76-86)
NASA announced selection of the Roeing Commercial Airplane Co. of Seattle for award of a $20-million contract to build an experimental flight research aircraft for use in noise-reduction technology. Roeing would modify a government-furnished C-8 Ruffalo transport aircraft into a quiet short-haul research airplane (QSRA) for the Ames Research Center’s noise-reduction research program, aimed at reducing aircraft-noise impact on U.S. communities and congestion at major airports. The redesign to meet QSRA concepts would enhance aircraft performance and control at low speeds, and would demonstrate propulsive-lift technology that would permit civil transport aircraft to achieve a short takeoff and landing (STOL) capability. STOL aircraft could use runways at existing smaller airports to relieve traffic at large metropolitan airports, as well as to reduce noise impact. (NASA Release 76-33)
NASA announced selection of the initial crew of the Boeing 747 shuttlecarrier aircraft that would carry and launch the Space Shuttle orbiter in approach and landing tests. Pilots would be Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Thomas C. McMurtry, both of Dryden Flight Research Center; flight-test engineers would be Victor W. Horton, also from Dryden, and Louis E. Guidry, Jr., of Johnson Space Center. All the men chosen were civilians. The ALT flights, scheduled for early 1977, would carry the orbiter to an altitude of 7.5 km, where it would separate from the 747 and the orbiter crew would pilot it to a glide landing. Unmanned and manned captive flights would precede initial free flights. (DFRC Release 3-76)
Two engineers working for Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had reported that windmills could supply up to a fifth of U.S. energy needs by 1995, the Washington Post said. The engineers, Michael Dusey and Ugo Coty, reporting on a year-long investigation funded by the Energy Research and Development Administration, said that large wind-turbine generators could save 2 billion barrels of oil a year; construction of 54 000 generators with rotor blades more than 160 m end-to-end could furnish 1 trillion kw hrs of electricity annually. Other benefits would include reduction of air pollution and creation of a new industry that would employ thousands, they said. The Lockheed researchers put no price tag on their findings, but an earlier study by the University of Hawaii had said such windmills could cost up to $50 000; the price would be regained within 7 yr and the windmills could remain in operation up to 50 yr, according to the 1974 report by Hawaii’s Donald Grace. A professor from the Univ. of Mass.—William Heronemus—had proposed some years ago a network of 957 windmills each about 113 m high just to meet the needs of the state of Vermont. (W Post, 22 May 76, F— 1)
NASA announced that the rollout of Orbiter 101 had been set for 17 Sept, at the Rockwell Int’l Space Div. assembly plant at Palmdale, Calif, [see 11 Aug.]. First of NASA’s Shuttle spacecraft olf the assembly line, OV-101 was not yet scheduled for orbital flight: its first job, beginning in Jan. 1977, would be as a test vehicle. It would be launched from a modified Boeing 747 jetliner on which it was riding piggyback, in a series of approach and landing tests at Dryden Flight Research Center. It would then be ferried early in 1978 to Marshall Space Flight Center for ground vibration tests. Mated in a test stand to the 46-m external tank as if for an actual launch, Orbiter 101 would undergo extended vibration and stress loading equal to that experienced during a launch phase, when all the main engines—OV-lOl’s three main engines and the two solid-fuel boosters—would produce up to 30 million newtons of thrust. After the testing at MSFC, Orbiter 101 would be-returned to Calif, to be prepared for space flight; Orbiter 102 would be used in initial orbital flights from Kennedy Space Center, scheduled for 1979. Under construction since June 1974, the Orbiter’s main parts came from various contractors: crew module and aft fuselage from Rockwell at Palmdale, mid fuselage (cargo bay) from General Dynamics in San Diego, wings from Grumman Aerospace in N.Y., and tail assembly from Fairchild Republic in N.Y. Orbiter’s three main engines (each providing 211 500 kg of thrust at launch) were constructed by Rockwell’s Rock-etdyne Div. under contract to MSFC. (NASA Release 76-143; Marshall Star, 8 Sept 76, 1)
A select committee of the National Academy of Sciences, named 2 yr ago at the request of four federal agencies, recommended a 2-yr delay before banning aerosol sprays containing fluorocarbons. The group advised three “urgent” measures: drafting of legislation to regulate fluorocarbon usage when the need arose; action to require labeling of products containing fluorocarbons, so that consumers could stop using them if they wished to do so; and a campaign by public health agencies to reduce people’s overexposure to sun and the resulting malignant melanoma, incidence of which had been increasing by 10 to 15% a year, about a third of the current 8500 yearly cases being fatal. An international conference on threats to the stratospheric ozone, meeting at the State Univ. of Utah, heard Dr. James G. Anderson of the Univ. of Mich, report findings from a 28 July balloon flight of chlorine and chlorine monoxide at 35- to 42-km altitudes in quantities twice as abundant as predicted by theorists. The results had not been available when the NAS findings were issued. The NAS had said that a selective ban on fluorocarbon spray-can propellants would be necessary within 2 yr. The international conference also heard a report that nitrous oxide in the air was increasing steadily as a result of many factors (including fuel combustion and bacterial digestion of fertilizers), becoming as serious a threat to the stratospheric ozone as the Freons, with a 20% ozone reduction possible by the end of the 20th century. Bags of exhaust gases obtained from a federal test center for auto emissions had shown that the catalytic converters designed to remove hydrocarbons from exhaust had permitted considerable release of nitrous oxides. Dr. R. J. Cicerone of the Univ. of Mich, had estimated that automobile contribution of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere within a yr was about a million tons. Researchers from the Univ. of Calif. Livermore Laboratory at Lawrence had told a meeting of the American Chemical Society that better methods of analysis were needed to permit accurate predictions of the effects of contaminants on the stratospheric ozone. Supersonic transport operations, for instance, were known to affect the stratosphere but not enough was known about the forty-odd possible chemical reactions at high altitude to say if or how the ozone layer was damaged. William H. Duewer, a chemist on the Livermore team, added that, even if all the chemistry were pinned down, the effect of SST operations could not be determined precisely until meteorological factors were fully accounted for. The next 1 or 2 yr should provide new insights into these stratospheric processes, the team said. (NYT14 Sept 76, 1; 17 Sept 76, A14; W Post, 14 Sept 76, A-l; Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 49) The biology experiments, which did receive soil samples, were progressing with their tasks. The gas-exchange experiment had already indicated a slower response to oxygen leaving the soil in its test chamber than was shown by a similar Viking 1 instrument at Chryse, where a high oxygen count had been considered a possible indication of life activity. Scientists had decided the reading probably resulted from “an exotic chemistry.” Dr. Harold P. Klein, chief biologist on the project, said the lower readings at Utopia might simply indicate “less oxidizing substances at the Viking 2 site.” The other two biology instruments were incubating their soil samples; both were transmitting data on background radiation for use as reference points later in the experiments, which would use radioactive counts to determine the presence of microorganisms. After seeing a picture of the lander’s arm, showing that it had rotated 180° instead of 45° as it should have, flight directors diagnosed the problem as failure of a switch. Project Manager Martin said it would be possible to override the switch and get the arm moving again by Friday, 17 Sept., when flight directors would order the arm to continue delivery of a soil sample to the x-ray instrument. At a news conference 16 Sept., project scientists reported that the first measurements from the labeled-release experiment showed 33% more radioactive gas count from the Utopia sample than had come from the Chryse soil: 10 000 counts per minute (compared to 7500) or 20 times the amount of gas that would be registered in the absence of metabolic activity. The scientists still refused to say the activity was proof of life, noting that, if organisms were picking up all the nutrients in the instrument, it should record up to 15 000 counts per minute. The gas-exchange experiment, which had detected some signs of activity in the Utopia sample but less than Viking 1 found in the Chryse sample, apparently provided an argument against the “exotic chemistry” theory because of the prolonged increase of carbon dioxide in the test chamber. Dr. Vance I. Oyama of Ames Research Center said of this result, which might be attributed to chemical reaction, “if it persisted and was accompanied by other changes, we can ascribe it to biological changes.” No decisive report had come from the pyrolytic-release experiment, considered the least ambiguous of the detectors. Project geologists meanwhile were scanning the photographs from both Viking orbiters and landers, noting especially the enormous scale of Martian topography. “Everything we see is ten times anything on earth,” said Dr. John Guest of the Univ. of London, adding that earth in comparison was almost as smooth as a billiard ball. Most prominent features on Mars were the volcano Olympus Mons whose base on earth would reach from New York City to Montreal, and a canyon long enough to stretch from New York to Salt Lake City. The plateau on which the Mars volcano rested stood more than 9 km high, taller than Everest, earth’s highest mountain. Dr. Michael Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey suggested that the outsize features of Mars existed because of the lack of plate movement on the planet. Mars, like earth, appeared divided into two “provinces” geologically, one area heavily cratered and higher, therefore assumed to be older; the other area was lower and smoother, considered to be younger. This division might be typical of all bodies of the inner solar system, as a similar distribution of “provinces” appeared on the moon and on earth. {WStar, 13 Sept 76, A-5; 15 Sept 76, A-2; WPost, 14 Sept 76, A-12; 16 Sept 76, C-l; 17 Sept 76, A-4; ATT, 17 Sept 76, A14; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had used aerial thermalscanning techniques to locate high heat-loss areas as part of its energy resources management program to reduce energy consumption agencywide. The Lewis Research Center had made thermal scanning flights for all NASA centers, and MSFC had been scanned twice, once in October 1975 and again in February 1976, using a C-47 aircraft with onboard scanners that recorded on digital tape the average temperature of each area covered. Fed into a computer, the digital tape produced printouts and live mosaic maps projected on a television monitor to show areas where excessive steam-line losses occurred and to identify buildings losing excessive heat through roof structures. The MSFC facilities office validated the data through visual inspection of steam lines and roof insulation, and issued work requests for repair and replacement of insulation in 88 steam-line locations. Longer range action was planned to repair and replace deteriorated roofing and replace sections of the steam lines. (MSFC Release 76-104)
Johnson Space Center announced on 21 Sept, modification of a costplusaward-fee contract with IBM, Gaithersburg, Md., to cover software for ground-based computing and data-processing systems at JSC. IBM would develop computer programs for Space Shuttle vehicle management and flight operations, and related scientific and medical operations. Value of the modified contract would be $19 463 000. (JSC Release 76-59) —NASA contracted 22 Sept, with Aeronutronic Ford Corp. for support services for the Mission Control Center and other ground-based data systems at JSC, including data hardware and software systems engineering and maintenance, as well as logistics, reliability, and quality assurance. The cost-plus-award-fee contract would cost about $46 550 000 from July 1976 through 30 Sept. 1978. (JSC Release 76-60) —JSC announced 24 Sept, selection of Hamilton Standard Div. of United Technologies Corp. for negotiations leading to award of a contract for development and production of a portable oxygen system for Space Shuttle crew and passengers. The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, costing about $1.9 million, would run from 13 Nov. 1976 to 13 July 1979. The system, designed to meet four special Shuttle needs (emergency oxygen in case of cabin-atmosphere contamination, prebreathing before spacewalks, life support during rescue, and emergency oxygen after landing in case of landing-area contamination), would be capable of operating independently or connected to the Shuttle oxygen'system. The contract would call for delivery of ten units and 50 recharge kits for NASA use in certification, training, and flight, plus ground-support equipment and manpower; it would contain options for 62 additional units and 310 recharge kits. (JSC Release 76-61)
The Apollo lunar scientific experiments package (ALSEP) set up on the moon in Feb. 1971 by astronauts Alan B. Shepard and Edgar D. Mitchell during the third manned exploration of the moon ceased transmission, probably because of failure of electronic components, engineers at Johnson Space Center said. The Apollo 14 instrument, one of five stations on the moon, had provided scientists with lunar seismic data in combination with stations set up during the Apollo 12, 15, 16, and 17 missions. Originally designed with a 1-yr lifetime, the ALSEP 14 was first of the stations to fail completely, although it had lost its ability to receive commands a year previously. The remaining stations continued to provide data on the moon’s seismic activity, heat flow, interactions with earth’s magnetic field, and the solar-wind and cosmic particles that continuously bombard the lunar surface. Findings based on ALSEP data included measurement of moonquakes, mostly at about 4 on the Richter scale; indications of a lunar core at or near the melting point; a thick lithosphere that probably prevented mountain-building on the moon; and a tenuous atmosphere deriving from solar-wind particles. The seismic instruments on the ALSEPs were the most sensitive in existence, and the remaining stations were estimated to last for another 3 yr. (JSC Roundup, 13 Feb 76, 1)
NASA’s cancellation of a mission to Uranus by withholding funds in a severely restricted budget for FY 1977 had produced a “Uranus option” plan, sponsored by engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, that would take a spacecraft destined for Saturn and give it the ability to go the extra distance to Uranus as well. In an interview with the New York Times, John R. Casani—deputy project manager of the Mariner project at JPL—said the necessary trajectories had been plotted, and modification of the spacecraft remote-sensing instruments to use at Uranus was already under way. Of the two Mariner missions scheduled for launch in Aug. and Sept. 1977, to fly by Jupiter in 1979 and Saturn in Nov. 1980andjan. 1981, the first mission would remain unchanged. The second Mariner, trailing the first by 9 mo, would fly a lower speed trajectory to allow a bigger slingshot effect from Saturn’s gravity for propulsion toward Uranus; the slower speed would also allow flight controllers to decide on the basis of the first Saturn flyby whether to use the second Mariner for a closer look at Saturn or to go for Uranus. The second choice would mean that, by 1985, U.S. spacecraft would have looked closely at all the planets of the solar system except Neptune and Pluto; a Mariner flyby of Uranus between Nov. 1985 and Jan. 1986 would take the spacecraft further out into the solar system, toward Neptune. Obtaining data on Neptune would take “a miracle,” Casani said, although the JPL engineers would not rule out the possibility. The infrared spectrometer on the second Mariner would be improved in sensitivity to detect the temperature of Uranus, twice as far from the sun as Saturn is, and 20 times as far as earth; also, the spacecraft would be able to photograph Uranus, 4 times the diameter of earth, and gather data on its magnetic field, atmosphere, and other physical properties. The Mariner missions to Jupiter and Saturn would cost about $305 million; addition of the trip to Uranus Would add about $21 million to the cost of the mission. (NYT, 1 Mar 76, 11)
Electricity from outer space to power homes and industry would be not only possible, but entirely probable, soon after the turn of the century, said Ralph I. LaRock of NASA Hq at a recent meeting held at Marshall Space Flight Center. LaRock, director of the Energy Technology Applications Division in NASA’s Office of Energy Programs, described a proposed satellite power system under study by NASA, industry, the Energy Research and Development Administration, and other groups. MSFC’s share of the study was aimed at defining overall systems requirements (including satellite structure, economical size and materials for the solar array, new technology needed in satellite and support systems, and transporting, erecting, and maintaining the system in space). LaRock said predictions of technology advancement during the 1980-1990 time period indicated a good chance of “our having a few solar-power satellites in operation by the turn of the century.” (MSFC Release 76-75)
ESA’s Science Program Committee announced that it had unanimously approved two new scientific projects at its sixth meeting held 4 and 5 Oct. in Paris. The committee approved participation in the Space Telescope, planned by NASA for launch in 1983, and agreed to finance a plan called GEOSARI (launching a Geos spacecraft into a different orbit on the second flight of the Ariane launcher, scheduled for Dec. 1979). The Space Telescope project depended on a favorable outcome of negotiations with NASA and approval of the project by U.S. authorities in 1977. The committee considered an additional ESA-NASA cooperative project, the Out-of-Ecliptic (OOE) mission to fly two spacecraft around the sun at its north and south poles in a first exploration of the solar system’s third dimension; the committee agreed to continue negotiations with NASA and to join in an announcement of opportunities for the mission if necessary before the committee’s next meeting, in the spring of 1977. (ESA release 6 Oct 76)
The U.S. Senate, by a vote of 78 to 6, confirmed the nomination of Dr. H. Guyford Stever to be director of the newly created Office of Science and Technology Policy in the White House. Dr. Stever, director of the National Science Foundation, had been under criticism for NSF actions in reviewing applications for research grants; also, conservative senators had objected to social-science textbooks prepared under NSF auspices in the 4 yr that Dr. Stever headed that agency. The confirmation marked reestablishment of aWhite House science advisory post after its elimination by President Nixon early in 1973. On 7 Nov. 1957 President Eisenhower had announced appointment of Dr. James R. Killian as special assistant to the President for science and technology, whose prime role was to speed rocket and missile development in the wake of the first satellite a month earlier. Dr. George B, Kistiakowsky, who succeeded Dr. Killian, wrote later that the science advisory committee set up in the White House helped President Eisenhower make major military decisions. The Natl. Science and Technology Policy, Organization, and Priorities Act of 11 May 1976 would also provide 4 new executive-branch agencies: the Office of Science and Technology Policy, whose director would advise the National Security Council upon request, but would mainly assist the Office of Management and Budget in decisions on funding federally supported R&D and would prepare an annual science and technology report for Congress as a counterpart of the State of the Union Message; the President’s Committee on Science and Technology, consisting of 8 to 14 specialists in a wide range of fields who would study for 2 yr and report on the nation’s science, engineering, and technology policies, and disband after submitting the report unless the President chose to continue it; the Federal Coordinating Council for Science, Engineering, and Technology, to deal with interagency problems, chaired by the Science Adviser; and the Intergovernmental Science, Engineering, and Technology Panel, consisting of the Science Adviser as chairman, the Director of the NSF, and at least 10 members representing state interests, to define civilian problems at state, regional, and local levels which could be resolved by science, engineering, and technology. Dr. Richard T. Atkinson, Deputy Director of NSF, would act as Director until the end of the present administration in January. (CR, 9 Aug 76, S 13954-13963; NYT, 6 Aug 76, Al; 10 Aug 76, A3; 15 Aug 76, 4-6; 24 Aug 76, 28)
NASA announced that a series of aircraft flights from Alaska to Argentina between January and May of 1974 had provided information on the transport and distribution of water vapor in the atmosphere from the tropic seas to the higher latitudes, as well as vertically to the stratosphere, important to an understanding of earth’s ozone layer and possibly of earth climate. Previous studies of water in the stratosphere, made from aircraft and balloon flights, had not provided data on latitudinal transport. Ernest Hilsenrath of GSFC, who reported this first mapping of water-vapor distribution in both northern and southern latitudes in a paper at the American Geophysical Union meeting 8 Dec., noted that the 1974 flights had confirmed an increase in the amount of atmospheric water vapor since 1964. The experiments, flown on an Air Force RB-57, were managed by GSFC under contract to DOT as part of its Climatic Impact Assessment Program. (NASA Release 76-201)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of 2 contracts totaling $486 388 for fabrication and installation of 2 test towers to be used in structural load tests of the Space Shuttle external tank. One contract, awarded to the Lucey Boiler Co. of Chattanooga for $344 660, was for pickup from MSFC of government-furnished construction materials and fabrication and delivery by July 1976 of all sections and components of the towers. The other contract, awarded to Teledyne Brown Engineering of Huntsville for $141 728, was for installation of the towers by 30 Sept. (MSFC Release 76-69)
Dr. Alexander M. Lippisch, designer of the first operational rocket-powered fighter aircraft, died in Cedar Rapids, la., at the age of 81. As chief of design after 1939 at Germany’s Messerschmitt Company, his speed research led to development of the ME 163B, world’s fastest airplane at that time, which had a speed of nearly 1015 km per hr and could climb to 9 km in 3 min. As director of research at the Airplane Research Institute in Vienna after 1943, he was rounded up in Operation Paperclip by the Allies, who put him to work for the U.S. Air Force technical intelligence section and sent him to the U.S. in 1946 to work at W right -Patterson Field in Ohio. He had left government service in 1957 and gone to work for Collins Radio, where he headed the company’s aeronautical laboratory. In 1965 he left Collins to form his own group, the Lippisch Research Corp., and at his death was developing an airfoil boat and an aerodyne (wingless aircraft) for the West German government. (ATT, 13 Feb 76, 34)
The Energy Research and Development Administration announced that a nuclear explosion reported by the Peoples Republic of China 17 Oct. had been detected by the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission’s detection system. The explosion, which occurred underground at 1 a.m. EDT at the Lop Nor test area in western China, was in the low-yield range, ERDA said. (ERDA Release 76-320)
An asteroid more than 3 km across was photographed near earth 27 Jan., about 7.5 million km distant, by the Mt. Palomar Observatory, the Calif. Institute of Technology reported. The asteroid, of the type that made giant craters on planets of the solar system, was closer to earth than any known celestial body other than the moon. The institute said there was no chance that the asteroid—called 1976 AA—would collide with the earth on its present path, as the orbits of the earth and the asteroid did not touch. (ATT, 4 Feb 76, 2l)
Ames Research Center announced that 18 scientists representing eight institutions would fly on NASA’s Galileo II airborne research laboratory on a 3-wk study of atmospheric pollution that would take them nearly pole to pole across the central Pacific Ocean, north to south. Between 28 Oct. and 19 Nov., the scientists in eight teams would measure changes in the upper atmosphere caused by jet aircraft exhaust and would investigate the effect on the upper atmosphere of fluorocarbons and halocarbons from aerosol sprays and other sources. The experiments at many latitudes from far north to far south would gather data in both northern and southern hemispheres to note changes in upper-atmosphere composition and pollutants between altitudes of 10.6 km and 12.1 km. Measuring would begin in Alaska, then proceed at Hawaii, Samoa, Australia, New Zealand, and Antarctica. Observations near Hawaii would be coordinated with similar measurements at about 18-km altitude by NASA’s earth-resources survey aircraft, also based at Ames. The jet-pollutant study was part of a 4-yr cooperative effort between ARC and the Lewis Research Center, which had included experiment packages carried on jets operated by Pan American, United, and Qantas airlines; the Galileo II flights would measure pollution over remote areas not covered by commercial aircraft. The aerosol pollution measurements were part of a broader program by NASA and other agencies to ascertain the constituents of the upper atmosphere in a nonpolluted condition, in order to define changes with time in proportions of ozone, fluorocarbons, water vapor, carbon monoxide, and other compounds, and to determine whether such changes were manmade. Galileo II data from both types of measurements would be coordinated with data collected by NOAA stations in Alaska, Hawaii, and Samoa, as well as by stations of the meteorological services of Australia and New Zealand and the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization. (ARC Release 76-79)
MSFC announced it had completed a critical design review for part of a heavy-nuclei experiment scheduled to go into space aboard the third High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO-C) in 1979. The experiment, called C-3, would characterize cosmic-ray flux from detailed measurements of charge and energy spectra, study propagation of cosmic rays, and search for superheavy elements. Principal investigators were Dr. Martin Israel, Washington Univ.; Dr. Edward Stone, Calif. Inst, of Technology; and Dr. Cecil Waddington, Univ. of Minn. The HEAO-C, whose objective would be to map the sky for gamma-ray and cosmic-ray flux, would carry two other experiments besides the C-3. A design review for the experiment hardware would be held in Feb. 1977. (MSFC Release 76-199)
Dr. John F. Clark, scheduled to retire 1 July as Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, had been selected to serve after that date at NASA Hq as special assistant to the Associate Administrator, according to an announcement by Dr. Robert S. Cooper, GSFC deputy director and Dr. Clark’s successor. Dr. Clark agreed to stay at GSFC through 14 August to review actions needed to finalize design activities associated with a stability problem in the Delta second-stage engine, Dr. Cooper said, and would also serve as adviser on the Delta’s readiness for the Palapa and Itos launches later in 1976. (GSFC announcement 1997)
The Natl. Science Foundation announced that federal funding for research and development would increase in FY 1977, ahead of expected inflation. The long-term trend of the R&D portion of the budget had been downward, with a steady decline from 1967 to 1971; a slight rise in 1972 preceded another decline to a 1975 low that represented the smallest federal support for R&D for the 10-yr period. The estimated increase for FY 1977 would restore “real performance” to a level close to that of 1972, although about 20% below that of 1967. Estimated shares of the FY 1977 total would be 11% for basic research, 23% for applied research, and 66% for development. (The NSF noted that most major NASA projects had been categorized as development, as they primarily generated outer-space transport technology. Substantial parts of these programs were classified in former years as basic or applied research. The shift in NASA categories resulted in lower shares of federal R&D funding for basic and applied research, and a larger share for development.) About 60% of development funds would be accounted for by DOD, which with NASA and ERDA would account for more than 90%. NASA’s $99-million increase put its share of the total 1977 R&D budget at about 15%; DOD accounted for an estimated 48% of the federal R&D total in 1977, and ERDA would account for 14%. HEW would account for about 11%, NSF 3%, and USDA about 2%. The next 4 agencies in size of R&D support—DOT, Dept, of Interior, EPA, and Dept, of Commerce—all showed decreases in their federal R&D funding from the 1976 level. (NSF, Science Resources Studies, 10 Aug 76, 1) September 1976
Dr. Bruce C. Murray, professor of planetary science at California Institute of Technology and geologist by training, succeeded Dr. William H. Pickering as director of Caltech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. After earning bachelor’s, master’s, and doctor’s degrees at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Dr. Murray became a geologist and later served in the Air Force. At the USAF Cambridge Research Lab., trying to expand knowledge of the earth’s shape and gravity field by the use of earth satellites, he became interested in space technology. First faculty appointee at Caltech in the field of planetary astronomy in 1960, Dr. Murray and Prof. James Westphal were in 1962 the first observers of infrared emission from an object outside the solar system (a star) and did infrared mapping of the moon, Venus, and Jupiter. Dr. Murray was the author or coauthor of 4 books and more than 60 scientific papers, including the recent book “Navigating the Future.” (Pasadena Star-News, 1 Apr 76, 1; Glendale News-Press, 1 Apr 76, 1; Montrose Ledger, 1 Apr 76, 1)
An early burst of activity recorded by an instrument aboard Viking 1 on the surface of Mars had begun to slow down, said biologists at JPL who had been startled by the high rate of reaction indicated by the labeled-release experiment. The instrument used a sample of Martian surface, fed with a nutrient of amino acids, sugar, and vitamins, plus a radioactive-carbon tracer that would produce radioactive carbon dioxide if the sample used the nutrient to grow or metabolize. A geiger counter in the instrument had counted as many as 4500 radioactive molecules per minute being released from the sampler over 8 hr, going as high as 8000 per min over the period of a day. Dr. Harold P. Klein of Ames Research Center, head of the Viking biology team, said the origins of the activity were not clear, and scientists were not sure whether “something is metabolizing” or not. It would take a wk to reach any conclusion from these results or those of the other two biology experiments, team members said. (NYT', 1 Aug 76, 1; W Post, 1 Aug 76, 1; 2 Aug 76, C-5; W Star, 2 Aug 76, A—1; WSJ, 2 Aug 76, 1)
A giant Air Force antenna at Hamilton, Mass., that had shared in transatlantic communications with the Jodrell Bank Observatory in England by way of moon reflections would be dismantled and moved to Westford, Mass., for use by the Lincoln Laboratory of MIT in radar studies of earth’s upper atmosphere, the AFSC Newsreview announced. The big dish, nearly 46 m in diameter, had been used by the USAF Geophysics Laboratory since 1962 for ionospheric and radioastronomy studies, as well as in auroral studies using satellite beacons. Continuing USAF research at Hamilton’s Sagamore Hill Observatory would use the facility’s 25.6-m antenna and smaller receivers. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 76, 10) October 1976
Ground-based equipment incorporating computers that would work with components aboard a Shuttle orbiter to guide it to a safe landing had been shipped from the contractor, Cutler Hammer’s AIL Division, NASA announced. The equipment, called a microwave scanning-beam landing system (MSBLS), would be installed on a runway at Dryden Research Center, where initial flight tests of the orbiter would begin in mid-1977; a second set would be installed on a newly constructed runway at Kennedy Space Center, where initial Shuttle orbital missions would be launched in 1979. Both locations would be equipped for approach from either direction, and each system would be fully redundant, including a comprehensive monitoring system with automatic switchover and an uninterruptible power supply. As the Shuttle orbiter would descend in a steep glide moderated to a soft touchdown, onboard computers would direct the vehicle through commands to the control surfaces and must know the vehicle’s precise position at every instant; standard instrumentlanding electronics could not provide this information, so that the type of beam created by the MSBLS would be needed. The MSBLS system would cover a total field of positions through all possible paths the orbiter would take, instead of providing a single straight path for the orbiter to follow; its scanning beam would sweep a wide flat course across the landing sector, and pulses from a ground transmitter would be coded to identify the exact angle at which the beam pointed at each instant of the sweep. A receiver in the descending orbiter would pick up the pulses and decode them to determine the track; the onboard computer would accurately compare the orbiter’s location with the desired location and automatically correct any discrepancy. The MSBLS would provide an unprecedented degree of position-guidance accuracy. (NASA Release 76-97; JSC Release 76-35)
A recently completed manipulator-development facility at Johnson Space Center’s Bldg. 9a laboratory would assist NASA engineers and technicians in studying Shuttle payload deployment and retrieval in space, JSC announced. The manipulating system, with a reach of 15.2 meters, was the largest known remotely controlled manipulator system. Sizes of payloads to be carried in the Space Shuttle would range from very small to a maximum length of 18.2 m and diameter of 4.5 m; objective of the facility would be to improve techniques of moving bulky payloads in and out of the orbiter’s bay in a weightless environment. The manipulator arm would be operated from inside the orbiter cabin by an astronaut using a pair of hand controllers and viewing the process through a window, aided by a closed-circuit TV system. The laboratory building also housed working models of orbiter components including a full-scale forward cabin section with cargo bay, manipulator station, and a large air-bearing table approximately 25 by 30m on which simulated payloads could be steered on a cushion of air by the remote arm. The air-be a ring table would also test the ability of astronauts to move over the smooth interior of the orbiter, using suction-cup shoes instead of cleats locking into grids. An engineer wearing suction-cup shoes and strapped into a cage-like apparatus on the air-bearing table could be familiarized with “walking like a fly” in the day-to-day work environment of the Shuttle. (JSC Release 76-66)
Lewis Research Center announced the first of a number of solar-cell demonstrations it would conduct as part of the national photovoltaic conversion program directed by the Energy Research and Development Administration: a solar-powered refrigerator, standard-size camper’s model, fitted with 3 panels of photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy. Designed for use in remote locations, the solar cells would run the refrigerator during daylight hours and charge conventional automobile batteries located under the unit; the batteries would power the refrigerator during darkness and on overcast days. With the cooperation of the Interior Department’s National Park Service, the refrigerator was being used for perishable foods at a trail-construction camp at Isle Royale National Park in Michigan, a roadless area near northern Lake Superior accessible only by boat or floatplane and typical of places that have no regular electric power. The solar-cell arrays, although relatively expensive, cost less to use in remote locations than the fuel and transportation would cost for alternative power sources. (NASA Release 76-110)
NASA issued a call for Space Shuttle astronaut candidates— 15 pilots and 15 mission specialists—to be selected by Dec. 1977. Applications would be accepted through June 1977, and candidates would report to Johnson Space Center in July 1978 for 2 yr of training. Appointment as an astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of training. Minority and women candidates were encouraged to apply. NASA spokesman Bob Gordon said the agency expected no problems if a woman were selected; the Space Shuttle was “designed to accommodate women astronauts... the waste management system is the only problem really and that has been designed for both males and females.” Since the astronaut program began in 1959, 73 pilots and scientists had been selected; 31 persons were available as Space Shuttle crew, 28 astronauts assigned to JSC and 3 holding government positions in Washington, D.C. Pilot astronauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and landing, and would maintain vehicle systems; mission-specialist astronauts would coordinate orbiter operations in flight planning, use of consumables, and management of the payload. (NASA Release 76-122; JSC Release 76-44; DOD Release 310-76; NYT, 8 July 76, 12)
An unusually high loss of total blood hemoglobin after the first 16 days of flight was one of the medical findings from the Salyut 4-Soyuz 18 mission reported by Cosmonauts Vitaly I. Sevastyanov and Lt. Col. Pyotr Klimuk to the 19th annual meeting of the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) of the International Council of Scientific Unions. If valid, the Soviet data would represent a “significant departure” from earlier data on body mechanisms governing red cells in zero gravity, said Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine. Klimuk told the Phila. meeting that hemoglobin had decreased 16% in his blood and 25% in Sev-astyanov’s by the 16th day of the flight; although past data showed hemoglobin loss averaging 1% daily, Sevastyanov must have had a mechanism that “destroyed more cells than normal” to achieve the 25% deficiency. U.S. Skylab missions reported that crewmen normally recovered their ability to produce red blood cells with more time in orbit; the cosmonauts did not discuss their recovery from the hemoglobin deficiency, but reported that nothing medical had ben discovered during their 63-day flight to prevent increased duration of Soviet space flight. (Av Wk, 5 July 76, 49)
NASA announced that a task team headed by Marshall Space Flight Center, and including representatives from Kennedy Space Center and Johnson Space Center, would assist the Air Force’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) in evaluating industry proposals for validating the development of the Space Shuttle interim upper stage (lUS). The IUS, an expendable solid-fuel rocket stage capable of launching one or more spacecraft, would be carried into low earth orbit in the bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter; after deployment, it would be fired to carry the spacecraft into orbits of from 800 to 35 000 km, or to earth-escape trajectories for interplanetary missions. The basic IUS developed to meet DOD objectives would be altered as needed to meet NASA-unique requirements (planetary missions, or economical delivery of several smaller satellites). MSFC would be responsible for establishing the NASA-unique requirements; its task team would be responsible for planning and coordinating NASA’s IUS activities; KSC would be responsible for IUS launch operations, and JSC for lUS-orbiter integration and flight operations. The Air Force was expected to award a contract for IUS development by Sept. 1976. (MSFC Release 76-89)
